---
title: 'National Assembly - 30 May 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-05-30
---

TUESDAY, 30 MAY 2006
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 10:05.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the ACDP I give notice that I
shall move:


   That the House debates South Africa’s response to the World Health
   Organisation’s report that the global shortage of doctors, nurses and
   other health workers is slowing down the fight against Aids and other
   fatal diseases, and that doctors and nurses are urgently needed in the 57
   countries worst affected by HIV/Aids, malaria and TB.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


Debate on Vote No 4 – Home Affairs:

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker ...

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: Can we ask if it is
parliamentary that all the smaller parties receive their speakers’ lists on
ANC stationery?

The SPEAKER: I would like the Whips to sort out that matter.
[Interjections.] It doesn’t sound correct to me. However, it is not a
matter that is on the Order Paper for this particular sitting, and I would
like the Minister to proceed.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, Deputy Minister of Home
Affairs, hon members, director-general and senior management of the
department, hon guests of the department and the Ministry, dear friends,
earlier this month, members of this House led the nation in marking the
10th anniversary of our country’s Constitution.

This was a significant event in the lives of all South Africans, as it
recommitted us to the noble principles on which our new nation is built –
the principles of a country united, democratic, nonsexist and nonracial. We
celebrated that in the past 12 years we have lived in a country that truly
belongs to all.
We stand before you here in the first instance to rededicate ourselves to
these principles and to make a further undertaking that our mandate, as a
government and as a department, should support these fundamental ideals of
our new society.

In a way the work of the Department of Home Affairs has always been
intimately weaved into the lives of our citizenry and the history of our
country in general. It was because of the discriminatory laws governing the
issuing of passbooks by this department that women marched on the Union
Buildings 50 years ago in protest. As we mark the anniversary of that
historic march, we once again remember how much we are indebted to those
heroines who were bold enough to take the first steps. It is therefore
fitting that for us as a department, we should dedicate this Budget Vote to
them.

Hon members, almost two years ago we came before this House to present our
plan to reposition the Department of Home Affairs in order for it to fulfil
its mandate. At the time we made a frank acknowledgement regarding serious
weaknesses at organisational and policy levels within our department.

It had always been our view that such weaknesses had a negative impact on
the ability of the department to function effectively. We presented a plan
that recognised that nothing short of fundamental transformation and
reorganisation could ensure a proper turnaround for the department. This
plan clearly identified major interventions both in the short and long
term.

In line with that obligation, we also made an undertaking periodically to
report to this House on the progress we were making in the implementation
of our plan. We called upon this House to hold us accountable and
responsible for the targets we set ourselves and to ensure that in the
interests of the people we serve, these targets are met.

Therefore the first part of this presentation will outline a progress
report on the key priorities, which formed part of our budget for last
year. Last year we had offered a budget presentation, which was designed to
allow our work to start making a real impact on the improvement of service
delivery at lower levels.

We indicated that we were going to receive the report on a survey
conducted, at our request, by the Human Sciences Research Council, HSRC, to
determine the extent of the problems regarding our services to citizens.
Through this survey, we wanted to have access to reliable data that
determines the extent of lack of services and the areas of prevalence with
regard to civic services provision. This data would in turn be useful in
determining key areas for our intervention.

The report of the survey has highlighted a number of factors that impact on
service delivery to citizens, particularly in rural areas. These factors
have been wide-ranging, including lack of access, awareness, proper
understanding of the need to be properly registered as well as historical
factors. The report has covered a number of areas of prevalence, by
province, by race, by social status, education and so on.

According to this report, there are approximately 1,5 million South
Africans over the age of 16 who do not have a green barcoded identity
document. This represents 6% of South Africans eligible for identity
documents. Most importantly, it also shows that living standards and levels
of education are a factor in these statistics and shows that people who
live in rural areas, with lower or no levels of education, are more likely
to be without IDs. The report also reveals that there were even fewer
people with green barcoded IDs in the Western Cape and amongst white South
Africans in general.

Most black people in the rural areas have not applied for the registration
of their children and this is more prevalent in KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga
and the North West provinces. Similar statistics were noted with regard to
the notification and registration of deaths.

We have since started to develop an implementation plan to take forward the
recommendations of the survey with a view to develop more resources to
target specific areas as identified.

In anticipation of the capacity requirements to implement the solutions
emerging from this survey, we had undertaken to specifically investigate
the transformation of our branch of civic services. As hon members can note
from our strategic plan, we shall be appointing a project team under a new
project manager to steer this process. We envisaged that the transformation
of civic services should cover its organisational capacity, workflow and
business processes as well as weaknesses in systems, such as the lack of a
track and tracing tool for applications and other documents.

The budget that we present today makes specific provision for the funding
of a new civic services establishment - both in this financial year and
throughout the remainder of the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework.

Hon members will remember that as part of our efforts to enhance the
capacity of the department, we had made an undertaking to put in place
sound leadership capacity in all our provinces, and we are indeed happy to
report that our new provincial managers have recently been appointed and
have joined us here today in the gallery. While these managers are
admittedly still new and are still settling in in the department, each one
of them is faced with immediate tasks of consolidating further leadership
and operational capacity at lower levels of their provinces.

In addition, we have also succeeded in filling the identified critical
posts as promised in our previous Budget Vote debate, thereby creating much-
needed additional capacity to ensure improvement of service delivery in our
offices.

During this financial year we shall finalise the devolution of certain
administrative powers to provinces in order to ensure better efficiency
while reducing the current levels of overcentralisation that frustrates
service delivery due to red tape.

We are also reviewing some of the occupational categories of our
organisational establishment in order to professionalise the department as
an organisation. This is because currently well over 70% of our human
resources are officials at level seven and below. This situation undermines
the need for strategic leadership at our provincial and local offices. We
are enlisting the support and assistance of the Department of the Public
Service and Administration in doing this work.

I am particularly happy to report that we are finally making progress in
addressing some of the structural weaknesses pertaining to our ports of
entry, and in particular the problems of congestion at our major
international airports. We have now appointed a departmental task team that
is tasked with monitoring the implementation of our rescue plan on an
ongoing basis to ensure the proper functioning of our structures at these
ports of entry.

We have been working in close consultation with all the stakeholders
involved, including the Board of Airline Representatives and the Airports
Company of South Africa, and we are indeed encouraged by the fact that,
since the work of the task team began, the problem of congestion at
airports has, to a certain extent, been resolved. The task team is also
working on extending some of these solutions to other ports of entry, as
evidenced in their work at both the Beit Bridge and Lubombo land border
posts.

This success has been complementary to the work of the Border Control Co-
ordinating Committee, or BCOCC, which has continued to bring together all
the government departments that operate at our borders to work together to
ensure better management of our ports of entry. As the lead department
within the BCOCC, we have recently appointed a chief director whose sole
responsibility is to ensure proper functioning of the BCOCC and its various
subcommittees.

Last year we indicated that we would make a further allocation to
additional mobile units only in the next financial year in terms of our
budgeting cycle. Due to the impressive work and relief that the current
units have given to the communities, we have decided to add to the 67
mobile units deployed throughout our provinces. Budget allocations to such
additional units have been made to the tune of R79 million and further
allocations will be made for the 2007-08 financial year as well.

We have also introduced extended hours of service in all our offices during
the week. These offices are also open on Saturdays until lunchtime to allow
communities more access to our services.

At the level of our contribution to international migration policy,
particularly relating to the link between development and migration, we
have taken very seriously our responsibilities as Chair of the G77 Group,
and are currently busy with the preparations for the High Level Dialogue on
Migration that will take place in New York later this year.
We are also able to report to this House that the Protocol for the
Facilitation of the Free Movement of People has now been adopted by the
Southern African Development Community, SADC, and during this session of
Parliament we will present this protocol to Parliament for ratification.

This protocol, which aims to promote regional economic development, will
take a number of years to implement. In the meantime, South Africa is
continuing the process of entering into bilateral visa waiver agreements
with SADC member states and strengthening co-operation on immigration
issues, including the proper alignment of resource and enforcement
capacities.

The Immigration Amendment Act of 2004 came into effect on the 1st of July
last year, and the immigration regulations also seek to meet our foreign
policy objectives in respect of the region. Just two examples of groups who
have benefited from the changes in policy are the cross-border traders,
many of whom are women and who can more easily travel to South Africa, and
students from Africa, who are no longer required to pay repatriation
deposits if their countries agree to take responsibility for their return.

Hon members, we are reaching the end of the first year of the
implementation of the Immigration Amendment Act, and are satisfied that
both the Act and its regulations represent a sound policy basis for the
management of immigration. We are happy that the policy objectives set out
by the President in 2004 when he directed us to amend the Immigration Act,
have been met. We do, however, recognise that there has been teething
problems in the implementation of the Act and these are being addressed.

Members must also realise that as a department we only facilitate the
import of needed skills into the country. As Minister of Home Affairs I do
not decide what those skills are. The Act requires me to consult with other
Ministers and their departments in deciding on quotas and with the recent
launch of the Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition, Jipsa, of
which we are part, we will revise the current quotas in consultation with
other stakeholders. I have taken note of representations made with regard
to the current two-year limit on the intra-company transfer work permit and
this period will be extended.

Members will recall that following a number of death cases in Lindela, I
commissioned an independent inquiry into the matter. The recommendations of
this committee of inquiry were immediately implemented and the result has
been an overwhelming improvement with the cases of death reducing
drastically.

The permanent campaign for civic registration has continued to make a
positive impact on the lives of ordinary South Africans. All the elements
of this campaign, including the marital status campaign, the ID campaign,
the birth registration campaign and the Lokisa Ditikomane, have brought
greater awareness amongst the public about the need to have enabling
documents and the kind of services offered at the Department of Home
Affairs.

As part of our programmes to contribute to the fight against poverty, we
have identified rural communities where most vulnerable groups still
struggle to access basic services. Recently, we had an opportunity to visit
a San community of the Xu! And Khwe in the Northern Cape Province, and to
provide a service for civic registration amongst these compatriots who have
never had enabling documents in their lives.

Hon members will recall that we made the commitment to specifically focus
on this community, who are one of the earliest inhabitants of our land,
during our Vote in 2004. This is because, as we said at the time, our
failure to properly accord them an identity and status amounts to a denial
of their existence and recognition before the law. This is something that
should never happen if we are to build a caring society that feels
discomfort at the sight of the suffering of others.

We are honoured to have the leadership of that community, as well as their
cultural entertainment group, joining us as guests to this Budget Vote and
they are seated in the gallery of this distinguished House. [Applause.]
Thank you.

Madam Speaker, last year I announced the start of a Refugee Backlog
Project. This was due to the huge backlog and delays in finalising
applications for asylum. We shall publicly launch this project on World
Refugee Day, which is on 20 June. This launch will provide me with a
further opportunity to interact with refugees as individuals and their
organisations. I found such interactions with them last year to be very
positive.

Later this year we shall also introduce legislation to amend the current
Refugees Act, with a view to ensuring better compliance with our
constitutional and international obligations. In particular, by
streamlining the status determination process, we will be able to prevent
future backlogs and to facilitate the integration of genuine refugees.

Hon members and friends, as we have already indicated during our previous
interactions with this House, many of our weaknesses in systems require a
dedicated technology solution. I am particularly happy that we have
registered considerable progress in this regard and that this budget has
made further resources available for us to consolidate current projects.

Regarding the back record conversion as planned, we shall conclude the
process of populating our Automated Fingerprint Identification System,
AFIS, this year. The digitisation of fingerprints records is now at 70% and
we can safely report that it will be completed long before the initial
schedule of September 2006. The records are an integral part of the Home
Affairs National Identification System, Hanis.

It had become necessary also for us to have a reliable National Population
Register, NPR, and Movement Control System, MCS, that can assure the
integrity of our data. We therefore made an undertaking that after proper
investigation, the two systems will require a rewrite. At this stage, the
Enterprise Architecture for the NPR and the MCS was started and significant
progress has been made in this regard. In an effort to enhance our
efficiency in the management of refugee affairs, the refugee live capture
has been initiated and finalised.

Of the 263 offices identified for computerisation in the 2005-06 financial
year, 240 were completed. The department still continues to deal with the
scourge of theft of equipment, and security requirements should always be
fulfilled before computer equipment can be installed in offices. This has
tended to affect the pace of installation. In a further attempt to bring
services closer to the citizens, the department has increased the number of
hospitals with access to Home Affairs Systems to a total of 119.

We have also continued to carry out our international work in support of
our foreign policy objectives and the activities of Nepad. We shall
continue in this financial year to implement the key elements of our
technical assistance agreements with the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which we are assisting with issues pertaining to their population register
and immigration management capacity. A similar agreement has also been
signed with the Government of Rwanda.

We have also increased the number of our consular officials in South
Africa’s missions abroad, from 21 in 2004 to 42 this year, and a further 10
will be added in the coming financial year. Most of these offices are
within the African continent where our services were almost nonexistent.

Allow me at this stage, hon members, to outline in broad terms the key
provisions of this budget for the period 2006/07-2008/09. The single most
important challenge that we will continue to be confronted with is the
inadequate levels of human resource capacity across the department. Plainly
put, the numbers, levels and quality of our human resource is a serious
mismatch for the crosscutting and overwhelming mandate of the department.

After our initial investigation of the organisational structure, our new
approved establishment has grown twofold compared to 2003-04 and funding
for this establishment has been approved over a period of four years,
ending in 2009. Of importance to note has been the need to make provision
for much-needed capacity within our civic services branch that was
initially left out of the first investigation of the establishment.

With regard to infrastructure, improvement and acquisition still remains a
critical area of intervention for the department. This is in relation to
the enhancement of the building infrastructure to improve accessibility of
the public to the services of the department.

As promised last year, we have now received the report of the study we have
commissioned last year in conjunction with the Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research, CSIR, on the location of our offices. The report will
serve as a guide in the roll-out of office infrastructure, taking into
account the distances, population densities and the need to support urban
and rural development.

Mr H P CHAUKE: Speaker, there is something that really disturbs the
Minister and we are trying to follow this ... The noise that is coming from
that other side, could you please attend to that.

The SPEAKER: Yes, hon members, please if you have to communicate with each
other, lower your voices, please.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Regarding Hanis, as already indicated in our
report above, most of the programmes that form part of Hanis, are now at an
advanced stage or nearing completion. These include the population of AFIS
through the conversion of over 40 million fingerprint records. The
completion of this process this year will add greater benefit for the
efficiency of our systems, including faster and reliable verification
processes.

Cabinet is still at this stage discussing outstanding issues relating to
the procurement model for the Smart ID Card, and we are certain that these
discussions will be finalised at some point. In this regard, we have made
provision for the roll-out of the process once we have the required go-
ahead.

Under service delivery: As already noted by the report of the HSRC that I
referred to earlier, our clients are still concerned with the quality of
service they receive in most of our offices. Due to this service delivery
challenge at our provincial and local offices, it became essential to
allocate resources towards the overall improvement in the manner in which
we serve our people.

Some of the initiatives in this regard will include the allocation of
further mobile units and the implementation of the recommendations arising
out of the civic service’s survey conducted by the HSRC. Additional
resources will be allocated towards a more efficient ID distribution
strategy, queue management in our offices, as well as the running of the
company on the rights of the client.

With regard to counter-corruption: We shall continue to enhance our
capacity to fight corruption within the department and we are greatly
encouraged by the progress we have made in the previous year. Most
importantly, we shall extend this capacity to our provinces in order to
improve our own ability to deal with cases more effectively throughout all
levels of our department.

Under immigrations services: The passing of the new Immigration Act
necessitated the fundamental transformation of our country’s immigration
services throughout the establishment of the National Immigration Branch.
We needed to source additional funding to provide a world-class service in
this area and to ensure that the department is well capacitated, to ensure
that immigration policy and its implementation can play a role in
supporting national objectives in the areas of development, economic
growth, security and foreign policy.

We also needed to make provision for the additional capacity that would be
required for the 2010 FIFA World Cup.

Regarding civic services, the final policy option that was brought forward
to request for additional funds was for civic services. This is our biggest
branch and one where the functions affect the lives of our citizens. Most
of the options stated above, such as harnessing countercorruption,
infrastructure and people, are also supporting the sound functioning of
civic services.
The financial year 2004-05 has been the year during which the department
was given a disclaimer audit opinion by the Auditor-General, AG. This
opinion had been a serious indictment of the manner in which the finances
of the department were being managed. I am aware that Parliament, through
the portfolio committee, is dealing with the matter of this report.

I must indicate that at the time of the release of the AG’s report I had
sought a meeting with him to discuss his findings on the state of the
finances of the department. After this interaction with the AG, I am
satisfied with the explanation of the circumstances that have led to his
opinion, and we’ve accepted the report of the AG and his opinion.

I have now instructed the director-general, DG, as our accounting officer,
to inform me about the steps that he will take to address and deal with the
issues raised in the report by the AG. Due to the serious nature of the
matter I have also requested National Treasury to invoke Chapter 2, section
6, of the Public Finance Management Act, PFMA, in terms of which Treasury:


  (2)(d)    may assist departments and constitutional institutions in
  building their capacity for efficient, effective and transparent
  financial management;
      (e)   may investigate any system of financial management and internal
  control in any department, public entity or constitutional institution.


Both the National Treasury and our department will report to Parliament on
the implementation of this process, which will start immediately hereafter.

We remain committed to ensure that this department should be put in a
position where it can serve its mandate in a manner that supports the
growth of our democracy and restores the dignity of our people. We
appreciate that owing to the nature of our work there will always be
greater impatience and pressure on us to deliver this quality of service
with urgency.

The needs of our clients are urgent and therefore we can never see this
pressure as an unjustified irritation, but as a constant reminder that ours
is a service that is about people. It is for this reason that we should
listen to your own assessment of the progress we have made and to accept
some of your observations and guidance.

Before I take my seat I think I did indicate that it was a difficult period
for the department, but I want to thank my senior management. I want to
thank the DG, I want to thank my colleagues for the support, but I also
want to thank ordinary Members of Parliament – the backbenchers – for the
support they have given us. [Applause.]
I equally want to take this opportunity, hon members, as it was a difficult
period - they say it doesn’t rain but it pours – and a time during which I
lost my mother and I got a lot of support from all of you, Members of
Parliament, and I have not had an opportunity to thank you for that and I
want to thank you. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr H P CHAUKE: Don’t make so much noise. Thank you very much, Speaker, for
giving me this opportunity to address Parliament on the Budget Vote on Home
Affairs for 2005-06 and 2006-07.

The focus of the committee for the last financial year has been to monitor
the systems that the Department of Home Affairs had put in place in making
sure that it discharges its duties in giving service to the citizens. One
of the areas that we focused on is the issue of immigration - as the
Minister has correctly raised the point on immigration and immigration
regulations – and part of what we did was to observe and monitor systems
that have been put in place at all our ports of entry.

There was a launch of the immigration branch early in February this year
and part of what we then wanted to look at was the kind of new system that
the Department of Home Affairs is coming up with, especially when it comes
to issues of immigration, training of immigration officers, issuing of
permits and passports, IDs and all of that. Now, the biggest challenge that
we then discovered was that there is still a problem with regard to the
ports of entry that we have in the country – they are not manned by Home
Affairs, they are manned by Safety and Security – and this arrangement
needs to be attended to, Minister, as a matter of urgency.

Critical to some of the issues that we focused on was to interact with our
counterparts within the SADC. We visited a number of countries: Mozambique,
Zimbabwe and Namibia. We observed in Mozambique their systems of the
issuing of birth certificates, passports – generally, the arrangements
regarding civil services. The same applies to Zimbabwe and Namibia.

What we discovered in Namibia was that they still have a problem with the
population register. Most of their citizens ... as you know the former
apartheid government colonised Namibia and when they left Namibia they took
along the population register. Most of the citizens in Namibia are still
South African citizens. We were told that almost 80% of Namibians are
holding South African citizenship.

So, I think, the bigger challenge is that we as a country, through you,
Ministers of Home Affairs and Foreign Affairs, must address this issue as a
matter of urgency because we have robbed the Namibians of their
citizenship, and they are currently part of our population register. I
think it is something we need to look at.
Again, Minister, we interacted directly on the issues of the SADC Protocol
because we believe this protocol is long overdue. What we looked at was to
see what systems they have in place with regard to the security of their
documents, the security of their systems with regard to movement of people
and the issuing of passports.

It became very clear that there are still challenges in that area that
needed us perhaps, at some point, to assist these countries to have proper
systems in place so that when you start the free movement protocol,
Minister, we will rectify that protocol before the end of this year. I
think it is critical that we look at systems which are in place, so that
the movement of people is accurately and correctly recorded, with clear
documents and clear security features on them.

I want to go straight to the issues raised by the Auditor-General. As we
all know, the Public Finance Management Act, PFMA, requires departments to
table their annual reports before 31 September. Last year we started that
process as a committee to engage with the Department of Home Affairs
regarding the issue of the tabling of the report and the strategic plan.

It was very clear to us, Minister, as we interacted with the department,
that there are problems around finalising the annual report and the
strategic plan, but we then decided to give them a chance to continue
resolving their problems. We then focused our work around a number of areas
that I have mentioned earlier.

However, what is very clear is a call that was made in one of the last
meetings during the budget hearings last year with SCOPA. The Department is
having internal problems with regard to the internal auditing and this
requires the department to immediately get involved and try to resolve
these problems - that was said by SCOPA.

When we interacted with the department in the last financial year
presentations and budget hearings they clearly did not raise these issues
with us, and members of the committee have been at pains to say: Raise the
issues that are problematic so that we are able to help you when you have
these problems. But, the department decided not to share these problems
with us, until SCOPA picked up these issues. This was at the time of the
former director-general Barry Gilder.

Minister, the problem that you must understand about this department is
that for the past four years - in fact, I would say that for the past 11
years – this department has been having problems. Not from the Minister’s
point of view, but the manner in which systems are put in place in the
department. If you recall, there were problems with the directors-general,
starting with Mokoena and how he left the department, to the point where
you had the same problems again with the former Minister vis-à-vis the
directors-general. About two or three of the directors-general experienced
very serious problems with the manner in which they related to their
Ministers.

That instability has really created these problems that we have today. The
ANC has raised these problems; that until such time as Lee ... you are
really making a noise ... and Mike Ellis ... your voice is horrible in the
mike, can you just lower your voice because I am just trying to raise
something that your member will have to try and follow. Don’t argue with me
on this.

Mr M J ELLIS: If you were making a decent speech I would listen.

Mr H P CHAUKE: Minister, it is very clear that these problems of the
directors-general have really impacted negatively on service delivery, but
not only on service delivery but on the overall strategic plan of the
department, and as you know the White Paper process has had its own
problems.

The current problems that we have are obviously the remnants of the problem
I mentioned earlier. Systems that are not in existence have led to this
situation that we are dealing with and it is quite a serious disclaimer.

In his report, the Auditor-General says that over R572 million was not
accounted for - it is quite a huge amount - because there were no
supporting documents coming from the department. He again mentioned that
over R66 million was spent on transport and the buying of vehicles from the
Gauteng department of transport, without a clear agreement between the
Department of Home Affairs and the Gauteng department of transport. I think
these are very critical areas that we’ll have to focus on.

Other issues I will not go into detail about, as members will be able to
deal with that when we deal with this problem. The manner in which we are
going to approach this problem, Minister, is that the committee will keep
on engaging with the Department of Home Affairs, the director-general, the
CFO and other senior officials in the department to try and resolve this
problem, because we want to see a situation where each and every cent that
this Parliament has appropriated to Home Affairs is accounted for.

Your call, Minister, that Treasury will come in and assist the department,
I think, is coming at the right time. I think we will support that. We will
support you, Minister, in making sure that Treasury comes in and assists
the department with putting systems in place, but also to deal with the
problem of elements that are not supposed to be within the department. It
is very clear that a huge amount of corruption is taking place in the
Department of Home Affairs and that needs to be addressed, Minister.
For far too long, for four years, we have been getting qualified reports,
before you even became Minister of Home Affairs. For four years the reports
were qualified. Under the leadership of the hon Mangosuthu Buthelezi we
experienced this problem. I was on this podium raising these issues and
saying that there is a problem that needs to be addressed, but people were
saying there is a war between the ANC and the IFP, nothing else.

The DA – when we were raising these issues at that time – wanted this
wonderful relationship between them and hon Buthelezi and the IFP, to have
this marriage of inconvenience that didn’t even last for six months.
[Interjections.] They did not support us.

But I am surprised, Minister, that today they have made a list of more than
50 issues that they want you to address on home affairs – over 50 issues.
[Applause.] So, all along they have been quiet knowing very well that there
are problems in home affairs and they kept on noting those problems and
waiting for the time when the ANC is in charge of the department to say,
“Address these issues, Minister, and/or you must resign”.

The problem at home affairs is not the Minister herself. The problem is the
system we have inherited from apartheid, which we have not yet addressed.
We have not yet addressed that problem. [Applause.] [Interjections.] You
know what hon member; if you would fix your hairstyle I will definitely
listen to you. [Interjections.]

But, clearly these problems that we have today are very old problems of the
apartheid legacy that we must deal with, because when we were supposed to
deal with these issues under the leadership of Buthelezi we were told that
we were out of order, we don’t know what to say and we are just fighting
the Minister unnecessarily. [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: How long have you been the Chairperson?

Mr H P CHAUKE: The people who are making such a noise today, from the DA,
most of you don’t even have fingerprints on the records of Home Affairs,
because only black people were supposed to have their fingerprints taken
and not white people. We want to capture your information, your
fingerprints and we want to make sure that you, Mr Gibson, have the green
barcoded ID book, because most of you are still holding on to that old
apartheid passbook and don’t want to change to the green barcoded ID book.

So, these are the problems that we find that the Minister must address.
[Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: For how many years have you been Chairperson?

Mr H P CHAUKE: How many years? For three years.
[Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: As long as... [Inaudible.]
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, you are supposed to address the House.

Mr H P CHAUKE: You see, the problem is that I am not afraid of you raising
anything. You can stand up and ask me any question and I will answer you.
But don’t use your baas-boy Lee to make a noise. Lee, don’t make a noise
because I am addressing issues that you yourself in your constituency have
problems with and that you - as a Member of Parliament – need to address.
The SPEAKER: Order! Hon member!

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, the hon member said he
would, with pleasure, answer a question if I asked it, may I ask the hon
member ... [Interjections.]

Mr H P CHAUKE: On home affairs?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Yes.

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon Chauke, please take your seat while he is asking
the question.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: When is the hon member and his party
going to accept responsibility for the deficiencies in the Department of
Home Affairs? When are they going to stop waving their fingers around and
blaming the previous Minister or the DA for it?
Mr H P CHAUKE: We have already taken the blame because we are in charge of
the department; we are not running away from the problems. We accept that
there are problems in Home Affairs and we are taking the blame. [Applause.]
In fact, we are accepting that we made a mistake from the beginning not to
be in control of home affairs. That’s the mistake we have made. [Applause.]

Next question? I will deal with you! [Laughter.]

So, Minister, if we are not going to be able to deal with these problems we
are going to have a problem, because of the new challenge that you have
mentioned, namely the role that we play on the international front – the
role of home affairs in the DRC and Burundi, and currently we are even
helping the DRC to compile their population register.

We have deployed two mobile units there that go to villages, as much as we
have this responsibility at home of making sure that we have mobile units
that go deep into villages where our people used to travel at least 400 to
500 km to access home affairs. We have made it easier now. Our people can
access these mobile units at no cost. These are the achievements of the
Department of Home Affairs.

As I said, the process continues on the disclaimer opinion. Tomorrow, after
this debate - hon member Kalyan knows very well - there is a portfolio
committee meeting at 9:00 and we are going to engage with the Department of
Home Affairs, the Director-General and the CFO. [Interjections.]

We are continuing and not doing it for the sake of the debate here. We are
going to continue until they account for every cent they have spent. This
is what we are going to do. We will table a report to Parliament with
recommendations, much as your hairstyle, Madam, really makes me sick.
[Laughter.] Minister, the report will come with recommendations and in
those recommendations we will support this problem.

One of the issues I want to deal with before I finish my time ...  Can I
have the last two seconds that you have taken, Madam Speaker? The only
problem I want us to address, Minister, about the Western Cape is the
xenophobia; the racism that you find in this province leaves much to be
desired. We have met with the MEC of safety and security in our hearing
last week. There is a problem that if you are black in the Western Cape you
find it difficult for you, for movement, for ... [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, on a point of order, you have indicated
already that his time is up and now you are giving him extra minutes ...
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon Chauke, thank you very much for your speech, your
time has expired.
Mr H P CHAUKE: Can I borrow another five minutes, Madam Speaker ...
[Interjections.] [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: No! You don’t have time. You are now on hon Kalyan’s time.
[Applause.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: Madam Speaker, President Mbeki said in his 2006 state of
the nation address that our country has entered the age of hope.

Well, the Department of Home Affairs has given new meaning to the words
``age of hope’’. The client of the department lives perpetually in hope. He
hopes that he will get efficient and courteous service. He hopes that there
won’t be queues. He hopes his identity document application will be
processed within three months and actually be delivered to him. He hopes
that the information on the document will be correct. He hopes that his
passport will be processed within six weeks. He hopes that none of his
documents will be lost, and he hopes that somebody at the Home Affairs
office will actually answer the telephone.

It is my considered opinion that one needs both a prayer and hope when
applying for any enabling document from the Department of Home Affairs.
Recent reports of a young man who held hostage a Home Affairs official
because he had been waiting for two years for an ID, is just one example of
the sheer frustration that Joe Public out there experiences. We were told
reliably that although the man in question now has an ID, it is incorrect.
So, so much for that!

Minister, I suspect that the double-page advertisement in yesterday’s
papers is both an attempt to highlight the department's successes and do
damage control at the same time. I note with great interest that the advert
doesn’t carry the department’s motto of being ``caring, compassionate and
responsible’’, nor is there any reference to the ``The client is always
right’’ campaign. Indeed, the issuing of birth certificates on site to
newborns and the marital status campaign has been very successful.

However, Minister, you have been rather economical with the truth and the
advert. The Home Affairs National Identification System, Hanis, and the
Automated Fingerprint Identification System, AFIS, are a case in point. The
advert would have one believe that the systems are up and running, but in
reality they are not, and you have indicated that it is on hold. Millions
of rands have been thrown at Hanis and AFIS, and we heard yesterday that
the full implementation will only happen by 2008.

The Department of Home Affairs submitted its annual report rather late on
26 May 2006. It should have been done by September 2004, and the main
reason was that the auditing process was flawed.

The recent damning report from the Auditor-General on the finances of the
department is a blight on the department’s track record. For four years
now, the department has been given a qualified audit report, and this year
with the disclaimer to boot, mainly because the department failed to
disclose a transit account with a debit balance of R5,8 million, and which
amount is not recoverable.

There was also failure to provide either explanations or supporting
documentation for R8,3 million credited to a department account from which
R3,1 million has been drawn and which cannot be accounted for. The issue of
missing documentation, the alien deposit bank account and unauthorised
expenditure is scandalous, to say the least.

The department’s explanation to the portfolio committee is unacceptable
and, in trying to justify the disgraceful state of the financial affairs,
the chief financial officer is digging a hole so deep that he cannot climb
out of it. It is clear that he is not up to the job; he has no business
plan in place to address the problems of the department.

I found the director-general’s comment in the advert that the Department of
Home Affairs´ delivery machinery is well oiled and fully functional quite
laughable, really. In fact, the director-general, by his own admission,
ascended the throne knowing nothing about Home Affairs. Well, one year and
two months later, he is none the wiser and his lack of leadership and
oversight by remote control have been much of the department’s undoing.

A forensic audit was requested to address concerns raised by the Auditor-
General. When the Minister became aware of the process happening, she said
at the briefing on 26 May that she had still not been presented even with
the preliminary report. In fact, she went on to say that it was highly
possible that the scale of mismanagement of funds may be much larger than
at first thought. One wonders why she is being protected from actually
seeing the report.

What also emerged during the department’s briefing is that the internal
audit team was unreliable. What is alarming is that they gave no
indications that there were problems, and the chief financial officer also
failed to pick it up. The head of the internal audit team declined to be
present at the briefing. So much for functioning at full steam!

The unfortunate comments by the chairperson that your problems are as a
result of the past, and that the DA contributed to it is absolute nonsense.
The present Minister was a Deputy Minister before becoming a full Minister,
so she is just as accountable.

Immigration control in our country at the present moment is sorely lacking
both in professionalism and capacity. Firstly, the Minister needs to
explain her failure to set up a new Immigration Advisory Board, IAB, since
August last year. The IAB has an important role to play in combating South
Africa’s scarce skills crisis by formulating immigration policy and
assisting the Minister in the implementation of that policy. Her foot-
dragging has resulted in the transitional chairperson of the board, Prof
Levy, resigning.

The vision of the Department of Home Affairs to deliver a world-class
service in respect of immigration is failing miserably. The lack of staff
at most ports of entry over long weekends and public holidays and the
consequent chaos are regular occurrences.

Home Affairs cannot control its staff and is incapable of making
contingency plans. The department allows too many staff members to take
leave at peak periods and has no reserves to fill the vacancies. Earlier
this year, passengers on an international flight from Nigeria, which landed
in the early hours of the morning, entered the country without being
screened by the immigration officials. This a clear sign of lack of co-
ordination, foresight and planning.

While the department has indeed made some progress in respect of corruption
within its ranks, it is my considered opinion that the pace is too slow.
What is alarming is the fact that 10 000 passports were found in the United
Kingdom. A forensic audit by the Government Printing Works, GPW, confirmed
that the passports are indeed authentic South African passports. It is also
clear that a syndicate within Home Affairs is responsible for the theft,
but no arrests have been made to date. The question is: Why?

The department has, by its own admission, stated in its strategic plan that
the quality of service they deliver is often inadequate. The much vaunted
turnaround strategy remains a dream of the Department of Home Affairs.
Furthermore, they acknowledge in the annual report that they have not yet
come to terms with the challenges of transformation and change.

I would like to applaud the Minister for her open and frank engagement with
the portfolio committee. In your own words, Minister, the reality of
inadequate training, understaffing and poor office location has hindered
progress in your portfolio and impeded the realisation of Batho Pele in the
fullest sense of the word.

However, Minister, as the political head, the buck does stop with you.
Heads must roll for such incompetence and insufficiency, and the DA urges
you to take swift action against those incompetent officials and to bring
in the skills that you actually need to help you improve service delivery
and actually make the Home Affairs motto of being a caring, compassionate
and responsive department a reality.

The DA will not pronounce itself on the budget today. We await further
discussion and logical reasonable interaction with the department before we
do so.

In conclusion, I would like to place on record my appreciation to my
colleagues in the Portfolio Committee of Home Affairs, under the
chairpersonship of the hon Chauke, for the genuine collegiality amidst
which we conduct our oversight work. We are allowed to air our opinions and
engage each other vigorously without fear of censure, although I must admit
that I was a bit taken aback by his comments today. It is a pleasure to
serve on the committee. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs I MARS: Madam Speaker, Minister, Deputy Minister and colleagues, Home
Affairs is bound to protect and regulate the interests of South Africans
regarding their individual status, identity and specific rights. This we
fully support.

The portfolio committee met with the department only last Friday and
yesterday to receive and interrogate the strategic plan for 2006, 2007 and
2008, and the annual report of 2004-05. Believe it or not, it is necessary
to schedule a further meeting to complete our work.

Now, it has been stated - and it has to be repeated – that the internal
mechanisms in the department leave much to be desired. I think there has
been total uniformity in our thinking in the Portfolio Committee on Home
Affairs that this is so. The interesting thing is that on 28 May, the
Sunday Tribune printed an article on the perceived weaknesses of the
oversight role of Parliament.
Please note that the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs has exercised its
mandate, despite the very poor responses from the department concerned. I
think this is where the main problem lies.

I know our chairman referred to our previous Minister, the hon Buthelezi,
and tried to put the blame on the past, but then he also said that it was
not the Minister, that it was the department. So, we agree that there is
very poor leadership currently, and this has manifested itself in the late
delivery of all reports, which has made the oversight work very difficult.

Now some months ago, as you have already heard, the committee engaged with
the Auditor-General and the department in order to understand the reasons
for the delays in the auditing process. The committee was only able – as I
told you before – to address and deal with these matters on Friday and
yesterday, and will have to continue on Wednesday. This is after the budget
speech.

It has to be noted that the initial response by the department to the
Auditor-General’s presentation was received by us with grave concern. Very
correctly the Minister, in her address to the portfolio committee, stated
that the department would have to make a serious commitment to addressing
the challenges and that it would have to live up to ensuring that there
would be an improvement in the lives of the people we serve.

The Minister also committed herself to reporting back to the committee on a
recently completed forensic audit regarding the suspension of a number of
individuals. We await this report with interest.

But we have to keep on registering our concern, which keeps on reflecting
the department’s lack of capacity and lack of leadership. Take the dismal
response to the 25 300 refugees, of whom only 23% have been dealt with. The
slowness of the process exposes noncitizens to police harassment and
xenophobia and, in some instances, drives them to criminal activities.

The issue of smart cards for refugees is a matter of great urgency. It may
become necessary to relook at the process of how to obtain these documents
and to make absolutely sure that the officials dealing with these people
are properly trained, are understanding and have some caring, some
compassion, for the plight that these people find themselves in.

We as the portfolio committee – and I must congratulate our chairman on
this – interacted with about 700 refugees in the Old Assembly last year,
and we listened to their many concerns. With South Africa’s strong
commitment to a human rights culture, it is imperative to address this
matter.

There is also the issue of processing the applications for permanent
residence for 17 000 foreigners. The outcome of these processes and that of
the asylum seekers have an impact on their futures, their families and
their professional lives.

We noted with interest in the 2006, 2007 and 2008 strategic plan that the
strategy delivery model puts the needs of the client in the centre of all
activities. Of course we all support this. However, this, as you know, is
not the way the client perceives Home Affairs. I won’t go into the details
of the many sad tales; they are published in the media daily. Members of
Parliament are very aware of them. They have difficulties themselves, as do
their own families and the communities they serve.

We hear a lot about vision and strategies and there are many, many
wonderful words that are meant to make us have confidence in the processes
we are currently involved in. But it would be a good idea if senior
personnel actually went to deal with their clients in their offices and
listened to the difficulties that they encountered. This interaction with
clients and officials is what the portfolio committee does very
successfully, and that is what enables us to speak on these matters with
authority.

It is very disappointing that having heard all the difficulties that have
been encountered, out of a budget of R2,8 billion, the allocation to
training has only increased by R4 million and stands at a total of
R28 million to train staff members. Now, we find it extremely difficult to
benchmark this training. We can only hope one day, when we check with our
clients again, that they have noticed a difference in the response from the
department and the service point. We do hope for this, because they deserve
it.

Last year we launched the immigration service, in terms of which the
current budget received R100 million, to improve salaries and build
capacity. We note that immigration officers are not yet in their new blue
uniforms and that there remains a number of vacant posts. Thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M R SIKAKANE: Madam Speaker, I would like to engage, one-on- one, with
member Kalyan when we leave this House, and teach her a bit of
constitutional law. She cannot equate the position of a Minister to a
Deputy Minister. They are so different.

Secondly, perhaps she never had to carry a dompas. My first employment was
at a notorious place in Durban called KwaMuhle. When I got there I worked
with the ANC stalwart, Johnny Makhatini. It was a place where people were
ordered to leave when they didn’t qualify to be in Durban. He taught me
that you must use names that are always spelt wrongly, and so forth. That
was the way we avoided sending people out of Durban. The mistakes you find
in IDs today are old problems, which are as old as Matlosela. Don’t take it
as if it is a new thing.

Having said that, let me highlight that Home Affairs is a unique department
whereby all the people of South Africa who are born, unborn, married,
unmarried, alive or dead, inside and outside the country, merely have to go
to Home Affairs to obtain whatever they need. Therefore, our benchmark
should be how to improve the situation.

Going back to the time that I am telling the member Kaylan about, I can say
that Rome was not built in one day. We should be asking ourselves how much
has been done. That is the key.

Let me give you the synopsis of what has been achieved or done in terms of
service delivery. There have been registration campaigns. Up to 1,4 million
children up to the age of 14 years have been registered. There has been a
review of marriage legislation in collaboration with the South African law
reform in as far as fraudulent marriages are concerned. A campaign to say,
“Check your marital status,” was launched in August 2004.

More than 179 000 IDs were checked, 2 636 alleged frauds detected, and
1 979 fraudulent cases successfully expunged. Up to 18 000 citizens came
forward to register their customary unions. Those men and women who want to
do customary marriages are free to do it. It is the law of the country. Up
to 68 hospitals were equipped with one line of birth and death registration
facilities. Mobile units that were ordered were 67 and all of them have
been distributed to various provinces.

Remember, there is only one Department of Home Affairs in the country, and
Home Affairs has to move and come up with the strategy that meets the
daily, monthly and yearly demands, and those of the years to come. The
establishment of client service centres, such as the multipurpose centres,
MPCs, that are visited by hundreds to obtain information and services, is a
catalyst to our shortcomings in home affairs.

Offices have been expanded, and the plan to do more is in place. There has
been great participation in the MPCs countrywide. There has been the launch
of the “The Client is Always Right” campaign. There are ongoing talks and
motivations to employees about changing their minds. On that, I suppose the
members in the House are witness to this effect.

Today when you get to Home Affairs, wherever you go, you find a different
attitude altogether. It is like when I go to the Empangeni police station.
I made a remark and wrote to the director-general there. I find it
wonderful when you come to a police station and the police personnel get up
and say: “Can we help you?” That is the attitude and culture that this
government has brought to this country. [Applause.]

That is what you find when you come to Home Affairs today. You find a
different attitude altogether. As a human being, it doesn’t matter if you
don’t obtain what you want, as long as you have been received with dignity
and decency, which is what we need. It is a culture that has only been
brought by this Department of Home Affairs. [Applause.]

Let me take this opportunity - my time is very short - and thank Mr Joe
Tshabalala who is the DDG for civic services, for the stunning work he did
for the stranded South Africans in China late last year. Three ladies ... I
am sure the Minister doesn’t get to know these mishaps. Three ladies went
to China, and they were robbed of their belongings when they were in
transit. They lost their money, they lost their tickets, and they lost
their passports. These were all snatched from them.

I was contacted immediately, and when I got this call from those stranded
South Africans, I called Mr Tshabalala, and he responded with vigour. He
commanded Home Affairs in Shanghai to assist them. They were given money,
they were given tickets and they were given passports, and they were able
to fly back to South Africa. [Applause.]

Incidentally, a week later, one gentleman went to China again. At the
airport in Hong Kong his passport was full. (Interjections.) I didn’t say
so. You don’t listen. His passport was full and they could not paste his
visa into his passport. They contacted me again, and I immediately called
Mr Tshabalala and he did the same. This gentleman slept at the airport. He
couldn’t leave the airport in Hong Kong. Mr Tshabalala immediately called
our Home Affairs in Hong Kong, and this man got his passport and he
proceeded into China. [Applause.]

This is a great achievement. That is why I have passion for service
delivery, and the Department of Home Affairs has been able to do all this.
Thank you very much. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms N C NKABINDE: Madam Speaker, and hon members, the Department of Home
Affairs is one of the departments that South Africans have to interact with
on a regular basis. Out of necessity, citizens require a variety of
services from the department. Whilst taxpayers fund this department to the
tune of billions of rands a year, this does not translate into basic
service delivery.

Any South African will tell you that their regular visits to the offices of
the Department of Home Affairs are a long and arduous affair of endless
queues and inefficiency. Perhaps we would be able to simply accept this
state of affairs if not for the strikingly contrasting experience that we
experience at other places.
If we take, for example, the South African Revenue Service, Sars, which
also interacts regularly with most citizens, despite the huge amount of
people demanding service, the usual experience at the Sars office is one of
efficiency, speed and even friendliness. Why can one government department
achieve the Batho Pele objective so comprehensively, whilst another fails
so dismally? South African taxpayers deserve better than what many home
affairs offices currently provide.

Another example is the continuing corruption and incidents of identity
fraud and fake marriage schemes. When can we expect this disease to be
rooted out once and for all? The department’s record of dealing with
illegal immigration has not been a shining one. Now we learn that officials
of the department have been involved in a shadowy affair, wherein an
individual was supposedly deported to Pakistan. Only, he seems to have
disappeared.

The Department of Home Affairs is the custodian of many human rights
entrenched in the Constitution, and it must therefore always be seen to
strictly uphold and defend those rights.

It would be a terrible shame and a blot on the name of our country if it
were to emerge that the department was involved in kidnapping somebody.
Extradition and deportation procedures provide for legal and constitutional
methods to deal with criminals or suspected criminals. Even convicted
criminals are treated constitutionally. They cannot simply be handed over
to unknown foreigners, flown off, and then disappear without a trace.

These are the tactics and the immorality of apartheid’s secret hit squads.
They are indefensible and have no place in the new South Africa. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, I am sure that the hon
member who just spoke, reads too many newspapers. [Laughter.] We are
honoured today to have to present our Budget Vote before this august House,
to account for the progress we have made towards fulfilling the objective
to deliver quality service to our people, and to table before you our plans
for the new year.

We are mindful of the high expectations of our people and their impatience
with the lack of quality and convenient service delivery. They are aware of
the enormous challenges that they have to confront daily, in their quest to
obtain home affairs services.

While we have witnessed a radical change in leadership vision and strategy,
we have, at the same time, been witness to a great struggle between the old
that is refusing to die and the new that is battling to be born.

What appear as intractable problems are in actual fact putrid and stubborn
tendencies of the past that we can and must overcome. We have been candid
in approaching these problems, mindful of the fact that while we did not
create them, we, however, have the responsibility to resolve them.

At the heart of our services stands each one of the millions of South
Africans to whom we must deliver a convenient and professional service. We
have a strategic role to play in the Accelerated and Shared Growth
Initiative for South Africa, to provide enabling documents to South
Africans and foreign nationals, each of who are vital both to the pursuit
of this programme, as well as the fulfilment of its objectives.

Our department is challenged to manage both civic services as well as
international migration, to ensure that such management of migration leads
to development - both for ourselves, as well as our neighbours.

In presenting this Budget Vote, we rededicate ourselves to the noble vision
of the youth of 1976 and pay tribute to their heroism. In his book, The
Wretched of the Earth, Frantz Fanon says, and I quote:


  A government which calls itself a national government ought to take
  responsibility for the totality of the nation; and in an underdeveloped
  country the young people represent one of the most important sectors.

Accordingly, as our contribution to deepening youth participation and
development today, and in partnership with the Department of Education and
other partners, we have embarked on a national campaign targeting students
to raise their level of social consciousness and civic responsibilities,
and have thus far been to three provinces.

In addition to this and in order further to raise our capacity to discharge
our responsibilities, we have implemented an extensive internship
programme, recruiting 734 interns since 2004, and permanently appointing
213 of them. Currently, there are 280 interns in the department and we
shall on Friday launch the National Youth Service Programme by recruiting
300 unemployed matriculants for placement in the frontline offices, mobile
units, MPCCs and hospitals.

We have also deployed the mobile units to schools in various provinces to
assist the learners to obtain birth certificates and IDs. We shall continue
to expand this programme. [Applause.]

We have continued also to provide hands-on leadership to the Film and
Publication Board, FPB, the Government Printing Works, GPW, and Information
Services Branch, and continued in all these organisations to consolidate
the leadership and management structure, making new strategic recruitments
and enhancing the capacity of the provinces.
At GPW, we have filled the key management positions crucial for the optimal
functioning of the institution and addressed the challenges of personnel
and human resources, thus stemming the loss of qualified personnel and
artisans, as well as attracting the right calibre of people to enable it to
attain its goals.

We shall continue during this year, vigorously and purposefully, to
implement the Human Resource Development Plan, to continue to build the
capacity of the GPW and FPB, and modernise and transform them, paying
attention to the question of what type of people we are recruiting, what
are their competencies and skills levels and what value are they going to
add to our organisations. We are proceeding to enhance the
professionalisation of these institutions through training, including for
examiners in the FPB.

We have continued to pursue the ideal of e-government in order to provide
integrated and convenient service to citizens through the use of
information systems, with the intention to transform home affairs into the
model user of ICTs.

This relates to the deployment of 67 highly equipped mobile units, the
computerisation of our offices at home and abroad, linked to our mainframe,
the installation of vital registration computer equipment in hospitals and
making progress towards live capture and integrated client service
consoles.

Towards this end, we will complete the Back Record Conversion by June this
year and complete the absorption of the records into the Hanis System in
2007. I am sorry about that.

During 2007, we shall both begin to pilot the e-passport and finalise
outstanding issues regarding the Smart ID Card. We shall, before the end of
2007, launch the Live Capture pilot project in the Northern Cape and, in
due course, extend it to all our offices countrywide, which will, in the
fullness of time, serve to eliminate manual applications and paper-based
workflow processes, which have caused files to get lost, names, surnames
and dates of birth to be wrong and many other problems.

This will put an end to archaic workflow processes, such that in future
when looking at home affairs today, people will look at it as a Jurassic
Park.

During the past year we adopted the turnaround strategy for the FPB and
began to implement it. We have also begun to strengthen compliance with
corporate governance principles within the FPB. There is now a fully
functional audit committee and we are happy to have had a clean report in
the previous financial year.

The campaign against child pornography continued to receive our close
attention, and we pursued it vigorously, further raising its profile
throughout the country through a variety of activities, including
conducting training for public prosecutors, forging strategic partnerships,
enhancing the call centre and recruiting more compliance monitors.

We are happy to report that compliance with the Act in general has
drastically improved and mobile phone operators adopted a code of good
practice to protect the children. We shall further seek ways to bring
broadcasters and the print media within the classification framework. We
shall also finalise this year the long promised ministerial task team on
child pornography.

During this financial year, we will further make the FPB fully compliant in
respect of corporate governance by appointing both the chairperson and the
deputy chairperson; pursuing the recommendations of the forensic audit; and
recommending comprehensive legislative amendments, which will also impact
upon the structure of the board.

During the previous year, we took new and further strides to strengthen,
reposition and transform the GPW to function like a business, addressing
the problems that hitherto existed.

The Ministerial Advisory Committee we had established to further advise us
on the conversion of the GPW has completed its work and handed over to us
its report containing its recommendations. We shall soon take to Cabinet
our recommendations, with the intention to convert the GPW into an
efficient and effective specialist security-printing agency.

To ensure maximum security printing of all security items, in conditions
requisite to support the processes of such scale, we shall complete the
relocation of the GPW to a specially designed complex by December 2007. It
is our intention to move the production and printing of all security
documents under the precincts of the GPW, to ensure that it happens under
maximum security in order to drastically reduce human intervention and
maximise the integrity of the process as a whole.

Many of our people treat their identity documents and passport documents
with frightening flippancy, losing them easily and without care, hence
resulting in many undeserving people fraudulently obtaining our
citizenship. We must take this opportunity to issue a clarion call to all
South Africans to respect and protect their identity documents and
passports and not lose them easily.

Furthermore, we must appeal to them, even those who may not think they
would ever travel abroad, to apply for regular passports in order to
eliminate the need for temporary passports. In time, we may have to do away
with the idea of temporary passports as this system is greatly abused,
difficult to manage and is causing enormous security and integrity
challenges internationally.

The GPW, working with home affairs, is developing additional security
features for all our security documents in order to enhance their
integrity. In view of the fact that technological improvements occur at a
very fast pace, and bearing in mind all the challenges the GPW shall in
future face, a machinery and equipment replacement programme of about R95
million shall commence this year.

The forensic audit was completed and action shall continue to be taken
during this financial year through involving relevant law enforcement
agencies and, at the same time, taking necessary disciplinary action
against certain members.

Furthermore, we shall expand the GPW into Africa, seeking to establish
strategic partners through developing unique capabilities; develop a
comprehensive transformation strategy for the organisation; develop
research and develop capacity; and continue to enhance all-round security,
both in terms of systems and processes of printing and production.

It is obvious from our plans that we know what to do; we know how to do it;
and we know why we should do it. Recently, a bank advert on TV indicated
that there would never be empty queues at home affairs, and indeed we
agree, because there are more people who need home affairs services than
they would ever need the banks.

Our challenge is not to finish up the queues, but to manage them better and
efficiently, and in the process ensure that the services rendered are
convenient and efficient. It is correct that our people should be impatient
for change and it is correct that they should criticise us; as much as they
can and as vociferously as they should, so that we do not become complacent
but continue to be kept on our toes.

The problems that we are dealing with have been raised with us a million
times by many of our people we have interacted with in our offices during
izimbizo and other sessions when we interacted with the staff and officials
of home affairs. We know them very well; we are facing up to them; we are
courageous enough to admit and concede to them and we promise that we will,
and shall deal with them decisively.

Our challenge is to retain our singular gaze at a comprehensive and
sustainable solution to the problem and harness and fire with enthusiasm
all the progressive forces for change we can muster in the department to
discharge our common responsibility.

I wish to thank the Minister, the staff of the Ministry, the director-
general and his entire team, as well as the CEOs of the FPB and GPW, the
chairperson of the portfolio committee and the entire committee, as well as
my wife and family for all their support and tolerance. [Applause.]
Ms N F MATHIBELA: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, let me state
upfront that the ANC supports the Budget Vote. The department’s activities
are divided into four programmes, namely, Administration, Services to
Citizens, Immigration and Auxiliary and Associated Services. The focus of
my discussion will be on Auxiliary and Associated Services.

The Auxiliary and Associated Services Programme comprises of the Film and
Publication Board, the Independent Electoral Commission, the Government
Printing Works, the Government Motor Transport, which is responsible for
the purchase and maintenance of the department’s transport fleet, and the
property management, whose task it is to manage buildings that are occupied
by the department across the country.

Due to time constraints to focus on all components of the Auxiliary and
Associated Services Programme, I will only discuss the following three: the
Independent Electoral Commission, the Film and Publication Board and the
Government Printing Works.

The Independent Electoral Commission, IEC, was established under Chapter 9
of the 1996 Constitution to assist in strengthening our constitutional
democracy through the delivery of free and fair elections. To date, the IEC
has contributed immensely and decisively to the credibility and stability
of our democracy.

Over the last three national and local government elections, the IEC had
not only highly impressed those of us supporting the development of
democracy in the country, but also those pessimists amongst us who do not
believe that South Africa has what it takes to grow into a leading
democracy. All our elections have been bluntly free and fair. Furthermore,
the IEC has continued to ensure optimum service delivery to our people.

During the first local government elections in March, the IEC increased
voting stations from just under 15 000 to 17 000 for the the 2004 national
and provincial elections just fewer than 15 000 during the 1999 national
and provincial elections.

The increase in voting stations was necessitated by the high number of
voters registered to vote, as well as the commission’s commitment to
improve the service delivery to rural as well as informal settlement’s
communities, by bringing voting stations closer to our poor communities and
thus ensuring that our people no longer have to travel long distances to
reach voting stations.

The commission’s budget for the year 2005-06 was accordingly increased by
R160 million. The IEC’s track record has not entrenched the stability of
our democracy, but has also made the commission one of the most sought-
after South African products. As we speak, the commission is assisting the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in organising and managing its elections.
The commission has also contributed to the electoral process of various
African countries and indications are that this will continue to be the
case.

The department salutes the sterling work done by the commission and remains
committed in supporting the commission in carrying out its duties.

The second component of the Auxiliary and Associated Services Programme I
wish to deal with is the Film and Publication Board. This is a body
established to, amongst others, regulate the creation, production and
possession of, and to fight the scourge of child pornography in our country
by ensuring that children are neither used in pornographic films nor
exposed to pornographic material.

Rapid technological developments have sadly made it even more difficult for
the department through, amongst others, the Film and Publication Board, to
fight the scourge of child pornography as well as exposure of our children
to pornographic material.

Different suppliers of pornographic material have used loopholes in
legislation to distribute pornographic material without putting in place
measures aimed at minimising children’s exposure and/or access to such
material. There is, therefore, a need for the Films and Publications Act to
be amended in order to tighten the screws on child pornography. Thank you,
Chairperson. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, hon Minister, last year the ACDP supported the
department’s Turnaround Strategy and its Budget Vote, notwithstanding
various reservations and the qualified Auditor-General’s report. It must
have been a shock to you this year with the Auditor-General’s disclaimer
and clearly, in our view, your department has let you down.

One of the main deficiencies, as pointed out by previous speakers, relates
to the failure of the Internal Audit Committee to timeously alert
management to severe internal control weaknesses. It is clear that for the
reporting period, the internal audit division did not operate effectively,
if at all, and it is regrettable that the chairperson of this internal
audit division did not appear before the portfolio committee.

Indeed, the Attorney-General points out that up to the time of his review
in August 2005, no internal audit report had been issued relating to the
period August 2004 to March 2005 - almost in excess of six months. This is
the crux of the problem. There were alarm bells expressed by both the audit
committee - that is not the internal audit committee but another audit
committee - the previous Attorney-General’s Report, as well as the Standing
Committee on Public Accounts, but these were not responded to, resulting in
the disclaimer by the Auditor-General.

It is disgraceful that notwithstanding this clear evidence of significant
financial accounting deficiencies, the department was trying to explain and
introduce the middle steps and also tried to attack the integrity of the
Auditor-General’s office. It is important to note that this is a Chapter 9
institution and independent and one of the organs of state that should
protect the impartiality, dignity and effectiveness of this institution.

However, we welcome your urgent interventions and we trust that the
invoking of the Public Finance Management Act provisions to obtain
treasuries´ assistance will assist and rectify the situation.

Whilst we appreciate that there are severe challenges facing this
department, on behalf of the ACDP we would like to thank all those
dedicated staff members for their committed and hard work in the
department. There have been significant improvements in a number of areas
as explained by the department and we look forward to an unqualified clean
bill of health from the Auditor-General in years to come. Thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr W M SKHOSANA: Chairperson, Minister of Home Affairs, Deputy Minister of
Home Affairs, Ministers, directors-general, deputy directors-general and
staff members of Home Affairs, South Africa belongs to all who live in it,
black and white. This is a clause in the Freedom Charter. It is also the
responsibility of Home Affairs to ensure that that happens.

The transition to a democratic state and the restructuring of apartheid
institutions is proving to be a lot more complex and challenging than
anticipated. The challenges of the global environment and South Africa’s
engagement with both international institutions and world powers have
multiple impacts on the development process, persistent poverty levels and
the continuing vulnerability of children. The Department of Home Affairs is
seeing to it that when a child is born its birth certificate already
contains identity document numbers, which was not the case before.

The development imperatives, as voiced by people at all levels, challenge
the government to respond in a significant way to the needs of the people,
but government’s capacity is constrained by a number of factors. These
factors include the structures and management. Also, when the national
budget is drawn up, it has to provide for South Africa’s internal and
external debt.

The Turnaround Strategy represents a dream of Home Affairs for the future.
This, in combination with effective leadership, can create the energy that
is required to make this happen. If you combine the energy that the
Minister is putting into her work with the energy that the department is
supposed to bring to ensure that the turnaround strategy becomes a reality,
we can achieve the dream that we all want to see.

The government does not function in isolation but is inevitably part of the
integrated governance system. This is one of the aspects that this
government and this organisation are looking into. You cannot deal with
Home Affairs in isolation from other departments, because of each and every
document that a South African citizen needs. Our population of about 44
million people, black and white, are looking to Home Affairs, and they all
want to identify themselves as citizens of this country.

Through optimum utilisation of information and technology, the department
can address the service delivery required by different business areas. One
of the main strategic areas of the department is the development of
information technology and systems to improve service delivery to all
stakeholders, as in the case of the Hanis project.

The strategic plan of the Department of Home Affairs seeks to address all
these challenges. The Department of Home Affairs, together with the
Department of Foreign Affairs, have put corrective measures in place
regarding the vouchers. We note the disclaimers by the Auditor-General. We
welcome the controls that are being put in place.
We also welcome the measures, which are being taken by the department in
terms of section 45 of the Public Finance Management Act. We appreciate and
welcome this.

We also welcome the efforts by the director-general and the department, in
order to avoid another disclaimer, to ensure that important documents which
may be needed for auditing 2005-06 are placed in a secure filing room. It
is important to accept that we are looking at these challenges. We are
going to address them, and we are going to win at the end of the day.

In saying that the Department of Home Affairs cannot work in isolation, we
also note that we are not only looking at the citizens of this country, but
we are also dealing with people who are coming into this country as
tourists. It is the responsibility of the Department of Local Government to
see to it that those people get a proper reception at immigration and get
correct documentation, so that we can know who is in and who is out.

It is important that the Department of Home Affairs should have each and
every person’s data in the Hanis system. It has been in existence since
1996, but even though it takes time, let us be patient, because we don’t
want to enter wrong data into the system. [Time expired.] I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson, hon members, for any country to attract
immigrants or even tourists, the Department of Home Affairs should be
operating well, because any entrant into a country meets Home Affairs
employees first at the ports of entry.

Our position is that any leader accepts the position with assets and
liabilities, and therefore we don’t accept fingers being pointed at past
leaders of the department. We note, however, that the Minister is taking
full responsibility.

The UCDP would like to commend the department on mounting the “Lokisa
Ditokomane” campaign, which benefited thousands of people by correcting
their surnames, first names, additional names and dates of birth. It is
unfortunate, however, that even with the best efforts and intentions, some
cases still fall between the cracks, as in the case of the young man who,
in frustration, ended up holding an official hostage in Johannesburg.

Another feather to add to the cap of the department is the fight against
fraudulent marriages and the tacit agreement with the Department of Justice
to expunge such marriages from the roll as soon as it is established that
they are fraudulent.

We applaud the steel muscles developed by the Deputy Minister against child
pornography. This makes us in the UCDP feel there is a willingness to
regenerate morality. This measure has our full support and puts paid to the
chatterboxes who say they are not Christians and will not heed the Ten
Commandments.

From a humanitarian point of view, the UCDP laments the plight of refugees
and asylum seekers. These people in need are not taken quite as seriously
as they should be by bureaucrats in the department.

While good progress has been registered in some fields, there is great
concern about the financial accounting practices of the department, as has
already been said. It seems the department finds it difficult to rid itself
of qualified Auditor-General reports. Year in and year out Home Affairs is
pointed at.

The filling of vacant managerial posts and the creation of more posts in
the department sounds good, but if these incumbents do not deliver, that is
money down the drain. The government should not be equated with or mistaken
for a breeding place for fat cats. There is work to be done. [Time
expired.] Thank you.

Mr S S VUNDISA: Chairperson, hon Ministers, Minister of Home Affairs,
Deputy Minister of Home Affairs, distinguished guests, as the ANC we
support the Budget Vote. Home Affairs is the home for all, even the
homeless. Home Affairs is the backbone of the country. Home Affairs remains
a gateway to access services and will be forever.
These statements define the way society views and values this department.
This is the home that defines love and extravagance to society at large. I
take this opportunity to acknowledge the contributions of our provincial
managers and provincial directors. I recognise the gallant spirit of the
DG, the DDG’s development cadres, who ride in his shade with the principles
of Batho Pele.

During the state of the nation address in 2006 the President said that
government must focus and pay attention to achieving a better life for all.
This will be realised through efficient and effective service delivery.
This requires the department to continue its efforts of skills development,
human capacity-building, a well-functioning infrastructure and more
importantly, the department must ensure that its branches serve the people
and are accessible.

Indeed, their work and the work of the portfolio committee remain critical
to integration and the implementation of our goal of providing
comprehensive service delivery, that will ultimately ensure that the
mandate of a better life for all as advantaged by the ANC-led government,
is realised.

Sihlalo, uRhulumente okhokelwa liSebe lezeKhaya ukwazile ukumisela inkqubo
yokunikezwa kweencwadi zokuzalwa kwabantwana kwizibhedlele ezingaphezu
kwama-50. Le nkqubo inceda abantwana abangama-27 898. UmPhathiswa weSebe
lezeKhaya uye wagxininisa wafakela iicomputerized mobile units ezingama-67
zona ezisasazwe ngokwamaphondo ukuncedisana nabo abangakwazi kufikelela
ezidolophini ukuze bafumane iincwadi zezazisi, iincwadi zokuzalwa kunye
neencwadi zabo bathe itshoba lalala umbethe. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraph follows.)

[Chairperson, the ANC-led government has launched a project that will
provide certificates in more than 50 hospitals. This programme will benefit
27 898 children. The Minister of Home Affairs has insisted on establishing
67 computerised mobile units in all provinces to produce IDs, birth
certificates and death certificates, thereby meeting the needy people who
cannot reach the towns.]

As the ANC we believe that the Department of Home Affairs will continue to
proceed to identify members of the population and grant them specific
rights and powers. The department will speedily take some drastic measures
to distribute IDs through post offices and also use mobile units. Home
Affairs will continue to provide ID documents to the poor and the
marginalised to have the right to vote and that can be extended to grade 12
learners, before they start writing their final examination; to have a
right to receive social grants, to have a right to foster grants, to have a
right to disability grants and to receive old age pensions. Home Affairs
will proceed with the issuing of passports to enable international journeys
as well as investors to travel overseas. The department has managed to
establish satellites and new offices throughout the country.

During August 2004 our Minister launched the checking of marital status
campaign to ensure that our fellow South Africans are not fraudulently
married to illegal aliens. The department had received a total of 179 123
marriage status enquiries and 2 636 alleged fraudulent marriages were
identified. Home Affairs has prompted citizens to register customary
marriages.

Our Minister also launched the Lokisa Ditokomane/Lungiza Izincwadi
Campaign. This can be attributed to the legacy of our past apartheid system
to print our names and surnames incorrectly.

As the ANC we seek to pronounce clearly to those who seek to stall and
undermine the transformation agenda, that they have no powers in South
Africa. As the ANC we draw our mandate from the masses. We do not draw our
mandate from the pollsters as others, who deny the poor and the
marginalised farmworkers access to the right to a dignified burial and
birth certificates. Furthermore, they ploughed over their graves so that
their graves could not be identified and unveiled. Some of them are still
tailing behind their forefathers as shadows, who are architects of a
segregated identity document.

The continual threat and behaviour shown by the DA is bad news for South
Africans, as it is clear that they do not care about the interest of the
poor masses of our country.

Mr M J ELLIS: We do; that is why ...
Mr S S VUNDISA: Instead they represent a wealthy few, with exclusive
interests. The people of South Africa and the South Africans in particular,
they must never forgive the DA for their bad choices. [Interjections.]
During the public hearings it becomes clear that they favour the status
quo. This was indicative of the fact that they advocate the continued
marginalisation of the previous disadvantaged majority of our people. On
that note, Kalyan, the ANC continues to be the political home of all, black
and white, united in determining the future ...

Mr T D LEE: Chairperson, is it Mrs Kalyan or the hon Kalyan?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon member, will you address
members as “hon members”.

Mr S S VUNDISA:  It depends. It is Mrs.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon member, will you address
members as “hon members”.

Mr S S VUNDISA: Honourable, honourable.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon member, please proceed with
your speech.

Mr M J ELLIS: It is not worth listening to.
Mr S S VUNDISA: I would like to tell hon Kalyan that she must respect our
Minister and our department. She must not run to the papers. [Time
expired.][Applause.]

Mr T M LIKOTSI: Chairperson, the Pan-Africanist Congress of Azania welcomes
the budget estimate as tabled before us in this House. The Department of
Home Affairs has many challenges and increased financial injections in this
department will assist towards addressing some of these challenges. The
topmost challenge from the PAC of Azania’s perspective is the inability to
provide IDs to orphans and displaced citizens. As a result they forfeit the
right to grants and pension payouts.

There is drug trafficking, smuggling of illegal goods, pirate copies, bank
robberies, abductions and murders, such as the one of the late Leigh
Matthews, child abuse, pornography, etc. Suspected immigrants mostly do all
of this. Home Affairs has no systems in place to monitor and control the
movements of these immigrants as soon as they enter our country legally or
otherwise. There is a systematic strategy of gang-raping women, as seen
when two Indians this weekend abducted and gang-raped a youth of 20 years
old in Bloemfontein.

Some of the offices of Home Affairs are not client-friendly. In
Bloemfontein the offices are situated at the upper level. The aged and
disabled are not comfortable in accessing these offices through lifts or
stairs. Some of these offices are still located in the cities and towns,
while the majority of their clients live in the townships. In essence, they
are forced to pay indirectly for acquiring the IDs, death and birth
certificates through transport and food money they have to spend to travel
to these offices.

The issue of service points in small towns has to be revisited. It is risky
for officials who have to drive to these points, as they are exposed to
criminals. They carry the income of the day and that will only be deposited
at the bank the following working day. A case in point here is Mantsupa in
Ladybrand and many other such areas in the country. The PAC supports the
Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the MF acknowledges the department’s
challenging task to protect and uphold the identity of every citizen of
South Africa and every person resident in South Africa. It is to an extent
discouraging that the media constantly discloses ID forgery and corruption.
We would have hoped that by now the problem would be contained, but it
appears that the department needs to toughen its stance on these corrupt
officials and offenders.

The MF acknowledges the department’s strategies, goals and objectives and
in our view the department is on the right track to turn around the dilemma
of Home Affairs in South Africa. We note the department’s decrease in
budget to be well reasoned after the transfer of funds to the IEC last
year, and we thereby support the allocation made to the department this
year to sustain its endeavours.

We question how the shortage of skills is being addressed through the
department by the appointment of immigrants and why our largely unemployed
desperately willing and seeking local residents cannot fill this gap. Also,
what are these skills shortages and how is the appointment of such
immigrants being monitored and maintained?

We do, however, see that the department’s objectives tie in well with the
endeavours of government as laid out in the state of the nation address. We
do believe that many challenges are evident but we are confident that with
this year’s budget, the department shall overcome challenges in the sector
to secure the identity of every South African, and provide us all with more
efficient and effective service at our departmental offices. The MF
supports the Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Mrs M M MAUNYE: Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon Deputy Ministers, comrades
and colleagues, the ANC supports the budget. Our country faces
developmental challenges. Meeting developmental challenges cannot be
separated from the quest for peace and democracy in Africa and the world.
This means that we must recommit ourselves to the injunction of the Freedom
Charter that South Africa shall strive to maintain world peace and the
settlement of international disputes by negotiations and not war.

Through the vision of the revolutionary Freedom Charter, 51 years ago, our
people outlined the way in which to relate with the peoples of the
continent and the world. The focus of my input in this debate will be on
the immigration activities that our department has to deal with and our
perspectives on immigrants.

We have acknowledged that our country faces a shortage of skills in certain
critical areas. To address this challenge, and in addition to the skills
development initiatives that are being taken, we also have to look
elsewhere on the continent and the world. Born out of a colonial
perspective of the past, there still exists a belief among some, that for
us to fill the vacancies that arise from this shortage of skills, we should
look at attracting only the European migrants.

As you will recall, the Department of Home Affairs has committed itself to
improving its services and to better the lives of our people. The portfolio
committee believes that in some areas the department is succeeding. Most of
the things it promised in the last financial year have been done. The
department has moved to transform and reorganise its immigration services.

The new national immigration branch of the department was launched in April
last year. This aimed at making the immigration services professional and
better positioning them to address both our domestic and international
obligations. The work of improving the services that government provides in
the ports of entry has started in earnest through the establishment of an
interdepartmental border control co-ordinating committee, BCOCC, with the
Department of Home Affairs as its convenor.

Among its tasks, the BCOCC will look at infrastructure development, and
seek to improve the state of our border posts, as well as the working of
the department, to ensure that all international airports have dedicated
personnel at counters for the processing of travellers who hold passports
from African states and western countries.

The national immigration branch was launched in 2005 and has the potential
to radically transform and professionalise the department’s immigration
function. After the passing of the Immigration Amendment Act, there has
been extensive consultation on the regulations that are to be used in the
implementation of the Act.

Some of the challenges facing the national immigration branch is the
shortage of personnel, vacant senior posts, working abnormal hours, no
uniform and equipment, and accommodation. We need to address these,
Minister.

There is also a challenge of xenophobia. The department established a task
team to deal specifically with challenges of xenophobia. However, its
objectives have not been met. We have seen these tendencies here in the
Western Cape, in Plettenberg Bay, where a Mozambiquean lost his life
because of racial intolerance. [Interjections.]

The department needs to be represented by officials in countries where
international organisations, such as the International Organisation of
Migration, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and the
African Union, are based. This is critical.

In line with our international obligation, the department has also moved to
reorganise the refugee affairs section, with a view of creating more
capacity in the medium term. The department has also decided that given
many perceptions held about the Lindela Repatriation Centre, both at home
and internationally, it was time for the centre to be opened to the public
to come and visit it. Since then they have addressed a number of problems
that have been reported to us about the centre, and its work has been
demystified.

The department has installed information technology capacity at the centre,
to ensure real time verification of fingerprints at the centre, so that
persons who are taken to the centre are verified and released as soon as
possible. In the quest to encourage regulated human movement, the
department has engaged in several bilateral engagements with most Southern
African Development Community, that is SADC, countries, on visa agreements.
We applaud this.

The release of the illegal Pakistani foreigner is a matter before the
court, and it is a matter of great concern. On the issue of the disclaimer,
the disclaimer is unacceptable. We support the proposal by the Minister and
the chairperson of the portfolio committee regarding the corrective measure
for the wrong that has been done in the department.

Ke tla rata ho bua ka Sesotho ka taba ena ya Xenophobia. Ha ke tsebe hore
Xenophobia ke eng ka Sesotho. Ke bua ka baphaphathehi, e leng batho ba habo
rona ba tswang dinaheng tse ahelaneng le rona. Ba balehetseng ka hare ho
naha ya rona ka mabaka a itseng. Ho molaong, ebile jwaloka leloko la
Matjhaba a Kopaneng (UN), ho tshwanehile hore batho ba jwalo re se ke ra ba
nka jwaloka batho ba siyo molaong. Batho ba jwalo ba tshwanetse hore ba
etse boitsebiso ha ba fihla kahare ho naha, hore boemo ba bona bo tle bo
tsebahale.

Ke ka moo re batlang ho etsa kgoeletso bathong ba habo rona hore, ke nnete,
ho na le batho ba leng ka hare ho naha ba se molaong, empa ho na le bao ba
leng ka hare ho naha e le baphaphathehi. Batho ba jwalo ba taolong ya
mmuso. Ke mmuso o tshwaneng hore o ba hlokomele o ba fe ditokelo tsa bona
jwaloka ha re leloko la Matjhaba a Kopaneng. Ke a leboha, Modulasetulo.
[Mahofi.] (Translation of Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[I would like to express myself in Sesotho on the issue of xenophobia. I do
not know what xenophobia is in Sesotho. I am referring to refugees, our
people from our neighbouring countries who fled to our country for certain
reasons. It is legal, as a member of the United Nations, not to regard such
people as illegal immigrants. Such people should report when they arrive in
the country, so that their status can be known.

We want to appeal to our people, it is true that there are illegal
immigrants, and those who are inside the country as refugees. Such people
are under our government’s control. It is the government that should take
care of them and give them their rights, as we are a member of the United
Nations. I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]]

Mr M SWART: Dankie Voorsitter. Agb Voorsitter ... [Thank you, Chairperson.
Hon Chairperson ...]

... I have listened to a lot of speeches by the ANC this morning and all I
can say about all of them is that I don’t recognise the people that made
them, because they are very different from the people that sat in the
portfolio committee with me over the last few days.

Voorsitter, daar was verskeie aanvalle op vlugtelinge in die laaste tyd van
mense wat hier bly, en die aanvalle en die redes wat aangevoer word is,
xenofobie, of dat daar nie werk is, of dat hulle ons mense se werk afneem.
[Chairperson, lately there have been various attacks on refugees who live
here, and the reasons given for these attacks are xenophobia, or the fact
that there are no jobs, or that they take our people’s jobs.]

And I see the hon Chauke even says it’s racist. How he gets there, only he
will know. [Laughter.]

As die aanvalle xenofobies van aard is, is dit jammer, maar dit moet
nogtans gesien word teen die agtergrond van die swak wyse waarop die
Departement van Binnelandse Sake die beleid ten opsigte van vlugtelinge
toepas.

Suid-Afrika se Wet op Vlugtelinge bepaal dat ’n vlugteling ’n persoon is
wie se lewe in sy land van herkoms bedreig word vanweë sy ras, geslag,
politieke oortuiging of ander redes. Sy lewe word bedreig. Ekonomiese
redes, soos byvoorbeeld ’n gebrek aan werk in die land van herkoms, kan nie
as rede aangevoer word waarna ’n persoon vir vlugtelingstatus kwalifiseer
nie. Dit is ongelukkig juis hier waar die knoop lê.

Daar is op die oomblik derduisende mense in Suid-Afrika wat om
vlugtelingstatus aansoek doen. Net die agterstand van aansoeke by die
Departement van Binnelande Sake beloop tans honderde, duisende gevalle,
maar in weinig van hierdie gevalle is daar nog omstandighede soos oorlog
wat die lewe van aansoekers bedreig.

In die meeste gevalle kom die aansoekers na Suid-Afrika om ekonomiese redes
en word dit bevestig deur die feit dat hulle gewoonlik deur ’n klomp lande
reis om na Suid-Afrika te kom en hier om vlugtelingstatus aansoek te doen.
As dit slegs om hulle eie lewens gegaan het of hulle eie veiligheid, sou
hulle waarskynlik in die naaste veilige buurland om skuiling gaan soek het.

Bo en behalwe die amptelike aansoeke om vlugtelingstatus is daar natuurlik
ook nog derduisende onwettige immigrante in Suid-Afrika, wat weens
gebrekkige grensbeheer maklik oor ons grense gekom het. Heelwat persone kom
die land selfs wettig binne, maar verdwyn dan eenvoudig in die sisteem. Net
die Suid-Afrikaanse ambassade in Harare, byvoorbeeld, reik meer as 1 000
visums per dag aan Zimbabwiërs uit om Suid-Afrika te besoek en dit laat ’n
mens wonder of hulle almal weer teruggaan na Zimbabwe.

Die ergste probleem is dat die departement nie oor die fasiliteite by ons
grensposte beskik om daar en dan te kan bepaal of ’n persoon vir
vlugtelingstatus kwalifiseer, al dan nie. Immigrante wat die Suid-
Afrikaanse grenspos bereik, word eenvoudig van Suid-Afrikaanse
reisdokumente voorsien en dan gevra om na Johannesburg of Kaapstad te
vertrek en daar om vlugtelingstatus aansoek te gaan doen. Ook baie van
hierdie mense verdwyn eenvoudig in die sisteem. Die teendeel, naamlik dat
ons baie gevalle van goedgekwalifiseerde persone het wat weens rompslomp
dit moeilik vind om ’n geldige werkspermit te bekom, is ongelukkig ook
waar.

Om die situasie reg te stel wil ons dus voorstel dat die departement
dringend aan die volgende aandag gee: Die daarstel van vlugtelingkampe en-
kantore by ons grensposte sodat ’n persoon se reg om vlugtelingstatus
vasgestel kan word voordat hy/sy toegelaat word om die land binne te kom;
meer polisie, meer immigrasiebeamptes en, indien nodig, die ontplooiing van
die weermag om die onwettige binnekoms van persone stop te sit; die oplê
van swaar strawwe aan werkgewers wat onwettige immigrante in diens neem;
sowel as aan korrupte amptenare wat teen vergoeding bystand aan immigrante
verleen om die land binne te kom, om onwettig hier te bly, of van onwettige
verblyfdokumente voorsien; die onmiddellike aanknoop van onderhandelinge
met lande vanwaar vlugtelinge kom om sulke mense na hul land van herkoms
terug te stuur, mits die veiligheidsituasie dit regverdig; en dat die
departement dringend aandag moet gee aan ’n wysiging van die
immigrasieregulasies om die rompslomp wat goedgekwalifiseerde aansoeke om
werkpermitte moet deurmaak, te verwyder. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[If the attacks are of a xenophobic nature, that’s a pity, but it must
still be seen against the background of the poor way in which the
Department of Home Affairs is enforcing the policy in respect of refugees.

South Africa’s Refugees Act provides that a refugee is a person whose life
is being threatened in his country of origin on account of his race,
gender, political convictions or for other reasons. His life is being
threatened. Economic reasons such as, for example, a lack of job
opportunities in the country of origin, cannot be given as a reason why a
person qualifies for refugee status. Unfortunately, this is precisely where
the problem lies.

At present there are thousands of people in South Africa who are applying
for refugee status. Just the backlog at the Department of Home Affairs at
present amounts to hundreds, thousands of cases, but in very few of these
cases circumstances such as war are still endangering the lives of
applicants.

In most cases the applicants come to South Africa for economic reasons and
this is confirmed by the fact that they usually travel through many
countries to come to South Africa and apply here for refugee status. Had
only their own lives or their own safety been at stake, they probably would
have sought refuge in the nearest safe neighbouring state.

Over and above the official applications for refugee status there are, of
course, also thousands of illegal immigrants in South Africa who have
crossed our borders owing to poor border control.  Many people even enter
the country legally, but then simply disappear into the system.  The South
African embassy in Harare alone, for example, issues more than 1 000 visas
per day to Zimbabweans to visit South Africa, and that makes one wonder
whether they all return to Zimbabwe.

The worst problem is that the department does not have the facilities at
our border posts to be able to establish there and then whether or not a
person qualifies for refugee status. Immigrants who reach the South African
border posts are simply provided with South African travel documents and
then asked to go to Johannesburg or Cape Town and apply there for refugee
status. Many of these people also disappear into the system. The opposite
is unfortunately also true, namely that we have many cases of well-
qualified people who, as a result of red tape, find it difficult to acquire
a valid work permit.

To rectify the situation we, therefore, want to propose that the department
pay urgent attention to the following: That refugee camps and offices be
established at our border posts so that a person’s right to refugee status
can be established before he or she is allowed to enter the country; that
more police, more immigration officials and, if necessary, the defence
force be deployed to stop the illegal entry of people; that harsh penalties
are imposed on employers who employ illegal immigrants; that corrupt
officials who, for their own financial gain, help immigrants to enter the
country or stay here illegally, or provide them with illegal residence
permits, receive heavy penalties; that negotiations are immediately entered
into with countries from where refugees come, to send such people back to
their countries of origin, provided that the safety situation justifies it;
and that the department must give urgent attention to an amendment of the
immigration regulations in order to remove the red tape that well-qualified
applicants for work permits have to endure.]

In the advertisement by the department it seems that the backlog of
refugees and asylum seekers refers to people who have been in the country
for eight years and only now is their situation being dealt with. [Time
expired.][Applause.]

Mr M P SIBANDE: Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members, ladies and
gentlemen, first of all I want to remind the hon member, Mr M Swart, that
the issue that we are dealing with now started while some of them were
still Ministers.

You have forgotten that a few years ago there was a problem in Mozambique,
and most of the white Mozambican people ran to Mpumalanga, in particular.
And you know what happened. You never accounted for those people whether
you issued them with proper IDs or not. That is why these days most of the
time you are fighting about immigrants. It is your own making.
With regard to Mrs Kalyan, I will deal with you in my speech. You are fully
aware that the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs has invited the
department and the forensic audit to bring the report to us - and you know
this very well. Today you are changing your tune as if it is something new
when it is, in fact, a very old idea. You know clearly that the chairperson
has even requested that tomorrow we should continue with our deliberations
about the department.

I would like to dedicate this speech to my grandmother who was a
storyteller, and to all the grannies who did not live to see and to enjoy
the fruits of freedom from the trees. These trees were nourished by the
blood of their sons and daughters who were maimed and tortured and died at
the hands of the fascist regime.

Ugogo wayethanda ukusixoxela ngelinye ibhungwana elalibizwa ngokuthiwa
uLibala. Ngolunye usuku uLibala wahamba nonina wakhe beya kwaninalume.
Unina ka Libala wayezithwele, futhi ememe enye ingane,ngesandla sokunxele
ebambe enye ingane, kwesokudla ephethe umphako wokudla, kodwa uLibala
angaphethe lutho. Wayehamba ezidlalela kuhle kwesixhuma senyamazane. Kuthe
bethi  memfu kwaninalume, uninalume wababaza umhlola ngengane engancedisi
unina wayo. Ulibala waxolisa wazicelela ushwele,wathi,  ulibele ukulekelela
unina.

Mgcinisihlalo, ngalokho ke ngalengxoxo ngibhekise kozakwethu ngapha, ukuthi
ngasosonke isikhathi  esinjengaleso laso inhlangano ka ANC iphethe ngapha
nangapha, ukwuthulwa kwezinhlelo zentuthuko ,uhlelo lokuhlomulisa  abantu
ngokwezomnotho, nezidingo ezimqoka zompahakathi njalonjalo, izinlangano
ezinjengo DA  azenzi lutho, zinkemile nje, kuhle okuka Libala kodwa nazo
ziyahlomula kukho konke I ANC ekuvunayo.

Mgcinisihlalo entwasahlobo kunenyoni ehaya kamnandi ethi phezu komkhono.
Ngokujwayelekile kunabantu abalukhuni, bayazihlalela nje. Ngo 1994, uma
uhulumeni oholwa I ANC uthatha izintambo zombuso, umongameli wokuqala,
ubaba uNelson Mandela wathi wonke umuntu makafake igalelo lakhe umbusweni
wentando yeningi. Asazize kubona ukuthi kusho ukuthini. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[My grandmother used to tell us the story of a certain young man by the
name of Libala. One day Libala accompanied his mother to his uncle’s home.
Libala´s mother was pregnant. She was carrying one baby on her back,
holding the other with her left hand and on her right hand she had some
provision. Libala carried nothing. He walked hopping about like the young
of a buck. When they approached his uncle’s home, his uncle shouted in
amazement at this child who could not help his mother. Libala made an
apology, saying that he had forgotten to help his mother.

Chairperson, I compare this parable with my colleagues on the opposition
side. While the ANC is busy working on various demanding projects, while it
is busy launching development programmes, working programmes for economic
empowerment, attending to important community needs and other things,
parties such as the DA sit and do nothing. They are just observers, like
Libala, whereas they also benefit from all the achievements made by the
ANC.

Chairperson, in spring there is a bird, the red-chested cuckoo, who sings a
melodious message announcing that people should start ploughing their
fields.  As usual, there are stubborn people who simply ignore the message.
In 1994,when the ANC government took over, the first President, Mr Nelson
Mandela, said everybody should contribute to democracy. We really do not
know what that message means to them.]

Chairperson, the hon Kalyan from the DA is a member of the portfolio
committee, and she knows very well what the position is in our portfolio
committee with regard to this matter. For the past four years the Home
Affairs budget was receiving qualification from the Auditor-General because
of the challenges we have inherited from the past. We can change Ministers
every now and then, but it won’t make any difference until we solve the
problems the department itself is facing.

Lalela ke lunga elihloniphekile, sesadlula lesosikhathi lapho wena ucabanga
ukuthi inhlangano ka ANC ungayithatha njenge siphungumangathi, lapho ufica
khona  okwamabhoxongwane, besibambe ngekhanda, bebuza bethi kukuphi eGoli,
naso bese sidlalisa umsila sengathi siyezwa ukuthi kuthiwani, bese sikhomba
nhlangothi zonke ungathi siyezwa kanti asizwa lutho. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Listen, hon member, gone are the days when you used to think that the ANC
was so minor that you could handle it like the puppy that teenage boys
would hold by the head and ask it where Johannesburg was. The puppy would
wag its tail as if it understood what was being said. It would point this
way and that way with its tail as if it had heard the question, when in
fact it had not heard anything.]

The creators of this mess did not give any recognition to the indigenous
people. You easily have forgotten that in your time there were no birth
certificates issued to blacks and no marriage certificates either, and even
traditional marriages were never recognised. People’s names and surnames
were misspelt and dates of births were indicated incorrectly on people’s
birth certificates.

It is only this government that started to recognise that people are equal.
We are still in the processes of rectifying all of the above-mentioned
problems that was left by you. We are now busy rewinding. The very same
Minister that you are accusing is the one who started the campaign called
Lokisa Ditokomane, which is part of this process of rewinding.
[Interjections.]

Mama Kalyan, ngicela ulalele ngoba awufuni ukulalela, sewuyadlala. [Madam
Kalyan, please listen because you don’t want to listen, you are now
playing.]

With regard to achievements, it must be noted that most of the challenges
facing the Department of Home Affairs were inherited from the legacy of
apartheid. The pre-1994 Department of Home Affairs was racially fragmented.
I would like to thank both Ministers and the Deputy Minister of Home
Affairs for their efforts in transforming the department.

Their contributions managed to achieve a very prestigious goal by
recognising indigenous people who were left to die without benefiting from
the resources of their motherland. On 12 May 2006, the Minister of Home
Affairs issued 200 IDs to Xhu and Khwe tribes in the Northern Cape
Province.

It must be noted that the only time the apartheid government recognised
them was for recruitment to serve in the SADF and Koevoet, for tracking MK
cadres while crossing the boarders from neighbouring countries into South
Africa.

I would like to go back a little to a certain Mrs N C Nkabinde who spoke
here from the UDM. I would request that she come and participate and attend
the portfolio committee meetings and the oversight visit so that she can
understand home affairs. Because what you are talking about does not make
sense. It looks to me like somebody wrote it for you. [Laughter.]

In reply to Mrs Inka Mars, we can’t make a mistake, not to mention the
previous Ministers of this department and the problems that they have
experienced - we are not going to make any mistake about that. We are
talking about the issues, which were created by some former Ministers of
the bucket system. We are busy redressing all those mistakes that we find
ourselves in today.

Concerning the hon member from the PAC, I think he must be careful about
xenophobia: It is just xenophobic because he does not have proof of some of
the things that he said. If you have proof, Ministers have always requested
that information should be brought forward. I don’t remember a single
instance when the member brought forward the information.

Regarding service delivery, there are no issues challenging the department
but we cannot undermine the progress in the department, for example, the
child on-line registration, enhancement of social security,
countercorruption and promoting security, improving South Africa’s global
relations and participating in the integrated sustainable rural development
programme and urban rural strategy of government.

Colleagues, another challenge that I would request we focus on is the
airport itself. We are experiencing problems, and something must be done
about some of the embarrassment that the foreign affairs department
encounters in that people are treated with hostility which is causing an
unnecessary impediment for investment in South Africa. That must be looked
at.

Pertaining to staff, most government officials in top management were in an
acting capacity – and I just want to underline that - but now they are
employed. Most vacancies are now filled. And also concerning systems, our
passport system with its security features is regarded as the fifth best in
the whole world. That is why it is very simple to identify a forged
passport. Lots of syndicates who are specialising in fraudulent IDs are
also advancing in forging passports and, fortunately, they get arrested
most of the time. [Interjections.]

I would be happy if Mrs Kalyan were to be so active even in the portfolio
committee meetings. [Interjections.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: I am very active in the committee!

Mr M P SIBANDE: You are not. Don’t waste my time. In July 2005, 146 offices
were installed with systems which linked them directly to the national
office. The only problem that makes us unable to speed up the process is
that most of our offices are situated in areas where we are still
struggling to get electricity.

With regard to mobile units, we know that the vast majority of our
population is living very far from offices of the department where they can
get services. Therefore, the department continued with planning for the
deployment of 67 fully computerised mobile units during the period under
review. The mobile units will be distributed to the provinces as follows:
Limpopo will get 10, Eastern Cape will get 10, the Northern Cape will get
10, Mpumalanga will get 6, Gauteng will get 6, Free State will get 6, North
West also 6 and Western Cape also 6.

Bakwethu ngiphinde futhi ngicele ukuthi amalunga amanye lawa esihlala nawo
lapha ekomitini ukuthi awolalela ngoba amakhanda abo alikhuni. Inkinga
ayikho kungqongqoshe kodwa isemnyangweni nasesikhungweni kanye
nasezindleleni zokusebenza esizitholile ezaqala ukusetshenziswa yini ngoba
abanye benu uma ubabuza ngomlando obhaliwe wabo abesabi ukukutshela ukuthi
baneminyaka engamasumi amathathu noma amabili kuhulumeni. Bebekade benzani
sonke lesisikhathi. I ANC iyasixhasa lesisabelo mali. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[May I again request some of my fellow committee members to listen, because
they are very stubborn. The problem is not with the Minister, but with
departments and institutions and also with the methods of working which we
inherited from you. When one questions some of you about their written
history, they boldly say that they have been in government for 20 or 30
years. What were they doing all this time?]

The problem is not with the Minister but the problem is with the
department, the institution and the systems that we found which you
implemented. Some of you are not even scared, when asked about a CV and
profile, to say they have been in government for nearly 40 years. What have
they been doing all this time? [Interjections.] The ANC supports this
Budget Vote. [Interjections.][Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you very much, Chairperson. I want to
start by thanking the chairperson of the portfolio committee and all
members of the committee for their participation in the debate, but also to
thank all parties which are not necessarily represented in the committee,
but who participated in this debate.

I want to thank the portfolio committee for its patience with the
department so that we could not table our reports and strategic planning in
good time. I know that we erred, but nonetheless, you still spent time,
even over the weekend, doing your work so that you could empower yourselves
to participate effectively in this debate.

I want to thank the Deputy Minister for his support and the staff of the
entire Ministry, both the Deputy Minister’s office and mine, for the
support which they have given us to enable us to pull through in this
department.

Hon members, I have noted all the issues and the observations you have made
during this debate. Somebody said to me yesterday, when I was agonising
over some of the issues and happenings in my department, that a pencil
maker taught a pencil five important things. I don’t know where this comes
from, but the five important things are: That everything you do will always
leave a mark; that you can always rectify mistakes you make; that what is
important is what is inside you; that in life you will always undergo
painful sharpening, which will make you a better pencil; and that to be the
best pencil, you must allow yourself to be guided by the hand that holds
you. I just hope that the department, the Deputy Minister and I will take
note of this.

I think this has been a learning curve for all of us, and an eye-opener,
and I think the disclaimer opinion by the Auditor-General has helped us to
understand and have a better insight, and to take corrective measures. It
doesn’t matter how drastic and how painful they are going to be, but I
think it has really assisted us to be on top of the department.

I welcome some of the suggestions which members have made during this
debate. I want to comment on one or two, particularly the issue of the
Immigration Advisory Board of the Minister. It is difficult, hon members,
to appoint an immigration advisory board, because in the first place we
have not disbanded the old advisory board. We have not discharged them
because they have not, in the first instance, completed their work. They
still have outstanding exemptions that they have to process. So, you can’t
discharge those people before they have exhausted all their work.

I would have been the first one to appoint a new board. I would have been
very happy to appoint my own advisory board. But you must allow the first
advisory board to complete everything, to discharge all their functions and
finish everything, in spite of the fact that there are new regulations that
empower me to set up a new advisory board.

You can’t say to people, “Stop, I now appoint my new advisory board”,
before they have completed the task they have been assigned. That is the
reason we have not appointed a new advisory board. They must complete that
process first and process the outstanding exemptions. I hope that is clear
to everybody.

The second issue I would like to comment on, has been raised very sharply
by the hon member, I think Swart, from the ACDP. This is the issue of the
internal audit committee of the department. It is clear to us that our
internal audit committee in the department is very weak.

It needs capacity because if we had had a strong and efficient internal
audit committee, it would at least have given us some danger signals much
earlier, and therefore we would have been able to anticipate that we are
likely to have a disclaimer opinion. The fact that we could not anticipate
this kind of opinion is an indication of the weaknesses within that
structure, so I accept that we need to do something about it.

We are invoking that section in the Public Finance Management Act which
allows Treasury to come in and give us some form of assistance. Of course
we shall conduct an investigation into our own internal controls within the
department, but Treasury will come in and render that kind of assistance,
and will, amongst other things, conduct an investigation into the capacity
we need within that structure in the whole area of our finance directorate.

Let me comment on the backlog project, because people tend to use the terms
asylum seekers and refugees interchangeably. We do have a huge backlog of
asylum seekers in this country, hence the interaction with refugee
organisations and NGOs, which have been dealing with asylum seekers, and so
on.

The reason we are launching this backlog project is precisely because we
have realised that the backlog is huge and runs over years. We have asylum
seekers who have been holding asylum-seeker documents for the past 10
years. We are making that admission here, we are honest about it, they have
been holding those documents for the past 10 years and every three months
they have to run to the nearest office to go and ask for an extension.

Now, what we have done is to take a decision to launch this backlog
project, which will involve status determination officers, who will run a
process that is parallel to the refugee directorate. The directorate in the
department does its own work, and this project will be dealing purely with
the backlog, because we have a backlog of more than 100 000 in this
country.

The status determination officers will have an opportunity of sifting
through those people who may not necessarily be asylum seekers. We also
have economic migrants in this country, who want us to grant them refugee
status, but in fact they don’t qualify.

So, the process of processing is actually very tedious. I remember, when we
were consulting with the representative of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, who is in fact very supportive of the project, I
was saying that we should maybe give ourselves three months for this
backlog project. He said: “Minister, you are very ambitious.” To process
just one person can actually take up to two to three hours, or even six
hours. So you may find that one status determination officer actually
processes three or four people per day, because of the kinds of questions
involved and so on.
We have taken the decision to have this backlog project because we realise
the extent of the challenge in this particular area in this country. We are
trying to deal with the problem, because we can’t afford to have so many
asylum seekers roaming the streets of this country without the necessary
documents. I know that some of them feel very aggrieved. They feel that it
is a human rights issue. They feel that South Africa doesn’t care, and we
are saying to them, we do care. We are a caring government, and we care
about asylum seekers and refugees. Therefore we want your support for these
backlog projects.

I am saying some of them have had these permits over a period of 10 years.
But you may find that in fact some of them don’t even qualify to be asylum
seekers. So, you may find that 10 years down the line a person may say: “I
have been here for 10 years”, and may really believe that he is going to
get his status as a refugee, but you may find that at the tail-end of the
process that person may actually have to be deported out of the country. We
want to thank the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for his
support.

Lastly, the hon member from the UDM ventured into the area of extradition
and repatriation. He used both words, I suppose, because he doesn’t have
the correct facts on the Rashid Khalid matter. Members must have noted that
I deliberately did not refer to this matter in my speech. I left it out
because it has become so sensationalised in this country, and it is a very
sensitive matter, by the way.

We as a department and I as the Minister of Home Affairs have to deal with
this sensitive matter, of an illegal person who has been deported and taken
back to his country. [Interjections.] I don’t know about torture, maybe you
should wait. At least you have the facts. I don’t know. I am the Minister
and I don’t know that he has been tortured. [Interjections.]

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: You should. You should.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Oh, really. At least you know. But be
careful! Wait until you get the facts of the case because you may be wrong.
Now, here is a lawyer who has taken us to court to say: “Please account for
the whereabouts of this particular person.” The same person is all over the
place, in the media and everywhere, and is conducting a public campaign,
mobilising you to really believe that he has been tortured.

In the department we don’t have the capacity, by the way, to torture
people. We are not a police enforcement agency. Now, the same people ...
Don’t say ”sies”, I don’t stink! You know torture better than I do, by the
way. [Interjections.]

Now, the same lawyer goes around and is conducting this campaign, and I am
sitting here as the responsible Minister who is being taken to court. As a
loyal South African, I am observing the sub judice rule. I am not supposed
to talk about the matter and I am not supposed to be addressing the media
about it, because I am waiting for my opportunity in court.

We have been filing in court, but the lawyer, who is the one who took the
matter to court, is the one who is conducting this campaign, and who is all
over, giving false information to the likes of yourself. You have chosen to
believe it, rather than to wait for an opportunity for me to come and give
a report to this House when the appropriate time comes.

I think this is totally irresponsible. We shouldn’t play politics on this
matter, because it is a matter of national interest as well. We shouldn’t
play pillow-politics on the matter because it is a security matter, it is
dangerous and it is sensitive. Here is a man who is going around whipping
up people’s emotions and actually trying to divide the nation. He is trying
to suggest to the Muslim community that South Africa may actually be
involved in purging the Muslim community in this country.

You must be sensitive in what you say and what you support, because it may
be dangerous. Be careful! [Applause.] You are heckling about things you
don’t understand.
The last thing I want to mention is this issue of the Pakistanis. Again,
here is a case of seven people who are illegal. I don’t want to attack the
judiciary, but people are illegal and you take them to Lindela and you are
told to release them. There is nothing you can do about it, but if those
were Nigerians, or Mozambicans or Zimbabweans ...

It doesn’t matter, you may be cynical, but I won’t be. I will address the
matter because you are raising it. If they were Nigerians, Zimbabweans,
Mozambicans or Swazis, or whoever from the continent, it would not have
been an issue. [Interjections.] The court instructs us to release them and
we do. You raise the matter and I don’t know what the context is, but they
have been released, nonetheless.

But the point is that they are illegal. They are illegal because they have
fraudulent documents in their possession. How far does the law go and to
whom does it apply? [Interjections.] I want to take my seat. Don’t heckle
about things you don’t understand. Educate yourselves first. Stop creating
an impression that we are purging people here. It is dangerous!

The last thing is that hon members, siyabulela [thank you]

... for the support for the debate of the Budget Vote. It may be that
people do not vote for the budget, but the fact is that there is
participation by parties, because the budget is not an ANC budget. It is
not a Mapisa–Nqakula budget. It is not the senior management of the
department’s budget. In spite of the problems, this budget is a people’s
budget because it is about the lives of the South African people; it about
service delivery to the people of this country.

So, for that I am grateful because I know that the portfolio committee on
Friday was really very upset about the fact that we only tabled the reports
at that time. That is why I am going out of my way to thank you for your
participation, in the first place, and for coming here to give us that
support.

Of course, last but not least, even if he is not here, I want to thank
Comrade Charles, because he has given me a lot of support during these past
months. I really want to thank that comrade, and thank him with his
children. Thank you! [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Business suspended at 12:52 and resumed at 14:07.

The SPEAKER: We now come to questions addressed to Ministers in the social
services and governance cluster. I wish to remind members that questions
will be taken for one hour today, in accordance with the resolution adopted
by the House on 31 March 2006.


QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY


MINISTERS:


                     Progress made in N2 Gateway project


    26. Ms Z A Kota (ANC) asked the Minister of Housing:


      Whether any progress has been made in the N2 Gateway pilot project; if
      not, why not; if so, what progress to date?  N565E

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Madam Speaker, the question is in relation to the
N2 Gateway project. It asks whether we have made any progress there; if
not, why not; and what progress we have made to date.

Hon Z A Kota, the N2 Gateway project is a product of government’s policy
aimed at integrating the first and second economies in South Africa, as
embodied in the breaking new ground comprehensive plan we adopted in 2004.

Arresting the growth of informal settlements and upgrading informal
settlements is viewed by government as central to the realisation of
sustainable settlements and development, and is a critical pillar of
addressing the shelter needs of our people, restoring their dignity and
citizenship, reducing vulnerability, ameliorating poverty, enhancing safety
and security and ensuring that our people are as close as possible to
economic possibilities.

Two issues to overcome regarding the realisation of this goal are: Firstly,
urban settlements – reversing the trend, which up to now has exacerbated
our situation concerning the marginalisation of the poor; and, secondly,
achieving new models of intergovernmental relations and integration, ie the
three spheres of government.

The basis of this project was to pilot the principles of the comprehensive
plan. It is a national priority and is situated very strategically along
the N2 to ensure that nobody misses it. It is visible, very close to the
airport and very close to the city. Its close proximity to the city ensures
that people who live there are close to economic opportunities.

We have now completed phase 1, with the completion of 705 social housing
units that are rental accommodation. They have been completed and soft
landscaping has been completed as well. The allocation of the N2 Gateway
pilot units is the responsibility of the provincial department of housing,
in line with our memorandum of understanding. This will be done in line
with the database provided by the auditors, Nkonki PriceWaterhouse.

The allocation principle will be in line with the pilot project business
plan, that is to accommodate 30% of people who live in back yards and 70%
of people from the neighbouring communities. The province will determine
the date of occupation without any pressure, as I insisted earlier on.

There have been a number of delays in the completion of the project due to
challenges in construction complexities related to the building of such a
huge project. There have also been challenges in co-operative governance.

These we have attempted to overcome by ensuring that we have regular
meetings of the three spheres of government, that is myself as the
Minister, the MEC for housing and the mayor of the City of Cape Town. We
were meant to have our first meeting this morning but unfortunately this
coincided with the NCOP’s sitting, and we therefore hope to have it on
Thursday.

However, in view of all the challenges, Forum for MECs for Local
Government, Minmec, who ultimately owns this project, has decided that
phase 2 of this project which follows, will be entirely managed by
Thubelisha Homes. Thubelisha Homes will operate along private sector lines
and report very directly to Minmec and interact with M3.

Finally, despite the hiccups, the N2 Gateway project is a success on a
scale that has never before been accomplished within the history of housing
in this country. I would like to say I hope that Members of Parliament here
will see it as such and ensure that we sell it as such. Thank you.

Nkskz Z A KOTA: Ndiyabulela, Mphathiswa, ngempendulo yakho ecacileyo. Ngaba
uyavumelana nam xa ndisithi ezi zindlu zintle kakhulu, yaye zibonisa
inkathalo yalo rhulumente nomnqweno wakhe wokubuyisa isidima sabantu?
Icekwa lilele kubanini bezi zindlu, xa bengena kuzo, ukuba bazigcine zintle
zisemgangathweni, njengokuba zinjalo ngoku. Enkosi.

UMPHATHISWA WEZEZINDLU: Ndiyabulela, Zou Kota. Ewe, besikhe sathatha ithuba
lokuba sikhe sithethe nabantu bethu, sizama ukubacebisa ukuba njengokuba
sibabeke emgangathweni nje, siyathemba ukuba nabo baza kuyithatha inxaxheba
yokuba nabo basincedise ngokuthi baziphathe kakuhle ezi zindlu.

Kwakhona, singurhulumente siyafuna ukuba basixhase kulo msebenzi siwenzayo,
bangamameli bonke aba bantu bagqitha ngendlela bagibisela amatye
kurhulumente. Le nto siyenza phaya kwi-N2 Gateway Project siyenzela abantu
bethu, ukwenzela ukuba babe nempilo engcono kwaye babe kufutshane neendawo
zokusebenza. Yonke le nto siyenza sifuna ukuba basebenzisane nathi side
sifikelele apho sifuna ukufikelela khona. Kufuneka bangathi xa bebona
uButch Steyn egqitha ngendlela phaya, babe bemlandela. Enkosi. (Translation
of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Ms Z A KOTA: I thank you, Minister, for the vivid reply. Do you concur
with me when I say that the houses are beautiful and they show that the
government cares about the people and its wish is to restore the dignity of
the people? The ball is in your court, homeowners, to ensure that the
houses stay as beautiful and up to standard as you find them. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: I thank you, hon Zoe Kota. We had time to talk to
the people and explain that they must maintain the high standard of these
houses and we hope that they will adhere to that.

Secondly, government is requesting their support and it will not listen to
all the stone throwers. The N2 Gateway project is for the betterment of the
people’s lives and it has to be as close to their places of work as
possible. We want their support in order to fulfil our promises. We do not
want them to follow the hon Butch Steyn when they see him. Thank you.]

Mr A C STEYN: Madam Speaker, the N2 Gateway project has basically kicked
off because of the crisis due to the fires in the Joe Slovo settlement.
[Interjections.] That was what brought it to light. However, 12 months
later, we now hear that 705 houses have been built. All of them are
unoccupied at the moment ...

Ms Z A KOTA: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: The member is really lying
to the House. The N2 Gateway project did not kick off because of the fires
in Joe Slovo ...
The SPEAKER: Hon member, you are not allowed to say another hon member is
lying.

Ms Z A KOTA: I am sorry. He is misleading the House.

The SPEAKER: He might be misleading the House. Maybe he is not aware he is
misleading the House. Hon member, please proceed.

Mr A C STEYN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It was brought forward as a result
of that crisis. However, 12 months later, there are 705 houses that are
empty at the moment because the beneficiaries for whom they are meant
cannot, in fact, afford those houses. How does this tie in with the
Minister’s new plan for housing when those houses are priced beyond the
means of the beneficiaries? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Madam Speaker, this gives me the opportunity to,
once again, educate the public, especially Butch Steyn. I am indebted to
the previous mayor of the City of Cape Town, together with the MEC for the
Western Cape and the previous Minister of Housing because, in fact, this
project was started in 2004, long before my time in housing. I came in May
2004 and picked up where it was necessary for me to pick up, to give it the
necessary status of national accreditation that it now has.

Fires broke out in the Joe Slovo settlement in April 2005. The project by
then had been approved and had been given over to a contractor. What I want
to emphasise to Butch Steyn, and I am hoping it’s for the last time, is
this: Please, do not use this for political purposes. This is not the
place. The reason why we insist on having intergovernmental relations - and
now we have meetings pending with the mayor - is precisely to ensure that
all three spheres of government are seized with the matter of ensuring that
we can give decent shelter to our people.

This project was given over to a contractor in April 2005. Today, a year
later, we have 705 units. That is on a scale we have not yet accomplished
before. The quality of houses that we have; the integration that we hope to
have, are aspects we have not yet piloted in this country. This is the
first and it is a great success for me.

The pilot project started with social housing, precisely because this is
what we want to do. We want to integrate social housing, affordable housing
and low-income housing. If you read the documentation which you yourself
approved, you will find that, in fact, this is an essential component of
integrating all spheres of society and ensuring that, in this N2 project,
we can put in that area the neighbouring communities which comprise of
Bonteheuwel, Langa and all other neighbouring communities, including low
and affordable income groups.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Hon Minister, I heard you well when you said it is the
provincial government that will be responsible for the allocation of the
houses. I want to know what criteria are going to be used because there are
people who say different kinds of lists are circulating around. On some
lists there are people who claim that they have been waiting for 20 years.
If there are different lists circulating around and there are people who
are saying they lost their houses through fires, what criteria will be used
to allocate the houses that are ready?

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Madam Speaker, it’s quite clear that the hon
Meshoe only came in at the end of my presentation. Please give me the
opportunity to read this: In line with the memorandum of understanding that
was signed by all three spheres of government, ultimately the allocation
belongs to the provincial government.

The allocation principle will be in line with the pilot project business
plan signed by all three spheres of government to accommodate
beneficiaries, which is 30% backyarders from the community there and 70% of
the N2 settlement itself. The province will determine the date of the
occupation and the province will ensure that the waiting list that has been
created by auditors Nkonki PriceWaterhouse is adhered to.

Members here will remember that we made an announcement last year, arising
from concerns from members here about the fact that the list was not a
credible list. We asked an audit company to come and assist us, which we
have just mentioned here. They have completed their work and this is the
basis of what we are doing. We had several lists in the City of Cape Town.
We needed to have them integrated. We now have a solid credible waiting
list and we are using this as the basis from which we are doing the
allocation. Thank you.

Mr T M LIKOTSI: Madam Speaker, my question to the Minister is this: The N2
Gateway project seems to be a very big success in this country. I think if
this project could be extended to other provinces it would give an
indication that the Department of Housing is trying to come up with a new
structure of housing regarding our people. My question is: Is this the end
of the RDP-style houses? If it is the end, how does the Minister hope to
phase those houses out? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Yes, hon Likotsi, the N2 project is a success.
Thank you very much. It is a success for me precisely because this is where
we are piloting the new approach to move away from our RDP houses into a
new kind of structure. We are working together with the NHBRC, that is the
National Home Builder´s Registration Council, our regulatory body, to see
if we cannot create a model out of this that we will replicate throughout
the country, and which moves away from the basis that we have been using.
The success of this will then be carried through to the other provinces.

I want to say to the DA that we may have taken a little longer than we
expected, but the lessons we have learnt from this project have been
invaluable. They will assist us, as government, to do things better. In
fact, this has meant that we have saved so much by making sure that we get
it right the first time. I thank you. [Applause.]


                     Eradication of informal settlements


  39. Mr A C Steyn (DA) asked the Minister of Housing:


       (1)  Whether, with reference to her reply to Question 797 on 6
            December 2004, the Government is still on track to eradicate
            all informal settlements by the 2014-15 financial year; if not,
            why not; if so, what progress has been made towards reaching
            this target;


         2) what total number of the estimated 1 548 608 households in
            informal settlements have taken occupation of their new homes
            as at the latest specified date for which information is
            available;


       (3)  whether, with reference to her reply to Question 575 on 17
           September 2004, the N2 Gateway project in Cape Town is proving
           to be a successful test of the appropriateness and effectiveness
           of her department’s housing plan; if not, why not; if so, what
           are the relevant details?         N582E

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Madam Speaker, the hon Steyn is interested in a
statement that he released some time last year, asking me if indeed I will
live up to my promise that by 2010 I would have eradicated informal
settlements. We responded to him and asked him to be very careful about the
information that he quotes, because in fact the truth of the matter is that
we had indicated that within 10 years, from 2004, we would have ensured
that we have eradicated informal settlements. In our calculation, that puts
us at 2014. So, we corrected that. We stick by that. This is the target we
have set ourselves and we are progressing very well towards that target. We
have made progress and we hope that with the support of all stakeholders we
will reach that target.

Also, he wants to know, out of the estimated 1,5 million households in
informal settlements, how many of them have taken occupation of formal
housing. I don’t know where he got these figures. As I indicated in my
budget, what we are doing is piloting. We compile a waiting list through
the pilot project of Servcon Price Waterhouse to ensure that we have
concrete data of how many people are still out there. We have not completed
this. So, I am unable to explain to him how from his figures – and I have
no idea where he got them from – how many of these people actually have
moved into formal settlements.

What we have done, however, is to ensure that each province has a pilot
project that has so far produced a number of formal housing – from Duncan
Village to Nelson Mandela Municipality. All of these were very carefully
laid out at the portfolio committee, which he did not attend. However, hon
Butch Steyn, we are on track and we are making exceedingly good progress in
all of these things.

The last question is about the N2 Gateway project. We are making
significant progress, especially in relation to intergovernmental
relations. We would like to make sure that the city council comes in and
gives the necessary support to the N2 Gateway project, so that it is a
success in the spirit of the Memorandum of Understanding that we have
signed.

Mr A C STEYN: Madam Speaker, the Minister is a bit disingenuous here. She
knows very well that the reason I didn’t attend the committee meeting was
because I was overseas on parliamentary business. But be that as it may,
Madam Speaker, the Minister is also redefining the word “success” here for
us today. She claims the N2 Gateway project is a success whilst
acknowledging that there are problems. Yet they have only achieved 705
houses in 12 months out of the targeted 24 000 over 18 months.

My question to the Minister was: Is the eradication of informal settlements
still on track? She said yes. However, she could not tell us at that point
what the total number of people who are in informal settlements is. It is
still being calculated. So, I find it difficult to believe how the Minister
can in fact say that the eradication of informal settlements is still on
track.

Minister, my follow-up question refers more to Question 3. You have
referred to all three spheres of government being part of this project.
However, unless you said that in the last committee meeting that I did not
attend, there is very little evidence on paper or otherwise, of any social
amenities that will make this particular project a sustainable housing
settlement like the one that you referred to in your new plan. What is
happening with the other spheres of government with regard to social
amenities such as education, health and all the others that the integrated
communities need?

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Madam Speaker, it saddens me that I have to come
here once again and repeat things that I have repeated to the hon member
Butch Steyn. I don’t know whether he is under pressure from his party to
ask questions. I am at a loss.

It was reported to the portfolio committee that when this N2 Gateway
project was presented to Cabinet, Cabinet on its own suggested that we form
an inter-Ministerial committee to ensure that all three spheres of
government and all departments within government are at one in dealing with
all the requirements of human settlements. There is an inter-Ministerial
committee, which ensures that this is in place. There is a plan, which was
given to you in the portfolio committee. And all three spheres of
government are required to play a role in that. What more do you want me to
say?

The N2 Gateway project is a success by any measurement. You can drive to
the airport now, where people living in incredibly dilapidating structures,
people were living in abject poverty, almost falling into the river; but we
now have standing 705 houses which they will move into. You could not have
done that at any other time within the space of time that we have been able
to do it.

This has been a pilot project. The success of it is not only those houses
there; it’s what we have learnt. Working together we can do it better and
what we have learnt will make it faster and better for this government and
for yourself as well. [Applause.]

Mr G D SCHNEEMANN: Madam Speaker, the Breaking New Grounds Strategy for
housing makes provision to each province to have an informal settlement
upgrading pilot project and a human settlement pilot project, and perhaps
for the benefit of the hon Mr Steyn, these pilot projects are meant to
pilot in a new direction in terms of housing delivery and the upgrading of
informal settlements. They are also meant to help identify and provide
solutions to prices in the housing chain, which may be slowing down the
housing delivery programme.

My question to the Minister is whether these pilot projects are helping to
improve the implementation of the Breaking New Ground Strategy and whether
they are helping to identify processes which need to be streamlined?

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Madam Speaker, yes indeed that is exactly what it
is that we are piloting and how we will be able to ensure that this
unfolds. The three issues that we have been able to identify over the past
year are very important to deal with. The first one is the issue of policy.
You will understand that there has been very little in terms of various
specific improvements to housing policy. What we have done now is to ensure
that we can have additional focus on the integration aspects on social
housing.

We have also ensured that we can have additional pressure applied on the
issue of land release. And EIAs, Environmentl Impact Assessments, has been
a huge problem for us. We have now been able to ensure that we can work
together with the Department of Environmental Affairs to fast-track this.
We have also been able to enumerate people who are now in the waiting list.
We have a credible waiting list, which we are now using to ensure that we
understand how many people are out there and how many people are waiting
for housing.
We also have been able to identify institutional constraints. We have been
able to identify what we need to do to ensure that we can remove
bottlenecks that we have experienced, to ensure that we can fast-track this
problem. We have also been able to ensure that we can integrate
communities.

This is a new concept and we needed to actually practically put it on the
ground to see how it is possible to do it.

Finally, we actually have been able now to sell the idea to the
communities, especially the communities of Johannesburg, around which we
have a very successful pilot project called Cosmos City. There we have been
able to show South Africans that it is possible to have a low-income house
next to an affordable house and next to a mortgage house, and that would
not devalue the mortgage house.

I think these are very valuable lessons which we are setting and we thank
members of the portfolio committee who have taken the time to go to these
sites and give the necessary support to the provinces. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon Minister, you have been quoted
also as saying that 22 000 houses will be built in Cape Town within three
years. Is this correct? Are you aware that Thubelisha Homes, the current
contractor, estimates that it will take 67 years to complete the 22 000
houses?
Are you also aware of the reports received by the Cape Town City Council
that nearly two thirds of developers who worked on the N2 Gateway project
will be suing the city of Cape Town for approximately R168 million for
expenses incurred through the suspension of this scheme, and due to money
being held up at provincial and national levels? How will this impact on
the project?

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Madam Speaker, yes, I am on record as saying that
we will complete these 22 000 houses within three years. I am certain that
we will meet the target. We are through with phase one, which was the most
difficult one, because this is where we were testing our capacity to
deliver.

We have now removed the three spheres of government from direct
intervention on the project, which has slowed it down considerably and we
have given over to Thubelisha Homes, which is going to run along private
sector development. I am certain this will ensure that we get the number of
houses that we have targeted.

I am not aware that a number of developers are going to sue the city.
However, we are ready to defend that - which we had to do because it was
important we do it this way. But from my side I have been concerned about a
number of things that have not been going right on the N2 Gateway project
and I on my own have requested the Auditor-General to come in and assist
me, audit exactly what has been decided was going to be done and why it was
not done with the speed with which we had assumed it would be done, thus
causing the kind of delays and unnecessary litigation that we have.

We will be dealing with this litigation, because alongside everything we
have done we have been very careful to make sure that we attach ourselves
to a legal firm that has advised us every step of the way. So, it will be
possible for us to deal with this.

The difference between the interpretation that Thubelisha Homes and
ourselves have had has led to the decision to ensure that we remove
government from direct intervention in the project to give it to
Thubelisha, because while we have learnt a number of very valuable lessons
from this; it has slowed the process down considerably.

If you take government along the way that we have been doing, it would have
taken the length of time that Thubelisha has indicated. However, we decided
that we are going to do it differently. I announced it in my Budget Speech.
We have given it over now to Thubelisha to do it along private sector lines
and we hope that in that way we will deliver the 22 000 houses.

Dr P W A MULDER: Hon Minister, in this question the estimate is that there
are about 1,5 million households living in informal settlements. However,
you said nobody is exactly sure how many households there are in the
informal settlements. My question is: What exactly is the policy on housing
for foreigners entering South Africa?

The problem is that there are some statistics that show how many foreigners
are in these informal settlement camps, and I think the reality is that at
the end of the day South Africa does not have the means to really supply
the whole of Africa with housing. We cannot finish this job and we will not
be able to reach those dates of 2014.

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Madam Speaker, one of the reasons why we decided
that we are going to ensure that we have integrated human settlement is to
ensure that we can give choices to people who live in this country. And
that choice is given to people who come here and for work purposes. These
would be the foreigners. They have a choice. They can go into our social
housing, into rental stock, rent the necessary accommodation that they need
for whatever purposes, whether they are here on business or on holiday,
whatever the nature of their business may be.

The only people that we provide housing for are South Africans. But if we
go that route, it excludes quite a number of people, which the hon member
has indicated might not be eligible to a house in the informal settlement,
which would be foreigners. Therefore, we hope that as we proceed unfolding
the human settlement’s plan there will be a stock of housing there that
will be available for foreigners to rent, because they are not eligible for
houses that we give out freely.

  Restructuring of departmental line functions with a view to hosting 2010
                         Soccer World Cup tournament

27.   Mr B M Komphela (ANC) asked the Minister of Sport and Recreation:

      (1)   In light of the central role that Sport and Recreation South
           Africa will play in co-ordinating the Government’s contribution
           in hosting the 2010 Soccer World Cup tournament, to what extent
           have his department’s line functions been restructured to
           actualise the objectives of hosting the tournament;


      (2)   whether any additional resources have been made available to
           capacitate his department’s execution of its mandate; if not,
           why not; if so, what are the relevant details?     N566E

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Madam Speaker, as a matter of fact
there’s a lot of revolution on the sports front. [Laughter.]

The question hon Komphela is asking us is: “To what extent have we
restructured the department’s line functions to be able to carry out our
responsibility as a central co-ordinating committee in the preparations for
the 2010 Soccer World Cup?”

As the hon member would know – and I’m sure others know too – the functions
concerning the preparations for the 2010 Soccer World Cup are a cross-
cutting responsibility, cutting across initially 17 national departments
and now 21. As a result of the period of negotiating with FIFA the
actualisation of the hosting, it became clear that not only those
departments that had signed the guarantees needed to come on board and make
this party the ideal party that we all want to see it become.

To this end, we established a new unit within the department, called the
2010 Co-ordinating Unit. It is co-ordinated by a national government lead
co-ordinator, who is at the level of a director-general. We felt this was
necessary because he needed the kind of clout that would make sure that all
departments took him seriously. This is how the Public Service works.

We also needed somebody who is very conversant with the functioning of the
departments of the state, because if they do not carry out the guarantees
that were signed by the Ministers in 2004, we will not be able to host a
veritable Soccer World Cup in 2010.

Assisting the lead co-ordinator is a technical co-ordinator, who must make
sure that the technical sectors of the departments are up to scratch with
their own preparations. When we say that we will be ready to broadcast the
soccer in 2010, they must make sure that the SABC, Sentech and all relevant
role-players are in fact up to scratch with their preparations. They must
make sure that the transport sector is ready with its plans and
implementation of the road transport access to those facilities.

With him is a senior co-ordinator for nontechnical responsibilities. These
relate to those other departments that must deal with such things as trade
and industry, environment and tourism, home affairs, and so on. These do
not need any provisioning of technical staff, but have to carry out
functions in a particular way, which this House will discuss when it begins
to discuss the 2010 FIFA World Cup SA Special Measures Bill before this
House.

There are also junior officials, an administrator, a deputy director for
communications, two secretaries and two support services staff members.

The hon member wants to know if we have made available resources for the
execution of these functions. Yes, we have. Initially we made available R7
million for the unit to operate in the period June 2004 to April 2005. For
the period 2006 to 2007 we requested R8 million. Yes, we have made
resources available.
Mnu B M KOMPHELA: Mphathiswa, ndiyabulela ngendlela owucacise ngayo lo
mbandela. Mphathiswa, ndifuna ukutsho ukuba sesiphambili kakhulu
ekumiliseleni izigqibo, nangona oko kwakucwangciselwe ixesha elizayo. Xa
ke, Mphathiswa, kubonakala ukuba inani labasebenzi abakhoyo phaya
alanelanga, sinakho na ukuba sibe asingexhalabi kuba siya kuba nakho
ukumelana nemiceli-mngeni esijongene nayo? Ndiyabulela.

UMPHATHISWA WEZEMIDLALO NOLONWABO: Ndiyakuqinisekisa, mntan’ eNkosi, ukuba
ilizwe lethu selihambe umgama omde kakhulu ukulungiselela le Ndebe
yeHlabathi. Inene emsulwa, ngoku sesithe xhaxhe kwisigaba amazwe ngamazwe
angazange afikelele kuso ngeli xesha lokulungiselela umnyhadala onje ngalo.

Umzekelo, bekufanele ukuba sibe sazisa ngamabala okudlalela ukuphela kwalo
nyaka, ngoDisemba. Sivene neFifa ukuba oko singakwenza ngoMatshi kuba
sesikulungele ukwenza oko.

Sivile kunxakanywa apha ekhaya, kusithiwa asinaso isakhono sokuphumeza
usasazo lwemidlalo ngowama-2010 kuba imali ayikho. Inene emsulwa, mntan’
eNkosi, kukuba ngoJuni wama-2006, hayi ngowama-2010, iFifa isicelile ukuba
siye kuncedisa ukusasaza eminye yemidlalo phaya eJamani. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
Sikude lee kwizivumelwano ebesivumelene ngazo ngokubhekisele ekubeni sibe
sesilungile.

Ewe, kufanelekile ukuba simane siyiphonononga indlela esisebenza ngayo.
Ukuqala kwethu ngoJuni siqale ngabantu ababini kwela candelo. Ngoku sifunde
ukuba sifuna abantu abaninzi nangaphezulu, abali-10. Kungenzeka ukuba emva
konyaka wama-2008 sibone ukuba sifuna nangaphezu koko. Siya kumana
siwuhlalutya lo mba, ukuze sibone ukuba abona bantu sibafunayo bangaphi na.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Mr B M KOMPHELA: I would like to thank the Minister for the way in which
he explained this matter. I would like to inform this House that we are
well under way with the implementation of the decisions that we took, even
though they were scheduled to begin at a later stage. However, we would
like the Minister to tell us whether, if and when we see that there are not
enough people to work on the project, he thinks we would be able to meet
our challenges. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: I assure you, hon member, that the
country’s preparations for the World Cup are at a very advanced stage. We
are much further ahead than other countries usually are at this stage of
the preparations for such an event. For example, at the end of the year we
are meant to announce the stadiums that will be used for the games. FIFA
and ourselves have agreed to do that in March, because we are ready.

We heard people’s concerns about the unavailability of funds that then made
them doubt our ability to broadcast the games in 2010. Let me remind you
that just a little while back, in June 2006, FIFA asked us to assist with
the broadcasting of the World Cup games in Germany. That was not in 2010.
We are far ahead with the preparations. [Applause.]

Indeed, it is important that we should continuously review our functions.
The co-ordinating unit started out with only two people in June. We now
need as many as 10 people to assist in its functioning. We may feel that we
still need more in 2008. As we say, we are going to review this matter in
order to assess the programme.]

Mnr T D LEE: Mevrou die Speaker, ons het nou gehoor van die koördineerders,
maar ander lande wat die Wêreldbeker aangebied het, het gewoonlik een
persoon verantwoordelik gemaak daarvoor om die proses te dryf, en daardie
persoon was gewoonlik ’n Minister.

Ek wil u vra, Mnr die Minister, daardie persoon moet tog aan die einde van
die dag die politieke verantwoordelikheid aanvaar vir óf die sukses óf die
mislukking van daardie proses. [Tussenwerpsels.] Nee, mnr Gert Oosthuizen,
jy’t al weer inge-“chip”. Ons wil nie hê dit moet jy wees nie.

Daardie persoon moet die verantwoordelikheid aanvaar vir óf die mislukking
óf die sukses van daardie projek. Ek wil u vra, mnr die Minister, of u
bereid is om dieselfde te doen, om die verantwoordelikheid te aanvaar vir
die sukses of mislukking van die projek? (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr T D LEE: Madam Speaker, we have now heard about the co-ordinators, but
other countries who have hosted the World Cup usually had one person
responsible for driving the process, and more often than not that person
was a Minister.

I would like to ask you, Mr Minister, whether at the end of the day that
person should in fact accept the political responsibility for either the
success or failure of that process. [Interjections.] No, Mr Gert
Oosthuizen, you have chipped in again. We do not want you to be that
person.

That person should accept responsibility for either the failure or success
of that project. Mr Minister, I would like to ask you whether you would be
prepared to do the same, to accept responsibility for the success or
failure of the project?]

UMPHATHISWA WEZEMIDLALO NOLONWABO: Somlomo, ilungu eliya libekekileyo
lixhentsel’ emva oku kukahili. Yonke le nto elithi masiyenze sesiyenzile.
UMongameli weli lizwe unyule ikomiti yaBaphathiswa elawulwa nguSekela-
Mongameli, obekekileyo uPhumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka. Nguye ophethe thina sonke
phaya.

UMphathiswa wezeMidlalo noLonwabo usekela yena, kwaye nguye ... [Uwele-
wele.] ... Hayi, Mnta’ kaGibson, ungabi yimpukane egxuphuleka elubisini,
linda. Zifundise ukulinda ungalali.

USekela-Mongameli uncediswa ndim. Ndim ke onika inkcazo kuye nakuMongameli
ngokuwa phantsi okanye ukuphumelela kwalo msebenzi. Kungeso sizathu ke
ngoko sineli candelo loyondelelwaniso. Asifani namany’ amazwe, mfo kaLee.
Amanye amazwe lo mnyhadala awubambe ngeemali zasemacaleni, iimali
zeemanyano zemidlalo ezahlukileyo kwaneemali zoosomashishini bawo.

Eyalapha ekhaya imali iphuma kurhulumente, kula masebe ali-19 abhale
phantsi, atyikitya ukuba aya kukhupha yonke imali anayo ukuze le nto
yenzeke kuba yenzekela abantu baseMzantsi Afrika. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Madam Speaker, the hon member over
there is taking us backwards. What he says we must do, has already been
done. The hon President has appointed a task team that consists of
Ministers, under the leadership of the Deputy President, hon Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka. She leads the process.

The hon Minister of Sport and Recreation ... [Interjections.] Hon Gibson,
please wait for your turn. Don’t just jump and talk like you were a fly in
a cup of milk. Learn to wait and not fall asleep.

I assist the Deputy President. I account to her and the President. The co-
ordinating unit was established for that purpose. We are not like other
countries, Mr Lee. Other countries have managed to hold these games using
private funds, funds from their sports organisations and businesses.

We can only depend on the government’s 19 departments that have committed
to assisting with funds in order that this event can take place for the
people of South Africa. [Applause.]]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Speaker, I thank the hon Minister for the reply.
Cabinet, recently, announced its approval of the 2010 FIFA World Cup SA
Special Measures Bill for submission to Parliament. This Bill is aimed at
removing obstacles that might come in the way of South Africa meeting those
guarantees that formed part of its hosting bid.

What are the relevant details with regard to the guarantees given by South
Africa to FIFA as part of its hosting bid? And how will this new Bill
affect the economy of the country and the general development of our
communities? Thank you.

UMPHATHISWA WEZEMIDLALO NOLONWABO: Somlomo, ndiqinisekile ukuba nawe
ulingqina lam, ngumbuzo omtsha lo, nombuzo okhawulela iinkawu zisiya
kusela. [Kwahlekwa.] Kaloku yonke le nkcukacha umthanjiswa ayifunayo yile
ndiza kuyidalanca apha xa sibeka la Mthetho uyilwayo phambi kwamalungu
abekekileyo. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Madam Speaker, you are my witness.
This is a new question. I was coming to it. [Laughter.] I am going to
provide all the information details that the hon member wants when we table
the Bill before this House.]

The SPEAKER: We proceed to the next question, asked by the hon Rabinowitz
to the Minister of Health. Because the Minister is not available, and would
like to answer the question herself, the question will stand over.

We now come to Question 29, asked by the hon Kota to the hardworking
Minister of Housing.


                        Blocking of housing projects


           29. Ms Z A Kota (ANC) asked the Minister of Housing:

      (1)(a)      How many housing projects have been blocked nationally and
                 (b) what has been done to reverse this situation;
      (2)   whether any of the developers are held accountable in this
                 regard; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
                 details?                                     N568E

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Madam Speaker, in view of the interest shown in
housing, I can only assume that if we were to respond to the President’s
call of Vukuzenzele, I would get the entire National Assembly to assist us
to build a village out in some informal settlement. [Interjections.] That
would be good, yes. I will leave the Speaker to work out whether this is a
standing challenge or not, in line with the Rules of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, this affords me an opportunity, in response to hon member
Zoe Kota, to explain what we mean by “blocked” projects. We have had a
number of challenges since the inception of the policy that we have been
running for the past 10 years, on a number of fronts. Challenges include
the issue of the delays we have experienced from the Deeds Office, the
liquidation of developers, cash-flow constraints, procurement delays,
environmental impact assessments, fraud, corruption and all of those
things.

These are matters that we have experienced over the past 10 years, and at
every stage we have discovered that there have been projects that have been
blocked. These are therefore projects that we have inherited and they run
at the level of 483. I take this opportunity to explain this, because from
time to time the opposition has criticised this as somehow a failure of
this period in our government, and in fact it is not. These are some of the
constraints and challenges we have experienced, and we are dealing with
them now.

These are the phases that we are now at. First, we have taken a decision,
as Minmec, hon Zoe Kota, to ensure that we can divert a significant amount
of money to unblock these projects. We have taken the necessary decision,
and I am certain that the next time you go on your housing visits, you will
see that most of these projects have now been unblocked, especially in the
area of Mpumalanga.

Ms Z A KOTA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank you, Minister, for your
comprehensive response. Is the Minister aware that the Treasury has agreed
that 3% of the housing budget should go to management, and that the
provinces can use that to equip themselves in terms of management and
monitoring of projects? Will that be useful in terms of the future
management of projects on the ground?

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Yes, Madam Speaker, our biggest problem in looking
at this issue has been the issue of project management. This we have
identified, and we are grateful that Treasury has put aside this amount of
money, but I am certain that if we increased the amount of money we have
put aside, we will do even better. Our biggest problem has been shoddy
workmanship, the corruption we found in the provinces, delays that we
ourselves in government have caused, and a number of other impediments that
we have put in the way of development. But I am certain that if we utilise
this 3%, we will get the necessary project management that we need, and it
will assist us greatly in this.

Mr S J MASANGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon Minister, what I want to know
is this: Blocked projects have been a problem for the Minister all over the
country, but the most important problem is that there are developers and
contractors who have fraudulently claimed money that did not belong to
them, due to the blocked projects. Has the Minister blacklisted those
developers and contractors, and if she did, is she going to make sure that
those developers and contractors get no more jobs from this department?

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Madam Speaker, yes, I think that the hon member
has been seized with matters of housing for long enough to understand that
a number of provinces have, independent of me, ensured that we deal with
this problem. The report from Limpopo dealing with corruption in housing
has been made available to the portfolio committee. Members are aware of
the steps that are being taken in various other provinces to deal with this
matter. Blacklisting is indeed a consequence when these matters are taken
to court and I am certain that the hon member is aware of that. Thank you,
Madam Speaker.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon Minister, since we are still
on housing, may I take this opportunity to say thank you for considering
the backyarders, which has always been my worry. I see you have reached a
certain percentage. My question is: Can the hon Minister kindly let us know
how many housing projects have been blocked in KwaZulu-Natal, and on what
grounds?

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Madam Speaker, I do not have the necessary
information specific to KwaZulu-Natal. The number of projects that have
been identified right now is the global figure that we have, and we are
continuously working on ensuring that by tomorrow it will be fewer.
However, we are working very hard, together with the MEC for KwaZulu-Natal,
to deal with the specific problem that arises from the issues that we find
in KwaZulu-Natal, and some of them might be related to the land question as
well.

The hon member is invited to join us in the committees, because we are
seized with these matters. We want to push forward and ensure that those
contractors that have been responsible for shoddy work are brought to book,
so that we can unblock these projects and move forward, especially in
KwaZulu-Natal. I think we have had our greatest successes in KwaZulu-Natal
and in Gauteng. However, I think what I will do, is send you the necessary
information in relation to KwaZulu-Natal, following this. Thank you.

Mr B W DHLAMINI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you, Minister. Apart
from the blocked projects, there are also these huge projects that date
back to 1996, where a lot of shoddy work was done. I am aware that the
department has come up with a programme to go back and remedy the
situation. I would like the Minister to educate the House about how that
programme would work in order to make sure that where the quality of work
on houses was not proper, this is corrected, and how much is budgeted to do
that.

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Madam Speaker, we took a decision in April 2005,
in view of the shoddy work that we discovered had been done, to ensure that
we would be able to rectify this. However, we worked out a number of
criteria.

Where the shoddy work was our responsibility, perhaps due to the fact that
we took so long to pay the contractor and he therefore went into
liquidation, we will deal with it as the Department of Housing. However,
where the fault is due to the contractor himself, we will take the
necessary measures. We are working with a firm of auditors called KPGM, who
are assisting us, especially in the Free State, to understand the nature of
this and ensure that we can refer this to the police.

The police will have to deal with those contractors who have defaulted on
the specific contracts that we had with them, because this is basically
corruption. But this is a matter that we are continuously seized with, and
we are assisted in this by the special investigation team that we have in
the department, which was established late last year, and also by KPGM to
do a thorough job.


                       Mentors for municipal managers


  42. Mr W P Doman (DA) asked the Minister for Provincial and Local
      Government:


       Whether any progress has been made in recruiting mentors for
       municipal managers from India; if not, why not; if so, (a) when are
       the mentors due to start work in South Africa, (b) how many mentors
       have been recruited and (c) which municipal managers will they
       mentor?                                           NA585E


The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Madam Speaker, the
decision to recruit professionals to help mentor our municipal managers is
part of the drive that is currently under way, a drive aimed at addressing
the capacity needs of local government.

As we have indicated before, other elements of the programme are already in
motion. With specific reference to the question, a joint working group made
up of representatives from the Department of Provincial and Local
Government and the Ministry of Panchayati Raj of India has been established
to facilitate and monitor the deployment of Indian specialists in the
fields of engineering, finance and planning.

A mentorship model has also been developed to ensure that the whole process
is managed in a structured manner. The first meeting of the joint working
group is scheduled for 19–21 June 2006. This House and all concerned will
be kept posted about developments in this regard. I thank you.

Mr W P DOMAN: Speaker, hon Minister, my question relates to the municipal
managers specifically. Now, the law provides that municipal managers that
have the necessary skills and expertise should be appointed. As it’s a top
position at a municipality, why do they need mentoring? Is this an
acknowledgment that those appointments weren’t made with those skills and
expertise in mind?

And then, it is a real concern: Will people from abroad be able to mentor
these municipal managers – I am just referring to them – while they don’t
understand the South African circumstances?

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: The decision to organise
people to come in and offer this mentorship is based on the acknowledgment
of the fact that the tasks that are devolving to local government are
becoming more complex by the day and, therefore, there is nothing wrong in
making sure that steps are taken to upgrade the skills and the capacity of
the incumbents in these positions.

In any institution you always hear about upgrading, in-service training, so
there is nothing unusual about this. I wouldn’t want to join you in
extrapolating and speculating without reflection about the capacity that is
being recruited to come and do mentorship. I think it is fair to assume
that those who are doing this know what they are doing.

Mr B M SOLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I’ve discovered there’s always a
problem and I have to ask a follow-up question. Let me thank the Minister
for the two clear answers that he has given. We tend to forget that we’ve
introduced a new system of local government, which is a developmental local
government in terms of our Constitution. We are experiencing new challenges
that are really complex in nature. We would also like to commend the
Minister for the progress made in this regard.

Accordingly, are there any plans to record lessons and good practices that
would be learnt in the process for the purpose of producing manuals that
would be used as instruments to facilitate skills transfer to local
government?

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Yes, hon member, as I
have indicated earlier, this initiative is being undertaken in terms of
Project Consolidate and it is our intention to ensure that all the
experiences deriving from the implementation of this project are properly
recorded in order to ensure that lessons of experience can be held out for
emulation.

Mr W P DOMAN: Speaker, I just want to ask the Minister: Isn’t it true that
nobody has arrived? As of yet the project isn’t coming of, the ground?

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Well, you know, I
addressed the House on the occasion of our Budget Vote and I indicated that
not only has Project Consolidate taken off; it has also started yielding
results. This is an element of Project Consolidate, so it can’t be correct
to say that an element that seeks to supplement other elements, which have
already kicked off, means therefore that the project has not taken off the
ground.

Why is it difficult for you to understand that I am saying that this
initiative must be contextualised within Project Consolidate? There is a
meeting that is going to finalise those sort of details. You ought to have
listened from the beginning, when I was responding to your original
question.

Mr W D SPIES: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon Minister, I would just like to
ask whether the department would also be prepared to take on South
Africans, who used to work as town clerks but who have retired since, to be
employed in mentorship programmes such as these?

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: The majority of the
people who have been mobilised in terms of Project Consolidate are South
Africans. So, we are not the only people, in case your concern is that we
are also looking for foreigners.

We are not the only people in the world who look offshore in order to
supplement their capacity needs and so on. It happens all over the world.
It is clear that these interdependencies are necessary and no xenophobic
attitude will help in dealing with the needs that we have. So, yes, we are
making use of South African professionals, but it’s not either/or for us.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


Debate on Vote No 33 – Transport:

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Hon Speaker of Parliament, hon members, the
Department of Transport’s timeframes, targets and programmes highlight key
components of our strategy to secure cost-efficient, poverty-breaking
integration across the transport system, by entrenching innovation,
reprioritising budgets, reinvigorating the department’s skills base and the
agencies that report to us.

The Development Bank of South Africa points out that investment in the
economic transport infrastructure lagged behind social infrastructure
investment in the first years of our democracy. Transport is about reducing
costs of doing business and improving the quality of life of our people,
and increasing the workforce productivity.

Development is more likely if infrastructure is purposefully managed and
financed to deliver the services where or when the economy requires or
people need, at prices that are affordable to both the economy and the
individual. But infrastructure provision needs to be sensitive to context
in order to most effectively enable and support the translation of
productive investment into efficient growth and equitable development.

Co-ordination and a comprehensive overall transport infrastructure funding
strategy that matches financial resources with identified needs to develop
infrastructure in a rational, integrated and coherent fashion, are central
to our success.

The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development describes South
Africa’s transport system as stellar in an African context, but also notes
that the quality is uneven, and requires significant investment. It also
highlights government’s co-ordination as a major factor for success,
singles out roads as regular recipients of investment, but also slams the
railways and ports as the weakest links in the South African transport
system.

Both these reports provide a starting point for our discussion, but there
are also important silences in them, such as our more recent efforts
relating to rural strategies and in the public transport arena. Many
challenges still bedevil the transport system, but public transport, the
freight logistic system and the safety and security of the transport system
as a whole, are critical to our project. I will focus on these three
elements this afternoon.

Public transport must focus primarily on the needs of the urban poor and
the rural disadvantaged and isolated communities. But, our planning must
also build a future where public transport is a viable alternative for all
travellers. Currently financial support for public transport is applied in
different ways.

For example, the rail commuter subsidies addresse historical backlogs and
operational costs, whilst bus subsidies are operational in emphasis.
Support for the minibus taxi industry takes the form of a recapitalisation
process as a step towards the integration of the taxi sector into a
reorganised public transport system.

The public subsidy review is due in September of this year and aims to
benefit the commuter, probably through a more equitable subsidy system for
rail, buses and taxis, by also rationalising route definitions and
allocations between different types of transport, as well as integrating
public transport systems suited to local commuter needs.

The merged South African Rail Commuter Corporation, SARCC, and Metrorail
entity is working to achieve administrative rationalisation, and also aims
to improve safety on our trains, reduce train delays, improve comfort for
passengers, and improve access for more and more of our people. In the
meantime, the SARCC-Metrorail is upgrading lines in Durban, Cape Town, and
the Witwatersrand areas of Gauteng.

As far as the Gautrain Rapid Rail Link is concerned, I am very pleased with
the way in which all stakeholders have reconfigured the original concept
towards greater integration into the wider public transport system in
Gauteng. This will ensure a broader social return on our investments than
previously estimated. We also expect to release more details about this
project shortly.

The taxi recapitalisation programme is divided into stages, such as the
current conversion of permits into operating licences. I am very heartened
to note that as of yesterday, conversion applications have been received
from 85% of taxi operators throughout this republic. [Applause.] This is a
marked increase since last year, when we twice entertained the industry’s
request to extend the deadline.

Licensing boards have struggled to process these applications and the
national department has provided resources to help them. I have also
requested my MECs for transport to monitor the licensing boards to ensure
that the backlogs are sorted out quickly. I must stress, however, that
there is no intention to penalise operators who are not in possession of
the new permits after June 1, as long as they have a receipt showing that
they have applied for one. In the few cases where it appears that receipts
were not issued, I have also asked all provinces to regularise the
situation urgently.

New safety requirement compliant taxi vehicles are now available in a price
range from about R140 000, excluding the R50 000 scrapping allowance. We
also expect that there will be between six and 11 different models for taxi
owners to choose from across the three vehicle categories that we have
agreed upon. With the appointment of the scrapping agency soon, we should
be well on our way by the second half of this year, to reach our target of
10 000 scrapped taxis by December.

The freight system is huge and complex with multiple structural inertias
that reduce its capacity and efficiency. The difference between earlier
projections and actual growth highlights the difficulty of responding to
immediate challenges, while developing the future structure and mechanics
of the system. We must integrate subregional initiatives to get the most
out of potential growth areas in South Africa.

The Department of Transport has sought also the assistance, amongst others,
of the University of Stellenbosch Business School to improve our
understanding of, and to develop a robust modelling for, the freight
logistic sector.

As we all know, transport currently contributes some 6% to the GDP, despite
an acknowledged negative impact of continued bottlenecks, non-transport
related tariffs and other impediments. But, the data shows that we have to
exert more transport effort than comparative economies around the world to
achieve the same goals.

In short, we have to transport freight over much longer distances to create
the same unit of GDP as other countries. The spatial concentration of
economic endeavour in the hinterland is also a major contributor to this
unhappy situation, and it also influences our corridor traffic densities
and invariably the cost of production.

Furthermore, although expenditure on our roads has increased quite
dramatically, and is set to continue across the Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework, MTEF, period, real expenditure is under pressure from sources
such as the spiralling costs of bitumen. High fuel costs have also
increased transport costs in our country.

Currently the imbalance between road and rail use is wholly inappropriate
and getting worse. Heavy vehicle registrations have grown dramatically,
while the locomotive fleet for general freight business has plummeted. The
locomotive fleet for the profitable heavy haulage iron ore and coal lines
has increased by 83% over the same period. In short, general rail service
capacity is declining, while service capacity to mining companies is
outstripping the growth of the South African economy.

All these trends represent a major challenge to provide cheaper transport
services where producers already face cost structure problems, brought
about through structural and spatial contexts. Our government will
introduce competitors across the entire rail network, as articulated in the
National Freight Logistics Strategy, with the exception of the heavy
haulage lines that are better suited to single operators.

Our analysis of the entire freight market suggests that rail services
supply is inadequate, while road supply is higher than the levels of
demand. The movement of appropriate cargo to rail is an imperative, but we
must ensure that rail capacity actually exists to take whatever tariff
shifts will be needed.

Corridor development is a core project. The Gauteng-Durban Corridor, for
example, aims to optimise and integrate all activities along the corridor
to improve efficiency. Linking the City Deep, the planned Harrismith Hub,
Durban Container Terminal, Dube Trade Port, the possible freight hub at
Cato Ridge, and other infrastructure and operational initiatives, will
greatly improve our situation. We have a better understanding of the growth
and dynamics of the freight network now as a result of our experiences to
date.

There is an artificial divide between the first and second economy
production systems, exemplified by an absent integrated transport network.
We cannot starve the second economy participant from economic prosperity of
our country. Secondary rail networks rehabilitations aim to support second
economy integration with the first economy. Targeted investments are
required in all these rural areas and second economy interventions. Current
projects that have been already implemented include the Kei rail in the
Eastern Cape, the Belmont-Douglas rail in the Northern Cape and the
Nkwalini upgrades in KwaZulu-Natal.

I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome to Parliament this
afternoon the representatives from the Belmont–Douglas and Nkwalini areas
and to wish them well in their projects. Self-contained and integrated
rural development activities that envisages deep rural areas developing
public and freight movement systems to both encourage economic development
and interaction within these areas and facilitate access to the outside
world, and vice versa, are also critical interventions.

The integrity of the whole transport system relies on adequate safety
systems and regulatory regimes to protect our people and cargo. Road safety
is the most visible and pervasive of all safety systems. It must encompass
a range of elements including technical and engineering standards in road
design, signage and, of course, vehicle safety. But, it also involves
policing and enforcement of regulations and laws that are currently the
responsibility of the Road Traffic Management Corporation, RTMC, and
various locally based structures.

Part of the problem with road safety, and this is brought about by the
wholly unacceptable levels of violence and deaths on our roads, is that we
are encouraged to consider the success or failure of initiatives on the
basis of immediate results. Road safety is as much a cultural matter of
road users as it is the responsibility of state agencies. I look forward to
the release, in the middle of the year, of an updated and reformulated road
safety strategy to deal with this particular issue.

As far as compensation for road injuries goes, the combination of new blood
at the Road Accident Fund, RAF, the implementation of the changes that
Parliament recently approved, the public discussions of the draft
regulations published yesterday and their adoption either in current or
amended form shortly, should go some way towards bringing sense and
sensibility to the system.

Incidentally, I have requested the Department of Transport and the Special
Investigation Unit to prepare a detailed presentation sometime soon on the
ongoing investigation into driving licence fraud. But, let me just say that
things are not as chaotic as some would have us believe as you will see in
the report that will be coming shortly.

Safety and security across the transport sector are critical components
that support the integrity and contribution of the system, but their
absence only undermines it. Violence and insecurity on our suburban trains,
in the taxi industry and, to a lesser extent, in the bus sector have long
plagued our public transport system.

Since the deployment of the SA Police Service trained personnel we have
witnessed a general decline in criminal acts, of all kinds, on the lines
where they have been present, especially in the Western Cape. We have
decided, therefore, to increase the number of special rail police from 400
to 5 000 by the end of 2008 to bring more areas under their control. We
believe this will go some way to improving people’s safety on trains and in
stations, although a lot still needs to be done.

The SARCC-Metrorail management have assured me that the safety of commuters
is a priority that they are addressing through a range of actions, such as
investments in signalling, stations, refurbishment of rolling stock and the
installation of CCV cameras - to mention but a few. The ongoing extension
of capacity in the Railway Safety Regulator is also encouraging.
We have not seen the current levels of death and violence on some of our
trains since the apartheid regime’s war against commuters on trains and in
taxis in the 1980s and early 1990s. No amount of rhetoric can justify these
actions today and I am sure Parliament will join me to condemn the
organisers and perpetrators unreservedly, whoever they may be. The cost to
life and limb and to property is enormous.

Infighting in the taxi industry is also an incredible waste of human and
other resources, and I would have hoped that by now these problems would be
behind us. The associations themselves, together with law-enforcement
agencies, have a combined responsibility to bring taxi violence to an end -
at the very least for the safety of passengers and the public.

I must also state that I am deeply concerned that officials who have been
tasked by government to develop, implement and oversee the taxi
recapitalisation programme have been subjected to intimidation and threats
to their lives and wellbeing. This is thuggery and government will act
forcefully against those responsible.

I have not touched on some issues such as the 2010 FIFA Soccer World Cup
preparations or other matters that have been dealt with in recent
parliamentary questions. And I am sure that more issues will be raised in
the course of the debate that will require some response at the end. I have
simply provided a snapshot of some of the critical issues that confront us
as we overhaul our transport systems. These are complex issues that do not
lend themselves to simplistic solutions.

But having said that, we must not dilly-dally in implementing measures that
will move us forward towards constructive interventions. That is why the
strategic plan is both ambitious and practical, but its implementation will
be marked by movement into the unknown and we will judge progress partly
from this perspective. I thank you in advance for an instructive and
constructive debate.

Mr J P CRONIN: Chairperson, Minister Jeff Radebe, staff members from the
department including the director-general and those like us passionately
involved in transport issues, I have now had the honour of representing the
ANC in seven parliamentary Transport Budget Votes. I think that for the
first time it is possible to assert that a corner is starting to be turned.

For many reasons in the first several years after the 1994 democratic
breakthrough, with many other pressing priorities such as health,
education, housing and water, transport tended to be somewhat forgotten.
This relative marginalisation was reflected both in the lack of the
positioning of transport within the national debate and, alas, in the
budgetary allocations that were made to this sector.

This is all beginning to change now, and I think that there are several
reasons for it. There is, of course, the 2010 factor. The Soccer World Cup
will only be an event that lasts for a few weeks, but it is helping to
concentrate South African minds around the imperatives of building towns
and cities, and thinking about safe and reliable accessibility, including
decent public transport.

In the ANC we have welcomed Minister Radebe’s consistent positioning in
regard to the 2010 issue. You have said, Minister, that we will use 2010 to
do the things that we have to do in any case, and that is exactly the
correct approach, we believe.

Another very important factor, I think, in deepening the awareness around
transport has been a gathering momentum of public concern, particularly
around road safety matters and public transport matters. There have, for
instance, been here in Cape Town citizens’ groups, supported by Cosatu,
raising legitimate concerns around security on trains.

Let me take this opportunity, once more, to remember Lynda Loxton, the
former parliamentary correspondent for Independent Newspapers, who
tragically lost her life after falling, while trying to board a train on
Cape Town’s Simon’s Town line.

In the Portfolio Committee on Transport we remember Lynda as a hard-
working, diligent and very fair-minded journalist and, of course, a
committed public transport commuter. We miss her at our committee hearings,
and as the transport committee we find it particularly tragic that she
should have died in this way.

Public concern about road safety has been growing and there are a number of
citizens’ groups campaigning around several issues: Pedestrian safety,
alcohol abuse, cyclist safety, the safety of students on their way to
school. As the ANC we welcome these initiatives. We may or may not agree
with every suggestion or proposal that is made, but as the ANC we welcome
active citizens, NGOs and social movements taking up transport issues and
forcing them into the public domain.

The debate around the merits of the Gautrain, partially initiated by this
committee here in Parliament, is an example and an important example of
growing popular debate and discussion around public transport concerns and
priorities. I’ll come back, if I have time, to the Gautrain matter. But we
should see in the debate an opportunity to foster discussion and debate,
not just around the merits and demerits of one particular project, but
around public transport in general.

Perhaps among the most important reasons for a greater focus on transport
is the growing national recognition of the centrality of transport to
government’s Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa,
Asgisa. It has now become commonplace to note how sustained economic
growth, with booming exports and imports, since 1994 has exposed many
bottlenecks in our critical freight logistics system. Transport, in its
many facets, is absolutely central to any sustainable, accelerated shared
growth in our country. This is the background against which there are
pleasing signs that we are indeed beginning to turn a corner.

This turning of a corner is reflected in the first place in this budget
where we see expenditure trends rising very significantly from R5,7 billion
in the 2002-03 financial year, to R15,5 billion in 2008-09. That’s an
annual average increase of some 18,1%. Included in this significant rise is
R1,6 billion allocated to passenger rail infrastructure over the Medium-
Term Expenditure Framework period. An amount of R7,2 billion is going
towards the Gautrain in the same period, and there is a very significant
increase in spending on national roads, with growth increasing to about 26%
over the medium-term period.

Over the past several weeks there has been quite an interesting debate in
the media around the significance of some of these increases, particularly
regarding road infrastructure. Malcolm Mitchell, the Executive Director of
the SA Road Federation, has argued that these increases are insufficient to
halt the slide in terms of the deterioration of our road system. Professor
Don Ross of the University of Cape Town has replied that, to the contrary,
we have now begun to cross what he calls the shadow line, the threshold of
investment below which we would be moving backwards in terms of road
maintenance.

Professor Ross argues that we need to calculate the amounts that we are
budgeting for roads, not just in terms of the allocation to national roads,
but also now to the increasing amounts available for provincial and
municipal road maintenance and construction.
Without going into all the details of Professor Ross’s argument, I find him
persuasive and I also particularly like the conclusion to which he comes.
We should, he says, be pleased that we are making progress but vigilant to
ensure that we continue to do so. I think that is a maxim that applies not
just to road infrastructure, but to the totality of challenges we are
facing, not least in transport.

While we are on the topic of road construction and maintenance, the ANC
would also like to urge that we don’t get stuck, once more, simply in a
maintenance mode. We cannot be satisfied, largely, with repairing a pre-
1994 road infrastructure, ie an infrastructure that was essentially
designed for the spatial realities and dominant social needs of an
apartheid system.

We need to be thinking in transformational ways. We must, of course, repair
the potholes even if they are potholes in apartheid roads, but we don’t
want to get stuck for another decade simply repairing the legacy of the
past, and doing it in the same old ways. In this regard, as the ANC we are
particularly pleased to note several labour-intensive community–based
projects. There is the pioneering Zibambele project in KwaZulu-Natal; Gundo
Lasho, a similar project in Limpopo; and now also Siyakha in Gauteng.

The Zibambele project, for instance, involves allocated road maintenance
tasks for specific stretches of provincial road, which are then allocated
to female-headed households in poor communities. They receive training and
assistance. They then take responsibility through the year, over many
years, to maintain that stretch of road and its sidewalks. We need to
replicate and extend these kinds of projects, working in partnership with
the Department of Public Works and the Expanded Public Works Programme.

As the ANC we would also want to urge, as we set about major road
construction, that we also begin to ask other questions. Are our roads
pedestrian-friendly? The answer is no. Are our roads safe for cyclists?
Same answer. As we begin to use our increased road infrastructure budget,
is this not an opportunity to think more imaginatively about dedicated
public transport lanes, for instance, at least where this is appropriate?

There are some important initiatives that have happened on this front.
There is, for instance, the wonderful Galeshewe bicycle path in Kimberley.
But we, again, would like to see their replication and expansion. In short,
we are saying that we must not allow road construction and maintenance to
exist in a silo apart from our other social and economic objectives.

A similar point can be made in regard to rail infrastructure. The Asgisa
initiative has, quite correctly, identified the major freight logistic
lines - Gauteng to Durban and so forth - as the key priorities from a
transport perspective in terms of accelerated growth. But we would be
neglecting the “S” in Asgisa, the Shared element of shared growth, if we
forgot about the importance of, for instance, rural branch lines.

Again, as the ANC we would like to commend the Department of Transport for
its efforts at revitalising key branch lines such as the Umtata-East London
line in the Eastern Cape, the Belmont-Douglas line in the Northern Cape,
and the Nkwalini branch line in KZN. We think that this is exactly what we
also need to be focusing on; not just focusing on the key corridors but on
the many branch lines that support them.

Another area in which, as the ANC, we believe that progress is discernable
lies in the area of departmental restructuring. I said earlier that in the
first years after 1994, there was a loss of professional skills, partly to
the private sector, but also to a range of public agencies at other
entities.

I believe that the retention and development of skills remain challenges in
the department, but we are very encouraged by the department’s plans to
expand its complement in critical areas like public-entity oversight,
transport regulation and accident investigation, and the area that
particularly affects us as a parliamentary committee in regard to
legislation. We will support these endeavours and work collaboratively with
our colleagues in the department to ensure that these expansion plans are
effectively implemented.
In the seven years that I have been in this committee, one entity that has
presented an ongoing challenge is, of course, our old friend the Road
Accident Fund. As a committee we spent many months last year amending, re-
amending and re-amending, again, the Road Accident Fund Amendment Bill. In
this year’s budget there is an urgent R2,7 billion transfer that will
enable the fund to meet its liabilities for 2005-06.

In welcoming this allocation, we hope that this will prove to be a one-off
emergency measure, but we need put it on a sustainable basis. Key in that,
obviously, is to lower the levels of fatalities and injuries on our roads.
That’s the one sustainable direction.

I think as a committee but, certainly, as the ANC component of the
committee, we are also very encouraged by the new strategic insight that
the CEO, Jacob Modise, is beginning to bring to the Road Accident Fund. He
kept reminding us in budgetary hearings that the core mandate of the fund
was not to protect a lump sum of money, as if it was Fort Knox. Its role is
to pay out legitimate claims to legitimate claimants; that’s its role. We
welcome that understanding of the core mandate of the fund and look forward
to an improved Road Accident Fund.

Another speaker from the ANC, Comrade Barbara Thomson, will talk at greater
length on road safety matters, but in this overall input from the ANC I
cannot fail to make some mention of this critical area. As the ANC we are
well aware that transport involves a huge range of issues: Aviation issues,
maritime issues, cross-border issues, road-traffic regulations and many
more. But if we were to identify, as the ANC, two areas of great concern to
our broad constituency then they would have to be safety on our roads and
public transport.

In regard to road safety, we believed that, over the past several years,
important progress had been made. I think that was justified in some
respect. First of all, in the road to safety strategy, we have on paper an
excellent and internationally commended approach - but on paper. Secondly
and importantly, through Arrive Alive and other initiatives, a very clear
and consistent message has gone out to South Africa: Speed kills, drinking
and driving is grossly negligent, we should all buckle up, and so forth.

These messages have gone out. There is no one in South Africa who could not
have heard them. But, alas, there is still a hard core of drivers out there
who don’t give a damn. In the last two or three years we were somewhat
encouraged by the statistics. While remaining at very high levels, there
did seem to be an indication of improvement. However, last December we had
an increase of 19,8% in fatalities in comparison to the previous December.
And over the first four months of 2006, there has also been an increase
measured against the previous year in fatal crashes and fatalities.

We need to be careful about statistics. They are not always very reliable.
Accidents are random. You might have a concentration of accidents in one
month and then fewer in another, and so on. So we need to be careful about
reading trends, and also we need to understand that there has been a 12%
increase in traffic volumes in one year. But with all of these
qualifications it is clear that as a country, we confront a very, very
serious challenge indeed.

The cost of accidents in 2005 was around R40 billion to our country. That
is two Gautrains we are spending every single year on this issue. On a
daily average, we have 38 deaths on our roads, three are taxi-related on
average, 16 are pedestrian, 21 are disabling injuries, and there are 125
serious injuries - every single day on average. It’s a war zone out there.
Those death figures are worse than the casualty figures of the war in
Baghdad. I think we need to get a grip and an understanding of this.

We were encouraged in the budgetary hearings to hear from the Department of
Transport of its commitment now to move with much greater determination to
enforcement. We have communicated, we must continue to communicate - buckle
up, don’t drink and drive, speed kills.

We must continue with those messages, but now we must enforce. Of course,
the Department of Transport does not employ a single traffic officer and
cannot ensure enforcement on its own. We require the co-operation of the SA
Police Service, of provincial and municipal traffic departments, of the
courts and, of course, of the public in general.

There is inadequate road policing in our country, often the policing hours
are when they are not needed most, and on a Friday night when the accident
rate is high, there are only a few traffic officers, and so forth. Vehicle-
testing stations are often not up to scratch, and there are many other
things. Overburdened magistrates’ courts are not taking road offences
seriously, and light fines are often given for extremely serious and
murderous behaviour on the roads.

These are just some of the challenges we face, and we firmly agree with the
department that now is the time for enforcement, enforcement and, of
course, enforcement.

Turning briefly then, in the few minutes that I have left, to the Gautrain.
I welcomed earlier in this speech the public debate around public
transport, in general, that has been provoked by the Gautrain project. At
our hearings last year the committee, in a formal report to Parliament,
expressed several concerns about this project: Its cost of R20 billion,
relative to our spending on all other public transport systems; its
operational viability and its lack of connectivity to other forms of public
transport in the Gauteng province.

Relevant Cabinet Ministers all welcomed, I must say, the committee’s work
and the report that we tabled. Cabinet, considering the report, proceeded
to recommend that the project goes ahead, however, with the qualification
that much greater connectivity between Gautrain and other forms of public
transport in Gauteng are addressed.

When we met in November last year, we were told that the closing of the
negotiation with the preferred bidder was eminent. However, those
negotiations, as we speak, are still continuing now, and we have been
assured by the Department of Transport that this is largely due to the
seriousness with which they, the department, are treating the requirement
that much greater connectivity between the Gautrain and other forms of
public transport in Gauteng be built in. We welcome that assurance.

We also welcome the point that Gauteng Premier Comrade Mbhazima Shilowa
made last week. He noted that while the Gautrain will, if we are lucky –
that’s me, not him - only be completed or partially completed – that’s me -
by 2010, there are other immediate and pressing public transport needs in
Gauteng and throughout South Africa which must be addressed now.

We also welcome Gauteng MEC Comrade Ignatius Jacobs’ moves towards
constituting a transport authority for Gauteng that will consider the
totality of public transport requirements and general mobility challenges
throughout the province.
As an ANC study group and as the portfolio committee we will continue to
monitor this project, as we certainly must. However, as the ANC we also
urge all interested parties to engage with the matter, not as pro and anti-
Gautrain factions, but rather as South Africans passionately concerned with
improving their overall situation with regard to public transport in our
country.

The ANC under the portfolio committee has consistently supported
government’s attempts to democratise, regulate, formalise and recapitalise
the minibus sector. This sector today is the backbone of our public
transport system; it transports 64% of commuters.

On the other hand, it is a sector that is characterised by vehicles that
are dangerously unroadworthy, operating systems based on fare collections
and competition for passengers on the road and at ranks, and by drivers who
drive dangerously because the only way in which they can make money is to
return R300 to the owner and then, once they have made the R300 in a day,
what’s left is their wage.

This whole sector requires massive transformation, but we would urge the
department in carrying out the recapitalisation process to try to integrate
it much more thoroughly into a range of other initiatives at the municipal
level, in particular in terms of subsidies for buses and other transport
modes and developing integrated transport systems ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member, your time is up.

Mr J P CRONIN: Thank you very much. The ANC obviously supports the
Transport budget. [Applause.]

Mr S B FARROW: Chairperson, Minister and colleagues, I have only been in
this position for the last six years, but as the Transport budget comes
before this House today, I have seen about three directors-general come and
go, and as many strategic plans.

At last, within its vision of “Transport, the heartbeat of the South
African economy”, some light seems to be emerging at the end of what has
been a long, dark tunnel. Many of the department’s important policy
developments, however, will require exceptional resolve and political
leadership, for without political support the challenges outlined in the
strategic plans will again come to nought.

The first challenge relates to the staffing structure of the department in
order to meet the objectives of the strategic plan. It is encouraging to
note that the new director-general, Ms Mpumi Mpofu, seems to have a good
grip on what is taking place in her department, considering she only
recently took over the reins, and I’d like to take this opportunity of
wishing her well in her endeavours.

However, the new director-general can only achieve what she sets out to do
with the collective help of a competent and well-motivated team. The
department’s new organogram was approved only on 16 May 2006, however, some
15 new posts out of 26 positions that have been outlined in the top
structure still have to be advertised and filled. I trust this will be
expedited as swiftly as possible, because the department cannot continue to
function as it did in the past.

Key posts in Programmes 2, 3 and 5 similarly need to be filled. They cover
very important aspects such as research and policy, transport regulation
and public transport. They have a direct bearing on the service delivery of
the 13 public entities reporting to the department. Many of these entities
seem to be operating reasonably well, but others have serious constraints
and problems.

Our airports, for example, are still suffering from passenger bottlenecks
and through-flow, which will require a major effort to streamline before
the Soccer World Cup. This will need to be looked at very carefully if we
are to cope with the thousands of visitors.
Security at both the aircraft and passenger sides need serious
investigation with regard to suspected inside information leaks which took
place there, and the role of private security contractors on the one hand
and the SAPS on the other. The future allocation of the shareholding of the
Airports Company of South Africa also needs addressing since the moratorium
that was placed on it by the late Minister Dullah Omar some three years
ago.

The role of the Dube Trade Port, which the Minister actually mentioned, and
how the proposed King Shaka Airport fits into the existing airport hub at
Johannesburg Airport, needs to be clarified. International trends tend to
centralise large aircraft arrivals and departures at one airport and then
distribute passengers through smaller regional carriers.

The new CEO of the Road Accident Fund, RAF, Jacob Modise, is a refreshing
and truthful change from his predecessors, who were hell-bent on securing
their own positions and those of their senior managers, rather than those
of the 400 000 claimants waiting for some sort of payout for three years or
more.

The CEO has realised that if the fund is to become sustainable, a new look
at its organisational and financial structure will be necessary. The
continued litigatory approach must only be used in exceptional cases, and
the fund must now be transformed into an efficient, corruption-free
administration, looking primarily at the needs of the claimants.

The DA fully supports the appropriation of R2,7 billion to meet claims in
arrears and to return the fund to a sound financial footing, but the bail-
out will not solve the fund’s insurmountable problems, unless the Road
Accident Fund Act is relooked at. It may restrict claims by virtue of its
caps and prevent foreign claims, but what it will not do is reduce the
number of accident claims, which have increased by 9% since 1999, or for
that matter the estimated increase in the number of new car registrations
taking place annually.

The bottom line, Minister, is that South Africa has one of the highest
traffic accident rates in the world, and unless we can bring this down the
fund’s liabilities will continue to exceed its assets, rendering it
technically insolvent. Coupled to this is the serious threat of continued
constitutional challenges coming from claimants whose common law rights
have been removed. They will undoubtedly contest whatever definition comes
out of the regulations you spoke about, Minister, in terms of classifying
what is termed a “serious injury”.

We need to sit down and assist the new CEO and board, together with the
Road Traffic Management Corporation, to see how best the RAF can look
forward to an accident-free South Africa. To this end in last year’s budget
debate I proposed investigating the Namibian model with regard to its
financial workings, and I wonder if anything has been done in that regard.

The underfunding of the SA National Roads Agency Limited and the problems
associated with the SA Rail Commuter Corporation constitute a continuing
problem which I have raised many times in this House, and my colleague, the
hon Swart, will be covering these aspects later on in the debate.

Let me now turn to the big issue of tackling the dilemma of public
transport in South Africa, in particular within our major metros. My
colleague will be raising his concerns about the taxi industry and aspects
of recapitalisation. However, I want to put on the table the whole issue of
finding the best, most cost-efficient model to ensure safe and affordable
public transport for many of our less advantaged communities.

As you are aware, the Portfolio Committee on Transport had the opportunity
of visiting many of these metros as part of an oversight function, to see
how far they had progressed in producing their integrated transport plans.
Some interesting observations came out of that.

The first thing of note, in particular with regard to Johannesburg and
Tshwane – this is something the chairman alluded to – is that neither seems
to be talking to the other in respect of connectivity, and they are
planning in isolation. Of concern also was the independent planning taking
place with regard to the Gautrain, and the aspect of ensuring that commuter
rail, buses and taxis operate as part of a single urbanwide system, rather
than competing with each other, needs to be addressed.
Unfortunately, many of our towns continue to develop on the peripheries of
CBDs, which results in lower-income earners of our society having to rely
more on public transport. The recent National Household Travel Survey
highlighted this with regard to time travelled and the costs of these
trips. Many of these housing developments do not provide the service
providers with enough decent roads, cycle tracks or pedestrian lanes to
link them to these transport terminals.

Recently a number of portfolio committees undertook a tour of South America
to look at their problems. I found the talk very enlightening, as many of
the problems facing the cities of Buenos Aires and Bogota, we could relate
to South Africa.

What happened in Bogota, Minister, involved political risk but it paid off.
Public transport previously was serviced by small taxis, minibuses and
large buses, and congestion was so great through the use of private
vehicles that parking and traffic jams were the norm. The mayor of Bogota
decided to restrict private car access to the city, formed a consortium
with existing bus and taxi operators, and, on dedicated lanes eased up as a
result of private car restrictions, introduced mass public transporters,
whilst at the same time embracing access for cyclists and pedestrians to
these services. The model is now well known and supported by the World
Bank.

Minister, for this to have worked successfully, it needed the political
will, the need to cater for the demands of the commuting public, and above
all, foresight. The DA believes that with careful planning and good
negotiations with bus and taxi associations, together with the support of a
co-operating metro, a pilot project should be investigated, with a win-win
approach to solving our dissected and often violent public transport
sector.

If R20 million can be thrown at the Gautrain, with every possibility of
failure, then surely some funds can be found to investigate the Bogota
model, obviously with some modifications. The Gautrain project still has
many bridges to cross, and I’d like the Minister to be aware of the
concerns raised by the routing of the proposed train through AECI property
at Modderfontein, which has not reached finality.

The more recent decision is to go above ground through parts of Centurion
via ducts, due to the problems with underlying rock conditions. This is a
total abuse of the rights of the residents of Centurion and has major
environmental and property implications if pushed ahead without proper
consultation, which seems to be the norm for the Gautrain project team.

Finally, let me comment on some of the more worrying aspects of the
preparation for the FIFA World Cup, and in particular the aspects of the
tourism bus licensing procedures as a separate requirement to that of the
scheduled and unscheduled commuter industry services.

Tourism operators are required to provide daily tourism transport across
multiple provincial jurisdictions, but obtaining interprovincial licensing
requires the concurrence of other provincial operating licensing boards,
which either refuse or do not respond to such requests. This is causing a
major problem to tour operators and is an impossible situation that is
damaging to our tourism transport and tourism industry.

Clearly, Minister, this cannot continue, and I call on you to relook at the
National Land Transport Transition Act licensing procedures, to see whether
we cannot sort out this problem. [Time expired.] Thank you. Sorry it was a
bit rushed. I should have taken more of your time. [Applause.]

Mr T E VEZI: Thank you, Chair. Kindly take note that this is my maiden
speech as far as this department is concerned. The aim of the department is
to provide an integrated, sustainable, reliable and safe transport system
through implementation of transport policies and strategies.

In supporting this budget of R12,8 billion, which is 19% more than the
previous budget, the IFP wishes to raise what we consider to be serious
concerns.

There were more than 12 000 road deaths in 2005, 40% of which were
pedestrians. Road deaths cost South Africa around R40 billion per annum. It
is estimated that up to 50% of drivers’ licences are fake. The estimates
are that daily we have 38 deaths, 21 disabling injuries and 125 serious
injuries. Most of these are caused by faults committed by drivers and
unroadworthy vehicles.

It is estimated that South Africans pay R43 billion per year for road use,
but only R13 billion of that goes to road maintenance and repair. We spend
about R23 billion every year to try to address backlogs.

Another major concern to the IFP is the fact that after almost 10 years the
taxi recapitalisation programme remains unresolved, resulting in
instability, violence and job losses in some cases. One of the reasons for
the budget increase is the establishment of a taxi recapitalisation project
office. We cannot understand why this is only now being done. Someone must
have put the cart before the horse here.

Another major concern to the IFP is the Road Accident Fund. Capping up for
compensation is indeed a short-term solution. Unless there is a reduction
of accidents on roads, which lead to death and permanent injuries, the
financial problems of the Road Accident Fund will remain unresolved.
The question of the proper management of this fund is very important. If
this is not addressed as a matter of urgency, this fund will remain a
bottomless pit for many years to come. As usual, I am not here to pose as
an armchair critic, because I don’t live in an ivory tower, like some of
us. Having served as a chairman of the Pietermaritzburg Transportation
Board myself, I am aware that the present Minister inherited some of the
unfortunate problems.

It is unfortunate that in some rural areas there are no exit roads to
community facilities such as schools and pension paypoints. Some officials
who are able and willing to assist have their hands tied, as they have to
go through transport forums before they can do anything with regard to some
of these access roads. Some members of these forums do not attend meetings
where such matters are supposed to be addressed.

In conclusion, my other concern, although that will be dealt with by my
colleague who serves on the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, is the
fact that the department has had a qualified report. I thank you.

Ms N P KHUNOU: Chairperson, Ministers present, Deputy Ministers, hon
Members of Parliament, officials from the department, ladies and gentlemen,
I greet you all in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. I would also like to
talk in remembrance of our greatest heroes and heroines who fought for the
struggle and whose fruits are eaten daily and we will continue to do so in
the future.

Abraham Lincoln said that the best thing about the future is that it comes
one day at a time. As we enjoy these fruits, let us remember that our
people are still living under poverty margins. Women in our society who are
champions of families are still unemployed and suffering. Most youths are
loitering on the streets because they are unemployed. We still have
households that are headed by children.
These struggles and challenges need not be forgotten. They need to be
emphasised so that we all are working under pressure to make our ancestors
proud. We as public representatives are here to keep the interest of our
voters at heart. As part of what we do every day, we need to be thinking of
how to change their lives.

Woodrow Wilson said, and I quote:


   You are not merely here to make a living. You are here in order to enable
   the world to live more amply, with greater vision, with a fibre of hope
   and achievement. You are here to enrich the world and impoverish yourself
   if you forget the errand.

One of the key factors that the government and Department of Transport has
prioritised is infrastructure. The Budget Review document is addressing
that. It talks about the infrastructure investments, which make up a
steadily growing share of general government expenditure. It has increased
from the 2002-03 financial year up to 2005-06 financial year from R1,9
million to R19 million, an average increase of 115,6%, as additional funds
were allocated to developing freight transport policy and implementation
strategies.

Expenditure picked up in the 2003-04 financial year to revitalise railway
branch lines in Umtata. In 2005, the budget of R5 million was allocated for
the 2005-06 financial year, and R10 million in 2005-07 for developing
freight logistics strategies and pilot implementation of these projects.
There has been an escalation of budget increases every year for
infrastructure.

As you are aware, every year we have the state of the nation address. In
2005, the President highlighted the following as key government priority
areas relating to the transport sector. On infrastructure, there is a need
to develop strategies and investment plans in relation to transport
logistics and to the amount of R180 billion. There is an investment of R220
million from the SA Rail Commuter Corporation for commuter transport and
safety. He also talked about speeding up the capital investment programme.
The focus of government is a rational logistics system.

The Department of Transport is tasked among other duties to improve and
expand transport infrastructure. The ANC also pronounced itself on 8
January through the President when he said there is a need to expand
infrastructure, as it creates jobs and this will include labour-intensive
jobs. Roads are built or constructed to improve accessibility.

Modulasetilo, Letona la lefapha la dipalangwa, ga go sena ditsela ga gona
go nna le tswelelopele le bophelo bo bontle bo ka se tswelele pele fa re
sena ditsela. Le ditsela tseo dijanaga di ka tsamayang ka tsona.Jaaka go na
le matona a diporofense tse dingwe, ke batla go le bolelela gore re batla
go bona ditsela tsa magae, metse-setoropo di siamisiwa. Re bua ka dinako
tsotlhe gore ga go na ditiro. Batho ba tla ditoropong go batla botshelo jo
bo botoka ka go bona ditiro, gonne tiro ga e teng fa re nnang teng.

Ke batla go bona kwa Mangaung go na le mabenkele a magolo go tshwana le
boGame le mabenkele a mangwe a magolo, gore le rona re kgone go tsenya
letseno mo moruong wa naga re tswe mo metse setoropong le mo magaeng jalo
le jalo. A re se direng tsela e le nngwe ngwaga di le pedi kgotsa tse tharo
kgotsa tse tlhano. Seno ke se buisiwa ke N1 e e sa fetsweng go baakanngwa.
Bomme, re tshaba go tsamaya moo bosigo. (Translation of Setswana paragraph
follows.)

[Chairperson, Minister of Transport, there are no roads on which cars can
drive, and if there are no roads there won’t be progress and life won’t
improve. Since there are some provincial Ministers present, I want to tell
you that we want to see the upgrading of roads in villages and locations.
We always say there are no jobs. People come to towns for a better life by
getting employment, because there are no jobs in the places where they
stay.

I want to see big shops like Game and others here in  Mangaung, so that we
can also contribute to the economy of our country and move away from the
villages and locations and so forth. Let us not take one, two, three or
five years to build one road. I am saying this because of the ongoing
upgrading of the N1 road. Ladies, we are afraid to walk there at night.]

I won’t do justice if I don’t talk about the N12 road. This road needs
special attention. Potholes are large and cars are breaking down. A part of
it has been fixed but we need the whole road to be taken into cognisance.
Minister, when fixing this road or constructing it, it must be done in a
manner that is user-friendly.

There are roads that won’t give pedestrians right of way, eg the road from
Durban that we took when we went to the funeral of the late Minister, that
is, the road from Durban to Lusikisiki. Schoolchildren there walk to school
and it is very dangerous. One of my colleagues told me that, on their way
to the funeral, they saw how a child was killed on the road. Because of
that we really need to make our roads user-friendly.

I know that according to the strategic plan, the action plans for roads
have been completed. The key priorities include access to roads
development, improving the national and secondary networks, and developing
and standardising information and division support systems. Amongst others,
public transport interchanges in Inanda, Ntuzuma and KwaMashu in KwaZulu-
Natal were completed in December 2004.

There is also the Galeshewe bicycle path in Kimberley, Northern Cape. The
first phase of the Baragwanath public transport interchange in
Johannesburg, Gauteng, was completed in 2005. This is very good and as the
ANC, we are happy about this.

Earlier in May 2006, we went to Colombia, South America, on a study tour.
We went to a city called Bogota. Colombia is a country with more or less
the same population as South Africa. They also have the same experience in
terms of poverty-stricken areas. We went to one of the townships where
people are striving very hard in terms of living standards.

However, one thing that was interesting was that there was a big pavement
where pedestrians, together with cyclists, walk without being fearful of
their life. This needs to be done in our townships. Bicycles are affordable
and we need to encourage their use in our country. We need to see our
children riding bicycles without them being in danger from cars. We need to
walk freely on our streets without fearing dying from motorcar accidents.
That is why we need these pavements to be constructed in our own townships
and the places where we are staying.

I am glad to report to you that the Department of Transport also has a plan
on the rural transport strategy. This will help improve roads in rural
areas and will bring about a difference in terms of economy, since it will
create jobs and bring about a better life. I am still waiting for the day
when I will see a big shopping complex in Thaba Nchu; that is where my
constituency is.
In Koffiefontein, instead of seeing those old businesses from the apartheid
era, we need to see smiles on the faces of our people where most of the
children and women will be employed; where they will not have to travel for
250 km to buy groceries in the city of Bloemfontein.

In 2005-06, 52 public infrastructure projects to the value of R1,9 billion
were approved for funding in 18 municipalities through the new public
transport and systems conditional grant.

This includes capital spending on station upgrades, constructing and
upgrading public transport, nonmotorised transport infrastructure and
facilities, including pedestrian and cycle ways. It will make a difference
and better the lives of our people, which is the message from the ANC.

One other challenge that is facing us is that these roads are being
constructed by big companies employing our people, who don’t have any
shares. They are not even sure if these jobs will be sustainable. We must
think of ways to empower them and make their lives better.

We can never separate growth from sharing with everyone. Our country’s
economy is growing rapidly, and people should share in the economic growth.
We must all share the growth, construct these roads, initiate the black
economic empowerment companies and get into joint ventures so that after
the completion of roads, people can still survive through money and from
their own businesses.

Theodore Roosevelt wrote that:


   It is not the critic who counts; not the man who points out how the
   strong man stumbles or where the doer of deeds could have done them
   better. The credit belongs to the man who is actually in the arena, whose
   face is marred by dust and sweat and blood, who strives valiantly; who
   errs and comes up short again and again; because there is not effort
   without error and shortcomings; but ... who knows the great enthusiasm,
   the great devotion, who spends himself in a worthy cause, who at the best
   knows in the end the triumph of high achievement and who at the worst, if
   he fails, at least he fails while daring greatly. So that his place shall
   never be with those cold and timid souls who know neither victory nor
   defeat.

Modulasetilo re na le diporo mo metseng ya rona, go fedisa bothata jwa
dipalangwa ke rata go naya thuso,utlwelelang gonne botlhale jwa phala bo
tswa phalaneng.Re batla go bona diporo tseo di dirisiwa,go le dipalangwa
tse dintsi tse di fapafapaneng. (Translation of Setswana paragraph
follows.)

[Chairperson, we have railway lines in our villages, to eradicate transport
problems. I would like to help by listening, because the young ones always
have good ideas. We want to see those railway lines in use and lots of
different modes of transport.]

In 2004-05, the department established the freight logistics and corridor
development programme. This is to reduce the cost of doing business in the
country by making the freight logistics sector more efficient, reliable and
cost-effective, which is what the Minister said earlier on.

Within the sector, we have four subprogrammes. The national logistics
strategy aims to improve strategies and unblock bottlenecks in freight
systems. The Eastern and Western Corridors will be used to implement
projects in the freight corridor. Border operations and control will be
responsible for co-ordinating development and maintenance of transport
infrastructure at border posts.

Transport vis-à-vis the FIFA World Cup is on board. The action plan is
articulated in the vision, objectives and plan, and is at its final stages
for development. All host municipalities are on board. Let us not forget
the use and upgrade of stadiums in townships. Make our people proud and
happy. As we are developing and preparing for the success and milestones of
growth in our country, let us not have projects that will turn into white
elephants after the World Cup.

Our airports are being improved, and I think that Mr Farrow knows that,
because the Airports Company SA Managing Director, Monhla Hlahla, came to
the committee and briefed us about this. It has spent R6 billion on
improving terminals in Johannesburg and, as you can see when you go to Cape
Town Airport, there is an improvement in the parking space which will be
well in line by 2010.

All these things are being done by the ANC. At Umgabulo, the April 2004 ANC
document emphasised that we have a growing economy, so, therefore, we need
to attack poverty in all ways by building economic infrastructure, creating
work opportunities and encouraging labour-intensive methods, which our
President emphasised last year. We need to take more youth into learnership
programmes for them to gain skills and work experience.

Let us make a difference in the lives of our people in ensuring that
tomorrow is better than yesterday and I have no doubt that it is indeed
better than yesterday. The ANC supports the Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Ms N C NKABINDE: Hon Chair and members, the transport infrastructure of a
country is like the arteries in a body. If they are clogged or too narrow
the rest of the body suffers, and where the arteries fail, the affected
parts of the body will suffer and slowly die.

The South African economy is facing exactly this type of dilemma because
GDP growth is placing more and more strain on our transport infrastructure.
In a stagnant economy the current disastrous rail transport infrastructure
will perhaps have gone unnoticed, but with a rapidly expanding economy, we
are faced with a freight industry overly reliant on road infrastructure. In
turn, our road infrastructure is carrying a rapidly increasing load.

The results of this scenario are that road transport is becoming unreliable
and slow, as traffic volumes continue to increase and exceed the capacity
of the infrastructure. Eventually, this situation will become one of the
major restraining factors on the economy, and will prevent us from
achieving and exceeding the goal of 6% GDP growth.

The 2010 Soccer World Cup will only further increase the transport
infrastructure burden around major venues and centres. Together, these
infrastructure needs are addressed in the budget with an expenditure of
several billion rands over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework period.

Indeed, these challenges are massive and should be seen in the context of
other major responsibilities of the department, such as the ever-struggling
Road Accident Fund.

Allow me to express concern regarding the taxi recapitalisation programme.
It has been postponed and delayed many times, often because of government
bungling. Again, we are told that the process will soon reach conclusion.
We would assume that government has now addressed the concerns of the
industry. However, besides claims from the Ministry, there are rumblings
from the industry about the same old concerns, such as the insufficient
scrapping fee. [Time expired.] We support the budget.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): By agreement the following speaker
will speak from his desk: hon V C Gore.

Mr V C GORE: Thank you Chair, hon Minister and hon members, the Department
of Transport continues in an exemplary manner to overcome the great
imbalances created by apartheid, especially with regard to equalising
government structures and infrastructure, which supports it, and offer
services that cater for a minority of South Africans and exclude the
majority.

Due to the time constraints of this debate, I am unable to highlight the
many successes that the Minister and the department have been able to
achieve over this period. For these, the ID congratulates the government
and offers our continued support in this regard.

However, we would like to draw your attention and request your intervention
with regard to an issue that affects the lives of about 14% of the South
African population, and prevents them from enjoying their full rights as
enshrined in our Constitution.

It is an indictment on us as a country that between four and seven million
people, because of their disabilities, are prevented from getting from
their homes to their places of work, to schools, to universities, to
government services such as health facilities, and even to partake in extra
activities, due to inaccessible transport systems. These do not cater for
physical, sensory or mental impairments.

Despite some important initiatives and policy and pilot projects around the
country, transport systems, from taxis to buses, to trains and airlines,
remain disabled-unfriendly and inaccessible. It is important to note that
in order for any transport system to be accessible for people with
physical, mental and sensory impairments, it needs to be 100% accessible;
not 10%, not 50%; not 80%, but 100%.

Hon Minister, the ID supports the work that you and your department are
doing and encourages you to address the needs and rights of the
marginalised sector of this community.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson and the hon Minister, the ACDP welcomes the
government’s stated intention to spend billions of rands on roads, which is
the single largest sectoral target of the infrastructure roll-out plan of
some R372 billion over the next number of years.

The state of our roads, as other speakers have indicated, and the delays
with regard to maintenance and repairs, have been and remain a source of
major concern. I am glad the one member referred to the N12 and the
deplorable condition of that road which I have raised in this House before,
and I myself am unable to use that due to the number of potholes, and I
have sought alternative routes. Many other people, obviously, can’t find
alternative routes.

While there has been a measure of criticism that this funding is still
insufficient, given the enormous backlogs and general delays in repairs and
maintenance, we as the ACDP are satisfied that the urgency of the matter in
general is being recognised and that we are, as hon Cronin pointed out,
“turning the corner.” But, we would like an urgent intervention on that N12
route.

As far as the Road Accident Fund is concerned, there has been severe
criticism of the board regarding the standard of political independence,
financial independence, accountability and service delivery.

The ACDP’s position on last year’s amendments to the Act is on record. We
do, however, find it deplorable that a foreigner should be able to claim
R90 million from the fund, as reported in the media, and we supported the
amendment relating to limiting foreigners’ claims.

We also, as the ACDP, welcome the appointment of the new CEO and fully
appreciate the precarious financial position of the fund. The solution,
however, lies in better management of the available fuel levy and the
eradication of corrupt practices; not, we believe, in the reduction of the
victim’s rights to claim. Additionally, we urgently need to reduce the
number of serious collisions on our roads, as has been pointed out, which
in turn will reduce the number of claims.

In conclusion, we wish to thank all the dedicated staff members of the
department for their hard work and we wish them well in their new budget
here. There can, however, be no doubt that there are a number of
challenges, but we do believe that the corner has been turned, as has been
pointed out.

Ms B THOMSON: Chairperson, Minister Radebe, Deputy Ministers present and
hon members, road safety is a major priority in any developing country,
notwithstanding, of course, other national priorities as well.

I am fully aware of the measures that are put in place to secure our
people, especially our children. I briefly want to emphasise the safety of
our little ones, particularly because they wander to their schools with the
prospects of meeting their colleagues and their educators. In the midst of
this, as they wander, these children come across reckless drivers and those
who are uncommitted to the future of our children, pedestrians and our
country as well.

Just the other day this very subject was broadcast on national TV, SABC 1.
The question was: How do we protect our children and educators from this
evil aspect of society? In the same sense, there is a welcome economic
resurgence in our economy. This has led to high vehicle sales and also to
higher road usage and, equally so, higher rates of pedestrian movement.

The safety of our kids must be a priority; it has to be secured. It is
where I see transportation of children being critical, because this
critical period, after having left home to go to school - this leg - must
be covered. These two legs between home and school become the focal point
of danger to our little ones.

Ake ngixoxe kancane ngezinto eziyimbangela yezingozi emigwaqeni yethu.
Uphuzo luyinkinga enkulu emigwaqeni yaseNingizimu Afrika. Empeleni kufanele
ukuthi imiphakathi yethu uphuzo iluthathe njengento eyihlazo kunokuba
iziqhayise ngalo. Iningi lezingozi zezimoto nokufa kwabantu abahamba
ngezinyawo libangwa ukweqiswa kophuzo. Siyanxusa ngokukhulu ukuzithoba
ukuthi abantu abake bomele ngasekhaya. Safa ubhubhane lwamanzi amponjwana.

Isimo esingemukelekile sezimoto njengamasondo ayizimpandla, amabhuleki
angabambi ngokufanele, nokunye nokunye yikhona okudala izingozi. Kwezinye
izindawo – abanye abahlonishwa sebeke bakubeka lokhu – izikhintsi
emigwaqeni zinkulu zedlula amasondo ezimoto zethu imbala. Ukuhamba futhi
ngesivinini eseqile kuyingxenye yomthelela. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Let me briefly tell you about the causes of accidents on our national
roads. Drunken driving is a major problem on South African roads. In actual
fact, our communities should consider drunken driving as an embarrassment
rather than something one can be proud of. Many car accidents and deaths of
pedestrians are attributed to drunken driving. We humbly request our people
to drink their liquor at their homes. Deliver us from the scourge of
drunken driving!

The poor maintenance of vehicles results in worn-out tyres, defective
brakes and so on, which are the causes of accidents. In other forums
members have already raised concerns about this. Potholes on our national
roads are bigger than the size of the tyres of our vehicles. Overspeeding
is another contributing factor.]

However, this should not be a transport matter alone. Prosecuting
authorities should be sensitive to lawbreakers. Low fines should be
discouraged. One is fully aware that our courts are overloaded, hence not
enough attention is paid to traffic offences.

The issue of huge differences in fines levied from one jurisdictional area
to another is also of concern. Bribery and corruption are other disturbing
factors in the existing processes of law enforcement and adjudication. The
total result of all these problems is the prime reason for road traffic
accidents.

Another element of concern is bad driver behaviour. One sees much of this
here in the Western Cape, especially amongst taxi drivers. This would
include, among other things, disregarding pedestrians and noncompliance
with road signs.

Having said this, one has to mention that levels of law enforcement are
totally inadequate. There are few metro police, and they focus on crime and
not traffic offences. There is also a lack of visible enforcement by
officers who do not produce the work necessary to change driver and
pedestrian behaviour.

I’d just like to mention that the national health survey showed that the
use of minibus taxis as a travel mode was 29% higher in metropolitan areas
than in the rural areas, which was 14%. The second most used mode was the
ordinary vehicle. The only other modes that experienced significant use
were trains and buses.

All race groups and people in every province indicated that the most
important factor to consider when travelling was safety from accidents. So
this factor is the overwhelming travel choice. If the concerns about the
security are added, the safety and security choice factors then become even
more overwhelming.

The department has considerable tools in place to address most of these
challenges we are faced with. The Road Traffic Management Corporation Act
provides for the establishment of the Road Traffic Management Corporation
to enhance the quality of roads, traffic management and service provision.

It is also supposed to strengthen the co-operation with and co-ordination
between the national, provincial and local spheres of government in the
management of road traffic; to maximise the execution of provincial and
local governments´ efforts, particularly in road traffic law enforcement;
to create business opportunities, especially for the historically
disadvantaged sector; and to guide and sustain the expansion of private-
sector investment in road-traffic management.

Okusho ukuthi ngasohlangothini loMnyango wezokuThutha iqhaza labo bona
bayazama ukulibamba. Ingcabha-ke isala ngakithina kanye nomphakathi wethu
eishlala kuwona. [It therefore means that the Department of Transport tries
in all possible ways to play its own role. Sadly, the buck stops with us
and the communities we live in.]

There is also the Road Traffic Infringement Agency, which serves as the
collection agency for outstanding fines and adjudicates on contested
traffic offences. This system is more efficient and effective for
administering traffic offences. Another tool in place is the Administrative
Adjudication of Road Traffic Offences Amendment Act, which provides for a
more efficient system of collecting traffic fines and for the introduction
of a points demerit system.

This Act allows for the driver’s licence to be suspended when he or she has
12 penalty points against his or her name. For every point over and above
12, the motorist’s licence will be suspended for a period of three months.
Points can easily be accumulated; for example, four penalty points each for
exceeding the speed limit by 50%, driving an unregistered vehicle, refusing
to undergo a blood or breathalyser test and the use of a hand-held
cellphone. All these could cost the motorist points.

Ngiyazi-ke lokhu kokushayela sibambe izincingo yinto ejwayeleke kakhulu
kithina cishe sonke. Sengathi singazama ukukugwema lokhu. [I therefore know
for a fact that talking on a cellphone whilst driving is something common
almost to all of us. If we could please try to avoid this.]

When the driver’s licence is suspended for the third time, it will be
cancelled and the motorist will then have to undergo the driver’s test
again. In some serious cases, the court may forbid the motorist to drive on
a public road again. All these efforts that have been put in place should
be the champions of road safety. Arrive Alive has been a very successful
communication tool. This campaign is aimed at reducing the number of road
traffic accidents in general and fatalities in particular by 5% compared
with the same period of the previous year.

However, Arrive Alive has not led to driver behaviour change despite a
series of highly emotive television, radio and billboard advertisements.
Communication should be in support of enforcement, and there has been too
little enforcement to be effective. One has to agree that the rate of
pedestrian fatalities is still unacceptably high.

In conclusion, let us all be part of this bigger family, the Department of
Transport, in its endeavours in trying to curb accidents and promote road
safety. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B E PULE: Chairperson and hon Minister, the Department of Transport has
to play an important role in the restructuring of economic growth and the
promotion of integrated transport planning. It is, therefore, critical that
it must ensure socioeconomic growth through effective public-private
partnership of the first and second economies.

These objectives may not be realised, given the road traffic congestion and
accident levels in South Africa, which unfortunately is ranked high in the
world. It is reported that the cost of accidents to the country in 2005 was
approximately R40 billion. There was also an increase of 19,8% in
accidents, and again this year an increase in accidents. This is really
unacceptable, as human life is very important.

Given an increase of 12% in traffic volumes and an increase of 7% in
vehicle registration in 2006, it is a real challenge for the Department of
Transport. It is really disheartening to note that alcohol abuse is
reported to be the main cause and law enforcement is very minimal, with a
fine collection of only 17%.

There are also challenges facing public transport, which accounts for the
bulk of the department’s budget. This programme has an average annual
increase of 14,9%, reaching R9,4 billion. Most of the expenditure is for
public transport subsidies. Despite these allocations, there are also
additional allocations in the 2006 Estimates of National Expenditure over
the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework period.

This budget may not necessarily meet the expectations of our commuters, but
burning buses and trains will not solve any problem. It is irresponsible
and the UCDP condemns it with the contempt it deserves. Ke a leboga. [Thank
you.] [Time expired.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairperson, during the last Budget Vote debate of this
department, the PAC stated its concerns regarding the nonsubsidy to
commuters of the taxi industry, as with bus and train commuters.

To date, in this new financial year’s budget, the same position still
prevails. Something is not right. Taxi commuters, who contributed to
putting this government in office through sweat, tears and blood, are
excluded from commuter subsidies.

The R7 billion taxi recapitalisation programme has many shortfalls.
Struggling taxi operators are forced to be bought out of business for a
mere R50 000 instead of being assisted to keep their heads above water.
This is murder.

No right-thinking person may trade off his lifetime investment and be
cheaply pushed out of business in this fashion. The only honourable thing
to do, hon Minister, is to stop the recapitalisation programme and give
subsidies to taxi commuters. [Interjections.] Set standards for taxis that
may be subsidised, period.

Let us not be seen as advocating for a free market economy system while on
the other hand when it comes to issues that are related to our people, we
drive the policy of socialism. Socialism and the socialist principles
should only affect major natural resources and not a small industry such as
the taxi operators. Let us use the R7 billion today to kick-start the
subsidy for taxi commuters.

The provinces should make it convenient for taxi associations to register,
as entrenched in our Bill of Rights on rights to association. The Portfolio
Committee on Transport should monitor the registration process of taxis at
the provincial offices in their oversight duty and expose corrupt dealings
by some provincial registrators with vested interests in the taxi industry.
[Time expired.] The PAC supports the budget.

Nk W NGWENYA: Sihlalo, malunga ahloniphekile, Ngqongqoshe Jeff Radebe,
okokuqala nje ngithi angithathe leli thuba ngithi nxese, ngithi dudu kubo
bonke abathe behlelwa yizingozi emigwaqweni yethu. Ngibala namaqhawe ethu
aka-ANC nomndeni wami nawo owalinyalelwa engozini yemoto. Ngithi dudu.

Ngizokhuluma ngezithuthi zomphakathi ikakhulu ngigxile ematekisini,
maqondana nokuthi kungani lo hulumeni uthe wangenelela kwezamabhizinisi
osomatekisi. I-ANC iyasesekela lesi sabiwomali. I-ANC izimisele
ukuthuthukisa ngohlelo olusha lwamatekisi ezweni lonke lomzansi ne-Afrika
ngoba uhulumeni wobandlululo ukuphela kwebhizinisi angazange alinake leli
losomatekisi.

Yingakho uMnyango wezokuThutha uze nalolu hlelo lokuhlela kabusha imboni
yezokuthutha ematekisini, olubizwa ngothatha skorokoro. Angazi ukuthi yini
abanye bona bethi alungasetshenziswa ngoba niyalizwa ukuthi lithini igama
lalo, lithi “thatha iskorokoro.” Iskorokoro ngumkhehlekhehle nje wemoto.

Izolo alifani nakusasa, ukuguqulwa kwezitifiketi ezindala zibe izimvume
ezintsha sekuqalile. Lo hulumeni uza nezinguquko. Usuku olubekiwe
lomnqamlajuqu umhla ka-31 Meyi 2006 njengoba eseshilo uNgqongqoshe wethu
wezokuThutha uMmnu Jeff Radebe. Kanti futhi uhulumeni ka-ANC ukhiphe uhlelo
lomxhaso lwama-R50 000 olubhekiswe kosomatekisi ukuze bakwazi ukuguqula
izimoto zabo kube ezintsha, khona sizokwazi ukuhlala kahle sibe ntofontofo.
Uhulumeni ubambe imihlangano nabantu abathintekayo kulolu hlelo kanti futhi
ukwenza lokho kudinga izinsiza.

Ngizothatha imiqondo yenu ngiyibeke eGauteng, lapho lolu hlelo
lusezithebeni zikahulumeni wesifunda saseGauteng. UNgqongqoshe wesifundazwe
wezokuthutha nemisebenzi yomphakathi usebenza ngokubambisana nazo zonke
izinhlangano zamatekisi eGauteng. Lezi zinhlangano zonke zaseGauteng
sezibhalisile kulolu hlelo lokuhlela kabusha imboni yamatekisi. Ihhovisi
likaNgqongqoshe wesifunda wezokuthutha nemisebenzi yomphakathi lusingethe
lolu hlelo ngendlela evulekile maqondana nawo wonke umuntu othintekayo
kulolu hlelo.

Ngizonibonisa-ke ukuthi kungani uhulumeni engenelele futhi kulolu daba
lwamatekisi. Izinhlangano zamatekisi endaweni yakithi zisebenzisa imizila
eminingi eyahlukene, akukho ukubangisana futhi kusetshenziswana kahle.
Empeleni, kule ndawo kunezinhlangano ezintathu ezinkulu. Izindlela zazo
zimi ngale ndlela elandelayo. ISoweto Taxi Association ebizwa ngokuthi i-
STA inamarenki eNaledi kuya eBaragwanath; eNaledi kuya eJohannesburg;
eNaledi kuya eKliptown; naseNaledi kuya eLenasia.

Eyesibili inhlangano iSoweto Taxi Services ebizwa ngokuthi i-STS. Ilayisha
eNaledi kuya eBaragwanath; eNaledi kuya eKliptown; eNaledi kuya eLenasia.
Eyesithathu yi-Witwatersrand Africa Association, i-Wata, okuyilapho
ngibekwe ukusebenza khona. Le nhlangano yona isebenzela eMndeni kuya
eBaragwanath; eMndeni kuya eJohannesburg; eMndeni kuya eDobsonville;
eSakkies kuya eBaragwanath; eSakkies kuya eJohannesburg naseGreen Village.

Zonke lezi zinhlangano engikhuluma ngazo ezendawo lapho ngihlala khona
futhi sezilibambile iqhaza kulolu hlelo lukahulumeni. Endaweni sinamarenki
amatekisi amaningi akhiwa nguhulumeni omdala. Lapho ngibala amarenki
aseNaledi, iNhlazane neSiteshini. Lawa marenki awasetshenziswa amatekisi.
Niyabona-ke ukuthi ingakho uhulumeni engenelela? Izinhlangano zamatekisi
zizenzela awazo amarenki emakhoneni ezitaladi. Lawa marenki awanele, enjalo
nje awakulungele ukufeza izinhloso zawo.

Manje ngizokhuluma ngenselelo ebhekene nabagibeli kukho konke lokhu.
Abagibeli bamatekisi bahlangabezana nezimo lapho bezithola behlohlwa
okwezinhlanzi emathinini, lapho kuthiwa abahlale ngabane esihlalweni. Lokho
kuhlaliswa bakubiza nge“four four” elokishini. Ngesikhathi semvula,
amakhaza ebusika, nasemoyeni abagibeli bayahlukumezeka ngoba amarenki lawa
okuzenzela awanalo uphahla.

Izimo zamanye amatekisi amaningi zimbi kabi ngendlela yokuthi kwamanye
amatekisi unethwa yimvula kodwa ube ugibele futhi ube ukhokhile; kanti
kwamanye kumele ubambe isivalo ibe ihamba itekisi, uma kungenjalo uzophuma
naso isivalo. Amanye amatekisi awekho esimweni sendlela njengoba udadewethu
oqeda ukusuka lapha eseshilo ukuthi umthetho kufanele uthathe umsebenzi
wawo. Awekho esimweni sendlela kodwa ahamba egibelisa abantu. Amanye
awanawo amabhuleki, bawashayela ngama-screwdrivers nangezincingo. Lokhu
kubeka izimpilo zabantu engozini enkulu. Yingakho uhulumeni engenelele
ngalokhu kuhlela kabusha imboni yamatekisi okungafunwayo.

Lawa matekisi aziwa ngokuthi izikorokoro, imikhehlekhehle. Uma bekuzwe usho
njalo abanikazi bamatekisi bayakukhipha etekisini. Uyaphuma yize
usukhokhile. Kusukela ngesikhathi sikahulumeni wobandlululo imboni
yamatekisi ayizange yanakwa. Lokhu kwenze ukuthi abamatekisi banganaki
izimpilo zabantu nezimoto zanganakwa. Siyazinaka ke thina singuhulumeni ka
ANC.

Maqondana nokuziphatha kwabashayeli nabasizi babo, abagibeli bazithola
bethukwa, behlukunyezwa abashayeli kanye nabasizi babo kanti futhi nabo
abasizi baphathwa kabi abanikazi bezimoto. Into efunekayo ukuthi abashayeli
kanye nabasizi babo bake bafundiswe ukuziphatha nokusebenzisana nabagibeli.
Uhulumeni lapha uza nezinhlelo eziningi. Okunye sebekubalile abafowethu
nodadewethu abasanda kusuka lapha.

Manje sengifuna ukukhuluma ngalolu hlelo olubizwa ngokuthi iShova Kalula.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Ms W NGWENYA: Chairperson, hon members and Minister Jeff Radebe, firstly
let me use this opportunity to pay tribute to all the heroes who fell on
our roads. Here I am referring to the families, including my own family,
who lost their loved ones and ANC heroes in road accidents. To those left
behind I say: “Be comforted.”

I will talk about the public transport system and my speech will focus on
the taxi industry. I will mention why this government has involved itself
in the taxi industry. Firstly, the ANC supports this Budget Vote. The ANC
supports the taxi recapitalisation programme in this industry, because this
is the only business industry that the apartheid government did not pay
attention to.

It is for this very reason that the Department of Transport introduced this
programme of rejuvenating the taxi industry, dubbed Operation Thath’
Iskorokoro. I am not too sure though why certain people say this should not
be done, because you can see that the name is self-explanatory. It says
“Operation Thath’ Iskorokoro”, which means ``Operation Remove the Jalopy.’’
A jalopy is a dilapidated old car.

Yesterday is not like tomorrow. The programme of changing the old taxi
permits to operating licences has already started. This government is
coming up with changes. The deadline, as our own Minister of Transport Mr
Jeff Radebe has stated, is 31 May 2006 and the ANC government has issued a
scrapping allowance of R50 000 per vehicle so that the taxi owners can
start with new, comfortable taxis. The government has had meetings with the
concerned parties and there is a need for infrastructure.
I will take your minds to Gauteng, where this matter is now in the hands of
the provincial government there. The MEC for Public Transport, Roads and
Works is working co-operatively with all taxi associations in Gauteng. All
these Gauteng taxi associations are registered for this taxi
recapitalisation programme. The office of the MEC is handling this matter
openly, visible to all those who are affected by this programme.

I will tell you the reasons why the government intervened in the taxi
industry. Taxi associations in my area use many different routes. There is
no fierce rivalry and they work very well. In fact, in the area there are
three big associations. Their routes are as follows: Soweto Taxi
Association, known as STA, has routes from Naledi to Baragwanath, Naledi to
Johannesburg, Naledi to Kliptown and from Naledi to Lenasia.

The second association is Soweto Taxi Services, known as STS. It carries
passengers from Naledi to Baragwanath, from Naledi to Kliptown and from
Naledi to Lenasia. The third one is Witwatersrand Africa Association, the
Wata, where I am deployed to work. This association operates from Mndeni to
Baragwanath, from Mndeni to Johannesburg, from Mndeni to Dobsonville, from
Sakkies to Baragwanath and from Sakkies to Johannesburg and the Green
Village.

All these associations I am talking about are based in my local area and
they are playing a major role in this government programme. In our vicinity
we have many taxi ranks which were built by the old government. I am
referring to the ranks in Naledi, Nhlazane and Siteshini. These ranks are
not used by the taxis. Do you see why the government intervenes? The taxi
associations create their own taxi ranks on street corners. These taxi
ranks are not enough and they are not serving the purpose they were meant
for.

Now I am going to talk about the challenges faced by the passengers in all
this. The taxi passengers face the situation where they find themselves
being packed like fish in tins, where they are told to sit in fours on the
seats. This type of sitting is called four-four in the townships. On rainy
days, on cold winter days and on windy days the commuters suffer because
these open-air taxi ranks have no roofs.

Many of these taxis are in such a bad condition that rain penetrates them
and you get wet sitting inside and having paid for the transport. In some
taxis you have to hold the door while the taxi is in motion, otherwise you
can fall out of the taxi together with the door. Others are not roadworthy
and, as the sister who spoke here has said, the law should take its course.
They are not roadworthy but they do carry passengers. Others have no brakes
and the drivers drive them with screwdrivers and with wire. This puts
people’s lives in great danger. That is why the government has intervened
with the recapitalisation programme of the taxi industry, which some people
do not want.
These taxis are known as ``izikorokoro’’ [jalopies]. If the taxi owners
hear you saying that, they take you out of the taxi. You get out even if
you have already paid. Since the apartheid government the taxi industry has
not been cared for and this caused taxi owners not to look after people’s
lives and after their own taxis. We as the ANC government will take care of
them.

Regarding the behaviour of drivers and their assistants, the passengers are
sworn at and abused by drivers and their assistants and the same applies to
the assistants who get abused by the taxi owners. We need to teach the
drivers and their assistants how to behave and to work hand in hand with
the passengers. The government is coming up with many programmes, some of
which have been mentioned by the brothers and sisters who have spoken.

Now I want to talk about this programme called Shova Kalula.]

The Department of Transport has implemented the Shova Kalula bicycle
programme to ensure flexibility and reduced traffic congestion on roads.
Bicycle transport is a cheaper, reliable and flexible mode of travelling,
to cater for both urban and rural people, to reduce delays and travel
periods.

Kulapho-ke sifake amakhosikazi ukuthi ake alungise le migwaqo. Asiyivali
kodwa siyayilungisa, siyayinweba. Amakhosikazi amaningi aseGauteng yiwo
lawa alungisa imigwaqo, ukuze abantu bakwazi ukuthenga amabhayisikili futhi
bathole indawo yokuhamba ngoba leya migwaqo eyayakhiwe uhulumeni mincane,
ayikho indlela yokuhamba ngamabhayisikili.

Bengifuna ukukhuluma ngezamabhasi kodwa ngihlushwa yisikhathi, bengizonaba
kakhulu. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[That is where we hired women to construct these roads. We are not closing
them but we are constructing and widening them. The majority of Gauteng
women are the ones constructing the roads so that people will be able to
buy bicycles and be able to walk on the road. The roads that were built by
the government were narrow; there was no space to ride a bicycle.

I wanted to talk about the buses, but the time is very limited and I was
going to talk about them at length.]

The bus industry in South Africa has for many years made a vital
contribution to the economic development of the country. As a provider of
service, it has provided, and continues to provide, mobility to our people
who depend on public transport to get to and from work, for shopping,
seeking employment and to transport people to school. According to
available statistics, 80% of South Africa’s population is totally dependent
on public transport for their mobility needs.

Uma sengiphetha, ngithi, kafushane nje, lo mbiko uhlose ukuveza izimo
zokuthutha abantu ezingeni likazwelonke. Izimoto zokuthutha zidinga
ukubhekisiswa ukuze kuhlangatshezwane nezidingo zezakhamuzi zezwe. Uma
kufika kwezokuthutha emphakathini wethu, uhulumeni ka-ANC kumele abhekisise
futhi athathe izinqumo ezihlolisisiwe kahle, kuhambisane nezidingo zomuntu
wonke.

Lo mbiko uqhakambisa isidingo sokwenzela abantu impilo engcono futhi
uxhumana kahle nohlelo lukahulumeni lokuthuthukisa ezomnotho olubizwa nge-
Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa. Ngiyabonga.
[Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[In conclusion, I would like to say that this report is about the
conditions under which people are transported nationally. The taxis need to
be looked at carefully so that we will be able to meet the requirements of
the citizens of this country. If we are talking about the transport in our
communities, the ANC government must be careful and take proper decisions
that will be in line with the people’s needs.

This report clearly shows the need to make people’s lives better and it
aligns with the government programme for economic development called the
Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the MF applauds the department’s initiatives to
manage, develop and sustain an accessible, safe and cost-effective
transport sector for South Africa. Rail, road, sea or sky, South Africa is
showing much improvement in the sector, even though challenges do still
hinder progress.

The MF is especially pleased with the department’s initiatives to maintain
the taxi industry. The conditions under which taxi drivers are employed,
and the safety of passengers and other commuters, as well as the
roadworthiness of taxis are crucial factors, which the department is
addressing effectively and efficiently. Although some dissatisfaction has
been expressed by many taxi drivers, the MF supports the department’s
endeavours to make this means of transport safer and accessible.

The MF welcomes the department’s nominal growth of 13%. We acknowledge that
the budget increase is a result of the taxi recapitalisation project,
payment to the Road Accident Fund, and the public transfer of
infrastructure in the light of the Gautrain project, as well as the
building of public infrastructure for the 2010 Soccer World Cup. The MF
supports the growth in the public transport programme.

Lastly, we seek that the conditions of our national roads be seriously
monitored and maintained, as road safety strongly depends on the conditions
of our roads. Further, we express our interest in how the department
intends addressing traffic congestion.

As for aviation, the MF is pleased with the performance of SA Airways, but
we seek a reduction in prices to make travel more accessible to our middle-
and lower-income sectors.

The MF, in view of the department’s programmes and projects, is confident
that the sector shall, over this year, introduce a safer and more
accessible transport system. The MF supports the Budget Vote.

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, hon Minister and members, when we debate this
Budget Vote today, we must highlight the main aim of the Department of
Transport, namely the provision of an integrated, sustainable, reliable and
safe transport system. This is a noble objective, and I think we all should
support such an objective.

Programme 3 deals with “Transport Regulation and Accident and Incident
Investigation” and has the objective of creating “an enabling regulatory
environment in the areas of safety, security and environmental compliance,
and manage accident and incident investigations in all modes of transport”.

The FD is of the view that much more funding should be made available to
Programme 3 so that our public transport becomes much safer. Of late, there
have been many newspaper reports on the lack of safety on trains. During
the recent strike, several commuters lost their lives because they were
thrown from moving trains. There was no security present to protect them.
Robberies are a daily occurrence for many train commuters. Metrorail does
not do enough to protect the property and person of regular commuters. In
several recent court cases, Metrorail denied having responsibility for
protecting their commuters.

The FD welcomes the new allocation to the taxi recapitalisation project. We
also welcome the announcement made by the hon Minister today, that 85% of
our taxi operators have applied, and that 10 000 minibus taxis will be
scrapped by December 2006. The scrapping of old, unsafe minibus taxis
cannot be wrong, irrespective of our political philosophy. The life of one
commuter is more valuable than 10 000 minibus taxis. In conclusion, the FD
supports this Budget Vote.

Mr M M SWATHE: Chairperson, I thank the Minister of Transport for the input
delivered on the Budget Vote of Transport today. However, the Budget Vote
still does not adequately address the major concerns and problems facing
South Africa.

Our prime concern is the continued lack of funds, which are not allocated
correctly, as per demand, considering that nearly R2,7 billion is
channelled to the Road Accident Fund alone.

The taxi recapitalisation programme is now six years old, and only a small
number of the estimated 90 000 existing taxis have been replaced. In City
Press of 23 April 2006, the Minister is quoted as saying that only 10 000
taxis will be scrapped in this financial year. The delays have also
resulted in the scrapping fee being increased from R10 000 to R50 000, and
the cost of the new 18-seater taxi vehicle has nearly doubled from the
original estimated price of R120 000 to R250 000 per unit. This has major
ramifications for taxi owners in terms of affordability and viability.

The turbulent taxi industry is continuously under threat, with fluctuating
fuel prices and high maintenance costs. The delays have resulted in the
already ageing taxi fleet becoming older and, in many cases, unroadworthy
and unsafe for public use.

The one-off capital subsidy does not take into account future subsidisation
of the taxi industry as the largest of our public transporters,
representing 60% of public transport. Nearly R4,7 billion, the largest
share of the budget of the national Department of Transport, goes to the
bus and rail industries, and it is still not known whether taxis can
qualify for these subsidies.

The bus industry also needs to be checked and the roadworthiness of buses
and the fitness of drivers need to be assessed. During April, the media
reported bus accidents, which killed many people and left some critically
injured. These accidents happened on Moloto Road and other high accident
frequency roads.

The DA’s policy focuses on the safety of passengers and how commuters can
be subsidised, as opposed to operators. The DA believes that the
introduction of a multi-ticketing system will help in this regard and the
department should investigate this further.

Minister, the intended merger of Metrorail’s Shosholoza Meyl into the SA
Rail Commuter Corporation does not seem to have materialised, according to
your plans. Disputes are still continuing about salaries, pensions and its
ultimate restructuring.

In the interim commuters are becoming more frustrated, and trains have been
burnt. Damage continues unabated and violence appears to be the norm. The
transport police units’ influence has not yet taken hold and the recent
security worker strike saw many innocent commuters thrown out of trains,
resulting in Metrorail having to consider the use of the SA National
Defence Force.

Can we really see something happening to stop deaths and injuries on our
trains and railway lines? How long will this continue before we see action?
Surely prevention is better than cure, and therefore more visible security
is needed.

Le ge lefapha lekhwi le hweditše kokeletšo yeo e menaganego mengwageng ye
lesome ya go feta, ga se ya hlwe e kgona go ka tswalela sekgoba sa tšhalelo-
morago. Se ke seo DA e dikilego e se laetša ngwaga ka ngwaga.

Mohlomphegi Tona, mafarahlahla a ditsela a akanyetšwa go bitša R500
billion. Go ya ka lekgotla la South African Roads Federation, go tšwela
pele ka go aba tšhelete ya fase mengwaga ya go feta 25 go hlotše dipoelo
tšeo di sa kgahlišego tša boemo bja tlase bja ditsela le go dithoto. Go ya
ka fao lekgotla la SARF le akantšego, go nyakega R10 billion le go feta fao
go bušetša mafarahlahla a ditsela sekeng. Ka nako ya kabo ya ditšhelete
SARD e bile ya bega ka ga seemo seo se sa kgotsofatšego sa ditšhelete le ge
lefapha le lekile go oketša mašeleng. Eupša mašeleng ao ga a ka a tliša
diphetogo. A be a hlaela go ya ka kgoolo ya theko ya didirišwa.

Nepo ya SARD e be e le go godiša mafahlahla a ditsela ka dikhilomethara tše
3 170 go tloga ka la 31 Matšhe 2005. Se se laetša nhla ya mathata ao a
nyakago magato a bjako ka ge go se lokišwe ga ditsela ka bjako go hlola
tshenyegelo yeo e menaganego gašupa go hlola mathata go ikonomi ya Afrika
Borwa.
Mohlomphegi Tona, ge R20 billion yeo e šomišwago protšekeng ya Gautrain,
yeo e lego ``tlou ye tšhweu’’ ka therešo, go ka se be bothata go laetša
Moswaramatlotlo a Setšhaba go hloma le go oketša sekhwama sa go phološa
ditsela le dithoto tshenyegong.

Ke a go leboga, Modulasetulo. [Nako e fedile.] (Translation of Sepedi
paragraphs follows.)

[Even though this department received a considerable increase over the past
10 years, it did not succeed in clearing their backlog. This is what the DA
has been trying to point out every year.
Hon Minister, it is estimated that road infrastructure rehabilitation is
going to cost R500 billion. According to the South African Roads Board, the
low budget allocation during the past 25 years has brought about negative
results with regard to poor roads and cargo services.

According to the recommendations from SARB, an amount of more than R10
billion is required for the rehabilitation of these roads. During the
budget allocation the SARB complained about the department’s unsatisfactory
financial status, in spite of the increase. The increase did not bring
about much change, because of the increase in expenditure.

The SARB’s main objective was to extend the road infrastructure to 3 170 km
from 31 March 2005. This shows that the matter needs urgent attention
because, if the road is not reconstructed, then there will be a waste,
creating problems for the South African economy.

Hon Minister, if R20 billion is being spent on the Gautrain project, which
is a white elephant for real, then it will not be difficult to convince the
Governor of the Reserve Bank to increase the budget for rehabilitation and
cargo services.

Thank you, Chairperson. [Time expired.]]

Mr M I MOSS: Comrade Minister, Deputy Ministers, hon members, distinguished
guests and especially the delegation from Hout Bay up there in the gallery
[Applause.], I would like to dedicate my speech today to the many fishermen
who have drowned while working under the most unsafe and unpleasant
conditions at sea and lost their lives with little and no compensation.

The South African Maritime Safety Authority, Samsa, is an agency under the
auspices of the Department of Transport and is tasked with the
responsibilities of ensuring the safety of life and property at sea, to
prevent and combat pollution from ships and to promote South Africa’s
maritime interests.

The mandate of Samsa is thus very important, as it has to do with matters
of life and death of people and has to set safety standards and measures
for punishment on violation by vessels. These measures make the environment
conducive for safe trade and goods transportation through the import and
export of goods at our ports, which contribute to the gross domestic
product of our country. Comrade Jeremy has alluded to the above.

’n Maand gelede is ek deur die gemeenskap van Houtbaai uitgenooi om as
spreker op te tree tydens ’n roudiens waar vissermanne vir die soveelste
keer hul lewens aan die rowwe en onstuimige see moes afstaan. Die vyf
vissermanne het gesterf, ondanks die feit dat hulle veiligheidstoerusting
aangehad het. Enkele dae nadat die vissermanne begrawe is, het nog ’n jong
visserman van dieselfde omgewing verdrink.

Navorsing het getoon dat om as ’n visserman op see te werk een van die mees
gevaarlike beroepe is. Die feite wat die navorsing beaam is onder andere:
Dat vissermanne gewoonlik die rowwe en onstuimige see moet trotseer; die
werkoppervlak op die bote is beperk; en dat die vis se vette en olie die
werkvlak glad en glyerig maak, wat gevaarlik is.

As ’n persoon wat in ’n vissersgemeenskap gebore is en grootgeword het, is
dit vir my, en ek neem aan vir al die agb lede van die Parlement – vir jou
ook, Comrade Bloem – onaanvaarbaar dat so baie vissermanne hulle lewe aan
die see moet afstaan. In die meeste gevalle is hulle die enigste
broodwinners. Dit is ook alombekend dat veral die vissers wat op die klein
bote werk nie gedek word deur die vergoeding wat werkers van die
Ongevallekommissaris kry indien hulle aan diens sterf of op see beseer word
nie.

Pastoor Johannes Dreyer van die Houtbaai Christian Initiative en Timothy
Jacobs van die Houtbaai Civic Organisation wat die roudiens georganiseer
het, het tydens die roudiens spesifieke aanbevelings en voorstelle gemaak.
Samsa sal, saam met hulle, moet kyk wat meer gedoen kan word om die lewe
van veral die vissermanne op see te beskerm. [Applause.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[A month ago I was invited as guest speaker at a memorial service for the
Hout Bay community, where fishermen had, for the umpteenth time, lost their
lives to the rough and stormy seas. The five fishermen had lost their lives
in spite of the fact that they had worn their life jackets. A few days
after the fishermen were buried, another young fisherman from the same area
lost his life.

Research has shown that working as a fisherman at sea is one of the most
dangerous professions. The facts, backed up by research, are inter alia:
That fishermen usually have to brave the rough and stormy seas; that the
boats have limited working surface; and that the fat from the fish and oil
result in the working area becoming smooth and slippery, which is
dangerous.

As one born and bred in a fishing community, it is to me, and I take it to
all hon members of Parliament – you too, Comrade Bloem – unacceptable that
so many fishermen should give up their lives to the sea. In most cases they
are the sole breadwinners. It is a known fact that especially fishermen
working on the small boats are not covered by the compensation that
workers, under the jurisdiction of the Accident Commissioner, receive in
the case of death on duty or injury at sea.

Pastor Johannes Dreyer from the Hout Bay Christian Initiative and Timothy
Jacobs from the Hout Bay Civic Organisation who organised the memorial
service, made specific recommendations and suggestions during the memorial
service. Samsa will, in collaboration with them, have to look into what
more can be done in order to protect the lives of specifically fishermen at
sea. [Applause.]]

In 2002 the then Minister of Transport, Abdullah Omar, launched an
initiative to bring a stop to the senseless loss of life of fishermen.
Minister Jeff Radebe took it further. The Safety Awareness Programme was
launched and fishermen along the coast of South Africa were trained in all
aspects of safety on small fishing vessels and it went beyond the safety of
workers, as it also addressed the problem of alcohol and drug abuse.

The training included the development of revised training and certification
standards for fishing vessel personnel. These standards also seek to ensure
appropriate, quality and portable skills for seafarers. Samsa also
continues to work with industry stakeholders, the training establishments
and the transport Sita, Teta, to ensure that issues around training and
development are addressed on an ongoing basis.

The programme showed a vast improvement, but the number of catastrophic
fatal incidents in the past year negated the progress made since 2002.
According to the Samsa Annual Operations Unit Report of last year, there
has been an increase in fatal incidents and the number of deaths has more
than doubled. Factors such as an increase in surveys for small vessel and
racing yachts are some of the contributing factors of the operations unit
report.

Some of the fatal catastrophic incidents of the past year have been the two
marine tragedies where the fishing vessel, Lindsay, drowned in a collision
with a cargo vessel and 14 of its crew members died and the South African
sailing yacht, Moquini, which went missing with its six crew members who
drowned.

A notable achievement and important shift of Samsa is now occurring with
concrete proposals focusing on the human element issues in fishing and
stevedoring industries where the development of standards for compulsory
accident insurance for all seafarers will be implemented.

These standards seek to ensure a minimum level of financial compensation
for seafarers and their dependents in the event of personal injury or
death, especially where they are not covered by the Compensation for
Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act. The portfolio committee is waiting
for the department and Minister to table these proposals and to support
them.
Another achievement for the year was the adoption of amendments at the
Marine Environmental Protection Committee. This new special area will make
a significant contribution towards the protection of the marine environment
from pollution from ships. The challenge is to ensure that the area is
properly policed through effective monitoring and response capabilities.

Samsa is committed to work with the key government role-players, namely the
Departments of Transport and Environmental Affairs and Tourism. Samsa is
currently going through restructuring and the need for better service
delivery will, hopefully, also improve – hence the increase in the 2006-
2007 budget.

I shall not do this debate justice if I do not touch on the issue of
inaccessibility to a public transport system by persons with disabilities
in our country. The public transport system excludes disabled persons and,
as a victim of our unacceptably high road accident statistics, I regard
myself qualified to speak on this subject.

Since disabled persons constitute one of the most vulnerable groups in our
society and are making use of public transport on a daily basis as part of
their daily lives, the need for a safe, affordable, accessible and
efficient public transport system for disabled persons is very important.
The introduction of the new Taxi Recapitalisation Programme should begin to
address exactly that.

Disabled persons have a slogan, which says “Nothing about us without us”.
The disabled sector of our society is concerned with the response they got
from the Department of Transport on a question regarding transport for
disabled persons. The Department of Transport is saying that not all, but
certain taxis, will be accessible to disabled persons.

The three accessible public pilot projects currently running in Cape Town,
Durban and Johannesburg must now improve and reach maturity so as to become
best practices for other municipalities and provinces. The Department must
also roll out a safety training campaign for commuters, drivers and
transport workers.

I am informed by disabled persons and their respective structures that, to
them, universal access to all modes of transportation is key. There must be
continuous consultation with the disability sector to ensure a sustainable
and integrated transport plan.

The then minister, Abdullah Omar, once visited our constituency. He came to
the meeting and he was late. He told us that, as the Minister of Transport,
there is no way he could speed and exceed the speed limit, and in so doing
he would also ensure that he reaches his destination safe. That is the
encouragement we want to take to our people today. We don’t need more
disabled persons, and most of the disabled persons that we have today are
as a result of accidents on the road.

Comrade Jeremy Cronin alluded to this earlier when he said that 14% of all
road accidents result in people who become disabled and we must really walk
on to ensure that we don’t add to the already high number of disabled
persons in our country. [Interjections.]

As we all sit here today, remember we are all potential disabled persons,
because tomorrow you might find yourself injured in an accident and then
adding to their ranks. [Interjections.] We don’t want more disabled
persons. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Madam Chairperson, as predicted, the debate has
been both instructive and constructive, for which I would like to thank all
the hon members who participated in this debate. I would like to make just
a few comments on the inputs by colleagues.

Regarding the issue of skills development, as hon Cronin has indicated,
there are three areas we are looking at as the Department of Transport, and
within the department itself, so that we would be able to up-skill the
skills base of the department and be properly positioned to play the
strategic role of steering this transport ship.

Secondly, regarding the agencies and state-owned enterprises that report to
the Department of Transport, there is a great deal of work that is being
done in order to support skills development. Also, concerning the transport
sector generally, there is a particular emphasis on engineering across all
the subsectors of transport. I received a report from the officials last
week and I would therefore urge that the officials brief the portfolio
committee, so that it can see the excitement of what is coming across in
this skills development strategy, which is going to be fed into the Jipsa
programme initiated by the Deputy President.

Concerning the issue of security at airports, it is very clear that the
conundrum about safety at airports is that we engage in a constant tussle
where criminals and syndicates attempt to outwit whatever systems we try to
put in place. But, in general terms, we are satisfied that the airport
safety plans are in place. The airports management is doing whatever it can
to ensure that our systems are in order. This is in accordance with the
national aviation safety plan that has been developed by the department,
together with the chief of aviation security in South Africa.

Of course, all these incidents, especially these high-profile ones, are a
matter of grave concern to us. The appropriate authorities are dealing with
these matters in order to ensure that we can be able to pounce on the
perpetrators.

There are a number of positive developments as far as security is
concerned, particularly at the Johannesburg International Airport. Firstly,
the physical wall around the Johannesburg International Airport on the
entire airside has been completed. We have also installed CCV cameras. They
have already employed the manager whose job is to look after security, so
that we can be able to co-ordinate security matters.

The new equipment is in place and also internal robust checks are being
undertaken by the Airports Company South Africa in order to enhance the
security at our airports. Also, we are of the view that, compared to other
countries, our airports are in fact compliant with the International Civil
Aviation Organisation, ICAO, standards, as has been seen when I
commissioned an audit with ICAO and the International Air Transport
Association, who gave a very positive response concerning the security
measures at our airports.

Hon Farrow, regarding advertisements on the structures of the department,
we, shortly, are going to advertise posts for directors-general and chief
directors. The hon Farrow is also urged to apply. [Laughter.] I am sure he
will be favourably considered. [Laughter.]

On a more serious note, concerning the issue of dedicated transport lanes,
our strategic plan, which I believe the portfolio committee received a
couple of days ago when we briefed them, clearly states our intention to
designate - where they do not exist - dedicated public transport lanes, and
to enforce the regulations where the dedicated transport lanes are already
in place, in areas such as Cape Town.

We have also set ourselves a target of achieving this in all the
metropolitan areas of South Africa by the end of this financial year. We
are also going to ensure that we co-ordinate with enforcement agencies so
that we can be able to enforce these measures.

We have also done an assessment of last year’s Transport Month. One of the
things that we want to pilot is particularly the issue of dedicated public
transport lanes. We are thinking of maybe dedicating one week in October
this year, where we are going to ensure that in all the major metropolitan
areas we support people who go by public transport, not the car-free day,
but pro-public transport day.

Coming to road maintenance issues, this is a very interesting legacy. The
previous government, between 1975 and 1990, actually halved the investment
in roads in South Africa. Given the nature of roads and pavements
rehabilitation, the cumulative impact of that decline has been even larger
since 2000. However, we are seeing an increase in our investment in road
infrastructure in real terms. This allows us to begin a long whole task of
ensuring that we do whatever we can in order to improve the situation.

Concerning the famous N12, I am pleased to indicate to hon members that
this was a provincial road. So the province has now applied to the National
Roads Agency to have it transferred into the national department, through
the roads agency. We are beginning to do work and I hope that when we meet
again next year, there will be a great deal of progress on the N12.
[Applause.]

Regarding the travel demand management model, we are developing a travel
demand management strategy. We hope that this will be completed before the
end of this current year. As part of the model we are going to focus on
high-occupancy lanes and on congestion management. When the report is fully
ready, we will be able to report to the portfolio committee.

The issue of tour operators is a matter of concern to us as well. We were,
in fact, talking about this particular issue at the last Minmec that was
held last week here in Cape Town, so that we can be able to ensure that we
improve the situation. Where appropriate, we are also prepared to amend the
legislation in order to ensure that this issue is addressed properly.

Regarding the famous Road Accident Fund, I am very happy to hear that
Members of Parliament are pleased by the turnaround that is emerging within
the fund. Your views are actually my views. For the first time since I
started at Transport in 2004 - when Jacob Modise, Danisa Baloyi and the
board talked to me about the Road Accident Fund – I can actually see the
light at the end of the tunnel and that this is a group of individuals who,
in fact, are focusing on changing the Road Accident Fund for the better.
Viva Danisa! Viva Modise! [Applause.]

There is a lot of enthusiasm from Members of Parliament about Namibia and
officials of the department who interacted with Namibia. The Namibian
colleagues want to know more about our system. So you have to go very far
away to realise that we are leaving the good things at home. Nevertheless,
we are interacting so that we can be able to learn some of the positive
lessons from Namibia.

Concerning the issue of the Gautrain, our involvement is not isolated – it
was motivated by the importance of integrated planning. We believe that the
Gautrain is now a project of national strategic significance. We are going
to ensure that we do everything we can so that it is properly integrated
into rail, bus or taxi service systems and networks. This is to enable us
to provide an integrated ticketing system so that it really becomes the
backbone of public transport in Gauteng.

When it comes to the issue of the Public Transport Infrastructure and
Systems Fund, some of the conditions with regard to its implementation are
to make sure that we support small and medium enterprises, and also that
the principles of the Expanded Public Works Programme are taken into
consideration when we fund projects of this nature. We have initiated a
monitoring mechanism so that we can ensure that these conditions are
complied with by all those who are beneficiaries of the fund.

Regarding the safety of children on our roads - the road safety education -
we have begun a joint programme with the Department of Education where we
have developed a curriculum for children from Grade 0 to Grade 8. There is
a budget of R6 million to ensure that, in partnership with the Department
of Education, we will be able to impart knowledge from an earlier age to
our children in order to improve road safety in South Africa.

The second programme is a scholar partnership programme, which is
proceeding very well in many provinces where scholars are being taught
about the implementation of the rules of the road. In addition, we also
provide illuminated clothing in many schools as part of the effort to
improve our road safety in South Africa.

Concerning the issue of subsidising the taxis, the R50 000 scrapping
allowance is actually a form of capital subsidy. The strategy that has been
developed and which we are currently proceeding with is part and parcel of
our desire to reform the public subsidy system in South Africa, in order to
ensure that the taxi industry also participates in operations of the public
subsidy system.

Already, there are areas where the taxi industries form part and parcel of
consortia that are given the contracts of these buses in our country. As we
move towards the implementation of the Taxi Recapitalisation Programme, I
am certain that we are going to see more and more taxi people being
involved in the subsidised system in South Africa.

On the issue of Metrorail and the Rail Commuter Corporation, as hon members
are aware, as of 1 May there is no longer an isolated Metrorail. There is
one passenger rail in South Africa that is S A Rail Commuter Corporation,
which is now operating Metrorail. The only outstanding thing is Shosholoza
Meyl, which is going to join this merger in the next financial year, 2007.

Lastly, concerning maritime issues I want to thank the hon Moss for raising
such critical issues regarding this aspect. I just want to respond to him
on the issue that he has raised about the recent incident in our seas.
There has been the issue of the Lindsay. We commissioned a marine court of
inquiry, which has already deliberated on the issues at hand.

Regarding part of their recommendations to improve safety at sea,
particularly referring to fishermen or women, I have asked the Department
of Transport to make sure that we can fast-track the implementation of the
recommendations that they have made, including the issues related to
improving and amending legislation in order to ensure that the compulsory
accident insurance is effected.

Therefore, there has been consultation in this particular regard. So we
suppose that, very shortly, we will be able to move. We agree with the
sentiments and comments that you have made.

In conclusion, I would also like to take this opportunity to thank all my
MECs of transport, with whom I work very closely in championing the issues
of transport in South Africa and many of whom are present in the gallery
today. I also want to take this opportunity to thank the Director-General
of the Department of Transport, Mpumi Mpofu, for the sterling work that she
does together with her team at the Department of Transport, including my
special advisor, Ian Phillips, for making sure that we are able to make a
difference in transport in South Africa.

I also want to appreciate the role of the transport portfolio committee in
Parliament and the Chair, Mr Jeremy Cronin, for the leadership they are
providing in terms of transport in Parliament. I do hope we will continue
our dialogue, so that we can provide as much information as possible to be
able to make laws befitting the challenges that transport has in South
Africa.

I would like to thank the agencies, all the Chairs, chief executives, top
management and board members of all the agencies that report to transport
without whom many of these challenges would be very difficult to
accomplish.

I would also like to thank my family, my wife, Bridgett, who is also in the
gallery, for tolerating me in terms of focusing on the Public Service.
[Applause.] But I am sure she has heard today how complex the transport
portfolio is so that she will understand why I am always called by the
director-general, provinces, and municipalities. My friends in the taxi
industry also give us a lot of things to do in South Africa.

In conclusion, I also take this opportunity to invite members to a
reception that starts at 6 o’clock that will take place at St Francis
Catholic Church, KwaLanga Township. Because we are focusing on the
transport debate today, we have organised some minibus taxis to transport
hon members to the venue. They are recapitalised. What we are not certain
about at this stage is whether they are 100% safety requirement compliant,
but we are satisfied that they are almost compliant. So please enjoy a ride
from the minibus taxis to KwaLanga Township. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

     INDEPENDENT COMMUNICATIONS AUTHORITY OF SOUTH AFRICA AMENDMENT BILL

   (Consideration of Bill, Report of Portfolio Committee on Communications
    thereon, and President’s reservations on constitutionality of Bill as
                              submitted to him)

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Hon Chairperson and hon members of this
House, in 2000, when the Icasa, Independent Communications Authority of SA,
Act was passed, we were one of the first countries that recognised the need
for a joint body to regulate broadcasting and telecommunications.

Technology has advanced further and South Africa is, once again, one of the
few countries in the world to create policy and regulatory conditions for a
converging ICT - information and communications technology - sector. This
we do not because it is fashionable, but because we have recognised that
ICTs are essential tools for socioeconomic development.

At its lekgotla last year Cabinet identified lowering the cost of doing
business in South Africa as essential to achieving higher rates of
investment in the economy of our country. Access to and cost of
communications are critical in meeting our socioeconomic development goals.
It is in this context that Cabinet prioritised the strengthening of our
regulatory institutions in all sectors.

On our part, we had a twin legislative process to ensure that the ICT
sector contributes to meeting the country’s development goals. These are
the Electronic Communications and Transactions Act, which has been signed,
and the Icasa Amendment Bill that is before you today. We are confident
that if we provide an enabling environment, one that is regulated well, our
ICT sector will play its part in meeting the national aspirations.

Professionalism, speed of action, decisiveness, flexibility, excellence and
experience are important features of a strong regulator, a regulator which
is truly an authority in its work, a regular whose stature is recognised
and respected by all. That is the kind of strong regulator we are committed
to building.

Building a strong independent regulator requires a commitment from
government to creating the conditions for three things, namely empowering
legislation, financial support, and the appointment of the best people who
are committed to serving in its leadership and its staff.

So how does this Bill strengthen Icasa? Firstly, it increases the number of
councillors, taking into account its new task in relation to the regulation
of the postal sector. Secondly, it clearly separates the appointment of the
chairperson of the authority from that of other councillors. This makes it
easier to attract people with not only experience in the sector, but also
the leadership attributes required of a country with a developmental state.

Thirdly, it makes provision for the use, by the National Assembly, of
industry experts and stakeholders in the appointment process, thus
increasing the prospects of getting the appropriate types of people,
different kinds of expertise and experience for the time.

Fourthly, the Bill provides for the executive to select from a list,
provided by the National Assembly, the candidate or candidates that seem
most likely to contribute to the implementation and achievement of the
country’s development agenda at the time.

Fifthly, it provides for the scientific, individual and collective
performance-management system to assess the authority, thus reducing the
number of subjective and/or unsubstantiated complaints about its
performance or the lack thereof. Sixthly, it makes it compulsory for all
councillors to sign a performance agreement, thus ensuring that all of them
do their bit in the work of the authority.

As the House may recall, the President returned the original amending Bill
with some concerns about three provisions in which there could be possible
constitutional challenges. He called for the role of Parliament to be
strengthened. We believe that this amending Bill has now addressed those
concerns. It ensures that Parliament takes responsibility for the
appointments and gives the Minister tools to ensure not only the quality,
but also the accountability of the regulator. It also ensures that the
regulator continues to enjoy the protection of its independence under
chapter 9 of the Constitution.

This amending Bill guarantees the independence of the authority not for its
sake; it guarantees this independence in the context of a developing
country, with clear policies within which the authority must regulate. It
brings us closer to international best practice in this area. In fact, I
can say without fear of contradiction that it takes us to the top of that
international best practice.

We will have a world-class regulator that is indeed independent, but one
that will contribute to our goals of, one, achieving higher rates of
investment in the economy; two, increasing the competitiveness of our
economy; three, broadening participation in the economy; four, building a
better world; and, lastly, improving the capacity of the state to deliver
on its mandate.

I therefore ask Parliament to pass this Bill so that we can ensure that the
ICT sector indeed takes South Africa to higher ground. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr G G OLIPHANT: Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Ministers of
Communications, esteemed Members, comrades, friends, ladies and gentlemen,
it is late in the day, and we want to finish this matter today.

Icasa is the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa, which
was enacted into being in 2000 to regulate broadcasting and
telecommunications matters. Technology and other developments in the
information and communications technology sector are rapidly moving towards
convergence, hence the promulgation of the Electronic Communications Act in
2006.

The ANC intends to keep the independence of the regulator, Icasa, intact.
The President’s letter to the Speaker of the National Assembly, dated 11
April 2006, further strengthened our assertion. In his letter, the
President raised reservations about the possible constitutional challenge
in the Bill relating to the appointment, removal and performance management
of the council. The President insisted that this process should remain
driven by the National Assembly. I am happy to report that we have fully
complied with the President’s request.

The centrality of the National Assembly is reasserted. Once more, the
separation of powers between the legislature and the executive is enhanced,
and we thank the Presidency for its wise counsel.

Following the President’s letter, the Speaker of the National Assembly
referred the remitted Bill to the Portfolio Committee on Communications for
consideration. Her letter dated 24 April 2006 was well received, and on 24
May 2006, a month later, the committee concluded its work.

We wish to thank all members of the portfolio committee, across party
lines, who participated so enthusiastically in this process for their co-
operation and consistency. Thank you Madame Vos. Thank you Madame Smuts,
and everybody else in the ANC.

We had noted abstentions from some opposition parties during the committee
voting process. However, we are happy to report that the majority of
members voted in favour of these amendments.

In line with Joint Rule 203, the committee confined itself to clauses 7, 9
and 11 of the amending Bill, which formed the basis for the President’s
reservations. The appointment, removal and performance management and
evaluation of the council will continue to be driven by Parliament.

Clause 7 seeks to amend section 5 of the principle Act relating to the
constitution and appointment of councillors to the council. The National
Assembly committee will henceforth be seized with the process of appointing
eight councillors and a chairperson for Icasa according to the principles
of public participation in the nomination process, transparency and
openness.

The committee may, in the process, also invite technical experts to assist
in the selection, evaluation and appointment of councillors, if so
required. All parties on the committee will participate.

The committee is expected to submit at least one-and-a-half times the
numbers required for the Minister’s appointment, following approval by the
National Assembly. To give an example, in the near future, at least by the
end of June this year, we will have five vacancies in Icasa. What the
committee should do is to interview people and give the Minister at least
eight names to choose from, eight of the best. So, those names will be
coming from the National Assembly, and we insist and intend to give only
the best.

The National Assembly will also play a central role in the establishment of
a performance management system. An evaluation panel may be established for
that purpose.

On the removal provisions, no councillor may be removed from office without
a resolution to that effect by the National Assembly. With all these
safeguards in place, the chairperson and councillors are expected to sign a
performance agreement.

We therefore submit that Icasa remains strengthened, independent and ready
to face the new challenges of this environment. The ANC supports the Bill
as amended. [Applause.]

Ms M SMUTS: Chairperson, please allow me to note that we find it strange
that the hon the Minister of Communications introduced this Bill after it
was referred back to the National Assembly by the President. But, she was
obviously not speaking in her capacity as a member of this House but as a
member of the executive.

When this Bill first arrived in the National Assembly, the ANC was caught
between the Department of Communications and the DA. The Department of
Communications wanted to take control of Icasa and the DA wanted the
Assembly to stay in charge.

Now, the compromise reached between us at this first stage created a panel
listed by categories of expertise to advise the National Assembly and kept
the appointment process in our hands. Although the Minister was allowed to
express her preference from a list one and half times the vacancies, we in
turn could reject her choices.

We said on 3 November when we first debated that Bill that we supported the
compromise because we drove that. Thereafter followed the capitulation of
the NCOP, which was approached directly by the Ministry.

The National Assembly could simply have thrown out their amendments, but it
seems the ANC loses equilibrium when the symmetry of two opposing sides is
lost. With the DA on the one side and the Department of Communications on
the other at the first stage of the process, a balance was achieved. But
when the NCOP sat with the Department of Communications on one side of the
seesaw, the ANC slid down the plank and into their laps.

By that stage the product was constitutionally compromised and the
President declined to sign. His letter to the Speaker, published 26 April
in the ATCs is, I repeat, as fine an expression of Presidential protection
of the Constitution as one could hope to find.

It follows, sir, that a fresh appraisal, free of all the pressures at play
during the earlier stages, should not only have been possible after the
President expressed himself so strongly. I would say it was called for. And
the ANC knows it to be so, because it has issued a caucus statement during
lunchtime in which it nervously claims to have concurred with the
President. All I can say is up to a point the ANC concurred with the
President. And that point was where the Ministry weighed in again because
the Assembly Committee came with in reach of an uncompromisingly clear
appointment provision two weeks ago.

However, this evaporated at the final meeting with the Department of
Communications and the hon the Deputy Minister, very visibly in attendance
to augment the influence of the director-general who late last week was
openly advising the ANC MPs, much as the former director-general, Andile
Ngcaba used quite openly to lead the ANC MPs in drafting the
Telecommunications Amendment Act of 2001.

The end result before us differs from the original version only in
collapsing the panel of experts into the portfolio committee itself. There
are persons with the expertise previously agreed to together with the
economic qualifications, which the hon Khumalo helped me to introduce. They
will be invited to join us for the process leading of that recommendation
of one and half times the vacancies to the Minister who must send her
preferences back to the National Assembly. The National Assembly can again
reject and return and again retains the power of selecting the final
councillors for formal appointment by the Minister, no longer the
President.

Then, why will we oppose it? Because this final version should have
constituted no compromise - the President made it possible to legislate
clearly. It should have constituted no compromise but the impartial
exercise of our best judgement as legislatures. This is particularly so
when it was visibly the Ministry and the Department of Communications
calling the shots that triggered yet another compromise. I fear that this
may show that the majority might be prone to pressure during the
appointment and removal procedures also.

This does not in and of itself make the Bill unconstitutional. The courts
have said in Van Rooyen versus the State that ``the possibility of abuse
has no bearing on the constitutionality of the law concerned.’’ But it is
not the Bill it could and should have been, especially given the fact that
the Minister has a conflict of interest when her public interest duties
clash with her duty to maximise the assets of the state - representing
between 38% and 100% of a number of dominant licences.

Let me conclude by saying that the performance management provision is of
particular interest now that we have identified the need for Parliament to
look after all of the Chapter Nines, all of which appear to have either
capacity or administrative problems. We have acknowledged from the start
that there are capacity problems at Icasa. We have placed on record that
the capacity problem commenced when the ANC began to take majority
decisions on appointment in the committee.

The Icasa Bill now requires a performance management system. It does have
safeguards built in. But the question is: Will the sector appear before the
regulators with the sense that they are as powerful and independent as any
court or tribunal? That’s the question the hon Paul Swart kept asking you.
What is the situation with perceived independence? That too is a
constitutional question. It should perhaps have been conclusively answered.

I would have preferred a mechanism created by all of the National Assembly
for all of the Chapter Nines. It is a little problematic that the Icasa
Council has now had to sign with the Minister. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Chairperson, I note that out of
the 40-odd members currently present in the House, the DA has only 6
members. Can the hon Mike Ellis maybe explain where the others are?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): I would request him to engage the
hon Chief Whip after the sitting.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, may I say to the hon Chief Whip ...
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon Ellis, please take your
seat. I will request you to engage the hon Chief Whip after the sitting.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, are you absolutely saying that I can’t reply?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): No, you can’t. Thank you, Mr
Ellis.

Ms S C VOS: Chairperson, the IFP will not fully support this Bill for
precisely the reasons the President of the Republic referred certain
clauses back to the committee for redrafting, and why we are debating this
Bill yet again today. These clauses relate to the constitutionally mandated
independence of Icasa and its councillors and the powers of the Minister.
The IFP will not support the dilution of this independence, and we believe
it is now time that a Constitutional Court is given the opportunity to
pronounce on the issue in terms of section 192 of the Constitution.

This is not to say that the amendments before us now are unconstitutional.
They sail close to the wind in ensuring that the Minister gains the powers
she has wanted all along over Icasa regarding the appointment, removal and
performance evaluation of councillors. And now the role of the National
Assembly has been re-inserted – where it was previously removed - to give
respectability to her obvious power grab and intention to exert an iron
grip over Icasa and its councillors.

We agree, of course, that Icasa and its councillors must be accountable and
that they must perform with the levels of expertise expected of them, but
not in the manner now demanded by the Minister. It has long been clear that
government wishes to erode the independence the Constitution affords to
Icasa. As a matter of principle and of conscience, the IFP will continue to
oppose this. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Hon Chairperson, the Electronic
Communications Act and the Icasa Amendment Bill are the two most important
pieces of legislation that seek to transform the ICT landscape in the
country.

It is vitally necessary, therefore, that we address the constitutionality
concerns expressed by the President in the Icasa Amendment Bill so that we
are able to make this law come into effect. This will enable a date for us
to determine the Electronic Communcations Act, which will in turn catalyse
the developments we wish to see in the ICT sector without any further
delays.

The constitutional reservations expressed about the earlier draft of the
Bill centred primarily around the role of the Minister in respect of the
appointment and dismissal processes of Icasa councillors and the
performance management of the council.

The view was expressed that the appointment of councillors by the Minister
in the manner prescribed in the previous draft of the Bill has a serious
and real potential, that it will in fact impact negatively on the
impartiality and independence of the council, in contrast to the
requirements of section 192 of the Constitution.

In the light of these statements, reservations were expressed by the
President about the constitutionality, as you heard, of clauses 7,9 and 11
of the Bill. In the main concerns were expressed about these provisions, in
that they gave the Minister absolute power to appoint councillors from a
short list. No provision was made for the National Assembly to disapprove
the Minister’s recommendations, and Parliament’s role was reduced to merely
appointing and serving on the selection panel, unlike in the principal Act,
in which Parliament was central to the appointment and dismissal of
councillors.

In that previous proposed amendment it was the Minister who was central to
these processes. In giving consideration to the views expressed by the
President on these matters, the present version of the Bill before us, duly
modified, restores the role of Parliament as envisaged in the principal
Act.

In the Bill before us it is the National Assembly, acting through the
Portfolio Committee on Communications, and no longer an independent panel,
that will be responsible for the selection of the councillors and that will
produce a shortlist according to principles of public participation,
transparency and openness.

This selection process, in the Bill before us, is further strengthened by
the portfolio committee having the right to call on experts to assist it in
the selection process, should they see the need to do so.

It is from this list that the Minister is able to recommend – and let me
underline again – the Minister is able to recommend back to the National
Assembly which of those councillors on the short list are to be appointed.
Provision is made for the National Assembly to disapprove, and the
councillors are only appointed when the National Assembly has approved the
list of recommended councillors.

This, we contend, effectively removes any arbitrary power that may have
been – I repeat, may have been - prescribed to the Minister in the previous
formulation, and it subjects the Minister’s recommendations to a veto
power, which is now held by the National Assembly.

Now the establishment of a performance management system is indeed a new
element in the Bill. Provision is made for this to be developed by the
Minister in consultation with the National Assembly. And similarly so, a
councillor may only be removed from office on a finding by the National
Assembly and on adoption by the National Assembly of a resolution calling
for that councillor’s removal from office.

We are satisfied that the Bill before us, in its modified form, addresses
completely the reservations expressed by the President. In particular it
has given serious attention to safeguarding the role of Parliament in
relation to ensuring the independence of the council, as envisaged in
section 192 of the Constitution and with absolute due regard to the
provisions in respect of chapter 9 institutions, as in fact envisaged by
our Constitution.

We must, however, reiterate that there is legal significance to the fact
that the broadcasting authority, Icasa in this case, as envisaged in
chapter 9, is not listed in the set of designate-institutions as it is
listed in that section of the Constitution where these institutions that
promote constitutional democracy are listed.

We believe that there is legal significance to the fact that Icasa is not
amongst those institutions listed. We are, therefore, of the view that
Icasa does not enjoy the same status as the other chapter 9 institutions.
We are of the view that the appointment of councillors is not necessarily
dictated by the Constitution ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon Deputy Minister, could
you take your seat, please. Hon Dene Smuts.

Ms M SMUTS: Chairperson, would the hon Deputy Minister be prepared to take
a question?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon Deputy Minister, do you want
to take a question?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: [Inaudible.]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): The Deputy Minister will take a
question.

Ms M SMUTS: Thank you, sir. Through you, Chairperson, to the Deputy
Minister: He has just asserted that there is legal significance in the fact
that a broadcast regulator, as it is currently described, is not listed in
section 181. Does he not concur with the hon the President, who said in his
letter to the Speaker, published in the ATC of 26 April, 2006, in the very
next sentence, that there is equally legal significance in the fact that
the regulator appears in chapter 9? Does he, therefore, go against the view
of the President?

And the President goes on, in the paragraph thereafter, to ask ... Have you
forgotten? Or do we not remember, Madam Speaker? Let me address this: Why
is it in chapter 9? There is a reason why the regulator is in chapter 9,
and the President feels quite strongly about it. Is the hon Deputy Minister
taking a contrary view?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Hon Chairman and hon member, the
Deputy Minister does not take a view different from the President’s. If you
read the President’s letter carefully, you will read that he also points to
the fact that there has to be a legal significance in the fact that Icasa
is not cited as part of the institutions that are listed.

That’s what he says in the letter. And we, therefore, take the view that if
it had originally been intended that the level of independence of Icasa
ought to be the same as that of the Independent Electoral Commission, then
there is no reason why Icasa should not have been listed as part of those
institutions.

So all we say is that we have to find the proper interpretation as to why
Icasa is not listed there. And if it is not listed there, it must mean that
there is some significance for the legislature to have to take it out of
that set of institutions and put it somewhere else under chapter 9.

The significance of it being listed in chapter 9 is that it is considered
to be one of the institutions that promote constitutional democracy. But we
draw the inference that because it is not listed in the list of
organisations, it, therefore, does not mean that Icasa must have the same
level of independence as those listed institutions.

Hon members, we are of the view, therefore, that Icasa does not enjoy the
same status as the other chapter 9 institutions, that the appointment of
councillors is, therefore, not necessarily dictated by the Constitution,
and that the authority, as envisaged in chapter 9, does, in the current
formulation of the Bill, enjoy the status and level of independence as
envisaged in that part of the Constitution.

We are, therefore, of the view that the Bill, as it is presently
formulated, addresses the concerns expressed by the President and will
indeed pass constitutional muster. I thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mrs L E YENGENI: Mhlalingaphambili obekekileyo, malungu eNdlu yoWiso-
mthetho, zihlobo nezalamane, maqabane, molweni. [Hon Chairperson, members
of the National Assembly, friends, relatives and comrades, I greet you.]

The ANC is happy to support this amendment precisely because it asserts the
principle and is premised on the primacy of the role of Parliament,
particularly the National Assembly, in the selection, appointment and
monitoring of Icasa councillors.

This is, without doubt, a victory for Parliament in that this amendment
ensures that public participation, transparency and openness are adhered
to, and it creates a harmonious balance between the powers and functions of
the legislature and the executive in the process of appointment of Icasa
councillors.

The ANC embraces this amendment also because it sets a good precedent and
example for other institutions and departments to follow. Secondly, Icasa,
like all other chapter 9 institutions, contributes in unique and various
ways to supporting and entrenching our young democracy. The question is:
What qualifies Icasa’s constitutional independence and status? The answer
to that question will lead to more political discussion.

In recognition of the concerns expressed by the President in his letter to
the Speaker of the National Assembly, the role of Parliament in selecting
and appointing Icasa councillors has been reinstated. The National Assembly
will select suitable candidates according to the principles prescribed in
the principal Act, including the publication of a shortlist of candidates.

The National Assembly may invite technical experts to assist in the
evaluation process. After the selection of candidates the National Assembly
will give to the Minister at least one and a half times the number of
councillors to be appointed. The Minister will select her or his preferred
candidates from the list, and then recommend them to the National Assembly.
If the National Assembly is not satisfied with the persons recommended,
then the National Assembly might request the Minister to review her or his
recommendations. If the National Assembly approves the recommendations,
then the Minister will appoint the chairperson.

Xa umhlalingaphambili wooceba be-Icasa engazi kubakho, kufuneka anyule oza
kumbambela. Oko kuya kuba semthethweni xa kubhalwe phantsi. Ukuba
akashiyanga nto ebhaliweyo, ooceba be-Icasa baya kuzinyulela usihlalo
wethutyana. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)
[In a case where the chairperson of councillors of Icasa is not present, an
acting chairperson must be elected. This appointment will be legal only if
there is a written note in this regard. If such a document is not
obtainable, therefore, the councillors will elect an acting chairperson.]

Parliament recognises the challenges faced by Icasa, and as a result their
budget has been increased, as well as the number of councillors from seven
to nine, of which one is the chair.

This amendment is not necessarily brought about for this specific Minister
of Communications, as opposition parties feel. It is an amendment to
properly regulate the appointment of Icasa councillors for now and in the
future.

It is our assertion in the ANC that giving the Minister one and a half
times the number of councillors required will in no way compromise the
independence of Icasa or give too much or undue powers to the Minister,
precisely because the process starts and ends with the National Assembly.
The ANC supports the Bill. [Applause.]

Mr V C GORE: Chairperson, hon members, hon Minister, the Icasa Amendment
Bill has been a huge success for the development of democracy in South
Africa and at the same time it has been a major setback or attack on our
young democracy.
The growing maturity of our democracy was highlighted by the fact that
President Mbeki had the courage and conviction to send the Bill back to
Parliament with serious reservations about the constitutionality of the
legislation. For this, our President needs to be congratulated and
supported.

Unfortunately, the ANC was unable to rise to the challenge and bulldozed
its own views through, despite the serious concerns around the conflict of
interest between the Minister acting both as a referee and as a player, as
well as the independence of the regulator from the executive. The
consequence of this is that the new Amendment Bill is still questionable in
terms of its constitutionality and will have serious repercussions on the
industry as a whole.

If the President decides that he still has reservations, and the ID
sincerely hopes that he does, the process of this Bill and the associated
revisioning of the entire telecommunications broadcasting industry, through
the Electronic Communications Act, will be put on hold for an unacceptable
period of time. It is, therefore, questionable whether the ICT sector will
be able to contribute meaningfully and realise its full potential in
achieving the goals of the Asgisa programme.

The ID, unfortunately and regrettably, will not be able to support this
Bill. [Applause.]
Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson, the ACDP cannot support any attempts to
undermine the independence of our chapter 9 institutions. The
recommendation that the Minister of Communications should have the power to
appoint, remove and administer performance management systems of Icasa
councillors is unacceptable.

The Parliament of South Africa is the principal institution for oversight
and accountability. We have a mandate from the citizens of this country to
exercise that oversight function with integrity and transparency.
Centralisation of power in the Minister takes away this essential aspect of
the nature and function of Parliament and the National Assembly.

Tampering with the independence of Icasa will set the precedent for
undermining our other chapter 9 institutions. Such actions will have a
negative impact on public and civil society’s confidence and will have to
be taken into account in instances such as the African Peer Review
Mechanism.

The ACPD wishes to emphasise that the appointment and management of Icasa
councillors should be conducted in an impartial manner, and in a manner
that takes into account the actual needs of the various communities who are
served by broadcasting institutions.

Councillors should be individually representative of all the different
communities, so that the Icasa council becomes a genuine democratic panel
that will speak for those whose voices will not normally be heard. Such an
approach would put an end to the thoughtlessness of the undemocratic
closing down of Christian radio stations across the country. [Time
expired.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Mnr die Voorsitter, in die media die laaste ruk word daar
al hoe meer geskryf en vraagtekens geplaas oor die skeiding tussen die
wetgewende en die uitvoerende gesag in Suid-Afrika - tussen die Parlement
aan die een kant en die Kabinet aan die ander kant. Dit is tipies van enige
stelsel waar ŉ regering te lank regeer dat die wetgewende gesag al hoe meer
ingekrul word. In die Nasionale Party dae, en ek was daar in die
opposisiekant, het presies dieselfde gebeur, en ek sien die vraagtekens
daar en dit is die dilemma van die stelsel as jy hulle nie heeltemal uit
mekaar uit hou nie.

Ek is jammer dat, vanweë ’n druk program, ek nie al die komiteesittings kon
bywoon nie. In die ou dae, en die ou dae is nou van 1994 tot 1999, was
hierdie ŉ baie lekker komitee omdat dit oor komunikasiesake gaan wat baie
tegnies is en daar is meestal konsensus gebruik.

Die laaste paar jaar vind ons dat ons konsensus bereik op tegniese punte,
dan gaan die ANC-lede huis toe en môre kom hulle terug met totaal nuwe
standpunte wat hulle iewers vandaan gekry het. Ek vind dit jammer veral
wanneer dit kom by tegniese sake soos hierdie. Dieselfde geld vir hierdie
wet.

Die feit van die saak is dat die wet, wat my betref, te veel mag aan die
Minister gee, veral waar die staat ’n hoofaandeelhouer is, en die FF Plus
sal nie hierdie wysiging kan steun nie. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Mr Chairperson, recently there have been more and more
reports and queries in the media about the separation of the legislative
and executive powers in South Africa – between Parliament on the one hand
and the Cabinet on the other. This is characteristic of any system where a
government has been governing for so long that the legislative power is
becoming less and less significant. In the days of the National Party, and
there I was on the side of the opposition, exactly the same thing happened,
and I saw the queries there and this is the predicament of the system if
one does not separate them entirely.

I am sorry that I could not attend all the sittings of the committee
because of a hectic schedule. In the olden days, and by the olden days I
mean merely from 1994 to 1999, this used to be a very good committee,
because it is all about communication issues which are very technical, and
most of the time consensus is reached.

In the past few years we have found that we reach consensus on technical
issues, then the ANC members go home and tomorrow they come back with
totally new viewpoints acquired elsewhere. I find it regrettable
particularly when it comes to technical matters like these. The same
applies to this Act.

The fact of the matter is that the Act, as far as I am concerned, gives too
much power to the Minister, especially in the case where the state is a key
stakeholder, and the FF Plus will not be able to support this amendment.
[Applause.]]

Ms S RAJBALLY: The communication sector is developing fast and, to secure
the convergence and competition in the sector, the MF supports the
empowerment of the Independent Communications Authority of SA, Icasa, to
manage this sector.

We have no objection to the substitution of the “postal regulator” by the
Authority. We find the clarity being given to the duties and functions of
both the Authority and the chair of the council as insurance that the
sector shall be managed efficiently and effectively. It is good that
clarity as to the procedure of appointing the chair and other councillors
is spelled out as to speed up such processes.

The consolidation of the related Bills to deal with convergence in the
broadcasting, signal distribution and telecommunications sectors are also
supported. It is important that the Authority, in holding all this power,
is able to conduct inquiries to improve the performance of its functions.
The MF supports the Bill.

Mr K M KHUMALO: Modulasetulo, Maloko a Palamente, Matona, ba hlomphehileng,
metswalle le Maqabane ... [Chairperson, hon Members of Parliament, friends
and comrades ...]

... allow me to clarify a bit of the confusion that has emanated,
especially among the ranks of the opposition. There was an institution
called the Independent Broadcasting Authority, which came before, and
subsequent to that, the Constitution of South Africa was signed on 10 May
1996.

At that point in time, the evolution of the telecoms industry moved so much
that we had to establish a new institution, even before that, called SATRA,
SA Telecommunications Regulatory Authority. You had to combine both the
Independent Broadcasting Authority and SATRA to create one institution.
That institution was then created and is called Icasa, the Independent
Communications Authority of South Africa.

There is no Icasa in the Constitution precisely for one reason, that Icasa
was formed in 2000 and the chapter 9 institutions that have been referred
to are in the Constitution that was signed on 10 May 1996. Therefore, to
say that it is unconstitutional to say that Icasa is not there is wrong. If
you check the Constitution you will see that there is no mention made of
Icasa.

Therefore, it is incorrect for members to come and say today if the
Minister becomes part of the process of making sure that we have a strong
regulatory system of the industry that is incorrect. Members please go out
and check the Constitution from the first to the last page. There is not a
single word mentioning Icasa.

Some members did not hear what that member said and I think that it’s
important for me to respond, because very often people say that. That
member must tell you. You suffer from a fallacy of retrospective
determinism. [Laughter.] And I must tell you there is no cure for that. The
only cure for that is vitamins A and C, and you could never find that
anywhere, except in the branches – they are very simple to find. They are
black, green and gold in colour, thank you. [Laughter.]

In terms of the issue that we are fighting over here, it is very simple ...
[Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, it sounded to me as if the hon member had some
very important advice for us, but he spoke so fast that we couldn’t
possibly hear. I wonder if he would repeat that? Could he please repeat
that? [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! I think he said something
about vitamin something and something. [Laughter.] Please continue.

Mr K M KHUMALO: I said the only cure for the hon member’s illness is
vitamins A and C, and you cannot find this in any chemist. You can only
find it in the branches, in the community, and the colours are simple to
find, they are black, green and gold. So, that is what I said. [Applause.]
They must remember that cure; it’s very important. [Laughter.]

The issue of the independence of Icasa, as my members have already said, is
quite interlinked with the issue of the Convergence Bill that we are
dealing with. You must understand that with the issue of the emerging
markets in terms of telecommunications they are also moving forward. You
have to bring things together.

The most important things that we had to consider were: Firstly, the
initiative to make regulations in that communication services move together
with the communication network services; secondly, the issue of coming up
with a law that will provide for a radio frequency spectrum; and finally,
the issue that relates then to provide for the control of all services that
we are providing in terms of how we issue our licences.

These issues - some members might find it very difficult to follow - are
quite vital for us to then combine with the Convergence and Icasa Bills as
we move forward.

The reason why we need to have the authority itself having to have proper
leadership is precisely for the following reasons: If the people of
Embuzini in Mpumalanga aren’t able to receive all of the broadcasting
channels and Telecoms networks, then there’s a big problem.

If the masses of Morokweng, Ganyesa and Breying are not, for example, able
to access telephones, internet services and network services, we are far
from closing the digital divide that exists in our society.An
interconnection rate should be provided, and all schools should be relayed,
either by the department, or, most importantly, by the authority. So, it
will be important for us to close the digital divide and provide
interconnection rates and the authority must be strengthened in terms of
this issue.

Another issue that also needs to be understood is the fact that there is a
perception by the DA and other parties that rarely come to the portfolio
committee, that the independence of all authorities is covered by a number
of institutions: Firstly, Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, which in itself deals with the issue of freedom of expression,
protection of the Broadcasting Authority and the regulators, and in that
issue there’s a report from the World Summit on the Information Society
that contains all the elements that deal with the areas of communication
and authority; and ...

Secondly, in the event that the DA might want to find a legal recourse,
there is a commission of the African Union called the African Commission on
Human and People’s Rights, which deals with freedom of expression and it
also covers ... [Interjections.]

No, no! Wait a minute, hon Dene Smuts! This is the attitude that we are
dealing with. I don’t know why, as the ANC, we sometimes spend so much time
wasting our time on the small opposition parties, while we’ve got a much
larger mandate for people to provide leadership, guide and also deliver.
They are just making a noise and trying to derail us. We must stick to our
course and continue to deliver services, as expected. [Interjections.]

With regard to section 192, and whether it is constitutionally correct or
not - as they say - I must say, as I have said earlier, section 192 deals
with one simple issue. It is a paragraph that says “ national legislation
must establish an independent authority to regulate broadcasting in the
public interest and to ensure fairness and diversity of views broadly
representing South African society”. There is no mention made of telecoms
in that aspect.

Let me tell you what happened. In the Financial Mail ... [Interjections.]

Ms M SMUTS: Chairperson, will my friend, the hon Khumalo, take a question?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Do you want to take a question,
hon Khumalo?

Mr K M KHUMALO: Chairperson, I can take a question, but I don’t have the
liberty of time, and time is money. I am sorry.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Proceed, hon member.

Mr K M KHUMALO: Chairperson, considering the fact that when you are too
fast because of time, some members might not even hear. So, there’s not
even time to give to hon Dene Smuts. She had all the time to deal with
that.

In the Financial Mail of 19 May 2006, on pages 62 and 64, the DA through
its spokesperson, Ms Dene Smuts, wrote a long article to say that, because
of the Minister’s interference in the process of Icasa, she should resign.
If she does not resign, then the President must fire her.

Now, obviously this is a very serious and ambitious project from the DA to
consider that because now, quite clearly, they have missed the point and as
I’ve explained to you, chapter 9 does not refer to that. Anybody would
understand that this type of talk, quite clearly, couldn’t even be
considered to be political maturity.

This issue is quite important, so we must deal with it, because it is
covered in terms of all the areas that we have dealt with in the
communications study group in relation to the inventors of Icasa. But, more
importantly, what we must now do, disregarding what they have said, is to
check the 2005-06 yearbook issued to us. If you have a look on page 72, it
deals with the issue considered to be the challenges and opportunities
facing us for a second decade of freedom.

There are only three of them that I want to mention: Firstly, a better
performance of the state to unlock the delivery lock jams; secondly,
addressing consequences of the social transition improving access to work
opportunities in urban and rural areas. Quite clearly, information is
power. It is our belief that, if Icasa is strong and is able to achieve and
deal with all those universal services of obligation, it should be able to
unlock the economy in terms of the players that are there; and, finally,
faster growth in Sub-Saharan Africa and improving the regional ... [Time
expired.]

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Chairperson, I’d like to take this
opportunity to thank those who have supported this amending Bill for the
way in which they supported it.

I would like to respond to one or two of the objections that were raised.
There was an objection from the FF Plus on specific issues, but we looked
at international experience. I’d like to mention them here. We looked at
many countries that are regarded as democratic, which don’t have the kind
of threats that are in the minds of many people on my left here.

We looked at countries such as the United States, where commissioners are
appointed by the president only, with no involvement from Congress; Canada,
where the appointments are made by the Minister through cabinet without
parliamentary involvement; Kenia, where the appointments are made by the
Minister, and the same enabling legislation is also under that same
Minister; Australia, where the appointments are made by the Minister, and
the United Kingdom, where appointments are also by the Minister. I think
the greatest fear is simply because this is a Minister of the ANC, and that
is what the problem is. [Interjections.]

However, as the President pointed out, we had to make sure that in this new
democracy this fine balance that the hon Lumka Yengeni was talking about,
this harmonious balance that entrenches our democracy, is achieved, and
this Bill does do that, and I thank you for pointing that out.

I hope, as we pass this Bill today, we’ll recognise that we have indeed
gone through ups and downs which were not fundamental differences, but
differences that alerted us to the fact that we should pass the kind of
test that would indicate we were indeed building a democracy. I think this
Bill does build this democracy, and I thank members for raising the issues
that they have, but on many matters we will agree to disagree.

I’d like to take the opportunity to thank the portfolio committee under the
previous chairperson, but also, particularly, under the acting chairperson,
for making us sit down and work through step by step as to what are the
challenges that we have to overcome, especially after the President had
made his observation.

I also thank the chairperson Godfrey Oliphant for being able to bring us
all together, even if some people will have discordant voices, because the
Bill now is constitutional. I’d like to say thank you very much and I hope
our vote will indeed indicate that we all support this Bill. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, we move that the Bill,
as amended, be passed.

Motion agreed to (Democratic Alliance, Inkatha Freedom Party, Freedom Front
Plus, Independent Democrats and African Christian Democratic Party
dissenting).

Bill, as amended, accordingly passed.

The House adjourned at 18:22.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


      Report and Financial Statements of Mineral Technology (Mintek) for
    2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
    Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 58-2005].

COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly


1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation on United
    Nations Education, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO)
    Convention Against Doping in Sport, dated 24 May 2006:

        The Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation, having considered
        the request for approval by Parliament of the United Nations
        Education, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) Convention
        Against Doping in Sport, referred to it, recommends that the House,
        in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said
        Convention.

Request to be considered.
2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services on 2006/7
    Budget Vote 20 and the 2006/7-2010/11 Strategic Plan of the Department
    of Correctional Services


                       Supplement to Committee Report



    National Assembly


    The Report of the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services on
    Budget Vote 20 was tabled on 22 May 2006. The report was noted by the
    National Assembly on 23 May 2006.


    The Committee met on 25 May 2006 and adopted an amendment to a
    recommendation under the Facilities programme in the report,


    The Committee supports the allocation to the Facilities programme and
    welcomes the construction of eight new prisons in the near future. The
    Committee must be regularly updated on the progress of the building of
    New Generation facilities. At present, due to insufficient information,
    the Committee cannot make a decision on whether to support or not to
    support the construction of the new prisons using the Public Finance
    Model (PFM).


    The Committee requires a full written report and verbal briefing, before
    12 June 2006, by the DCS highlighting the comparative cost implications,
    in both the short and long term, for building using conventional
    processes, the PFM or the PPP routes. The Committee supports the
    decision by the DCS to review the contracts of the existing public-
    private prisons and believes that these prisons may be better utilised
    for juvenile and minimum offenders.

