---
title: 'National Assembly - 17 February 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-02-17
---

FRIDAY, 17 FEBRUARY 2006
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 10:01.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE


                         (The late Mr K M Moeketsi)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without
notice:

  That the House -


  (1) notes with profound sadness the untimely death of Mr Khahliso Meshack
        Moeketsi on 7 February 2006;


  (2) recalls that –
        (a) Mr Moeketsi was a Member of Parliament from 1999-2004 and that
              he served in the Portfolio Committees on Housing and on
              Correctional Services; and


        (b) at the time of his passing on he was a member of the Mayoral
              Committee of the Fezile Dabi District Municipality in the Free
              State;


  (3) further recalls that Mr Khahliso Moeketsi was a prominent member of
        the African National Congress Youth League and the ANC and that he
        had served as Deputy Chairperson of the Regional Executive of the
        ANC Youth League and that at the time of his death he was an African
        National Congress Regional Executive Committee Member; and


  (4) conveys its condolences to the Moeketsi family  and  friends  and  the
        African National Congress.

Agreed to.




   ADOPTION OF REPORT OF AD HOC COMMITTEE ON NOMINATION OF PERSONS TO FILL
                 VACANCIES ON COMMISSION ON GENDER EQUALITY


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House, with reference to the Report of the Ad Hoc  Committee  on
   Filling of Vacancies on the Commission on Gender Equality,  published  on
   the  Announcements,  Tablings  and  Committee  Reports  of  Thursday,  16
   February 2006, adopts the report, thereby extending the deadline by which
   the Committee must report to the House to 22 March 2006.

Agreed to.

 RATIFICATION OF DECISION OF JOINT SUBCOMMITTEE OF JOINT PROGRAMME COMMITTEE
                   TO FAST-TRACK DIVISION OF REVENUE BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

There was no debate.

Decision of the Joint Subcommittee of the Joint Programme Committee to fast-
track the Division of Revenue Bill ratified.

The SPEAKER: Order! As the fast-tracking has now been ratified, the Rule
that at least three working days must elapse from the time the committee
reports to the time the debate takes place in the House is waived. The
requirement that a translated version of the Bill be available before the
Second Reading debate takes place is also waived.




                          DIVISION OF REVENUE BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, hon members, I’d like to express my
sincere appreciation for the decision just taken to waive the requirements
normally associated with the passage of the Bill. I think it is in our
collective interests.

We all need to get out into the field and persuade voters that there is
only one way to vote – and that is for the party that we represent.
[Interjections.] No, I’m not saying for the party I represent. We all will
go out and persuade them. That’s what I’m saying, hence the fast-tracking.

The Constitution requires of us to govern in a co-operative way, and right
at the very heart of this co-operative governance, in respect of public
finance management is, of course, the Division of Revenue Bill. The Bill
that serves before this House in its second reading is the product of very
extensive consultation – across government and between the spheres of
government. Certainly, the Treasury has consulted quite extensively with
provincial treasuries, with Salga, but also in line functions through
Minmecs and so on. The inclusions in dealing with conditional grants and so
on all come from line-function relationships, and so it is right at the
very heart of intense consultation, which defines co-operative governance.

What we have built here in South Africa as the system of intergovernmental
fiscal relations remains unparalleled in the world. Increasingly, our
people from our intergovernmental fiscal relations branch – headed by Mr
Fuzile, who has run away somewhere now – are called upon to explain the
system elsewhere. We do so not just as government but also with the FFC.

The Bill before us gives effect to section 214 of the Constitution, and
that requires that each year we present a piece of legislation before
Parliament that divides nationally raised revenue. Over the past few years
since we first introduced a Bill like this, it has gone through many
changes. Now we believe that it is significantly user-friendlier.

What the 2006 Bill does is to provide details on every grant, including its
purpose and the criteria for allocating that grant, and account for the
performance of each grant. I believe that in tabling a piece of legislation
like this we, in the executive, invite Parliament, through its committees,
to increase its oversight role. There is transparency and certainty about
the allocations. There is clarity also about the rationale behind each of
the grants – the detail on conditional grants. And we can do so much and
now we ask of Parliament not just to approve this legislation, but also to
use it as an instrument of oversight.

A number of provinces are tabling their budgets today and municipalities
will do so before the start of the new fiscal year. Through the budget
processes provinces must explain in more detail how the resources that we
are allocating here will be used for the furtherance of democracy in their
particular instance of government.

Schedule 1 of the Bill provides a summary of the allocation of funds. Of
the R418,2 billion, which we tabled in this House on Wednesday, national
department functions will receive R215 billion. Now, we need to remind
ourselves that there is a significant transfer this year with the social
security transfers now a national competence.

The debt service costs amount to R52,1 billion. There is a contingency
reserve of R2,5 billion. The provinces receive R176,7 billion; and R26,5
billion is allocated to local government, an amount that includes some
R7 billion to make good that which has been lost as a result of the
termination of the Regional Services Council levies.

The second schedule of the Bill deals with the provincial equitable shares,
and those are the amounts to which the provinces will now add provincial
own revenue and appropriate in a process which started in some provinces
yesterday, but I think the bulk of them are delivering their budgets today.
The allocations in the Bill reflect those big changes, including, as I said
earlier, the shift for social security funds.

Schedules 2 and 3 allocate the equitable shares of provinces and of
municipalities, and so we can see in some detail how we arrive at the
numbers for each of the provinces. Schedules 4, 5 and 6 allocate
conditional and other grants, and schedule 7 provides for indirect or in-
kind transfers to municipalities.

Because of the emphasis that we placed in the budget on pro-poor spending –
and, I think, this takes forward the spirit of the time of hope that
President Mbeki spoke of just a fortnight ago – a substantial share of the
additional resources is expected to go to education to fund the phased
implementation of no-fee schools and further expansion of early childhood
development programmes in poor communities.

Of course, it is up to the provinces to allocate the resources. We’ve
discussed this matter with them. The Minister of Education has discussed
this intensely with them. We want to ensure that where there is a broad
objective we have to improve on the quality of outcomes, and that we can
work together, recognising that provinces must take the decision. But in
the spirit of co-operative governance we must ensure that you don’t have
policy determined primarily at national level, which is not supported by
the allocation of resources at provincial government level. That is heart
and soul. That is what we have to work through, because it is really the
acid test of whether co-operative governance works or not.

The further education and training grant allocation of R1,9 billion is
included, as a conditional grant, and that is money that we can watch and
monitor because that is a conditional grant.

The provincial budgets will also reinforce the strengthening of the health
sector. Now, I’d just like to say something on health. A few years ago this
Parliament approved a scarce skills strategy for health. Today I’m pleased
to share with members of Parliament the fact that in the three years to
December 2005, employment in the health sector increased by more than
12 000 new professionals. It’s significant that a decision like that can
have that impact. So, in this year there are additional resources allocated
for emergency services. We call them ambulances; other people may call them
other things. There will also be services for forensic pathology.

In respect of local government allocations, over the next three years
municipalities will receive R97,3 billion, or an additional R32,7 billion
over the baseline that we announced last year. As a result, the local
government share increases from 4,6% in the current financial year to 6,3%.

One of the decisions we have also taken – announced perhaps too quietly
last week – is that, having evaluated the remuneration of councillors,
we’ve now been able to bring all councillors onto the same system so that
off a single grid you can see what the President earns, what a Minister
earns, what an MEC earns, and what a metro councillor earns, that is the
interrelationship between remuneration scales in provincial legislatures
and what is happening in councils. This follows the six-category grading
system and it will cost us some R584 million. We will assist only the
poorer municipalities to ensure that they can remunerate adequately.

The MTEF year also sets aside R31,3 billion for municipal infrastructure.
There is a reduction in the restructuring and capacity-building fund here –
we’re doing capacity-building elsewhere.

Let me conclude by thanking this House for its forbearance in agreeing to
fast-track the processing of the 2006 Division of Revenue Bill. Thank you
very much. [Applause.]

Mnu N M NENE: Somlomo wePhalamende ohloniphekile namalungu ePhalamende,
Ngqongqoshe ubuqinisile uma uthi wonke umuntu kufanele avotele leli qembu
lethu ngoba elawo wonke umuntu.

Wathi uNgqongqoshe weziMali umfo ka-Manuel oqeda ukusuka lapha mhla ethula
isabelo sezimali ezinsukwini ezimbili ezedlule, inala ifikile asivune.
Impela siyavuma baba, idubukele. Okuhle kakhulu ukuthi lo hulumeni
kaKhongolose uma eseyikhipha ngezithebe, uyaba ngononina ngokusobala futhi
ngaphandle kokukhetha.

Lo Mthethosivivinywa esiwudingida namuhla ungolunye lwezinhlelo
zokuqiniseka ukuthi lo mnotho waleli zwe udliwa yibo bonke abantu
ngaphandle kokukhetha iphela emasini. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr N M NENE: Hon Speaker of Parliament and hon members, the Minister was
quite correct when he said every person should vote for our party, because
it is everybody’s party.

Two days ago, during his Budget Speech, the Minister of Finance, Mr Manuel,
who has just left the podium, said the time of plenty has come. We do
indeed agree with you, Comrade Manuel, that everything is now in the open
and every person should help themselves. What is even better is that the
ANC-led government is very good at portioning the Budget, giving every
department what is due to it.

The Bill that we are discussing today is one of the programmes to make sure
that the wealth of this country is shared equally amongst all people.]

This Division of Revenue Bill is an important instrument put in place by
the ANC democratic government with the objective of ensuring that revenue
raised at national level is equitably divided between the three spheres of
government. As the Minister has said, section 214(1) of the Constitution
and the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act of 1997 are the two pieces
of legislation that are instructive on us as Parliament and the executive.

When the Minister of Finance tabled the Appropriation Bill two days ago, he
also tabled this Division of Revenue Bill, which we consider here today as
referred to our committee by this House. We therefore would like to report
that the committee has considered the Bill and adopted it without
amendments as reflected in today’s Announcements, Tablings and Committee
Reports.

The ANC is the only party that has a plan to make all spheres of government
work better for the people of South Africa and that plan dates back to 1956
when we adopted the Freedom Charter as the ANC. The theme for this year’s
state of the nation address was, “Equality for All” and indeed a clear plan
was put before the nation as to how this ANC government is going to ensure
that this equality is realised in our lifetime.

On tabling the Budget the Minister of Finance also reaffirmed this season
of hope that the President spoke of by putting resources to the plan. This
Division of Revenue Bill of 2006 has a number of features that reflect the
changes that seek to put the plight of the poor at the centre of our agenda
for a developmental state that continues to cater for the vulnerable.

Lo Mthethosivivinywa uqinisekisa ukuthi zonke izigaba zikahulumeni zithola
izabelo ngokulingeneyo, hhayi ngokulinganayo, ukuze zikwazi ukufeza
izidingo zabantu bakuleli njengoba sathembisa mhla kubhalwa loSomqulu
weNkululeko eminyakeni engaphezulu kwama-50 eyedlule.

Uma sithi kubantu uwodwa umbutho onezinhlelo zokwenza izimpilo zibe ngcono
nazo zonke izinhlelo zikahulumeni zibasebenzele kangcono, bayazi ukuthi
sikhuluma ngani ngoba kule minyaka lo Khongolose ebusa sebebheme bakholwa.
Isithunzi sabo siya sibuya imihla namalanga. Sebenezwi ekuthathweni
kwezinqumo zezinhlelo eziphathelene nezimpilo zabo.  Siyazazi izinhlelo zo-
IDP namakomidi ezigceme nazo zonke izinhlelo zentando yeningi ezisebenzela
abantu bakithi. Sebenelungelo lokuzikhethela ohulumeni abazobabusa kusukela
kokazwelonke kuya kowesifundazwe, ngisho nabasemakhaya imbala.

Leli zwe selinoMthethosisekelo ohlonipha isithunzi sawo wonke umuntu
ngaphandle kokucwasa ngobuzwe, ngobulili nangebala. Umnotho waleli zwe
udlondlobala ngesivinini esingakaze sibonwe ngaphambili. Amanani nawo
akhula ngokusezingeni elamukelekile, lokhu esithi yi-inflation
ngokuphakathi kwama-3% nama-6%, nokuningi-ke engingakubala kuze kushone
ilanga, abantu bakithi bayakwazi.

Lo Mthethosivivinywa uyisisekelo sohlelo lokukhulisa umnotho okukhulunywa
ngaso oluyisixaxambiji somfelandawonye wokukhulisa umnotho, esithi yi-
Asgisa.

Uma kwehliselwa ukwabiwa kwemali esiya esigabeni sikahulumeni wesifundazwe
nowaseskhaya kulapho phela izinselele eziningi ezikhungethe abantu bakithi
zikhona. Kulapho futhi la abantu bakithi bedla khona imbuya ngothi nalapho
sithola khona lesi sigaba somnotho sesibili esidinga ukuthuthukiswa
ngesivinini esikhulu ukuze sifice labo akade kwasa bedla amantshontsho
emsamo.

Ozakwethu bazokhuluma kabanzi ngezinhlelo zohulumeni basekhaya lapho
bezocacisa khona ukuthi lo Mthetho ubhekana kanjani nezinselelo zokufakwa
kwezingqalasizinda ezinjengemigwaqo, amanzi, ugesi nezingcingo
zikathelefoni ezizokwenza ngcono izimpilo zabantu ngokuphindwe kaningi
ngoba phela vele umsebenzi usuqalile. Esikushoyo nje ukuthi kumele sithi
ukufingqa imikhono ukuze lo msebenzi uphothulwe manje.

Uma ubheka lesi sabelo sezimali esethulwe kulo nyaka, singasho ngokukhulu
ukuziqhayisa ukuthi impela indlala izobhincela nxanye kwelakithi ngoba,
ngaphezu kwezimpesheni nezibonelelo zabantwana kanye nalabo
abakhubazekileyo, nezindlu ziyakhiwa ngisho nasemakhaya imbala.
Osozinkontileka abancane nabo igcagcele esokeni kubo ngoba bayahlomula
kulezi zinhlelo zokufakela ingqalasizinda nokwakhiwa kwezizinda
zomphakathi. Abantu bakithi-ke abaningi bathola nethuba lokufunda amakhono
anhlobonhlobo ngenkathi kwakhiwa lezi zingqalazizinda.

Isamba semali okwabelwana ngaso kulo nyaka wezimali sesisonke – ayibizeki
ngesiZulu – sibalelwa ku-362,7 billion. Ngithi ayibizeki ngesiZulu ngoba
inkulu kakhulu ngakho asikaze sicabange ukuthi kuyoze kufike kulezi
zigidigidi. Ngonyaka olandelayo siyokwenyuka sibe ngu-R395,8 billion bese
kuthi ngaloya sibe ngu-R427,5 billion. Isabiwomali salonyaka-ke sigxile
kakhulu ekwelekeleleni ohulumeni bezifundazwe nabasekhaya ukuze bakwazi
ukunikezela ngezidingongqangi, nokuqinisekisa ukuthi labo hulumeni
bayizinsika nodondolo lwentuthuko.

Kusukela ngonyaka ka-2002 isamba semali esiya kohulumeni basekhaya silokhu
sikhule njalo. Kulo nyaka singama-4,6% njengoba somzwile uNgqongqoshe,
sikhule ngozayo sibe u-6,3% bese kuthi ngo-2008/9 siyobe sesingu-7%.
Uyibizile-ke ngezigidigidi nayo uNgqongqoshe. Ngaphezu kwakho konke, omunye
wozwakwethu uzophinde asicobhelele-ke ngezincomo zekhomishane eyeluleka
uhulumeni ngokwabiwa kwemali kulezi zigaba zikahulumeni okubizwa nge-FFC,
nokuthi zizoba namthelela muni ezimpilweni zabantu bakithi.

Lesi-ke isikhathi esimbi-ke. Sekusuka nokungebani nje kukhulume kugeqeze
mayelana nezidingo zabantu okungathi uma bekhethwa ngabantu kukhona
abangakwenza. UKhongolose kuphela onohlelo nosenomlando wokuletha ushintsho
ezimpilweni zabantu, ikakhulukazi labo ababecindezelwe yibo laba namuhla
asebethi bayasikhulumela. Sithi-ke siwuKhongolose abantu abaqaphele lezi
zimpisi eziza kubo zigqoke izikhumba zezimvu. Azisoze zaguquka emikhutsheni
yazo. Njengoba ziphikisa yonke into ezoletha ubungcono kubantu lapha
ePhalamende, ziyohlale ziphikisa njalo. Yingakho bephika nokuthi
babengobhongoza bobandlululo ngesikhathi esedlule. [Ihlombe.] UKhongolose-
ke uyowa evuka nabantu kuze kubhubhe umhlaba, awusoze wabalahla. Yingakho-
ke siwu-ANC siweseka loMthethosivivinywa. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[This Bill makes sure that all tiers of government get an equitable but not
equal share so that they can fulfil the needs of our people as we promised
them during the writing of the Freedom Charter over 50 years ago.

If we say to the people there is only one party that is capable of making
their lives better and making local government work better for them, they
know what we are talking about because since the ANC took over they have
been completely satisfied. Their dignity is coming back day by day. They
now have a voice in the daily discussion of decisions regarding their
lives. We know about programmes such as IDPs and the ward committees and
other democratic programmes working for our people. They have a right to
choose their own representatives, from national to provincial government,
and even in local government.

This country has a Constitution which respects the dignity of every person,
without looking at ethnicity, sex and colour. The economy of this country
is growing tremendously and it has never been like this before. Inflation
is also increasing by between 3% and 6%. There is a lot to mention in this
regard, and our people know it.

This Bill is the foundation for the Accelerated and Shared Growth
Initiative for South Africa, or Asgisa.

It is indeed good when most of the revenue goes to local government,
because that is where the real challenges are. This is where our people,
the poor of the poorest, are and it is where we find the second economy,
which needs to be developed in order to reach those who have always been
part of the economy.

My colleagues will talk extensively about the local government programmes.
They will clarify how this Bill aims to face the challenges of
infrastructure such as roads, water, electricity and telephone lines, which
will make the lives of our people better. We have already started doing
that, but what we are saying is that we need to speed up the processes.

If one looks at this year’s Budget, we can proudly say that hunger will
indeed suffer in this country. Over and above pensions and grants for
people with disabilities, houses are being built, even in the rural areas.
Up-and-coming contractors are also getting something in terms of building
infrastructure. Our people also acquire skills during the process of
building infrastructure.

The budget allocation for this year is not easy to pronounce in isiZulu –
it’s about R362,7 billion. I am saying it is not easy to pronounce it in
isiZulu because it’s too much and we never anticipated that we would have
so many billions one day. Next year the budget allocation will be R395,8
billion, and the year thereafter it will be R427,5 billion. The budget
allocation for this year is aimed at helping the provincial and local
governments to meet the prime needs of the people, and also to make sure
that these spheres of government become the pillars of development.

Since 2002, the budget allocation to the local governments has been growing
steadily. This year alone it is 4,6%, as we heard the Minister say; next
year it will increase to 6,3%, and in 2008-09 it will be 7%. The Minister
expressed the money in billions. On top of that, one of my colleagues will
tell us about the recommendations of the FFC and the implications thereof
in our people’s lives.

These are bad times. Every Tom, Dick and Harry now has the audacity to talk
about the people’s needs as if there is something that they would do if
they were voted in. Only the ANC has the programmes and the history in
terms of bringing change in people’s lives, especially for those who were
oppressed by the very people who today claim to be talking on their behalf.
We as the ANC say people should heed these wolves in sheep’s clothing. A
wolf will always be a wolf. They always oppose everything here in
Parliament which aims to bring a better life to our people. They will
forever be opposing. That is why they even deny that they were the
architects of apartheid. [Applause.] The ANC will be with the people until
the end of the world. The ANC will never forsake them. It is for these
reasons that we as the ANC support this Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It’s under a year since we last
debated a Division of Revenue Bill and I was new to the finance committee
at that stage and I came with a fresh mind. And certainly I was aware of
the problems that existed. But after reading the Finance and Fiscal
Commission’s report last year – much of which was frank and to the point –
and after noting government’s positive response, which was a positive
response thereto, my view was to support the Bill at that stage and that is
exactly what the DA did, because I believed there would be a significant
improvement in expenditure and a significant improvement in respect of
delivery.

One year later, I have a distinct sense of déjà vu, because the underspend
continues, more particularly in respect of conditional grants, capital
grants and municipal grants. In some respects this underspend has become
chronic. The only difference between now and last year is that, I think,
last year the FFC’s comments were more frank and to the point and this year
they are somewhat more benign.
Two points of the Bill give what I believe is a sense of unreality.
Firstly, the increase in the allocations of many of the capital,
conditional and municipal grants; and that provinces have exhibited an
inability to spend what they have, let alone spend more of what they are
about to be given.

Secondly, the debate around sections 19 and 20 of the Bill, which allow
National Treasury to stop after a process and reallocate an allocation to
another department or province. Once again I make the point that very often
those provinces and departments are unable to spend what they have been
given, let alone absorb a greater allocation.

An analysis of the latest provincial expenditure figures reveals that, once
again, provinces are likely to end the financial year with massive
underspending. Failure to spend on services even when plenty of money is
available is failure to deliver. While some provinces have performed well,
others are failing their residents by lagging behind. By the end of the
third quarter of 2005-06, the provinces had only spent 55% of their R13,9
billion capital allocation. Not one of the nine provinces had spent 75% by
the end of the third quarter. The worst performers did not even spent 50%.
The Free State spent only 46%, Limpopo 43% and the North West only 48%.

It seems that while provinces are perfectly capable of spending taxpayers’
money on salaries and to keep bloated provincial bureaucracies running,
they are unable to spend money on tangible benefits to citizens.

Underexpenditure on the capital portion of the budget points directly to
service delivery failures. Underspending on conditional grants is even more
worrying. Conditional grants are used, among other things, to finance the
hospital revitalisation programme, to provide support for land transfer
beneficiaries, HIV/Aids programmes and school feeding schemes, to name but
a few.

Despite the urgency of these humanitarian and socioeconomic projects we
find once again that provinces are lagging behind. By the third quarter,
four provinces had spent less than 65% on education. The Western Cape spent
57%, the Free State 60%, the North West 60% and Limpopo 62%. When it comes
to health, the Free State spent 39%, Limpopo 46%, the Eastern Cape 51% and
the Western Cape 56%.

The Minister spoke of the health sector. Let me choose but one conditional
grant, that is the Hospital Revitalisation Programme. It is unsurprising
that public hospitals are in the state that they are in. Despite the fact
that R1,2 billion had been allocated to the Hospital Revitalisation
Programme by December last year, only 53% of it had actually been spent.
The worst offenders were the Free State, the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-
Natal, spending only 31%, 35% and 38% respectively. Now if underspending on
this programme continues we will have an underspend or saving of R250
million on that programme.
Now if one looks to the 2003-04 financial year, there was a saving of R306
million on the Hospital Revitalisation Programme and last year there was a
saving of R231 billion. That is three quarters of a billion rand unspent on
the Hospital Revitalisation Programme in three years and we ask ourselves
why our hospitals are in such a state.

Last financial year only two provinces, ie the Northern Cape and the
Western Cape, spent their entire budget in this programme. The worst
performer was KwaZulu-Natal. It spent only 26% of its budget last year and
36% the year before. National Treasury’s allocations in the Northern Cape
were equally as bad. This year the National Treasury is allocating an
increase for the next three years of R500 million to this Hospital
Revitalisation Programme.

Doesn’t one get a distinct sense of unreality of money that is budgeted
for, able to be spent and yet not spent? And yet we have budgets coming
through that project increases in the amounts to be spent. And if one turns
to the municipal infrastructure grants that likewise the Minister focused
on we note again with concern the revelation that municipalities around the
country last year failed to spend R1,2 billion of their municipal
infrastructure grants, because of a lack of skilled engineers.

The Department of Provincial and Local Government’s 2005 Report on Skills
Levels in municipalities noted that:


   Resignations had played a significant part in the outflow of skills,
   particularly from managerial and skilled technical occupations;
   significant number of engineers had been offered early retirement or had
   been replaced by non-technical decision-makers.


Placed on early retirement at this time of our skills crisis? It goes
further:

   Many engineers had left the sector out of extreme frustration; an
   introduction of equity targets ...


This is their report, not mine –

   ... at all levels of the state had resulted in the sector losing staff
   and being unable to fill vacant posts.


This in a time when we have a skills crisis in our country. The result is
that 74 out of 231 local municipalities have no civil engineers,
technologists or technicians; 45 have only one civil technician and 186
local municipalities have no civil engineers whatsoever.

Alarmingly, the report noted that the system of internship at local
government is not at all well developed. And so, we now reflect on whether
we need to, as the DA, support this budget. It goes against my natural
instincts; and I repeat that: it goes against my natural instincts. But if
you ask me whether the DA can support these increased allocations, I have
to say; we cannot.

It is not money that is lacking, and it is not an increase in budgets that
is needed, but the ability to appropriately spend and deliver. Thank you.

Mr T E VEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, section 214(1) of the Constitution
requires that every year a Division of Revenue Act determines the equitable
division of nationally raised revenue between the three spheres of
government. This year’s division of revenue is framed against the backdrop
of the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa. The
design of the equitable share formula for both provincial and local
government is such that these spheres have desirable, stable and
predictable revenue shares and that existing economic and fiscal
disparities are addressed.

Investing in people and ensuring that skills development complements
employment creation are critical platforms on which to build future
prosperity. The IFP supports labour-intensive rural infrastructure
development. The IFP supports the FFC proposal that the government should
address housing delivery bottlenecks to reduce underspending in provinces.
We further support the devolution of bus and taxi subsidies to
municipalities where the capacity exists to manage these services.

Despite the Minister’s logical explanation, we are still of the opinion
that he could have done a bit more in respect of social grants. The IFP
further supports the FFC proposal that consideration be given to link new
housing subsidies with the municipal infrastructure grant, and to the
equitable share formula to ensure that municipalities can deliver basic
services to poor households.

In conclusion, the IFP supports the Division of Revenue Bill and applauds
the SA Revenue Service, Stats SA and National Treasury for a job well done.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms J L FUBBS: Madam Speaker, hon members of this House, cadres, comrades
and people, this division of revenue marks these allocations as a milestone
in the human rights reflected in the Constitution, but it also underpins
the ANC’s goal of a social contract with South Africa.

Yes, we pledged in 2004 to enter into a people’s contract to create jobs
and to fight poverty, and this division of revenue is a fundamental plank
of the financial commitments to bring about this pledge that was made to
the people then. As we go into another election one is certainly confident
that the pledges we make are quite clearly commitments and not idle
promises.
Significantly, this division of revenue marks an unbroken thread that has
characterised the struggle for political, economic and social justice. How
the government divides the money collected from the people is directly
informed by the principles translated into its policies and its
implementable actions. The ANC-led government’s basic policy remains
reconstruction, development, meeting basic needs, growing the economy and
promoting social development, and this year it is quite clear that Asgisa
is our weapon against the war on poverty and a sharp policy instrument that
will fuel the second and survivalist economy into an engine of skilled
workers in employment.

What the division of revenue does is to translate these policies and
strategies into measurable objectives, clearly defined outputs and
realistic outcomes informed by collective engagement with the people
through izimbizo and other outreach processes.

The division of revenue, as I said, marks a milestone in the equitable
allocation of funds to the three spheres of government: national,
provincial and local. However, the primary objective of the division of
revenue is that South Africans receive basic services. Nevertheless, look
at some of the highlights of departmental expenditure allocations: R82
billion more has been added to departmental expenditure plans over the next
three years. These allocations provide financial resources for the
objectives of human development, and poverty reduction; and they emphasise
education and the built environment.

There is tax relief to companies and, indeed, the allocations that are made
in the division of revenue are informed by sustainable and implementable
measures rather than vague promises generated by an election year.

The key objectives of the intergovernmental transfers are to promote
efficiency, equity and democracy. The Financial and Fiscal Commission has
once again provided its impartial checks and over the years many of these
radical recommendations have been phased in. This year a number of them
were fully taken on board, in particular those related to local government
and the conditional grants.

My comrade, Yusuf Bhamjee will deal in depth with the provincial
allocations, broadly speaking. I think it is worthwhile noting that
although I won’t focus on local government elections, I want to just refer
to a clause in the Division of Revenue Bill, clause 38, which is of great
interest to all South Africans. Why is it so significant? Because it is
related to the social conflict in some of our municipalities, particularly
those involved in the redemarcation, as it were.

This clause is testimony to the fact that conflict is unnecessary because
the relevant clause 38 ensures that a province, that is the releasing
province, must continue to spend its allocation for the financial year
commencing 1 April 2006 in terms of this Bill, as if that particular area
was not reallocated to another province. The receiving province thereby
ensures that the affected municipality will not be negatively financially
impacted in any way whatsoever.
This clause confirms, once again, the ANC’s government’s commitment to
ensure that the legalities of the Constitution are balanced by its social
and moral principles. Clearly, social upheaval is not warranted in these
cases.

I now wish to go back to the provincial side of things and look at
literacy. Literacy, skills, specialised skills, employment and indeed the
fight against poverty are critical. This importance of literacy and
increased and focused skills in our learners as an instrument for
employment and fighting poverty is supported by a number of measures in
education.

Apart from the R565 million extra for libraries and the shift from local
government to provinces, there have also been additional funds allocated to
higher institutions of learning, amounting to as much as R1 billion over
three years. An increased amount of funds has been allocated for upgrading
of existing facilities in schools. Yes, the 17 learners under trees will be
in buildings, but those already in buildings will find that issues such as
equipment, doors, windows, toilets and all the other things that full
upgrading will address are met decisively in this division of revenue.
With regard to hospital revitalisation, there has already been reference to
the fact that there is not enough money, and I ask you to ask any wife,
mother or any person in a home who is providing for a family, "Have you got
enough money?" You never have enough money. The critical issue is the
expenditure of those funds that are available for that allocation and how
best those funds are employed. I mean that R900 million will now boost this
hospital revitalisation programme to R5,1 billion.

I want to ask members, those who do not have amnesia, of course, to just
refresh their minds and recall what the situation was 10–12 years ago and
how progressively over the years this has been addressed. Of course we were
left with areas - I hate to say it - in Johannesburg where the
infrastructure under the DA was left to rot and left for the ANC to pick
up. [Interjections.] But never mind, of course you were, man! Of course you
may think you were not in charge but you were elected to be in charge.

Now, with regard to social development: R70 billion a year, that is what it
is now getting, which is 3,4% of GDP. It reaches 10 million beneficiaries
and will continue to reach more.

The other issue, as some governments before us said, is: Let’s put a roof
over their heads. We know that housing is not a roof over your head. I can
put a roof over my head with a raincoat. No. What it means is schools,
clinics, roads and transport. It means all of those things plus cohesion in
the community. Working with the community, that is what it means.
[Applause.]

Transport is getting up to R2 billion by 2008-09, nearly R700 million this
year. For those of our people living in rural areas, this includes the
rural areas significantly. Provinces will get up to R4 billion over four
years with the implementation and for the implementation of several social
service employment-intensive programmes with regard to community health
services, for one. [Interjections.] My job is not in danger, but yours is.

The other factors in this regard are that there will be several community
services, early childhood development and associated training projects. All
of these recognise the need to build cohesive communities.

The other point, which I think is worthwhile noting, is that conditional
grants to provinces have been rationalised. Over many years the provinces
constantly complained of what they called fiscal dumping, that is the
inability to shift the conditional grant around if for legitimate reasons
it wasn’t spent, and how this could be used more effectively, say, if you
couldn’t spend your own conditional grant fully on housing or whatever.
This is now able to go into the national kitty, to another area in our
country where such funds can be effectively used. In other words, we’ve
become more practical, realistic, prudent and efficient. I wish a lot more
businesses would follow suit, because we hear every day about the
inefficiency in business. One only has to look at one’s own bank account -
but never mind.

I just want to complete this aspect on intergovernmental fiscal relations.
The Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act is unique in some ways. And one
of these ways in which it is unique is that it rests on - for me, it would
seem - a very ubuntu-like and African concept, a very collective and
sharing-based concept of co-operative governance. It is something foreign
to some members of the House, but if all of our allocations are examined,
it is quite clear that the concept of co-operative governance, the concepts
of collectivity and sharing and working together are present. We appeal to
businesses in this country to see how we allocate the funds.

When you look towards the division of your profits remember we are living
in South Africa where only together can we become a prosperous nation in
which all people benefit in the wealth of the country without any one
having to make the heavy sacrifices and bear the burden of poverty that
they currently may still endure. I thank you. The ANC supports this.
[Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Madam Speaker and hon Minister, the ACDP supports the
Division of Revenue Bill. However, we do have certain reservations. We
share the concerns expressed relating to underspending by provinces and
municipalities. These spheres of government must be capacitated to spend
their capital budgets and must retain skilled engineers and technical
officials.

The division of the equitable share allocation takes into account
population size and education and health needs, amongst other factors. The
question arises, hon Minister, whether the equitable share has been
adjusted following changes to provincial boundaries flowing from last
year’s elimination of cross-border municipalities.

The previous speaker also referred to this issue. Clearly, this is the case
over the MTEF period and this issue will undoubtedly allay fears of those
communities whose municipalities have been moved from one province to
another and we trust that this information is communicated to communities
involved.

At this stage we also wish to commend the Receiver of Revenue and Ministry
for the budget and, as I indicated, we will support the Division of Revenue
Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr G G WOODS: Madam Speaker, Nadeco is satisfied with the criteria and the
overall formulation used to establish the divisions as they appear in the
Bill, and for those reasons we support it.

While sharing the concerns mentioned earlier on by the hon Davidson, we do
think that that is a separate issue. In terms of the Constitution, the Bill
has its role that it has to carry out. It must equitably provide the
divisions and allocate them.

We do think that the strong features that the Bill has are the conditions
of transfer, which continue to develop year by year. We see the transfer
accountability arrangement strengthening as we continue each year. In
particular, I would like to mention that the risk management requirements
in chapter 3 are very innovative and are a welcome addition to the Bill in
recent years.

Chapter 3 covers schedule 5 and schedule 6 allocations. Chapter 4 covers
the duties of transferring and receiving officers, which in turn deal with
schedules 4, 5, 6 and 7 allocations. I think these will go towards
providing initiatives for capacity increases at both provincial and
municipal levels. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Madam Speaker, the PAC wishes to thank the Minister of
Finance and the Treasury for a well-presented and balanced Budget estimate.
We had hoped that the budget would resolve most of our problems, reach out
to our expectations and meet the demands of our nation, but it is not
likely to do so.

The nation had visualised the emergence of a completely new order that
would result in the creation of scarce jobs, address abject poverty and
revamp our living conditions in general. The projected budget indicates
otherwise.

Let me take a leaf from the writings of Dale Carnegie in his book How to
Win Friends and Influence People, and I quote:


   You may satisfy some of the people some of the time, but you may not
   satisfy all the people all the time.

The PAC supports the Bill. [Applause.]

Mr Y S BHAMJEE: Madam Speaker, thank you for inviting me to participate in
this debate. Firstly, I wish to just make a few comments on the views
presented by hon Davidson. Members of this House should know that yesterday
when we were sitting in the committee the hon Davidson did not utter a
single word while we were discussing the Division of Revenue Bill. When we
asked him to support the Division of Revenue Bill, he said he must first
get a mandate.

I can safely argue that he came to this House with an incorrect mandate,
because the ANC has clearly identified challenges and backlogs. The ANC is
a people’s organisation. Therefore if there are backlogs and challenges, we
will not deny that reality when speaking with our people; because, at the
end of the day, we know that the people believe in the ANC.
In fact, his comments were so banal that he did not take into account the
corrective measures put in place by the conditional grants, etc.
[Interjections.]

Mr W P DOMAN: What are you going to say next year?

Mr I O DAVIDSON: There is still underspending.

Mr Y S BHAMJEE: You see, once you put them in a tight corner and you tell
them that they haven’t read the documentation, they start shouting like
small babies.

The ANC is the vanguard – the beacon of transformation. The ANC leads and
others follow. The ANC was and is the beacon for all South Africans. It
might not be to the DA but, certainly, for the vast majority of the people,
the ANC is hope. It is historically the only organisation that has the
virtue of political struggle and continues to declare to the world, and to
South Africa, that South Africa belongs to all who live in it – black and
white.

We have successfully restored the dignity of South Africans, Africans in
particular and blacks in general. The world respects and admires our
approach on how we addressed the legacy of apartheid, and set about
transforming and reconstructing our country. All, including those who were
historically advantaged, admire the impact we are making on the
international scene.
Now that we have constructed and consolidated the foundations of our young
democracy, guided by the principles of the Freedom Charter, we can
meaningfully focus on the reconstruction and development of our country. We
are now in a position to make it happen in areas that we live in. Yes,
there are huge challenges and backlogs, but it is only the ANC-led
government that has a plan to improve the general quality of life of all
South Africans, including the historically advantaged.

There is some discomfort in some areas. But when we unpack these challenges
we realise that our people also believe that it is only the ANC that can
make a difference in their lives and in the community in which they live.
Thus, not to vote for the ANC would indeed be a wasted vote. Now is the
time to consolidate and advance the people’s charter to its logical
conclusion in order to ensure that all shall be equal before the law and
that all shall enjoy the fruits under the South African sun.

The amount of R14 billion in additional taxes generated in this fiscal year
by a booming economy and the efficient administration of Sars offered the
opportunity to the hon Minister to cut taxes levied on individuals. In
fact, all South Africans, without exception, have benefited substantially
from the tax cuts. This can only serve to enhance local economic
development.

But all of us must agree that lots more still needs to be done on the local
government front to sustain delivery of services and to create an
environment that is conducive to healthy living. To this effect, the hon
Minister of Finance has, through the Division of Revenue Bill before this
House, significantly increased the allocation to local government. The
amount of money allocated to local government, adding to equitable share
and conditional grants, has significantly increased from the 2002-03
allocation of R8,1 billion to R16,9 billion in the 2004-05 allocation. It
has now been announced that it has increased to R25,9 billion and it is
projected that the 2008-09 allocation ought to be in the region of R30,9
billion.

This allocation is part of the plan that will play a significant role in
realising the ANC’s vision of speeding up delivery to ensure that all South
Africans have access to clean water and decent sanitation by 2010; that all
houses have electricity by 2012; and that all houses receive free basic
services. Schedule 6 of the Division of Revenue Bill deals with specific
allocations to municipalities to effect good governance practices and give
meaning to the ANC’s manifesto. This is what the hon Davidson failed to
read, understand and internalise.

As a recurrent grant, the Department of Provincial and Local Government
has, via its municipal systems improvement grant, allocated R200 000
million to assist municipalities in building in-house capacity, and to
perform their functions and stabilise institutional and governance systems.
It is a challenge. We have identified it and we are moving head.

As a recurrent grant, the National Treasury has allocated R145 000 for
local government financial management with the objective to promote and
support reforms to financial management and implementation of the Local
Government: Municipal Finance Management Act that is equivalent to the
Public Finance Management Act, which this House is familiar with. We have
identified the problem and we are advancing.

Furthermore, Treasury has made R350 million available for local government
restructuring, with the intention of supporting municipal restructuring
initiatives of large municipalities. We have identified the problem and we
are advancing. Water Affairs and Forestry, via the water services operating
subsidy, is committed to augment the water trading accounts to subsidise
water schemes owned and/or operated by the department or other agencies on
behalf of the department. We have identified the need and we are advancing.

The Department of Minerals and Energy is committed to implement the
electrification programme by providing capital subsidies to Eskom in order
to address electrification backlogs regarding permanently occupied
residential dwellings, the installation of bulk infrastructure and the
rehabilitation of electrification infrastructure. We have identified the
need and we are advancing.

The Department of Transport is to provide for accelerated planning,
establishment, construction and improvement of new and existing public
transport and nonmotorised transport infrastructure and systems. We have
identified the challenge and we are advancing.

To ensure that the people take pride in the development of their local
neighbourhoods by fostering partnerships, Treasury will provide
municipalities with technical assistance to develop appropriate project
proposals for property development in townships and new residential
neighbourhoods, which include the construction of community facilities and,
where appropriate, attracting private sector funding and input.

These and many other grants are directed at improving the delivery of
services. It is in this context that the Accelerated and Shared Growth for
South Africa begins to have meaning, for it is a set of interventions whose
aim is to accelerate growth and development. It is work in progress and
focuses on key elements of the economy that currently serve as impediments
to high economic growth.

In addition, through public-private partnerships, government will make
large investments in different sectors in order to meet the demands of
electricity, provide an efficient and competitive logistics infrastructure,
expand and modernise the telecommunication infrastructure, and satisfy the
demand for water.

This project is a people-centred development paradigm. Therefore it is
crucial that public representatives – particularly councillors -
communities, ward committees, businesses – both big and small, cultural,
religious, sporting, professional and worker organisations are all on board
or need to be on board to develop local integrated development programmes,
IDPs, that will truly reflect the will and vision of each municipality on
how it will forge a partnership that will be committed to improving the
quality of life for all.

Yes, this process will draw up its own challenges. There are no ready-made
answers, but it is a challenge and we are up to it. We have identified it
and we will advance. It is this that gives all citizens the hope for a
better life. The Public Finance Management Act and the Local Government:
Municipal Finance Management Act are the envy of the world. There are very
few parallels to match the oversight role contained in documents that are
guided by our Constitution.

When the President spoke of hope for a better life for all, he was
challenging and inspiring us to play a robust oversight role to ensure that
the monies allocated via the Division of Revenue Bill are deployed to
achieve the desired outcomes. We need to hold all departments, public
entities and public-private partnerships to account.

We need to give practical meaning to the ANC’s election manifesto, which
declares that, together with the people, the ANC will, and I quote:


   Speed up delivery; improve the provision of housing; build
   infrastructure; stimulate local economic development; create job
   opportunities; make sure that the people’s voices are heard by
   strengthening participation in ward committees and other forums, so that
   ordinary citizens can have a greater direct say in the development of
   their communities; help local councils to meet their communities’ needs
   through programmes like Project Consolidate and others, that ensure
   national and provincial governments work harder to support local
   councils; provide more resources and trained staff for local government;
   train all councillors so that they can effectively serve the communities;
   and regularly review the performance of councillors to ensure that they
   meet the obligations of the people.


These guidelines signal the fact that the ANC has a plan of working with
people to make it happen where we live. Collaborative efforts are needed by
the public and private sector in order to fight corruption. All role-
players in the economy must address capacity and skills shortages.
Dangerous tactics must not be used to chase away South Africans whose
destiny is South Africa.

Short, medium, and long-term learnership and mentorship must be effected. I
hope the DA is listening. All patriots need to join hands to creatively
address the shortage of appropriate skills. Now is the time to walk the
talk. We need to share services with regard to scarce resources, forge
partnerships between a regional municipality and its family of
municipalities to monitor key performance indicators on a regular basis.
Project management units with the necessary skills and expertise need to be
institutionalised in each of the regional municipalities until such time
that each municipality has developed its own resource base. The private
sector will always be there to put skills into their organisation.

Government needs to be proactive and competitive to absorb the scarce
commodity of expertise. It must appeal to the social consciousness and
social responsibility to be creative and innovative role-players, in
developing a stable local environment, so that ordinary citizens can
determine their destiny with pride. The ANC supports the Bill. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Igama Lamakhosikazi! [Praise the name of women!]
Chairperson, I think there’s an old bit of Confucian wisdom that suggests
that if you haven’t asked the right questions you will never get the right
answers. I think the question before the House relates to the Division of
Revenue Bill. Key about it is that the Constitution assigns powers and
functions to different spheres of government and having done that, one
thing you could try and do is overthrow the Constitution; the other is to
recognise that the Constitution is a product of negotiated settlement.

The ANC certainly didn’t ask for all of these provinces, but they’re there.
They’re there and they have powers and functions as set out in the
schedules of the Constitution. Having established that, you must then ask
whether the resources have been fairly allocated to other spheres of
government from nationally raised revenues and secondly, whether the
resources available equip these spheres of government to deal with the
responsibilities the Constitution assigns to them.

The other issues, hon Davidson, are actually immaterial to the question
before the House. These are the issues that the hon Davidson raises about
the numbers of engineers, technicians and so on; all of those we supply.
The section 32 reports in terms of the PFMA are numbers that we supply. And
we do so because we’re conscious of the fact that Parliament has an
oversight role. The reason why we supply those numbers is to invite
Parliament to more actively participate.

Now, the hon Davidson speaks of capex. There have been very significant
changes in this year. Treasury facilitated work between the Department of
Public Works, the Department of Education and the Department of Health and
there has been acceleration of spending on capex. We need to understand
that there always are long lead times, but in the period that the hon
Davidson referred to – the first three quarters – R1,2 billion more was
spent on capex this year compared to the previous year.

Sure, there will be a bit of underspending, but it will be marginal,
probably something in the order of R800 million. But, with capex everywhere
you always have overflows between one year and the next, and the numbers we
shared earlier this week on both the building of classrooms and what
remains to be done speak volumes to that.

The issue of the availability of engineers, civil engineers and technicians
touched on by the hon Davidson, hon Woods and hon Swart is a reality. The
SA Federation of Civil Engineering Contractors has published the numbers.
There is an acute shortage in this country and in these circumstances it is
more likely that people will leave the Public Service for the greener
pastures of the private sector. This is an enormous challenge. I referred
in the speech to the changes that we have been able to effect by building
in the scarce skills allowance in Education, and how this has impacted on
the ability of Health to employ 12 000 more people. Similar things are
going to happen with the other scarce skills and Siyenza Manje [We are
doing it now] at the Development Bank will clearly facilitate this process
going forward. I am clearly not pessimistic about the issues.

In respect of the cross-boundary municipalities – the matter raised by the
hon Swart – we don’t have all of the numbers. If you look at the Northern
Cape, and I have said this, there is conjecture that the inclusion of the
Kgalakgadi District Municipality in the Northern Cape may actually increase
the population in the Northern Cape by 10%. How then will you fund
Education, Health and all those issues going forward? There is no ready-
made formula. We have teams that are actively engaged in the process, not
to take it away from one province, but we will have to find additional
resources in here to ensure that by the time that the next Division of
Revenue Bill is tabled these matters would be dealt with with a lot more
certainty than what we have at the moment.

Finally, I am not sure what the hon Davidson is suggesting. He is
suggesting that the DA will not support additional resources for the other
spheres of government - we’ll go out and tell the municipalities now that
the hon Davidson and the DA will not support additional resources for
municipalities. [Applause.] Let’s do it at the hustings. Thank you very
much for the support. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.
Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, the DA is not in any way put off by the Minister
of Finance’s statement and I wish that our objection be recorded. Thank
you.

Bill read a second time (DA dissenting).


                           MURDER OF MUSA MASONDO


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu B Z ZULU (ANC): Ukubulawa kweqabane uMusa Masondo obengenele ukhetho ku-
ward 7 egameni le-ANC futhi engusihlalo we-Dr Pixley ka Seme branch
kuwashaqisile amalungu e-ANC kanye nomphakathi wakwaNomgoma. Iqabane
uMasondo ubulawe ngesihluku esikhulu ekuseni izolo mhlaka-16 eduze komuzi
wakubo. Lolu lunya lokubulawa kweqabane uMasondo lwenziwe ngababulali
abanenhloso yabo ecacile yokwesabisa umphakathi wakwaNongoma ukuze
ungavoteli i-ANC. Sizakwalisa ukudabuka okukhulu esikubhekise emndenini
weqabane uMusa Masondo ngokulahlekelwa yilungu lomndeni.

Sinxusa amaqembu ezombusazwe endaweni yakwaNongoma, ikakhulukazi i-IFP ne-
ANC ukuba abambisane ngokuba akuchithe ukubalanana okwenziwa ababulali
bebhace ngegama lezombusazwe. I-African National Congress yenza
inhlabamkhosi iyibhekise emaphoyiseni nakubantu bakithi kanye namasotsha
aqaphe ukuthula ukuba benze isiqiniseko sokuthi abalulali balethwa
ngaphambi kokwahlulelwa yingalo eqinile yomthetho. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of isiZulu member’s statement follows.)

[Mr B Z ZULU (ANC): The killing of Comrade Musa Masondo, who took part in
the elections in ward 7 on behalf of the ANC and who was the chairperson of
the Dr Pixley Seme branch, has shocked both the members of the ANC and the
kwaNongoma community. Comrade Masondo was brutally killed yesterday
morning, on the 16th, near his home. The killers, who clearly intended to
threaten the kwaNongoma community so that they would not vote for the ANC,
performed this brutality of murdering Comrade Masondo. We convey our
condolences to Comrade Masondo’s family on their loss of a family member.

We request the political parties of kwaNongoma, especially the IFP and the
ANC, to work hand in hand to put an end to the murdering of people for
political reasons. The ANC is sending a warning signal to the police, the
community and the soldiers to make sure that the perpetrators are brought
to justice. Thank you. [Applause.]]


                     EXTENSION OF CONTRACT OF CAPE TOWN

                              MUNICIPAL MANAGER

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr W P DOMAN (DA): Chair, the ANC is not only giving jobs to pals, now it
is giving golden handshakes to pals. The extension of the Cape Town
municipal manager’s contract for another year, a decision taken solely by
the ANC Mayor Mfeketo, who claims she has the delegated powers to do so,
only days before the election date is further evidence of the ANC using its
ratepayers’ money to look after its friends.

Municipal manager Wallace Mgoqi has played an active pro-ANC role,
attacking the DA in letters to the press and publicly stating his bias in
favour of the ANC. As a result, he was forced to resign as the municipal
electoral officer.

In Mbana vs Mnquma Municipality 2004, the court held, and I quote:


   That section 82 of the Local Government Municipal Structures Act gave the
   municipal council, and no other person or committee, the power to appoint
   a municipal manager.


   This was supported by section 30 of the same Act, as well as the
   provisions of section 160 of the Constitution and sections 57 and 59 of
   the Municipal Systems Act.

Hierby is natuurlik inbegrepe die afdanking en verlenging van 'n munisipale
bestuurder se diens. Die DA glo die burgemeester het buite haar magte
opgetree. Haar besluit het geen bindingskrag nie, en die DA sal die
provinsiale minister van plaaslike regering versoek om in te gryp.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)
[This naturally includes the dismissal and extension of a municipal
manager’s service. The DA believes that the mayor acted beyond her powers
of authority. Her decision is not binding and the DA will request the
provincial minister for local government to intervene.]

Mr H P CHAUKE: On a point of order, Madam: I just want to understand. I
think it is not correct if a member cannot pronounce a name, or perhaps he
is speaking of someone that we do not know. With regard to the names of Mr
Mgoqi and Ms Mfeketo, I am not sure if he means the mayor of Cape Town or
if he means the manager of the City of Cape Town. I am not sure whom he is
speaking of. If he says it’s the mayor, I can help him; if he says it’s the
city manager, I will help him.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I was going to take your point,
because I thought you were going to be helpful.

Mr W P DOMAN: Chair, may I address you on that point? I just want to thank
the hon member, Patrick Chauke, for drawing more attention to this matter.
[Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, it’s all very well for the hon Chauke to start
making his allegations. [Interjections.] It’s a point of order, but it’s
not really a point of order; however, I would like to make it anyway. When
he starts making points like this, if we start standing up every time his
members mispronounce names, we could have a great deal of fun in this House
and, I think, he must understand that as well.


                      SIXTEEN DAYS OF ACTIVISM CAMPAIGN


                            (Member’s Statement)

Prince N E ZULU (IFP): Madam Chair, each year the Sixteen Days of Activism
against Women and Child Abuse campaign highlights and brings to the fore
sensational issues of gross inhuman behaviour and the levels of moral decay
found in society. It is unfortunate that once this campaign is over these
very important issues seem to fall out of the spotlight and to the back of
our minds, until the next Sixteen Days campaign begins a year later.

It is encouraging and uplifting that the Gauteng department of education
has committed itself to creating safer schools that do not tolerate gender
violence. This is especially relevant as violence and abuse towards female
learners becomes more and more rampant around the country.

We hope this initiative will have the desired effect and create a safer
environment for school-going children. We raise our voices to other
education departments, relevant stakeholders and schools around the country
to implement initiatives that will rid our schools of all forms of gender
violence. Thank you.
                   SOUTH AFRICA IS CHANGING FOR THE BETTER

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M P MENTOR (ANC): Chairperson, this statement is on the current optimism
and positive outlook that is displayed by South Africans in terms of their
future due to what government is doing, and how government is performing.

Recent surveys, including the one that is conducted by the AC Nielsen
Consulting Group, confirm that South Africans believe that life in our
country is changing for the better. The survey found that many people
believe the following: many more people than ever before have access to
clean water and have electricity in their homes; more South Africans have
gained access to housing, land and education, and government services are
improving.

The government works to promote the interests of children, persons with
disability, the youth, women and elderly people better than at any time
before. To accelerate the pace of social transformation and service
delivery, the ANC has developed a plan to make local government work better
for the people.

The ANC therefore calls on the people of South Africa to join in the
people’s contract to make local government work better by only voting for
the ANC. Amandla ngawethu! [Power to the people!][Applause.]

            CONDEMNATION OF ACTIONS OF MR JACOB ZUMA’S SUPPORTERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S N SWART (ACDP): Madam Chair, the ACDP supports organisations such as
the Commission on Gender Equality, the SA Human Rights Commission and
People Against Women Abuse, which have raised serious concerns about the
unacceptable behaviour of former Deputy President Zuma’s supporters outside
the Johannesburg High Court on Monday.

The treatment of the complainant by Mr Zuma’s supporters, who jeered and
shouted insults at her, was appalling and has to be condemned by all South
Africans who believe in justice for all, particularly for victims of
serious crimes such as rape.

Whilst we welcome the majority party’s condemnation of these actions, it
should also instruct Mr Zuma’s supporters to desist from carrying placards
that have the potential to incite public violence, such as the one that is
alleged to have read: “SANDF, SAPS – Be ready for civil war if Zuma ...”

It should also bring its youth league, which reportedly criticised these
organisations, into line. Any form of intimidation or violence, including
throwing stones at a woman mistakenly thought to be the complainant, is
totally unacceptable and illegal. The police should act immediately to
arrest such perpetrators.

The ACDP believes that these actions undermine both the rule of law and the
independence of the judiciary, and must be condemned in the strongest
terms. I thank you.

            CITIZENS OPTIMISTIC ABOUT THE FUTURE OF SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S E ASIYA (ANC): Chairperson, my statement is about elections. In the
past 12 years we have been in government the ANC has not disappointed the
people, despite the severe constraints inherited from the apartheid system.

Ellen Mphumela said, and I quote: “I will be voting next month, because
things are going to be better.” Lenton Radebe, who is 76 years old,
expressed satisfaction that he has just received a house of his own.

Taxi owners and drivers are excited about the ranks built recently. Jewel
Babamba holds the hope that hawkers will be provided with space to trade.

The optimism of our people about the future of our country is not
unfounded; it is based on the correct understanding that the country they
love – their own and only homeland – will not disappoint them in their hope
for an accelerated advance towards the day when they will be liberated from
the suffocating tentacles of the legacy of colonialism and apartheid.
Amandla! [Power!] [Time expired.]

HON MEMBERS: Ngawethu! [To the people!]


           PAC COUNCILLORS TO ADD VALUE AT LOCAL GOVERNMENT LEVEL


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M T LIKOTSI (PAC): Madam Chairperson, the PAC is making a clarion call
to all our citizens to approach the forthcoming local government elections
with one thing in mind, namely addressing the plight of the poor.

The PAC wants to place on record that it has positioned itself to serve the
citizens of our country with distinction. We screened all our candidates
fielded for these elections and the nation should brace itself for a world-
class service by well-disciplined, industrious and committed PAC
councillors, who will add more value at local government level. There shall
be zero tolerance of all forms of corruption and underperformance by our
councillors.

Comrades, it is now time for cadres who know what the struggle was all
about to take centre stage and to fight any form of manipulation of our
young and fledgling democracy.

The PAC calls upon all Africans in our country to vote for it to further
the means towards total freedom. The PAC has long declared its unambiguous
position on the return of the land to the rightful owners, the Africans.
This is the only reliable tool for socioeconomic emancipation of our
African masses. As we approach 1 March the PAC candidates, who are
prospective councillors, fully understand this point. [Time expired.]


              ANC CANDIDATE CAUGHT WITH 75 DA ELECTION POSTERS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M J ELLIS (DA): Madam Chair, today two members from the ANC have raised
the issue of the level of optimism among the people of South Africa and
given that as the reason people would vote for them. But, I want to say
that if the ANC really believes that people are going to vote for them
merely because of the level of optimism at present, then we have to
question their tactics in the local government elections and why they are,
among other things, taking down DA election posters. [Interjections.]

Yesterday an ANC candidate was arrested after he was found in possession of
75 DA posters in the ANC Chatsworth office. And quite frankly, the rate at
which the DA posters have been disappearing from poles around the country
is certainly higher than in previous elections. Obviously, the ANC is aware
that the DA’s message is hitting home amongst the voters.

But I want to say, Madam Chair, that removing election posters is illegal
and the ANC has some explaining to do about why their candidate was taking
down DA posters, and we have to question how widespread this behaviour is
around the country.

Quite frankly, it’s clear that the ANC’s election promises have grown tired
– the same promises every election; the same lack of delivery between
elections. I want to say to the ANC that removing DA posters from view
won’t change that perception in the minds of voters at all.


     ANC VICTORY IN FORTHCOMING ELECTIONS WILL SPEED UP SERVICE DELIVERY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S L TSENOLI (ANC): House Chairperson, the ANC applauds the increasing
resources for building the capacity of local government towards
accelerating service delivery. The proximity of local government to the
people makes local government the coalface of people’s power.

In recognition of this seminal role of local government, especially in
service delivery, the ANC has declared the year 2006 as the year of
mobilisation of people’s power through local government. This
acknowledgement is a fitting tribute to the 50th celebration of the
adoption of the Freedom Charter by the ANC.

The ANC manifesto announces a good plan to make local government work
better, in the interests of a better life for all.

The building of local government capacity is an indispensable ingredient
for successful implementation of government policies. Already Project
Consolidate is making a positive impact on service delivery. The victory of
the ANC in the elections on 1 March will speed up service delivery and a
better life for all of our people. I thank you. [Applause.]

                    STRATEGY TO FIGHT BIRD FLU ESSENTIAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr R RABINOWITZ (IFP): Chairperson, in the world’s scientific community the
jury is still out as to the possible likelihood of the H5N1 strain of bird
flu virus mutating to become infectious amongst humans. However, the
emergence of the strain of this deadly virus on the African continent is a
definitive signal to government to be prepared for the possible threats
this virus presents.

While we commend the Medical Control Council for rapidly registering
Tamiflu, the benefits of this drug are themselves still questionable. To
deal with a bird flu outbreak amongst birds, animals and humans, is there a
task team combining agriculture, tourism and health? Is there a strategy to
protect South Africa’s wildlife? Is there readiness and capacity in public
and private hospitals to identify patients and isolate them? Do we have
tests available in the country to identify the disease?

The worst way to deal with such a crisis, as we have seen with Aids, would
be to leave the population in a state of confusion and fear. Clear and
unambiguous responses should be formulated and widely communicated to all
South Africans.

It’s also interesting to note that the Tamiflu itself derives from an
Indian herb, and in South Korea scientists claim that a mixture of red
pepper, radish, garlic and ginger increases resistance to the disease, both
in birds and in humans. And this suggests the importance of combining
conventional science and medicine with responsible research into indigenous
knowledge and the use of herbal and homeopathic medicines. Our Health
Minister has a poor record in this regard. [Time expired.]

                       URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT COMMENDED


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S P RWEXANA(ANC): Chairperson, my statement is about the urban renewal
project.

Ndenza umpoposho malunga nonikezelo lwezindlu ebantwini. Isantya
sokubonelela abantu bakuthi ngezindlu sithande ukuthi kratya kwaye
singumbutho wesizwe, i-ANC, siya kuqinisekisa ukuba abantu bakuthi
bayangcamla kulo mthi wenkululeko njengoko sizimisele ukudala ubomi
obungcono kumntu wonke.

UMasipala weSixeko saseKapa, okhokelwa ngumbutho wesizwe i-ANC, uye
wanikezela ngezindlu kwiintsapho ezingama-600 zaseKhayelitsha. Le ndawo
yaseKhayelitsha yenye yeendawo awathi uMongameli Thabo Mbeki wayityumba
njengendawo ekufuneka iphuhlisiwe kulandelwa inkqubo yokuhlaziywa
kwemimandla yasezidolophini.

Kwiiveki ezintlanu ezigqithileyo umbutho wesizwe wathi waphehlelela umgaqo-
nkqubo wokulawula oomasipala kunye nooceba. Loo mgaqo-nkqubo uya kuphucula
inqanaba lokuziswa kweenkonzo zikarhulumente ebantwini.

I-ANC yiyo kuphela eneenjongo kwanomgaqo-nkqubo wokuzisa impilo engcono
ebantwini. Ndiyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa member’s
statement follows.)

[I want to inform you about the houses that were handed over to the people.
Housing delivery has been achieved by the ANC at a rapid speed to ensure
that people enjoy the fruits of democracy and a better life for all.

The ANC-led Cape Town City Council handed over houses to 600 families in
Khayelitsha. President Thabo Mbeki identified Khayelitsha as an area that
has to benefit from the urban renewal programme.

Five weeks ago, the ANC launched the municipality development programme, a
programme that governs municipalities and councillors. This programme will
help to improve service delivery in our communities.

The ANC is the only party that has this programme to provide a better life
for the people. Thank you. [Applause.]]

        VIOLENT CRIME HAS BECOME PART OF EVERYDAY SOUTH AFRICAN LIFE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R J KING (DA): Chairperson, Melissa Shelver’s unborn daughter was
callously murdered by a hijacker who deliberately fired two bullets into
the pregnant victim’s belly. This was after he had already shot the baby’s
father in the chest. The murderer then stole a wallet, a cellphone and a
watch before running away.

The victims co-operated with the hijacker, but he showed them no mercy. The
fact that he deliberately targeted the most defenceless of victims, an
unborn baby, makes the crime that more shocking.
Gruwelik gewelddadige misdaad het onder die ANC se bewind so deel van die
Suid-Afrikaanse samelewing geword dat die mees waansinnige vergrype teen
mens en dier skaars meer opslae maak of wenkbroue lig. Die regering faal
die wetsgehoorsame inwoners van ons land. Die regering volhard steeds om
rasgebaseerde besluite te neem, waar veiligheid die enigste norm behoort te
wees.

Die afskaffing van kommandos sonder om die leemte te vul, is dwaas en
uiters onverantwoordelik. Die bevordering van polisielede sonder dat
meriete en verdienste in ag geneem word, is dikwels die beloning vir
onbekwaamheid en ondermyn dissipline en prestasie. Bemagtig ons polisie en
herstel vertroue by 'n vuisvoos publiek. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Horrific violent crime under the ANC government has become such a part of
South African society that the most demented transgressions against man and
animal hardly cause a stir any more or raise any eyebrows. The government
is failing the law-abiding citizens of our country. The government persists
in making decisions that are based on race, when safety should be the only
norm.

Doing away with commandos without filling the gap was unwise and extremely
irresponsible. The promotion of police officers without taking merit and
worth into consideration, is often the reward for incompetence and
undermines discipline and performance. Empower our Police Service and
restore confidence in a punch-drunk society.]

The government is failing the people of South Africa. In particular, the
government has failed this unborn child and her parents. I thank you.


                         NGO WOMEN VOLUNTEERS HAILED


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms D M RAMODIBE (ANC): Madam Chairperson, Siphiwe Mphala and Angie Diale,
two women volunteers from Meadowlands, Soweto, run a skills development
programme for young people in the area. They also run awareness campaigns
around issues of HIV/Aids and help people to access government services.

The ANC is heartened by the work these two young women are doing to help
change people’s lives. Their efforts give meaning to the ANC’s call for
people to continue to act as builders of their own future.

It is heartening to observe that the spirit of Vukuzenzele continues to
inform the actions of our people.

The ANC salutes the work of these two young people and, on this 30th
anniversary of June 16, calls upon the youth of our country to mobilise the
people to vote for the ANC to ensure further rapid progress to a better
life for all. I thank you, Madam Chairperson. [Applause.]


                     2006 PROGRESSIVE GOVERNANCE SUMMIT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S D MOTUBATSE-HOUNKPATIN (ANC): Madam House Chairperson, I rise to
applaud the ANC-led government for its commitment to good governance by
accelerating the effort to work with all progressive forces as part of
building a progressive movement for transformation and a better life.

The Progressive Governance Summit comprising eight heads of state from New
Zealand, the United Kingdom, Sweden, the Republic of Korea, Ethiopia and
Brazil was hosted by South Africa and it took place during the week of 11
February 2006. This should be supported by all peace-loving people,
internationally and at home.

Members of the network are bound together by common values, including
commitment to solidarity and social fairness.

The summit focused on the challenges of the 21st century relating to
economic growth, eradicating poverty, new security threats and building
cohesive societies.

Certainly, from the ANC, we welcome this initiative since we believe that
it is the task of all democrats and humanists to identify opportunities in
search for a just, humane and equitable world order.

Yo a sa rego šate o a duma. Mošito o tšwela pele! Khutšo e tla rena! Viva
ANC! [Legofsi.] [Only those who are jealous will not be able to shout words
of praise. The beat goes on! Let peace reign! Viva ANC! [Applause.]]


                     2006 PROGRESSIVE GOVERNANCE SUMMIT


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: House Chairperson, I would like to respond,
firstly, to the statement just read in respect of the Progressive
Governance Summit.

It was a very good experience to participate in the summit, because you
have government representatives of people in different parts of the world
struggling with what it means to put people first and what the
opportunities are.

Amongst the issues raised is, of course, the sharing of information and
experiences.

There are some issues that other governments are taking to heed from South
Africa; not just the Constitutional order and the methodology we apply, but
also systems such as free basic services, which creates an extension to the
social wage that protects the poor from the ravages of the market. This is
something that is likely to take root. Another of the issues that was
accepted by the heads of state and the other participants in the summit
that was the defining of the humanism that is required of progressives the
world over.

So, I want to express appreciation for the matter being raised here.
Clearly, we have work ahead because we are not just doing it for ourselves,
we are doing it for the world.

The second issue relates to the matter referred to by the hon Mentor on the
AC Nielsen study. The AC Nielsen study comes after the Gallup international
study, which was released on 1 January 2005, which confirms that South
Africans in general are amongst the world’s most optimistic people, and
that’s not without reason. [Applause.]

Similarly, the AC Nielsen study confirms in detail that South Africans,
many of whom are poor, feel that there are measurable improvements in the
quality of life.

When you take these issues together, namely the Progressive Governance
Summit and the AC Nielsen study - and it’s not an ANC study, it’s an AC
Nielsen study of respondents out there - I think we can confirm that this
is the time of hope. We’ve got to build on that. I’m pretty sure that the
electorate will respond accordingly.

I would like to make a quick response in respect of what hon Ellis raised
on the posters. I’m advised that some of the DA posters have found their
way into schools of anatomy in various parts: DA Lewer! Mense soek nou die
hart, die longe, die kop en die ore! [DA "De-livers"! People are now
looking for the heart, the lungs, the head and the ears!]

So, it’s that kind of thing we see on those posters. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]


                         THE MURDER OF MUSA MASONDO





                            (Minister’s Response)


The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Ngifuna ukugcizelela amazwi eqabane uZulu uma ethi kuyashaqisa ukuthi
iqabane lethu uMasondo obehola igatsha le-Pixley ka Seme kwaNongoma
libuwale kabuhlungu ngale ndlela elibulawe ngayo. Ngifuna ukuthi ...
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[I want to emphasise Comrade Zulu’s words when he says it is shocking that
our Comrade Masondo, who led the Pixley Seme branch in kwaNongoma, was
brutally killed in such a way. I want to say ...]
... in reality, this shouldn’t be happening in the year 2006. It is time
for us to mature. We all have the responsibility of adhering to the
electoral code of conduct. We as leaders gathered here, representing our
parties and indeed playing very important leadership roles, have a
responsibility to ensure that our members are not involved in violence and
thereby in breach of a code that we all have signed as political parties.

I want to say that our cluster is committed to ensuring that the rule of
law is respected in our country and that those guilty of this dastardly act
will be found and indeed brought before the courts and hopefully, if
guilty, they will be convicted.

And this brings me to the remarks made by the hon member of the DA. All of
us, all good citizens abhor crime. But I think that in order to deal
realistically with challenges that face us, we must stay away from hysteria
and exaggerations.

There is no link and good sense in raising the commandos and giving us
information on what could have happened around a crime scene. I thought
that it was disingenuous, but let me say that we are committed. I think
there has been progress in combating crime in the past 10 years; we are
indeed committed to deal effectively with the scourge of crime. We are
dealing with this matter in an integrated fashion. We do not only want to
arrest the criminals, and we are not only arresting the criminals; we also
want to secure conviction. [Applause.]


                      SIXTEEN DAYS OF ACTIVISM CAMPAIGN

           PAC COUNCILLORS TO ADD VALUE AT LOCAL GOVERNMENT LEVEL
            CONDEMNATION OF ACTIONS OF MR JACOB ZUMA'S SUPPORTERS



                            (Minister’s Response)

TONA YA LEFAPHA LA THUTO: Modulasetulo, ke rata go simolola ka go leboga
moemedi wa IFP ka go amogela boeteledipele ba Lefapha la Thuto la Gauteng,
le le tshepisang bana ba rona ba basetsana polokego mo dikolong tsa rona.
Re amogela tiro e, e e tlileng go dira gore bana ba rona ba tlhokomelwe. Re
batla go tlhokomela bana botlhe, basetsana le basimane. Ke tshepa gore
mafapha a mangwe a thuto a tlile go dira jaaka Gauteng.

Re setse re simolotse mono mo Kapa Bophirima. Re dira porojeke ya rona ya
dikolo ya go tlhokomela basetsana. Re tlile go dira jalo mo mafapheng otlhe
a Aforika Borwa. Ke batla go fetsa ka gore, le rona re le batsadi re
tshwanetse go netefatsa gore mo magaeng re ruta bana ba rona gore ba
itshware jang fa ba le mo dikolong, segolo bana ba basimane.

E kete ga go na yo o nthusang go bua puo e ke e buang e ka sekgoa. Fa e le
gore ga bayo, ke tla kopana le baemedi ba ba sa nkutlweng sentle ke ba
tlhalosetse gore ke ne ke bua ka eng.

Kwa bofelong ke batla gore re dumalana le Khomišhene ya Tekatekanyo ya Bong
[Commission on Gender Equality]. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs
follows.)

[The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, I would first like to thank a
representative of the IFP for welcoming the leadership of the Gauteng
Department of Education, which has promised our female learners that they
will be safe in our schools. We welcome this initiative and hope it will
ensure that our children are safe. We would like to ensure that all the
children, both boys and girls, are safe. I hope that other education
departments will do what Gauteng did.
We have already started in the Western Cape. We have a girl child project
in schools. We will do the same in all other government departments. I
would like to conclude by saying that as parents we should ensure that we
teach children, especially boys, how they should behave at school.

It looks like there is no one to interpret my speech into English. If this
is the case, I will meet with the representatives of those who did not hear
and explain to them what I said. In conclusion, I would like to say that we
agree with the Commission on Gender Equality.]

There is no organisation that has been as open in speaking out against the
conduct of persons who were outside the court in Johannesburg and their
conduct towards the alleged victim, as well as the person that was mistaken
for the victim. Any such act against women who we have encouraged to speak
out should be condemned. I don’t think we should make any politics out of
this. The Women’s League statement has to be welcomed, and we object to any
conduct that would further abuse victims. [Applause.]

Finally, we would want to say to the PAC that they should not mislead the
electorate. If any PAC member is elected as a councillor in local
government – which is very doubtful - they will have very little impact on
the redistribution of land because that is executed at national level. We
urge voters to vote for the ANC. Thank you. [Applause.]


            EXTENSION OF CONTRACT OF CAPE TOWN MUNICIPAL MANAGER

                       SPEEDING UP OF SERVICE DELIVERY

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Hon House
Chairperson, I am going to respond to two statements: one from the hon
Doman and second another from the hon Comrade Lechesa.

The first one is on the reappointment of the Unicity manager of Cape Town.
There is nothing wrong with that. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Hon Minister, could you kindly
pronounce his name for us just to help us with the pronunciation.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: The name is
pronounced Mgoqi, and not “Magogi”. I almost didn’t know who he was
referring to, until an hon member on that side intervened. It was then that
I realised he was referring to Mgoqi, and not Magogi, whom I don’t know.

There is nothing wrong in the re-appointment of the city manager. It is the
prerogative of the Unicity mayor to reappoint a manager. At least this
manager, we understand, is very, very active in the transformation of the
Unicity and making a people’s Unicity, unlike the managers that you used to
appoint who used to deal with “spooks” and all such things in the
buildings. That is what your managers used to do instead of dealing with
transformation and delivery issues. So, there is nothing wrong with that.
They were busy with “spooks” strategies. [Interjections.] Mr Doman, don’t
get uncomfortable, please, just listen. I listened to you; don’t get
uncomfortable.

With regard to Mr Lechesa’s statement I would like to say: Viva Project
Consolidate Viva!

HON MEMBERS: Viva!

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: This government is
well aware of these challenges and we are dealing head-on with them. In the
past 10 years we have identified exactly where the challenges are. But, the
DA is going around and saying that we have failed the people of South
Africa in the past 10 years. I am going to refer them to this province and
the Unicity, where they governed . . . [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Order! Hon Minister, would you please
take your seat.

Mrs S A SEATON: Madam Chair, I’m just wondering if we are in an ANC rally
today, because it certainly sounds that way.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: I’m responding to
statements about where they governed. They would have at least halved the
ANC’s work in this province and in the Unicity if they had delivered during
the years they governed.

Now, what the DA delivered in the province and in the Unicity was the
eviction of poor people . . . [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Order! Hon Minister, I’m sorry, the
time for ministerial responses has expired. Would you please conclude?

Mr M B SKOSANA: I am sorry to come in this late, but I think you didn’t see
me. I simply wanted to get a confirmation from the Minister with regard to
the killings in Nongoma. I sympathise with the member who made the
statement, but then when the Minister made the statement or reiterated it,
I needed confirmation as to whether that was really a political killing or
not. Or is it related to party politics?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Order! Hon member, I don’t consider
this as a point of order. I suggest that you take it up with the Minister
after the sitting.
Mr M B SKOSANA: It is not a question to the Minister.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): I’m afraid there’s no opportunity for
a question now.

The House adjourned at 11:51.
                                 __________




                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                         THURSDAY, 16 FEBRUARY 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism on 16 February 2006 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(6)(d) classified the following Bill as a section 76
         Bill:


            i) Division of Revenue Bill [B 3 – 2006] (National Assembly –
               sec 76).
National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Referral of Bills

    The Additional Adjustments Appropriation Bill (2005/06 Financial Year)
    [B 4 - 2006] (National Assembly - sec 77) was referred to the Portfolio
    Committee on Finance on 15 February 2006. In considering the Bill, the
    Committee is instructed to confer with the Portfolio Committee on
    Transport and the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises with regard
    to the adjustments that affect those portfolios.




COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Division of
   Revenue Bill [B 3 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 76), dated 16 February
   2006:

   The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of the
   Division of Revenue Bill [B 3 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 76),
   referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section
   76 Bill, reports the Bill without amendment.


2.    Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Nomination of Persons to fill
   vacancies on the Commission on Gender Equality, dated 15 February 2006:

   The Ad Hoc Committee on Nomination of Persons to fill vacancies on the
   Commission on Gender Equality, having been appointed by the House on 2
   November 2005 to make nominations to the House in order to enable it to
   recommend to the President in terms of section 3(2) of the Commission on
   Gender Equality Act (Act No 39 of 1996) persons to fill vacancies on the
   Commission on Gender Equality, reports as follows:
   The Committee met on 15 February 2006 to elect a Chairperson and to
   outline the process it will follow.


   In order to be adequately capacitated to deal with its mandate and be
   clear on all its options, the Committee resolved to invite an official
   from the Department of Justice to brief it on certain matters pertaining
   to the appointment of Commissioners.


   The Committee therefore requests the House to extend the prior deadline
   of 15 February 2006 by which it was required to report, to 22 March 2006.


   Report to be considered.



                          FRIDAY, 17 FEBRUARY 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly in
     respect of Bills passed by Council and transmitted to Assembly


      1) Bill, subject to proposed amendments, passed by National Council
         of Provinces on 16 February 2006 and transmitted for consideration
         of Council’s proposed amendments:


             i) Electricity Regulation Bill [B 29B – 2005] (National
                Assembly – sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see
                Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 15 February
                2006, p 237).


                The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
                Minerals and Energy of the National Assembly for a report on
                the amendments proposed by the Council.

