---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 28 November 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2006-11-28
---

                          TUESDAY, 28 NOVEMBER 2006

                                    ____





              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 10:01.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION


Mr A WATSON: hon Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
House, I shall move:

  That the Council –


    1) notes that the leader of the Official Opposition, hon Tony Leon, will
       be retiring as leader of the DA in May 2007, after leading his party
       with great distinction for 13 years;


    2) recognises that the hon Leon is a true patriot of South Africa, in
       that for a period spanning nearly 40 years, he vigorously opposed
       apartheid and was a leading figure in the establishment of an
       effective multiparty democracy;

    3) applauds him for his contribution to the drafting of our
       Constitution; and particularly for his efforts that resulted in the
       entrenchment of liberal democratic principles; and

          4) wishes hon Tony Leon well in all his future endeavours.

I so move.

Mr R J TAU: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
House I shall move:

  That the Council –


     1) notes that –


          a) the economic offensive that the province of the Northern Cape
             has engaged in, is one of those processes that are a
             reflection of the implementation of the growth and development
             strategy of the province;

          b) the upgrading of the Big Hole as part of the partnership
             between government and the private sector is one of the key
             instruments we have always been struggling for;


          c) the massive capital investment into the project shall see the
             upgrading of the Big Hole into a Northern Cape tourism
             attraction pillar, notwithstanding other projects in other
             districts of the province.


     2) Through this infrastructure development, for the first time, we
        shall be exposed to real diamond mining experience with a full and
        real diamond experimental centre, including the first eureka in the
        complex.




     3) We therefore, as the Council –




          a) call upon the unemployed and the poor, and young people in
             particular, to take up such opportunities as active economic
             participants;



          b) urge the working class and the poor to organise themselves
             through co-operatives and to take advantage of such
             opportunities, because there will be a number of economic
             spinoffs;


          c) call upon women in particular to take up such opportunities;
             and


          d) congratulate the Protea group for having gone into partnership
             with the provincial government to build the hospitality
             industry in and around the Big Hole.

     4) With this and many more other projects in the province, we shall
        see and experience the growth of the economy of our province and
        much more, with poor people benefiting from this, in that they will
        be exposed to job opportunities and have a better province with the
        warmth that it has.


Thank you very much.

Ms J M MASILO: Chairperson, mine is a motion without notice.

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
House, I shall move:

   That the Council –



   (1)      noting the increasing level of public awareness about the
        campaign of no violence against women and children;




   (2)      further noting the increasing level of reporting of violent
        crimes against women and children; and


     3) believing that much still needs to be done in the campaign to each
        more people in our society;


     4) therefore calls upon this august House to hold a debate on this
        campaign with specific reference to the partnership between our
        government and civil society across nine provinces; and


     5) further calls upon all members of this House to be ambassadors of
        this campaign in their daily lives.



I salute men and women who have broken the culture of silence against the
scourge of violence against women and children.



I so move.



 INTERNATIONAL DAY FOR WOMEN HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS AND 16 DAYS OF ACTIVISM

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: I move without notice:
   That the Council –

      1) notes that -
         (a)      tomorrow, 29 November 2006, is the International Day for
             Women Human Rights Defenders;


         (b)      this day presents an opportunity for the global community
             to affirm its commitment to eliminate the violation and abuse
             of rights of women; and


         (c)      this coincides with the campaign on 16 Days of Activism
             for No Violence Against Women and Children, between 25
             November and 10 December, which is used as an organising
             strategy around the world to call for the elimination of all
             forms of violence and abuse against women and children; and


     2) urges the people of South Africa, civil society, gender activists,
        child abuse advocates and all structures, institutions and entities
        of government that are tasked with protecting women and children,
        to continually work together to strengthen their fight against the
        elimination of violence against women and children.

I thank you.
Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.




            CONDOLENCES ON THE DEATH OF AN EMPLOYEE OF PARLIAMENT



                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms J M MASILO: Ke a leboga Modulasetulo ... [Thank you, Chairperson ...]

I move without notice:

   That the Council –

   (1)      conveys its sincerest condolences to the family of Ms Nosipho
        Mafiyane, who passed away on 27 November 2006; and


   (2)      notes that Ms Mafiyane was a Personal Assistant to the
        Chairperson of the Select Committee on Social Services, that she
        started working in Parliament in 1996 and that she had diligently
        supported the Committee until the time of her death.

May her soul rest in eternal peace.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

   STERLING WORK BY AARON MOTSOALEDI, AND HIGH MATRIC PASS RATE IN LIMPOPO

                             (Draft Resolution)
Mr D J BOTHA: I move without notice:


   That the Council –

   (1)      notes the sterling work done by the MEC of Education, Dr Aaron
        Motsoaledi of Limpopo; and

   (2)      further notes the excellent work of Mrs Mokgaetji Johanna
        Mabusela, a teacher at Tlou High School in Sekukuni which has 535
        learners and which won the Best Principal Award for High Schools in
        the whole country and has achieved a 100% matric pass rate for the
        past 3 years.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


              THE RAGING MDR/XDR STRAIN OF TB IN KWAZULU-NATAL


                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms A N T MCHUNU: I move without notice:


  That the Council –


  (1) notes that the MDR/XDR strain of TB which is sweeping South Africa at
        present is of great concern, particularly in KwaZulu-Natal, where it
        is raging like a fire;




  (2) notes that a rollover of R112,18 million for building a TB wing at
        King George V Hospital in KwaZulu-Natal should be urgently
        considered, since KwaZulu-Natal is under siege; and




  (3) further notes that this TB scourge is riding on rampant HIV/Aids,
        which is fuelled by unemployment and poverty.



Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                               WORLD AIDS DAY


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: I move without notice:


   That the Council –

   (1)      notes that -


           a) 1 December is World AIDS Day;


           b) starting in 1988, World AIDS Day is about increasing
              awareness, education and fighting prejudice against people
              living with and affected by HIV and Aids;


           c) the theme for this year is “Stop AIDS: Keep the Promise”,
              which is an appeal to governments to ensure that they meet
              their commitments and set targets to fight the spread of HIV
              and Aids; and


           d) on this day, the people of South Africa, civil society
              organisations and government leaders, including the Deputy
              President, the Minister of Health and the Premier of the
              Mpumalanga Province will be gathering at the KaNyamazane
              Stadium in Mpumalanga, where they will be launching the HIV
              and AIDS Strategic Plan for 2007-2011 and announcing the
              South African National AIDS Council;

   (2)      expresses its gratitude and deepest appreciation to the
        thousands of health workers, caregivers, volunteers and family
        members who are working tirelessly and with the utmost dedication
        and love to support those infected and affected by this disease;
        and

   (3)      urges all the people of South Africa to use the occasion of
        World AIDS Day to join hands and reaffirm our collective commitment
        to curb the spread of HIV infection and reduce the impact of Aids
        in our country.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

  SPLENDID PERFORMANCE OF THE SPRINGBOKS AND USE OF OLD SOUTH AFRICAN FLAGS
                                  AT GAMES

                             (Draft Resolution)

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


   That the Council –

   (1)      congratulates the Springboks for their splendid performance
        against England, which came after two consecutive losses, and wishes
        them well in their future games;


    2) condemns the waving of the old South African flag by a few
       individuals during the game; and


    3) calls upon those individuals to respect and embrace our new flag as
       proud South Africans.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                              CIVIL UNION BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson of the NCOP, Chair of the Select
Committee on Social Services, hon Joyce Masilo, members of the Select
Committee, hon members, colleagues and friends, today is the culmination of
an important process in the consolidation of our democracy. Over the past
few months, our Parliament has led the public in engaging on one of the
most emotive and difficult issues since the dawn of democracy in our
country. This work culminates with a debate in this House on the Civil
Union Bill, which was passed in the National Assembly two weeks ago.

I must emphasise that the adoption of the Civil Union Bill is in itself not
the end of the public engagement process. The public debate has, however,
brought forth the issue of the extent to which society is prepared to
adhere to the Constitution as an embodiment of our democratic values.

The question that has been asked repeatedly over the past few months since
the introduction of the Bill has been: ``Why?’’ Why is it that this
government feels compelled and determined to pass a piece of legislation
that has caused so much controversy, which has polarised our society? The
answer to that question stems from our belief in our struggle for equality
for all people in the true sense of the word.

Perhaps the most important foundation that laid the basis for our principle
of equality were the remarks of the late ANC President, Pixley ka Isaka
Seme, during his keynote address on 8 January 1912, when the movement of
our people was born. His premise for a united action against all forms of
oppression was that: “We are one people”. He went on to say:


  We have called you therefore to this conference so that we can together
  devise ways and means of forming our national union for the purpose of
  creating national unity and defending our rights and privileges.

From the onset, the ANC has always had as its historic mission the unity of
our people and the defence of their rights. It is very important that the
seriousness that the ANC attaches to the ability of every human being to
enjoy rights and privileges should be understood within this historic
context.

The ANC has always associated the issue of rights with the accomplishment
and the logical conclusion of the struggle for freedom. We have maintained
that our country can never be truly free if any segment of our society is
still denied their rights and liberties. Accordingly, in the drafting of
our Freedom Charter in 1955, we proclaimed:


  Only a democratic state, based on the will of all the people, can secure
  to all their birthright without distinction of colour, race, sex or
  belief.

We further proclaimed:

  That our country will never be prosperous or free until all our people
  live in brotherhood, enjoying equal rights and opportunities.

We indeed further proclaimed that all people shall have equal rights.

I’m raising these issues here because there are some who have argued that
we can afford to take the rights of same-sex couples lightly in our country
and that anyway, our commitment to these rights only came with the new
democratic Constitution. Not only is this assertion wrong, but it is also a
misinterpretation of what our struggle for freedom was about. As you will
note from the history of our struggle, our people have always been
impatient with the state-driven discrimination as well as the treatment of
any section of our society as outcasts and second-class citizens
undeserving of rights accorded to the rest of the population.
It was with this in mind that government, in the context of its political
and legal obligations, started with the process of aligning old apartheid
legislation with the Constitution, including the Marriage Act of 1961.

The SA Law Reform Commission started a consultative process on the changes
to the legal regime governing marriages as early as 1996, two years after
the attainment of democracy in our country. However, during that process,
the definition of marriage in our current law faced a challenge within our
courts. The Constitutional Court declared that the definition of marriage
under common law and the marriage formula as set out in section 30(1) of
the Marriage Act were inconsistent with the Constitution and invalid to the
extent that they failed to provide the means whereby same-sex couples could
enjoy the status and benefits coupled with responsibilities that marriage
accorded to heterosexual couples. The court ordered Parliament to correct
these defects in the law by 1 December 2006, failing which section 30(1) of
the Marriage Act would be read as including the words “or spouse” after the
words “or husband”. This current Bill was drafted in response to the
court’s judgment in the Fourie case.

The court, while noting that “equal” does not mean “identical”, ruled that
it would be helpful to point to certain guiding constitutional principles.
In terms of the first guiding principle, the objectives of the new measure
must be to promote human dignity; the achievement of equality; the
advancement of human rights and freedoms.

The second guiding principle states that Parliament be sensitive to the
need to avoid a remedy which, on the face of it, would provide equal
protection but would do so in a manner that is calculated to reproduce new
forms of marginalisation. Which ever legislative remedy is chosen, it must
be as generous and accepting towards same-sex couples as it is to
heterosexual couples, both in terms of intangibles and tangibles.

It is our view that the Civil Union Bill, presently before this House,
indeed satisfies the order of the court. The objects of the Civil Union
Bill are to provide for the public solemnisation and registration of civil
unions by way of either a marriage or civil partnership and to provide for
the legal consequences thereof.

The Bill makes provision for opposite and same-sex couples of 18 years or
older to solemnise and register a voluntary union by way of either a
marriage or civil partnership. Care has been taken to ensure that a
distinction is drawn between the responsibilities of church and state as
section 15(3) of the Constitution calls for sensitivity in favour of
acknowledging diversity in matters of marriage. The Bill provides for same-
sex couples to be married by civil marriage officers and such religious
marriage officers who consider such marriages not to fall outside the
tenets of their religion. In order to give effect to the Constitutional
Court ruling, same-sex couples must be allowed to marry so that they can
enjoy the status, obligations and entitlements enjoyed at the moment by
opposite sex couples. The Bill allows for both same-sex and opposite sex
couples to choose the option of having their union solemnised and
registered as a civil partnership by a state-employed marriage officer.

I must restate government’s unequivocal commitment to ensuring that this
country has one legal framework governing marriage and that such legal
framework should be based on the principle of respect for human rights and
dignity for all.

The harmonisation of legislation and the building of a framework that
governs family law are paramount in our priorities for public policy
review.

I am aware that this has been one of the most difficult pieces of
legislation to engage with, but I hope that all of us will understand the
responsibilities of each one of us seated here to provide leadership to our
nation even if it seems hard.

As I said during the debate in the National Assembly, we elected to fulfil
the directive of the Constitutional Court by introducing this Bill instead
of allowing a situation where the court amends the Marriage Act. In that
way, we have ensured the responsibility to pass and amend legislation.

In this regard, I must thank hon Members of Parliament for their commitment
to dealing with this Bill within the timeframe provided by the
Constitutional Court. I must particularly thank members of this House, and
in particular, the select committee, for their preparedness to stay behind
to deal with this Bill despite this period being a constituency period.

I want to thank you, Chairperson. In spite of all the difficulties we came
across along the way, all of us were interacting during this time. It was a
very difficult period but, nonetheless, we have all come to a point where
we can pass this difficulty and overcome this difficult process. Ke a
leboga. [Thank you.][Applause.]

Ms J M MASILO: Ke a leboga Modulasetulo yo o tlotlegang. [Thank you, hon
Chairperson.]

Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Members of Parliament, senior officials
of the government, ladies and gentlemen, the National Council of Province’s
Select Committee on Social Services rises to support the passing and
enacting of the Civil Union Bill, which was presented by the Department of
Home Affairs to the committee on 21 November 2006.

Amidst a difficult process, I still stand here with immense pride that we
as members of the People’s Parliament continue to fulfil the mandate given
to us by our people to take Parliament to the people by decisively
formulating legislation that is transformative for a better life for all
the people of South Africa.

When the ANC government manifests for a better life for all, it means as
such a better life for all South Africans, irrespective of race, sex,
ethnicity, religion, disability, age and sexual orientation. This
manifestation by the ANC-led government is a credible, consistent
endorsement of section 9 (3) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
Africa of 1996. The provision officially made South Africa the first
African country to enshrine gay and lesbian rights in its Constitution.
This protects gays and lesbians against all forms of unfair discrimination.


The judgment handed down by the Constitutional Court in 2005, which
obligated Parliament to fix the law that limits marriage to a pact between
man and woman, should have come with neither surprise nor furore. In the
words of the Constitutional Court, South Africa as a nation needs to
continue affirming “the character of our society as one founded and based
on tolerance and mutual respect.”

Also, we are all witnesses in this House that this country was able to
premise its healing phase by utilising our Constitution as the supreme law
to transform a society that was brutalised by colonialism and a racist
apartheid regime.

Yet we as South Africans have been consistently reminded, and rightly
reprimanded by the most Reverend Archbishop Tutu that:


  Despite our Constitution, we still treat homosexuals as pariahs and push
  them outside our communities. We make them - homosexuals - doubt that
  they too are children of God - and this must be nearly the ultimate
  blasphemy.

Indeed, of the 128 submissions received by the National Council of
Provinces’ Select Committee on Social Services, the majority of those
groups who submitted comprehensively rejected the Civil Union Bill. Their
basis for rejection was that marriage is an institution created by God, a
union between a man and woman only. Some rejected that legislation as being
unAfrican, as the Bill allegedly derogates African traditions and cultures.


This ANC-led government will always give true meaning to the concept of a
People’s Parliament, and as such, submissions from all angles, whether in
favour of or against the Bill, have been given their due consideration,
respect and honour. Notwithstanding this, it is also the duty of the ANC-
led government to give true meaning to the fundamental principle of our
Constitution. Significantly, Parliament’s theme for this year 2006 is, “All
shall have equal rights before the law.”

Anything contrary to this fundamental principle is inhuman, as we have been
reminded by Archbishop Desmond Tutu, our own reverend Nobel Peace Prize
winner, who is a Christian and an African. The Archbishop has always
continued to publicly comment and to unapologetically acknowledge that
homophobia, or hating and discriminating against homosexuals, is a crime
against humanity and every bit as unjust and evil as apartheid.

We are empowered by this Civil Union Bill to enact a civil union between
two consenting adults regardless of whether they are from a traditional,
customary, Khosi, Christian, Muslim, Jewish, etc background.

As we all know, the current Marriage Act of 1961 does not even recognise
marriages of other religions, and this is a blindly Christian bias. The
Civil Union Bill thus facilitates an enhanced constitutional right for all
religious marriages. For instance, this Bill empowers the Minister of Home
Affairs to designate a minister of any religion holding a responsible
position in his or her respective religious institution to become a
religious marriage officer.

This is in line with the Constitutional Court judgment. As per the
Constitutional Court, our Constitution recognises “the multitude of the
family formation in South Africa and inappropriateness of entrenching any
particular form as the only socially and legal acceptable one”.

The Constitutional Court judgment sent a clear message that all South
African adults have the right to choose their families and relationships
while enjoying equal protection by the law.

The above judgment then means that we as South Africans may no longer
define or understand marriage solely from the premise of preserving
accumulated beliefs, customs and religion within a group.

The Civil Union Bill wisely shifts our paradigm to make us also understand
that marriage is an expression of a dignified and solemn covenant between
any two consenting adults irrespective of race, religious tradition or
sexual orientation. This means, then, that gays and lesbians will no longer
bear the state of not having inherent dignity and to always be regarded as
not worthy of human respect.

This Bill enables all capable consenting adults to express and share love
and its manifold forms, meaning that gays and lesbians are also capable of
constituting a family, including affection. They love the soul.
This ANC-led government has been, and will always be lucid, transparent and
consistent in embracing the Constitution of South Africa in its entirety.
The People’s Parliament will continue to respect the ruling of all courts
and institutions of law. We will fulfil its mandate of making
transformative legislation.

We as South Africans are invited by our progressive Constitution to work in
partnership with government to make visible and accessible the benefits
enshrined in the Constitution and a Civil Union Bill for a better life for
all citizens of this country.

In so doing, we will also be honouring in earnest the recent convention
this Parliament recently approved of protecting and promoting the diversity
of cultural expressions so that South Africa continues to be a
multicultural society that vigorously values and propagates diversity, co-
existence and tolerance.

In conclusion, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to the hon
members of the Select Committee on Social Services for the sterling work
done in their respective national constituencies in processing this Bill
successfully. A word of appreciation also goes to our hon Minster of Home
Affairs and her officials for their dedicated support to our select
committee.

Above all, we say a big thank you to those patriotic citizens who made
submissions. They have indeed added value to our democratic process. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mr O M THETJENG: Chairperson, it is a pleasure today for me to stand in
this House to debate the Civil Union Bill that intends to unionise same-
gender relationships. I have noted the submissions provided to the
portfolio committee and the select committee.

It is clear that the majority of South Africans are against this Bill. I
have gone through the unrevised Hansard of 14 November 2006 of the National
Assembly. The majority of people present on the day voted in favour of the
Bill. The DA has given its members a free vote, that is, each member will
vote according to his conscience and I will exercise that right as availed
to me.

I am going to vote against this Bill based on my Christian convictions
which I am not ready to compromise. My colleagues in the DA in this House
will vote according to their conscience and will do one of the following:
vote in favour, vote against or abstain depending on their choices. This is
democracy at its best, as individual members are not coerced into a
particular position.

The ANC has instructed its members to vote in favour of the Bill without
fail, and they have complied with the instructions. [Interjections.]
Others, who in all probability would have voted against the Bill, were sent
for activities outside Parliament so that they are absent during the debate
and not there for the voting because they would embarrass the ANC.

Where is Reverend Moatshe today? Where is democracy? Has it been thrown out
of the window? I hope and believe that this won’t be repeated in this House
today.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I want to ask a question,
namely whether the member is promoting that members should vote against the
Constitutional Court’s ruling.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon member, are you willing to take a
question?

Mr O M THETJENG: No, I am not.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: He is not willing to take a question.
Continue.

Mr O M THETJENG: Some gay and lesbian groups are not in favour of this Bill
because it does not address the aspect of marriage, as they would have
wanted it. This means it still falls short of their expectations.

Many more South Africans do not believe that this is the right thing to do,
and I concur with them. I am also quite aware that the Constitution of this
country does not only protect the majority of the people, but also minority
groups. There is also a Bill of Rights that protects and guarantees the
basic rights of all South Africans irrespective of race, gender, creed and
sexual orientation, etc.

But for me personally there is a bigger Constitution written under the
inspiration and under the power of the Holy Ghost, called the Bible. For my
fellow Christians, like myself, it has all answers to life’s challenges,
both good and bad. It also provides you with information on how you need to
go about solving negative or bad challenges, as well as providing ways to
hold onto good morals.

Somebody asked a question during the public hearings and referred to the
issue of: “Morals according to whose standards?” The answer is: God’s
standards as laid out in his Holy Book. He created male and female for
procreation and Christians believe that the word “female” means “a male
able to carry a foetus”. There is nothing called an alternative lifestyle
other than the one determined by God. Any other lifestyle is an abomination
before the eyes of God.

Organisations from churches, religious groupings, traditional and ordinary
people came in numbers to present their arguments in the public hearings.
More than 95% - and I agree with the chairperson of the committee that it
could be 99,9% - have literally come to present their submissions and are
not in favour of this particular Bill. I also agree with the Minister to
say that this has created polarisation in our society. Some have called for
a referendum, but I don’t think this is the right way to go about it.

Were these public hearings conducted for the sake of complying with
procedures and not meant to honestly consider submissions from the public?
The answer is: Yes. Members of the ANC in the committee displayed an
attitude of you may say whatever you like but we are ready to effect any
changes.

Were they complying with instructions from their senior office bearers? The
answer is: Yes. Why did this committee call for public hearings when inputs
were not valued and considered? Is this how the ANC undermines the public
that honestly responds when required to do so by the Parliament that they
have voted in?

The portfolio committee went through our nine provinces to conduct public
hearings. What happened to the inputs submitted during the public hearings?
Take a guess. Why, then, do we waste time and money by conducting public
hearings when the inputs are ignored?

Some called for a Constitutional amendment since the Constitution has been
amended about 13 times. They were told ... [Interjections.]

Mr B J TOLO: Will the member take a question?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Are you prepared to take a question?

Mr O M THETJENG: No.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: He is not prepared. Continue, hon member.

Mr O M THETJENG: They were told in no uncertain terms that the ANC cannot
and will never amend the Constitution. The DA is not going to take a
particular position as a party as reflected above. A free vote is accorded
to them and they are entitled to vote as they see fit.

Thank you, and I believe South Africans will take note of what happened in
this particular House and I say: South Africans, take note that those
people that you put in power are not considering your inputs.

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, it is obvious
and it must be accepted that the majority of larger sections of our
community are totally opposed to this Bill, my party as well.

The ANC is passing this Bill against the odds, using its majority status
and disregarding the overwhelming number of submissions made by people from
various sectors of society, who were vehemently opposing this Bill. It is
shameful!
The IFP has always very strongly espoused family values and is ultimately
guided by deep-seated religious and moral values. Same-sex unions...
[Interjections.]

Mr B J TOLO: Is the hon member prepared to take a question?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon member, are you going to take a question?

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: No, I am not taking any question. [Laughter.] I am at the
podium now and I did not interfere with you. Please sit down.

Mr B J TOLO: Chairperson, is the hon member afraid?

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: I am not taking any question here. I could do that
outside.

Mr B J TOLO: Are you afraid?

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: I will do that outside.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Continue, hon member.

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Thank you very much, Chairperson, for coming to my
rescue. The IFP has always very strongly espoused family values and it is
ultimately guided by deep-seated religious and moral values. Same-sex
unions are inconsistent with culture and traditional family values.

This Bill will obviously lead to the disintegration of family life and will
encourage abnormal sexual behaviour, which corrupts society, and that is
besides the corruption that we are experiencing now. We still expect more
corruption to come.

Our country is faced with innumerable social ills, tangibly tearing up the
moral fabric of society, and this Bill will further bring more havoc and
degeneration in society. [Laughter.]

Now, I am pleading: All God-fearing people must indeed say this: Cry, the
beloved South Africa. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs A N D QIKANI: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, the main source
of disagreement regarding the Bill relates to the equality clause in the
Bill of Rights, specifically clause 9(3), which states that we may not
unfairly discriminate directly or indirectly against anyone on one or more
grounds, including age, race, disability, religion, belief, culture or
birth.

What we have seen during the public participation process is that a wide
variety of institutions and organisations representing various sectors of
society have shown an intense interest in this Bill and the issue of
homosexual marriage. This included religious and cultural groups, and many
different legal opinions were raised. Despite these varying opinions, it
was clear that the vast majority of religious representatives before the
committee, representing the majority of religions in the country, were
opposed to the Bill.

The Christian representatives that appeared before the committee also claim
that the Bible explicitly prohibits homosexual behaviour. The specific
references are around Leviticus 18:22,20, and 13, which explains thus that
this act and orientation is detestable before God. Also in Corinthians:
6:10 and Timothy: 1:10, and Romans: 1:26 and 27, it is stated that the act
and orientation is sodomic, unnaturally shameful and against the doctrine
of nature. This doctrine of nature is captured in Genesis 1:28 where it
says, “Be fruitful and multiply. Fill the earth and subdue it.”

Marriage is a union that achieves oneness between a man and a woman. In
Christian theology this means a man without a woman is incomplete just as a
woman without a man is incomplete. This is then why the Bible states that a
man plus a woman is equal to one instead of two because they are halves
that become a single whole through the act of marriage, and in that
marriage ordained by God ... [Interjections.]

Mr B J TOLO: Is the member willing to take a question?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Are you wiling to take a question, hon member?

Mrs A N D QIKANI: No, Chairperson.

Hayi, Bawo uTola hlala phantsi. [No, Mr Tolo, please sit down.] [Applause.]

... they can reproduce, fulfil the blessing of and command of God as
expressed in Genesis 1:28. Marriage and marital sex from the perspective of
the Christian God are for procreation, to produce offspring. This means
that you are dependent on each other for everything. From this perspective
for Christianity, homosexual marriages will be non-reproductive, incomplete
and constantly dependent on other institutions for procreation.

Mhlalingaphambili, xa ndigqibezela mandithi, andihlali endlwini yamagqirha
wona athi: “Vumani nonke.” Andivumi. [Chairperson, in my conclusion I would
like to say that I do not live with traditional healers who coerce people
to accept what they don’t believe in. I do not agree.] [Laughter.]

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Hon Chairperson, hon members, I hope you will give us a
chance to speak. Thank you. The nation awaits your verdict today on what
must be the most controversial of all the Bills ever to reach Parliament
since the advent of our democracy.
The Constitution of the RSA provides that everyone is equal before the law
and has a right to equal protection and benefit of the law. It is speaking
about equality, but what we are talking about here is right and wrong, not
equality. The fact is that we are about to pass a Bill which legalises
sodomy, a disastrous message to the youth. It’s about what message we are
sending to the youth.

I have not come here today to judge anybody in their personal lifestyles.
For that they, like myself, will have to give an account before the
Almighty God but, Chairperson, this Bill will seriously affect the very
fabric of our society and the family unit as we know it. Children will
suffer psychological setbacks and, in short, we are failing the nation.
Already with people in those kinds of units, children are already showing
those kinds of signs.

We have called for public input, yet when men and women of God of various
religious faiths ask us to consider this Bill, we say it is not possible
because of the Constitution. Why did we bother to go to the public? Were we
just going through the motions?

The Constitution is not written in stone, and in fact has been amended
several times. It was written by fallible men and women, and it has to be
tested, and it was said so at the time. It could never be perfect.

Some people argue that because we are a secular state, the word of God has
no place in our argument. The fact is, the scripture says, “God rules in
the affairs of men” ... [Interjections.]

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Is the member prepared to take a question?
Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Not at all, sir. [Interjections.]

The fact is - and I will repeat this in case the hon member has not heard
this: The fact is that God says in His Word that He rules in the affairs of
men and, worse, through the passage of time God has judged several nations
for disobedience. We mustn’t think that as a nation we can do what we want
to do.

I make no excuse for quoting Scripture, and our sister there has quoted a
number of Scriptures which I wanted to quote to you, because even the last
couple of speeches I heard from our President, he has been quoting
Scripture ad nauseam, so I make no excuse, as my value system is based on
the word of God, right?

In short, the marriage of two people of the same sex is unnatural, and
makes a mockery of the sanctity of marriage and sends a wrong message to
already confused and traumatised youth that wrong can also be right.
[Interjections.] We are totally against this Bill in the UIF. Thank you.

Nk N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Sihlalo, ngibingelela uNgqongqoshe kazwelonke,
ngibingelele abasebenzi boMnyango, ngibingelele nabahlonishwa. Ngaphambi
kokuba ngethule inkulumo, ngithanda ukubhekisa lokhu engizokusho kwilingu
elihloniphekile uThetjeng. Ilungu elihloniphekile uThetjeng lalingekho
nhlobo ngenkathi silalele imibono yemiphakathi. Weza imizuzu enga-30 efuna
ukuzokhombisa kwabezindaba ukuthi i-DA yabe ikhona. [Ubuwelewele.]
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Chairperson, Minister, officials of the
department and dignitaries, I greet you all. Before I start reading my
speech, I wish to direct what I am going to say to the hon member Thetjeng.
The hon Thetjeng was not present during the public hearings. He only came
for 30 minutes just to show off to the media that the DA was also present.
[Interjections.]]

What I want to say to you is that it doesn’t mean we mustn’t guide the
majority of organisations that oppose this Bill. As the ANC, we are there
to guide the public, not to mislead them. [Interjections.] I want to say to
hon Qikani and hon Hendrickse: We are not in church here. [Interjections.]
We know the Scriptures. We do attend our churches. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, order! [Interjections.] Order!
Order!

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Lastly, I want to say to them ... [Interjections.]
Chairperson, can you protect me?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Mr Krumbock! Mr Krumbock, it is
unbecoming behaviour in the House to be pointing your finger like that to a
member. Please desist from doing that.
Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Ngizokuthola ngaphandle. Ngizokuthola ngaphandle.
[I will get you outside. I will get you outside.] [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Let’s not say that. Continue, hon member.

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: I want to say to them that, in our different
parties as we are here, we do have such people amongst us and they are
members. So they need our support. Why don’t we support them? Are we after
their votes only, and don’t we support them? [Interjections.] Chairperson,
I am now beginning my speech.

Mangikusho ukuthi namhlanje usuku olukhulu, ngoba ngani kuwusuku lokuvuna
ezinye zezithelo zenkululeko esayilwela kuleli lakithi. Ngemuva kokuthola
inkululeko ngonyaka ka-1994, sakubeka kwacaca singuKhongolose ukuthi
ubandlululo kanye noqhekeko phakathi kwesizwe saseNingizimu Afrika
sizokulwa nakho.

Inhloso yalo Mthethosivivinywa ukuqinisisekisa ukuthi iNingizimu Afrika
iyizwe elibumbene, inamalungelo omuntu wonke - kungakhathalekile ukuthi
owaliphi ibala, nokuthi uyibuphi ubulili noma ukuthi ungowayiphi inkolo.
Sazibophezela-ke thina siwuKhongolose ukuthi sizoluqeda lonke ubandlululo.
Lokhu kwashicilelwa kuSomqulu Wenkululeko ngonyaka we-1955 eKliptown.

Ubandlululo lwenza ukuthi sinyezane, singabi nenhlonipho komunye umuntu,
sehlise isithunzi somunye umuntu. Mangisho ngithi lo Mthethosivivinywa
ubuyisa isithunzi somuntu ngokungangabazi. Ubuye futhi unikeze amalungelo
alinganayo, phecelezi “all shall have equal rights”.

Mangisho ukuthi ngesikhathi siqala le ndima ngokubuyisana kuleli ngemuva
kwe-1994, lowo owayenguMongameli kuleli uNelson Rolihlahla Mandela
waphawula kanje:

  The time for the healing of wounds of the past has come. The moment to
  bridge the chasms that divide us has come. The time to build is upon us.


Ake ngiphawule ngezinye zezihloko kulo Mthethosivivinywa. Abashadisi
ezinkantolo bazogunyazwa ngokuphelele ukushadisa ongqingili uma bekudinga.
Lo Mthethosivivinywa uzogunyaza abafundisi banoma ngabe iliphi isonto noma
inkonzo ukuthi bafake isicelo sokugunyazwa ukushadisa ongqingili. Lo
Mthethosivivinywa awusoze uphoqelele abafundisi uma bengenaso isifiso
salokho. Maqondana nohlu lokubhaliswa kwemishado, bobabili ongqingili
kuzodingeka babhale phansi basho ukuthi banesifiso sokushada, basayine
ifomu elithize. Kuzofuneka ofakazi ababili. Ngemuva kokushada bazonikezwa
isitifiketi somshado noma sokuthi bahlalisane bobabili.

Umshadisi ngamunye uphoqelekile ukugcina uhla lwabashadile. Lolu hla
luzothunyelwa emahhovisi kahulumeni aqondene nokubhaliswa kwabantu kuleyo
ndawo. Ngithanda ukusho ukuthi uma kunabashadisi mbumbulu abangabhaliswe
noma abangagunyaziwe ngaphansi kwalo mthetho, bayojeziswa yinkantolo
yamacala. Ngokunjalo umshadisi owemukela imali ngokungemthetho, uyojeziswa
futhi inkantolo yamacala.

Ikomidi Lezasekhaya liwucubungule kabanzi lo Mthethosivivinywa. Ngesonto
elidlule silalele uMnyango Wezasekhaya ubeka ngabanzi ngalo
Mthethosivivinywa, sabuye salalela izinhlangano ezihlukahlukene. Mangisho
ukuthi izinhlangano, ikakhulukazi ezamakholwa, ziyaphikisana nalo
Mthethosivivinywa. Zitomula izahluko ezithile eBhayibhelini, njengoMnu
Hendrickse nelungu uQikani. Zibuye futhi zikhulume ngamalungelo abantwana.
Konke lokhu sibone kungahlangani nhlobo nalo Mthethosivivinywa, kungamanzi
nowoyela.

Okumangazayo ukuthi lezi zinhlangano zihlulela abantu abadalwe
uMvelinqangi, okunguyena ozobehlulela ngomhla wokuphela. Ngakho-ke
mabangabahluleli abanye abantu.

Kunezinhlangano eziseka lo mthetho. Enye yezinhlangano ezeseka lo
Mthethosivivinywa iphawule kanje, “I am in love with the soul, not the
gender.” Ngamanye amazwi ngithandana nomphefumulo qobo lwawo, angithandani
nobulili.

Okumangazayo ukuthi ongqingili babekhona mandulo, into nje kwakuyinto
eyimfihlo. Bebengaphumeli obala. Okuhle-ke kulesi sikhathi samanje ukuthi
ongqingili baphumela obala, bafuna amalungelo abo njengawo wonke umuntu
kuleli. Masingabi nobandlululo.

Ngithanda ukusho futhi ukuthi ongqingili bazozikhulumela uma befisa
ukushada kumbe bahlalisane. Abaphoqiwe ngaphansi kwalo Mthetho, kanti futhi
ngokunjalo nabafundisi abaphoqiwe ukushadisa ongqingqili. Masingakhohlwa
ukuthi laba bantu badalwe uNkulunkulu njengami nawe. Ngakho-ke
masibamukele. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[I must say that today is a big day, because it is a day for reaping some
of the fruits of freedom that we fought for in our country. After attaining
freedom in 1994, we as the African National Congress made it clear that we
would fight discrimination and division amongst the South African nation.

The objective of this Bill is to see to it that South Africa is a united
country, with rights for everyone -irrespective of colour, gender or
religion. We, as the African National Congress, therefore committed
ourselves to getting rid of all forms of oppression. This was entrenched in
the Freedom Charter in 1955 at Kliptown.

Oppression belittled us, and it caused us to disrespect each other and look
down upon other people. I must say that this Bill undoubtedly brings back
the people’s dignity. It also gives equal rights, and confirms that, “all
shall have equal rights”.

Let me also mention that when we started this process of reconciliation in
this country after 1994, former President Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela stated
as follows:

  The time for the healing of wounds of the past has come. The moment to
  bridge the chasms that divide us has come. The time to build is upon us.

Let me talk about some of the headings in this Bill. The marriage officers
in the magistrates courts will be fully authorized to marry gay people if
necessary. This Bill will allow ministers of religion of any church to make
an application to conduct marriages for gay people. This Bill will not
force ministers of religion to marry gay people if they do not want to do
so. Regarding the registration of a marriage, both partners would have to
make a written declaration stating that they wish to get married by signing
a certain form. Two witnesses will be needed. After marriage they will be
given a certificate that will certify that they are married and they can
live together.

Each marriage officer has to keep a list of married couples. This list has
to be sent to the local Home Affairs offices. I would also like to say that
if there are marriage officers who are not registered according to this
Bill, they will be punished by the court of law. Similarly, a marriage
officer who takes bribes, will also be punished by the court of law.

The Select Committee on Social Services broadly looked at this Bill. Last
week we listened to the submission on this Bill by the Department of Home
Affairs, and we also listened to different organisations. I must say that
organisations, especially those associated with religion, do not agree with
this Bill. They quote some chapters from the Bible, like Mr Hendrickse and
hon member Qikani. They also talk about children’s rights. We noted that
all this has nothing to do with this Bill, it is just like water and oil.

What is surprising about these organisations is that they judge people who
were created by God, who will judge them when Judgment Day comes. They must
therefore not judge other people.

There are other organisations that support this Bill. One of the
organisations that support this Bill commented as follows, “I am in love
with the soul, not the gender.”

What is surprising is that gay people existed a long time ago, the issue is
that this was kept a secret then. They did not come out in the open. What
is good, therefore, these days is that gay people are coming out of the
closet; they want their rights just like everybody else in this country.
Let us not discriminate against them.

I would also like to say that gay people will indicate if they want to get
married or simply live together. They are not forced under this Bill, and
likewise the ministers of religion are also not forced to conduct marriages
for gay people. Let us not forget that these people are God’s creation just
like you and me. We must therefore tolerate them.]

If we as lawmakers treat certain people less favourably than others, based
on certain characteristics or other considerations, concern will arise that
we are directing our policy and legislative decisions on, and acting out
of, sheer prejudice and stereotypical assumptions.

In conclusion, I would like to say, indeed we need to fight and resist all
forms of discrimination and prejudice, including homophobia. We should not
allow discrimination to marginalise a certain group of our society. As a
vanguard of all the people, we, the ANC, cannot allow suppression and
discrimination against homosexuals to persist in our society.

When we advance and deepen our vision of a better life for all the people,
we must understand that homosexuals are also people, bearing in mind that
there are men and women of homosexual and lesbian orientation who joined
the ranks of the democratic forces in the struggle for liberation. I thank
you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Voorsitter, die wetsontwerp se voorsiening om die
gemene reg sodanig te wysig dat partye van dieselfde geslag nou ’n wettige
huwelik kan sluit, is sekerlik een van die mees omstrede stukke wetgewing
wat sedert 1994 deur hierdie Parlement geloods is. Die Minister het tereg
gesê, “it was a difficult process.”

Ek kan dit absoluut glo, want die wetsontwerp word deur die meeste kerke en
gelowe geopponeer. Die beginsel word deur die meeste lande verwerp. En tog
is Suid-Afrika nou maar een van sowat vyf lande – ek meen twee van die
ander is Kanada en Nederland – wat sodanige verbintenisse erken. Die VF
Plus beskou dit nie as ’n prestasie nie.

Wat betref die vermoënsregtelike voordele van so ’n verbintenis, daarvoor
kan voorsiening gemaak word. Vermoënsregtelike voordele ten opsigte van
sodanige verbintenisse is ’n totale ander saak, maar ’n wettige huwelik
soos dié tussen man en vrou soos ons dit verstaan, is hoegenaamd nie vir
die party aanvaarbaar nie, en dus sal die party daarteen stem.

Wat ook vreemd is, is die Robinson-saak wat in Februarie 2005 gedien het.
Hierdie saak het gegaan oor persone wat saam gewoon het en toe is daar
uiteindelik ná die oorlye van een persoon ’n eis ingestel vir onderhoud
teen die boedel van die ander persoon, die man. Daar is in ’n
minderheidsuitspraak die volgende gesê:


   Although 2,3 million people have described themselves as living together
   like married partners although they are not married, there’s no
   comprehensive legislation to deal with the consequences of such
   cohabitation.


Die VF Plus is ook teen sodanige saamleefverhoudings gekant, maar wanneer
dit gaan oor die vermoënsregtelike voordele is dit ’n totaal ander storie,
en dan moet daarna gekyk word. Dié ding is twee jaar gelede gedoen en die
Regskommissie het opdrag gekry om te kyk na wat gedoen kan word ten opsigte
van wetswysiging om hieraan gestalte te gee by wyse van wetgewing. Twee
jaar is verby en niks het nog gebeur nie.

’n Baie meer verdienstelike saak is hierdie een, die Robinson-saak, maar
dit word op ys geplaas terwyl hierdie wetsontwerp gestoomroller word. Die
VF Plus sal dit nie steun nie en daarteen stem. Dankie, Voorsitter.
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Chairperson, the provision of the Bill to amend common
law in such a way that people of the same sex or gender are now able to
legally enter into marriage, is certainly one of the most controversial
pieces of legislation that have been initiated by this Parliament since
1994. The Minister was correct in saying that it was a difficult process.

I can definitely believe it, as the Bill is opposed by most churches and
religions. The principle is rejected by most countries. And yet South
Africa is now but one of five countries – I think two of the others are
Canada and the Netherlands – that acknowledge such unions. The FF Plus does
not regard this as an achievement.

With regard to the benefits based on proprietary rights of such a union,
provision can be made for that. Benefits based on proprietary rights
regarding such unions is a different matter altogether, but a legal
marriage such as in the case of a man and a woman, as we understand it, is
totally unacceptable to the party and, therefore, the party will vote
against it.

The Robinson case that was heard in February 2005 is rather peculiar. This
case dealt with people who lived together and ultimately, after the death
of one person, the surviving partner initiated a claim for maintenance
against the estate of the other person, the man. In the minority judgment
the following was said:

  Although 2,3 million people have described themselves as living together
  like married partners although they are not married, there’s no
  comprehensive legislation to deal with the consequences of such
  cohabitation.
The Freedom Front Plus is also opposed to cohabitation relationships, but
with regard to the benefits based on proprietary rights it becomes a
different matter altogether and that must be looked at. This was done two
years ago and the Law Commission was given a brief to investigate what
could be done regarding the amendment of the Act to embody this by way of
legislation. Two years have passed and nothing has been done about it.

The Robinson case is much more deserving, but it has been put on hold
whilst this Bill is being pushed through. The FF Plus will not support this
Bill and will vote against it. Thank you, Chairperson.]

Mr J O TLHAGALE: Hon Chair, hon Minister, and hon House, the naming of this
piece of legislation as the Civil Union Bill is crafted in a manner that
makes it less abhorrent than when it is referred to as the same-sex Bill,
or a marriage of a female to another female, or a male to another male.
[Laughter.] According to black African culture, the marriage of a male to
another male, or a female to another to female, is taboo. [Laughter.]
[Applause.] It is simply not done, lest we infuriate the gods.

On a personal note, I don’t normally agree with the politics of President
Robert Mugabe, but I like his stance on this foreign practice of same-sex
marriages. It boggles one’s mind to think of how exactly they are doing it.
[Laughter.] Before my time allocation expires, let me state that my party,
the UCDP is opposed to this Bill on religious and cultural reasons.

Can you imagine a situation where your son who works in Gauteng comes home
during the Christmas recess, accompanied by somebody that you perceive as a
male friend ... [Laughter.] ... but to your surprise and shock, your son
introduces this companion as your daughter-in–law, who has been married
according to this Bill. [Applause]

... makoti wa monna [A male daughter-in-law]. [Interjections.]

You had been expecting that one day at an opportune and appropriate time
you would get a daughter-in-law and not an indescribable somebody who is
going to be a square peg in a round hole when you conduct family rituals
and propitiation ceremonies to the gods. I thank you, Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Chairperson, hon Minister, I am not
sure where I am going to start ... [Laughter.] ... because I have my speech
here. But before I go into my speech, I think I have to make a few
observations in terms of the whole process of public engagement, which
culminated in the debate in this august House on this important piece of
legislation.

My observation is that, firstly, as the ANC we cannot be apologetic to
answer a question as to why we are the first country in Africa to pass this
legislation. We are the first country because we are the first, the premier
and the oldest liberation movement in Africa, with supremacy of ideas for a
better future for humanity, so that is our historic task. It has been
bestowed upon us by history. Nobody, locally, including on the continent of
Africa, has contested that particular historical reality. So we are on
course.

Secondly, one is a little bit disappointed with the engagement on this
particular issue. I am sure that you will all agree with me that the ANC is
not an arrogant organisation. We sincerely thought that we would get a
little wisdom from the manner in which our opponents from the opposition
would engage us on this debate with all sincerity.

The hon Minister has said that the conclusion of this Bill is not an end on
the public engagement between government and civil society broadly. We
really thought that some of the views that we would come across here would
really put us closer to be thinking on the same wavelength as other members
of the opposition are thinking.

At worst, what we witness, for instance, is that the DA, which calls itself
an indispensable force of the opposition on the South African political
landscape, has taken a cowardly position that no self-respecting opposition
in any country can take. For failing to take a public position on a public
policy issue! It has never happened anywhere. [Interjections.] I am not
sure what message, in that particular gesture, the DA is sending to the
aspirant electorates who may likely join the DA. [Interjections.]

One must say that we have heard nothing new in this House, particularly
from Mr Thetjeng, because he made it clear that he is exposing his views.
Mr Thetjeng, together with hon Mr Qikani and Mrs Vilakazi – she is old and
I will reserve my words for her. [Laughter.]

I am very honest that some of us wanted to hear something, but they wanted
to turn this august House – a self-respecting Parliament – into a
kindergarten Biblical lecture.

In doing that, they are projecting themselves as being more of a Christian
than the millions and millions of Christians who have voted for the ANC and
particularly for Chapter 2 of the Constitution, which entrenches equality
within our society. Chapter 2 of the Constitution forms the basis on which
today we are discussing this particular Civil Union Bill. I am saying that
we have not learnt anything. Of course, one must also admit that – not only
Mrs Vilakazi – but the IFP have also not been helpful because they are
basically living in the past.

I must say something here, I don’t want to be petty and say that Mr
Thetjeng was not in the committee ... [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): He does not want to tell this august
House that in the ANC, as a leader and the agent of change for
transformation in this country, we understand public participation, not as
something similar to a robot. A robot is something which somebody
programmes by using buttons - green, red, and yellow.

We see ourselves as leaders. We have listened to the views of our people
and we have engaged our people as a leadership. And, I thought that the hon
Tlhagale with his sincerity would say this thing. Errol Naidoo, who was
representing the Christian community in our public hearings and who was
supported – I am saying this thing at a public platform – by all other
religious leaders who were seated there, after persuasion by members of the
ANC in that committee said, and I quote:


    This Bill is a better evil than when the Marriage Act would have been
    amended to insert those new insertions, husband and a wife.
He further said:


    They would appreciate further public consultation as and when government
    engages in the whole process of overhauling the Marriage Act.

So, that is appreciation. What you read into it and what you want to
mislead the House and the public with, is what he has read and not by
following the public debate to the end. The conclusion of the debate in the
public hearing, of which I was a part, is that there was an agreement
between ourselves and the religious community that we needed to engage
further on this issue - I think I have outlined a process in that regard.

So, no party should be scared in this House, believing that all religious
communities are against this Bill. It is not true. It is a very complex,
emotive Bill that we must engage with the sensitivities that it warrants. I
think, in dealing with this challenge the ANC is on course.

Having made those observations, Chairperson, I want to move on by saying
that section 9 of the Constitution provides that everyone is equal before
the law and has equal protection and benefits of the law. In section 9(3)
the Constitution further spells out forms of discrimination and prejudices
that may not be allowed, and I quote:


  The state may not unfairly discriminate directly or indirectly against
  anyone on one or more grounds, including race, gender, sex, pregnancy,
  marital status, etc.

One member has just said that these gays and lesbians are with us here, and
they are in all the political parties. I can challenge any priest who can
claim that there are no gays and lesbians in church. I can challenge any
religious leader who says that gays and lesbians are somewhere else in
society, somewhere detached. So, I think our task as the ANC is indeed to
educate our public and that education must start here and nowhere else.

I am happy, hon Thetjeng, that after we have highlighted the hypocrisy of
the DA in the committee it has made a very principled public statement that
it does not agree with the referendum, but if we can reveal the records of
the committee meeting that he wanted to grandstand there and say the people
have spoken lets go for a referendum.

We asked him whether the DA would adopt a vote based on their conscience if
we call for a referendum on the property clause? We asked him whether the
DA would adopt a conscientious stance if we call for a referendum on the
landownership in this country?

Hon members, leadership as far as the ANC is concerned is the appreciation
of complexities of our transition, appreciation of difficulties. We don’t
have to take everything as light and easy.

We need to appreciate those things, we also want to learn from the masses
of our people whilst we educate them in terms of this Constitution. It is
the basis on which we are moving forward. However, those members have gone
to an extent of misleading our people in a public meeting.

Could members give us an example in the recorded history of this Parliament
where the Bill of Rights has ever been amended? But, deliberately and
educated as they are, they want to influence the masses for cheap political
poaching.

They say: No, but you have amended the Constitution many times, so why
don’t you amend the Constitution so that you would not be able to pass this
particular legislation? And we are saying that is opportunism and the ANC
are not intimidated by those gestures.

I told Mrs Vilakazi that we are going to continue because nobody else but
the ANC is going to go right to Ulundi to educate our people about the
values of our Constitution. Our people are going to accept and understand
that the freedom of the gays and lesbians is not taking away their own
freedom and their own privacy and rights.

I must repeat in this august House that we will go everywhere, even to
those traditional communities and the former white communities to preach
that message as the ANC. So, there is no crisis at all about this piece of
legislation.

We are confident that we are on track and there is nobody else in this
country that can do that except the ANC. Much as it is under the leadership
of the ANC that we have protected the minorities that are represented here,
we were never coerced to do that. We did it out of our own goodwill.

In conclusion, let me say that the DA is in a difficult situation because
if they can take a public stance on this position, the gay and lesbian
communities will expose some of their members who are in this Chamber and
elsewhere and who are gays and lesbians. Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, thank you very much. I shouldn’t
be responding to the issues that have been raised here, because I think the
hon Setona has actually dealt in the main with all the issues that needed
to be responded to. Am I in trouble? I don’t think so. [Laughter.]

There are two issues, though, that I really would like to raise. One of the
issues that was raised by both the DA – I hope I heard correctly – and the
FF was a suggestion that perhaps we needed to do away with minority rights,
because if there is any suggestion of that nature, it may actually have
very dire consequences. In my view, if people are suggesting that ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order, Minister. Hon Thetjeng, I think you
were well protected when you had the floor and debated. Let’s not disturb
other people. Let’s listen rather to their response. I’m sure this is the
time you have been waiting for.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you, Chair. If there is a view that in
determining public policy, only the views of the majority should be
listened to, I think it could end, and not listen to the views of the
minority. It could actually have very serious consequences for some of the
groupings and even political parties. It may actually not be good for our
democracy and it may not be healthy for our state.

The other issue is, yes, I think what has come out clearly from the process
is that there is a need to deepen the process of public engagement on the
matter, and not only on this matter but on a whole range of issues which
are quite controversial in our community. Therefore the challenge for those
of us who are in leadership - because as public representatives we are
leaders in our society - is not to flinch from that responsibility and that
challenge of actually providing leadership in the course of this public
discourse.
That, for me, is key in that beyond this – it is not about passing this
piece of legislation – we need to engage. Right now we have the challenge
of coming out with a single piece of marriage legislation, because the
current piece of legislation we have discriminates against a whole range of
people, including your religious communities.

Therefore, you must have a process of review. We need to complete the one
that has started. With that too, you need to engage with our people about
what, in fact, this means. Why is it that we preferred the route of coming
out with a piece of legislation, rather than having the Constitutional
Court determining for us, or coming out for us, or amending for us a piece
of legislation? This is the whole issue of separation of powers as well.

You couldn’t have had a Constitutional Court that was going to deliver a
piece of legislation to us, because if we had not gone this route, it would
have meant that the judges - I am not condemning them - would have
determined for us what should happen in terms of our laws in this country.

There is something called religious diversity, never mind that South Africa
is a secular state. I do worry. I am also a Christian, a very dedicated
Christian for that matter, and deeply religious at that. I worry about
people who, when they argue their points, actually make reference to the
Bible being the supreme constitution, because there are other documents
that we could make reference to as supreme constitutions of other
religions. Hence I am raising the issue of religious diversity in our
country, because it may actually run the risk of promoting a particular
religious grouping above the rest. It doesn’t matter that, in your view, a
particular religious grouping is a minority in South Africa. That is your
view.

The fact that the Bible is a supreme constitution is your personal view,
because you are a Christian. [Interjections.] Yes, it’s your view. You
can’t impose your view on the rest of the people. [Applause.] Yes, you’ve
got to be tolerant and appreciate the fact that you may believe in the
Bible and read the Bible every day, but another person reads the Koran, and
that there are also atheists in South Africa. We need to exercise religious
tolerance.

I really believe that there are those of us who are intolerant when it
comes to religion. We do have that problem. I think it is one of those
areas in which we need to deepen our engagement and discussion, because we
need to accept that in South Africa not everybody is a Christian nor is
everybody a Muslim. We actually have other people who believe in other
institutions.

Ntate Hendrickse raised the issue of domestic partnerships. It is good that
you raised it. You raised it, I think. Somebody raised the issue of
domestic partnerships. You know, the very people – members – were the first
to say, “There is no constitutional deadline on the issue of domestic
partnerships. Why should it be included in this piece of legislation this
time around?”

In fact, across all sections of our society people were saying that this
particular area was not a priority, despite the fact that some of them felt
strongly that the issue of domestic partnerships needed to be entrenched in
this piece of legislation, because it is, in fact, about the protection of
women in South Africa. This is because most of the people who lose at the
end of the day and who are in a disadvantaged position are women, and we
needed to protect women.

But people agreed across society that the one section that we didn’t need
here was this section; that you could deal with it later because there is
no reason to rush it. It should not receive priority, hence the deletion of
a chapter that dealt with domestic partnerships.

The last issue I want to raise is ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I am sorry, Madam Minister, just a moment. I
see some people on the gallery using their cellphones to record. In terms
of the Rules, you are not allowed to record any speech in this House up in
the gallery. Our speeches are recorded and they are for public consumption.
You can only get them through
the records of the Council and the records of Parliament. Please stop that.
The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you, Chair. We are all created in the
image of God. Those who believe in Allah believe they are created in that
image, and that’s it. This is what we believe, that we are created in some
supreme power’s image. This group of people also believe they are created
in the image of that power if God has allowed them to choose same-sex
people as their partners, if that is their sexual orientation. That is the
other debate we need to get involved in at some point: whether this is, in
fact, a matter of choice or a scientific issue.

Maybe this country needs to begin to talk about that now that we have
reached this point, so that as we judge people, as we judge your children -
because you don’t know who you have in your house; you don’t know who you
have in your family - as you have taken the decision or made the choice of
being heterosexual and marry a woman or a man as a partner, you should
appreciate that other people have taken different routes.

This Bill seeks to protect those kinds of people. I am not talking about
people who have decided to go underground. This Bill is not about people
who are mischievous. We are protecting people here who really believe that
they have relationships to solemnise, people who really believe that they
are attracted, they are in love. I am not talking about people here who
decide that when they are sitting here they are something else, but that
when they are out there they are a different story. [Laughter.]
In our society we also have that category of people. This Bill allows for
people to come out from underground. It empowers people to resurrect.
Mabavuke. [Let them wake up.] We are empowering our nation here. If,
unfortunately, people are saying that we are teaching our children sodomy,
I think that is unfortunate because for us it is not about imagining things
that people then do behind doors. It is about the love that develops
between two people, and therefore the solemnisation of a relationship.

What happens beyond that and what happens behind their doors and what they
do and how they do it really does not have anything to do with us. It is
about giving them dignity. It is about providing this equality. It is about
granting them the status, the benefits and the responsibilities that have
been given to some of us who are heterosexuals and who are sitting here in
this Chamber.

How, unfortunately, that impacts, we believe, on society, on our children,
on the moral fibre of our society, is another story. But here is a
particular grouping of people who have rights the same as we do, who are
here in our society. They live; you cannot wish them off the face of the
earth. You have nowhere to throw them. If they have sinned ...

Lowo ke ongenaso isono, makabe ngowokuqala ukuphakamisa ilitye abaxulube.
Ndiyabulela. [One who has no sin must be the first to throw a stone. Thank
you.] [Applause.]
Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I shall now put the question. Order! Could you
please be orderly? I shall now put the question. The question is that the
Bill be agreed to. In accordance with Rule 63, I shall first allow
political parties an opportunity to make declarations of vote if they so
wish. Is there any political party that wishes to do so?

Declarations of vote:

Mr O J TLHAGALE: Hon Chair, the UCDP is opposing this Bill on cultural as
well as religious grounds. Thanks.

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Thank you, Chairperson. I think I will just repeat what I
said there. The IFP is totally against this Bill.

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Chair, I will also have to repeat that. The UIF is
against this Bill totally.

Mrs A N D QIKANI: Thank you, Chairperson. Andivumi, nakancinci. [I am
totally against it.]

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Chairperson, the FF will also vote against it, as I
already indicated in my contribution. Thank you, Chairperson.
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, the ANC upholds the rule of
law. It respects the constitutional ruling, and has no intention of
discriminating against anyone. We are in favour of the equality clause.
Thank you.

Mr A WATSON: Hon Chair, the DA, as was portrayed by our speaker, recognises
the diversity of not only our nation, but also of our members. Therefore it
will allow a free vote on this very important matter.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: We shall now proceed to voting on the
question. Those in favour say “aye”. Those against say “no”.  I think the
“ayes” have it. The majority of members have voted in favour. I therefore
declare the Bill agreed to in terms of section 75 of the Constitution.
[Applause.]

Division demanded.


The Council divided:


   AYES - 36: Adams, F; Botha, D J; Dlulane, B N; Gamede, D D; Goeieman, M
   C; Hollander,  P M; Kolweni, Z S; Krumbock, G R; Mabe, S E; Mack, N J;
   Madlala-Magubane, N M; Manyosi, A T; Masilo, J M; Matlanyane, H F;
   Mazibuko, N F; Mkhaliphi, B J; Mkhono, D G; Mokoena, M L; Moseki, A L;
   Ntuli, Z C; Nyanda, F; Oliphant, M N; Ralane, T; Robertson, M O;
   Robinson, D;  Setona, T S; Shiceka, S; Sibiya, M J; Sogoni, E M;
   Sulliman, M A; Tau, R J; Terblanche, J F; Themba, M P; Tolo, B J; Van
   Rooyen, C J; Windvoël, V V Z.


   NOES - 11: Fielding, L H; Hendricks, N D; Le Roux, J W; Mchunu, A N T;
   Qikani, A N D; Thetjeng, O M; Tlhagale, J O; Van Heerden, F J; Vilakazi,
   J N; Watson, A; Worth, D A.


   ABSTAIN - 1: Matloaheala, B L.


Bill  accordingly  agreed  to  in  accordance  with  section   75   of   the
Constitution.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES – SOUTHERN
  AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY, SADC, PROTOCOL ON FACILITATION OF MOVEMENT
                                 OF PERSONS

Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Chairperson, the Southern African Development Community
Protocol on Facilitation of Movement of Persons was signed by six SADC
countries on 22 August 2005 at a summit that was held in Botswana.

The protocol is in line with the preamble to a treaty establishing SADC,
especially the provisions with regard to SADC’s duty to promote the
interdependence and integration of national economies for the harmonious
balanced and equitable development of the region, as well as the need to
involve the people of the regions centrally in the process of development
and integration.

The protocol has three objectives: namely, the attainment of overall
objectives as stipulated in article 2, specific objectives in article 3,
and implementation objectives set up in article 4. The overall objective is
to develop policies aimed at progressive elimination of obstacles to the
movement of persons of the region generally into and within the territories
of the state parties.

Article 3 actually specifies that the protocol is in relation to every
citizen of the state and is intended to allow entry for a lawful purpose
without a visa into the territory of another state party for a maximum
period of 90 days for a bona fide visit and in accordance with the law of
the state party concerned.

Article 11 talks about co-operation and assistance to the other state
parties to facilitate the movement of the persons in the community as a
vehicle of achieving economic integrations.

Upon ratification of the protocol, parliaments of the region could play a
critical role in ensuring that the provisions are met and implemented, and
that the harmonisation of the immigration laws will make it possible for
steps to be taken towards making sure that people are actually able to move
freely. They will also ensure that the requirements of visas are abolished.
In conclusion, the decisions by the heads of state to sign the protocol on
the free movement of persons is indicative of the commitment by SADC to
deepen its economic and socio-political co-operation agenda. The protocol
is one of the important instruments of SADC, and we will use it to ensure
that the people of the region are able to interact with other persons and
undertake initiatives that can result in mutual benefits.

I move for the adoption of the protocol. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: That concludes the debate. I shall now put the
question in respect of the second order. The question is that the report be
adopted. As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether the delegation heads are
present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes. Are all delegation
heads present? They are.

In accordance with Rule 71 I shall first allow provinces the opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province that
wishes to make a declaration? There is none. We shall now proceed to the
voting on the question. I shall do so in alphabetical order per province.
Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in
favour or against or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?
Ms B N DLULANE: Eastern Cape votes in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Free State votes in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: Gauteng votes in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: Elethu. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo ha yi seketela. [Limpopo supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Noord-Kaap ondersteun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Ms J M MASILO: Bokone-Bophirima ke ya rona. [North West supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Wes-Kaap ondersteun. [Western Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: All nine provinces have voted in favour. I
therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND RECREATION -
 CONVENTION ON PROTECTION AND PROMOTION OF DIVERSITY OF CULTURAL EXPRESSIONS

Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Chairperson, I would like to start off by quoting Article
1 of the constitution of Unesco. It says its objective is:


  ... to promote the free flow of ideas by word and image, while preserving
  the independence, integrity and fruitful diversity of the cultures.

This convention responds to an existing need to actively protect and
promote the diversity of cultural expressions in the face of the
accelerated pace of globalisation.
The aims of the convention are to create conditions for cultures to
flourish and to interact freely in a mutually beneficial manner; to give
recognition to the distinctive nature of cultural activities, goods and
services as a vehicle of identity, values and meaning; to identify new
arrangements for international co-operation, which is the cornerstone to
the convention; to reaffirm the sovereignty rights of states; and to
maintain, adopt and implement policies and measures that they deem
appropriate for protection and promotion of the diversity of the cultural
expressions on their territories while ensuring a free flow of ideas and
work.

The implication for South Africa and the rest of the world, and why South
Africa should ratify the convention, is that measures are to be taken to
balance the current imbalances in the trade of cultural goods and services;
and there will be facilitation of a strong South-to-South and regional co-
operation such as that within IBSA, that is India, Brazil and South Africa.


Lastly, cultures can be mainstreamed both nationally and internationally
for the development of our region and the entire developing world. South
Africa, as always, has been the champion and played a critical role by
chairing a working committee comprising 50 countries and member states, and
it requested the organisation to pursue normative action to defend human
creativity.

In conclusion, nearly everywhere languages are falling into disuse,
traditions are being forgotten and vulnerable cultures are being
marginalised, if not wiped out. They are threatened by various factors.
This development provokes an imbalance in the flow of cultural goods and
services such as films, music, crafts and books.

I move for the adoption of this convention. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I shall now put the question in respect of the
third order. The question is that the report be adopted. As the decision is
dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first
ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast
their provinces’ votes. Are all delegation heads present? They are.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province that
wishes to make a declaration? We shall now proceed to the voting on the
question. I shall do so in alphabetical order per province. Delegation
heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in favour or
against or abstain.  Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Eastern Cape votes in favour.
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Free State votes in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: Gauteng ke ya rona. [Gauteng votes in favour.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal votes in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo re a e thekga. [Limpopo votes in favour.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Siyavuma. [Northern Cape votes in favour.]

Ms J M MASILO: North West supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Western Cape supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: All nine provinces have voted in favour. I
therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
   AFFAIRS – HEARINGS ON IMPLICATIONS AND APPROVAL OF PROPOSED NEW SALARY
                            SCALES FOR MAGISTRACY

Order disposed of without debate.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I shall now put the question. The question is
that the report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in terms of
section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all
delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes.
Are they all present?

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall now also allow the provinces the
opportunity to make their declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there
any province that wishes to do so? There is none.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Eastern Cape votes in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Free State votes in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: Gauteng supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: Akube njalo. [KwaZulu-Natal votes in favour.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo ondersteun. [Limpopo supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?
Mr M A SULLIMAN: Kapa-Bokone ke ya rona. [Northern Cape votes in favour.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Ms J M MASILO: North West supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Western Cape supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: All nine provinces voted in favour. I
therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

                              FAREWELL SPEECHES

Mr A WATSON: Hon Chairperson, glancing back at the year behind us, we must
all admit that this was surely one of the most difficult and challenging
years in our democracy. The country and the governing party in particular
have been plagued by far too many instances of corruption and fraud, while
crime is at uncontrolled levels and interest rates are rising constantly.

Chairperson, this is not the time to dwell on negatives, except to say that
we should all devote the coming years, and 2007 in particular, to
addressing those challenges while constantly endeavouring to better the
lives of our people so that we can all enjoy the immense victory of hosting
the 2010 Fifa soccer tournament.

This is the time where we can look back at many successful oversight visits
organised by the NCOP leadership in order to give substance to our mandate
as the only legislative assembly that has interaction with all three
spheres of government.

I therefore wish to pay tribute to our Chairperson, the hon M J Mahlangu,
on behalf of all the members of the DA, for his unique leadership qualities
and to thank him, the presidium and all other leaders for their efforts in
this regard.

We also want to thank the secretary to the NCOP, Adv Matyolo, and all the
staff of the institution for their hard work through the year and for their
dedication to their duties. Finally, we add our thanks to all new members
of the NCOP who have been co-operative with us in our combined efforts as
an institution through the year, as well as in our interactions, of course.

May all of us, in this very busy year, have a well-deserved rest, and may
we all enjoy the love of our families and indeed the pleasure of being with
them.

Whilst, therefore, wishing everyone a very blessed Christmas and a festive
season, let us not forget the many people of our country out there who do
not have enough to eat each day, let alone the abundance of a feast. May we
all do our bit to ensure that some of them, at least, can share in what we
have so that the wonderful message of Christmas can find its way into the
hearts, the minds and the homes of all. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson and hon members, the month of December is
famous for the celebration of the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ. Let us
all go to prepare for this wonderful time with our families. On behalf of
the IFP, I say have a safe journey home and rest, for there is work facing
us in the New Year, 2007. We wish you a happy Christmas and a prosperous
New Year.

Hambani kahle. Ndlela nhle! Size sibonane futhi! Ngiyabonga. [Go well. All
the best! Till we meet again! I thank you.] [Applause.]

Nkskz A N D QIKANI: Sihlalo, malungu ale Ndlu, lifikile ixesha lokuba
siphinde sahlukane kwakhona kulo nyaka, siye emakhayeni ethu. Xa sijonga
emva kunyaka esiwushiyayo, zininzi izinto ezibalulekileyo esithe sazenza
kule Ndlu.

Kwakhona, kufuneka sikhumbule ukunika imbeko kuMalungu ePalamente kwakunye
neemvumi zeli lizwe ezithe zasishiya, sithi maziphumle ngoxolo.
Sinqwenelela abasebenzi bale Ndlu iKresimesi emnandi, kuba bathe bakwazi
ukufaka amavili, yatsho le Ndlu yakwazi ukukhawuleza.

Amagosa awongameleyo alapha kweli Bhunga nawo siwanqwenelela iKrisimesi
emnandi, kuba akwazile ukuba asiphathe ngokulinganayo. Anga onke amalungu
ale Ndlu ahamba ngezithuthi angahamba kakuhle, aphumle xa ediniwe. Ukuba
ayarhabula, kufuneka athathe nje ithamo elinye eliya kuwanceda ajongane
nendlela ende. [Kwahlekwa.]

Xa ndigqibezela, Sihlalo, ndinithanda nonke. Masihambe siye kudla izidudu
nezigwamba zasemakhaya. Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of isiXhosa speech follows.)

[Mrs A N D QIKANI: Chairperson, Members of Parliament the time for us to
part has once again come. That gives us an opportunity to go home. Looking
back, there is a lot that we have achieved.

Furthermore we must remember to pay tribute to Members of Parliament, and
the artists of this country who have passed away. To them we say they must
rest in peace.

We also wish the staff members of Parliament a merry Christmas. Their
support has enabled this House to work well.

We also wish a merry Christmas to the presiding officers of the NCOP who
managed to treat us equally. May all our members who will be driving home
do so safely, and rest when they feel tired. Members who take alcoholic
drinks should make sure that they take one sip only to keep them alert on
the road. [Applause.]

In my conclusion, Chairperson, I wish to say that I love you all. Let us go
home and enjoy our indigenous African food. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Hon Chair, you know, sometimes when you have to make a
speech at a birthday party or a funeral, it becomes a bit difficult because
you can’t say good things about people. However, this is probably the
easiest speech I have had to make.

I want to thank you, Chair, for the year. I want to thank especially the
Chief Whip and his office for the support he has given us. I want to thank
all the members of this House that welcomed me here. I came here last, and
I can only say that even though we have had robust discussions and gunned
for one another, it was enjoyable.

I’ve had a free flow of friendship – genuine friendship – in this House,
and I want to thank you for that. I want to wish you all a wonderful
holiday with your families. May God bless you during the coming Christmas
period.

I want to ask you especially to adopt a poor family during this time, and
to give them a bit of the pleasure that we might derive at this time of the
year. Drive safely, and don’t even have one. Thank you very much.
[Laughter.]

Ms B L MATLOAHELA: Hon Chairperson, I greet all hon members in the House;
all protocol observed. We have once more come to the end of a year and can
look back and evaluate our work and appreciate our democracy. We have had
several debates, some of which were very robust. Hence, I have to refer to
that in my closing speech.

The reality of HIV/Aids is being worked on. We are trying to fight it with
ARVs. On the other hand, it is being promoted by so many shebeens being
legalised, with the aim of putting food on the table. We know what happens
at shebeens.

We have freedom, but are we free? We are still enslaved by poverty. In
future we have to come together more collectively to seek solutions to the
challenges in our beloved country. This is not only the responsibility of
the ruling party, but of all of us that call ourselves part of government,
as well as of each and every South African citizen.

The President of this country started this year with a biblical scripture.
I trust that we will end it likewise. Let us put God above all else. Let us
believe in the God of the Bible and trust Him to give us direction.

I would like to wish everyone a blessed festive season. Let us come back
very refreshed for more robust debates and for the benefit of our beautiful
country. Thank you, hon Chair. [Applause.]

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Chairperson, I would also like to associate myself with
the thanks expressed here by all the other colleagues so far, but there is
one institution that we often overlook. I would like to mention it today,
and it is the library.

You know, we thank everybody – the people here in front of the table, the
ladies and gentlemen over there that bring us water and notes - but we
overlook our neighbour here which is the library. If the library were a
pub, I would have been drunk all the time, because it is so close to the
pub. [Laughter.] On my way to the pub I usually go into the library, and I
will never get out of that.

I would like to thank the staff of the library for all the assistance that
I get from them on a regular basis. They are very committed to everything,
and to each and every question that you ask. They are actually our
neighbours here, and I think we should visit them more frequently.

Then, again, as usual ...

... hierdie NRP is ’n ander plek. Ek was vir vyf jaar weg. Die plek wat ek
die meeste gemis het was in elk geval die biblioteek. Dit was nog ’n jaar
van vriendskap en kameraadskap wat ’n mens gekry het. Die hoofsweep het my
soms gevra hoekom ek nie vergaderings bywoon nie, maar hy het altyd begrip
vir my redes gehad.

Voorsitter, ook vir u sterkte, en aan al die kollegas ’n baie mooi jaar, en
laat dit met ons almal goed gaan en laat dit ook ’n vakansieseisoen wee
swat ons ingaan met ’n oop hand, ook teenoor diegene wat minder het as ons.
Goeie wense vir een en almal van u. Dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[... this NCOP is quite different from any other place. I have been away
for five years. In any event, I’ve missed the library most of all. Another
year of friendship and camaraderie was gained. The Chief Whip sometimes
asked me why I had not attended any meetings, but always understood my
reasons for doing so.

Chairperson, good luck to you as well, and best wishes for the year to all
my colleagues, and let all of us be blessed and also approach this holiday
season with our hands stretched out, also with regard to those who have
less than us. Best wishes to each and every one of you. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

Rre O J TLHAGALE: Motlotlegi Modulasetulo, batlotlegi botlhe ba ba fano, ke
boitumelo jo bogolo mo go nna mo letsatsing la gompieno. Re ntse re phela
sentle, re tlwaelane e bile re a ratana. Mme ka nako e fa re tshwanetse go
kgaogana, o ikutlwa mo pelong gore ga o monate sentlentle. Re ya kwa
magaeng le malapeng a rona, kwa bathong ba re ba ratang.

Ke rata go tsaya tšhono e go leboga Modulasetulo le Motlatsa-Modulasetulo,
batho ba ba ikokobeditseng ka dinako tsotlhe. Batho ba ba lerato. Ke rata
go leboga Moetapelemogolo wa Maloko [Chief Whip], Modulasetulo wa
Baduladitulo [chair of chairs] le Motlatsamodulasetulo wa baduladitulo
[deputy chair of chairs]; batho ba ba lerato ba re phetseng le bona ka
boitumelo jo bogolo. Ke rata go leboga mokwaledi wa NCOP Moadfokate. Ke
tlhola ke mmitsa Moadfokate fa ke kopana le ena. Re a mo itumelela ka fa a
re tshwereng ka teng.

Re leboga le badiredi ba bangwe botlhe ka fa ba dirang le rona ka teng. Fa
re kopana kwa toropong, fa re kopana mo diphasitšhing ke boitumelo fela, ke
lerato fela. Re itumelela selo seo. Re leboga ditokololo tsa Ntlo e ya rona
ka lerato le ba nang le lona. Rotlhe re bana ba motho, basweu le bantsho.
Re phela sentle. Ka mafoko a, ke re Modimo a re tshegofatse mo nakong ya
rona ya boikhutso. Ke a leboga. [Legofi.] (Translation of Setswana speech
follows.)

[Mr O J TLHAGALE: Hon Chairperson, all distinguished personalities present,
this is a very pleasant day for me. We get on well with each other. We are
a big family and love one another. When it is time for us to leave, we
become homesick. This is a feeling of going to our respective homes, where
there are families and the people we love.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Chairperson and the
Deputy Chairperson, people who are humble and loving at all times. I would
like to thank the Chief Whip, chair of chairs and deputy chair of chairs;
people who are caring and have been living with us happily. I would like to
thank the Secretary of the NCOP, the Advocate. I often address her in that
way whenever we meet. We really appreciate the way she treats us.

We thank all other staff members in the way they’ve been working with us.
When we meet them in town and in the corridors, it is smiles and love all
the way. We appreciate this. We thank the members of this House who showed
us so much of love. We all belong to one family, both black and white. We
live peacefully. With these words I would like to say, May God bless us
during our recess period. Thank you.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Hon Chairperson, hon members, as we close
our last term of our Parliament this year, in particular the NCOP, which
has had to close a week and a half after the NA to ensure that even its
minorities have a Christmas present to enjoy this year, I am privileged to
say that, as a Council, under the collective leadership of the Chairperson
of the NCOP, Comrade M J Mahlangu, including the other presiding officers,
the Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, Ms Hollander, and the two House
Chairpersons, Ms Oliphant and Mr Setona, we have every reason to be proud
of our achievements this year.

Our committees, led by various chairpersons, visited various communities
throughout the country to check the progress that our government is making
in the lives of our people. Some of our committees undertook follow-up
visits in the provinces we had visited before, including Mpumalanga
province in particular. As a Council, we had the opportunity to debate and
engage in various issues of national importance that are there to ensure
that they set an enabling framework to better the lives of our people.

Let me also take this opportunity to express our sincere appreciation for
the tireless work and commitment of our Whippery in continuing to engage
with us and also in ensuring that members did attend to the parliamentary
tasks expected of them. I must also thank those members who committed and
dedicated themselves to ensuring that they fulfilled the obligations they
were sworn to fulfil when they came to Parliament.

I must also thank the administration, under the leadership of Adv Matyolo,
for the good work they have done in supporting us as a political House. I
have also noted that we have the Secretary to Parliament in our presence.
Maybe, later on, before we close, we will get an announcement as to where
the end of the year function will be for the NCOP. [Laughter.]

May I say that this year we have seen the strengthening of our programme of
“Taking Parliament to the People”. We have been to the Northern Cape and
the Free State where, respectively, we were addressed by the Deputy
President and the President of the country. I must also say that we are
very appreciative of the support the Presidency always gives to the
programme of “Taking Parliament to the People”. I think the office of the
Presidency deserves great applause in this regard. [Applause.]

I must also say that our Council witnessed a number of interesting events
this year. Among them was the reburial of our struggle stalwart, Comrade
Moses Mabhida, who was also a secretary-general of the SACP. Comrade Moses
Mabhida died of a heart attack in Maputo in March 1986. Due to the
apartheid policies of that time, he could not be buried in his country of
birth. He was given, however, a Mozambican state funeral with full military
honours at which the late comrade Samora Machel and the then ANC President,
Oliver Tambo, and Joe Slovo were in attendance on behalf of the people of
South Africa.

Although the occasion of the reburial of Comrade Mabhida was a sad
occasion, which reminded us of the hardships and suffering that we endured
under apartheid, it was also an occasion for us to regain our strength and
inspiration, to celebrate the life of a leader and revolutionary who
dedicated his life to the liberation of our people. More sadly, we also
lost a number of our leaders, including utata uJames Zamiwonga “Castro”
Kati, Thozamile Gqwetha and umama Ellen Khuzwayo. These, among others, were
patriots who spent their whole lives in the struggle for peace, democracy
and social progress in this country.

The drumbeat of our concerted efforts to redress the legacy of apartheid in
our country was rumbling as we celebrated the renaming of Johannesburg
Airport to honour a rare human being of our country, O R Tambo. Indeed,
history has bestowed on our generation the gift of a rare historic
opportunity to celebrate the life and dedication of this noble son of
Africa by renaming one of the continent’s largest airports “O R Tambo
International”, and this week we saw a giant Airbus A380 coming in and
sealing the renaming of the airport after a giant of the African soil.
[Applause.]

I can go on endlessly and say that this was a year in which we celebrated
the 50th anniversary of the Women’s March, the 30th anniversary of the
Soweto uprising and the 20th commemoration of Samora Machel.

There is an endless list of events that were celebrated this year. But most
importantly, as we close this year, we need to also celebrate the
democratic threshold which the Democratic Republic of Congo has achieved
through their elections, which have seen President Joseph Kabila being
democratically elected to lead that country. We also appreciated, as we got
the news, that last night he met with Vice President Jean-Pierre Bemba and
came to an agreement that they must work together for the better to uplift
that country.

As we disperse to go on our Christmas and New Year holidays, we are
carrying with us an unequivocal message of hope. We are taking to our
communities, constituencies and families the message that South Africa is
blazing a trail towards a secure future. We are saying we are in this age
of hope. All of us agree that South Africa today is better than it was
yesterday.

In the spirit of Christmas and already in the festive mood, I will not
allow myself, like Mr Watson, to say negative things because the Christmas
period is a period of love, of giving and of caring for each other. We want
to close by saying, “Arrive Alive”, “Don’t drink and drive”. Enjoy your
festive season and all the best for 2007, including all those who have been
negative in 2006. Thank you. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Now that everybody has spoken, can I ask a
question: Why are the presiding officers not given the right to also say
farewell? [Interjections.] We are not put on the list to speak. Are you
saying I shouldn’t speak to all these good members here! Chief Whip?
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice that the
presidium be given unlimited time to say a farewell speech. Thank you.
[Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon member, thank you very much. I think you
have covered the ground. May I just say, as the last word, that I wish to
thank my Deputy Chairperson, Peggy Hollander, and the two House
Chairpersons.

I must say we have had a difficulty here. As some of you have heard, It was
not easy to drive you all along the road. It was at times very difficult.
Some of you have been very difficult with us but at the end of the day we
emerged as a team that has members who like one another. That’s what I like
about the NCOP.

My son once asked me a question. He said, “Dad, I normally watch you people
debating there in Parliament. You people shout, fight and fight. Do you
really love one another?” My answer was very simple. I said, “Yes, we
differ, but we don’t hate one another. After that big noise that you hear
in the House, we go together to one restaurant and have dinner there or
lunch, have coffee or go to the bar and have a drink.”

So, politics is about that – it’s about the exchanging of knowledge and
differences but not hating each other. If you hate others, then you are not
a mature politician. We have to listen to each other, we have to debate.
That’s why we are here, because this is a debating forum and other people
will differ with you. So, you don’t have to be aggrieved because I differ
with you or somebody differs with you. But you have the right to differ;
you have the right to debate and all of you are protected by the Rules of
this House.

So, I wish to thank all the members of this House, including the
chairpersons of committees. I know you have very difficult programmes ahead
of you.

Chief Whip, thank you very much. You’ve been lashing your whip and it has
been cracking all the time to get all the people or members in line. But I
don’t forget the provincial Whips. I think you’ve done some very wonderful
work to assist the Chief Whip in doing the job.

Secretary to the NCOP – thank you very much. You’ve done a good job. I know
you and I differ on many things but at the end of the day we agree because
we debate issues with the Secretary to Parliament and your deputy.
[Interjections.] By the way, Adv Matyolo, you don’t have a Deputy
Secretary?

The Secretary to Parliament and the Deputy Secretary have been very
wonderful to us. You may not see them in the House all the time but they
run Parliament - both of them. That includes the NCOP. From time to time I
do consult with them on the administrative issues so that we are on board
and so that we achieve our work.

They give us a lot of support and I don’t want us to forget them. I want to
say thank you for the support that you have actually given us, both of you,
as administration staff, together with all your staff members, particularly
those who give us water. Yes, when everybody is tired here, you just
gesture like this and a glass of water comes. Don’t you think it’s good
service that you’re getting? You don’t have to stand up from your seat.
[Applause.] We actually normally forget them – they are doing an excellent
job. Thanks to those who also keep this Chamber clean.

Lastly, let me just say: Have a good Christmas. [Interjections.] Who is
that? Oh yes, the programming Whip – thank you very much. Thanks to you,
Nita, as well. I see you’re looking at me as if I’ve not expressed my
gratitude to you. Thank you very much, all of you. Wattie, you’ve been a
very good team, and your members as well. Dr van Heerden, Ms Qikani, Mme
Matloela, Ntate Tlhagale, hon Hendrickse, Mam’V - you’ve been all very
good.

I wish to say to you all: Have a prosperous New Year with your families,
and I wish and pray for you that God be with you for the rest of the
period. I would like to see all of you back in January when we start. Don’t
forget the date on which we’re starting. I think you have a long holiday.
What is the date on which we reopen, Chief Whip? The 17th of January 2007?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Yes, 17 January 2007.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I also think it’s 17 January 2007.

An HON MEMBER: March!

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: No, not March. [Laughter.] It’s 17 January
2007 for all of us here.

I have one announcement here from House chairperson, hon Oliphant, that I
must remind the task team dealing with the case studies to meet at 13h00 in
S26.

The Chief whip also wants me to make an announcement. The funeral of
Nosipho Mafinyane, the PA to Ms Masilo, will be on 9 December 2006 at
Khayelitsha in Cape Town. Thank you very much, hon members.

The Council adjourned at 12:30.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          FRIDAY, 17 NOVEMBER 2006
COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

CREDA INSERT - Insert T061117E-insert PAGES 2815-2916


                          MONDAY, 20 NOVEMBER 2006

COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces



CREDA INSERT REPORT - Insert T061120E-insert1 – PAGES 2918-2935

                          MONDAY, 27 NOVEMBER 2006

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Quarterly Report of the Auditor-General on  the  submission  of
        financial statements by municipalities  and  the  status  of  audit
        reports as at 30 September 2006 [RP 258-2006].
COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Social Services on the  Civil  Union
    Bill [B 26B - 2006] (National Assembly-  sec  75),  dated  27  November
    2006:


        The Select Committee on  Social  Services,  having  considered  the
        subject of the Civil Union Bill [B 26B - 2006] (National Assembly -
        sec 75), referred  to  it  and  classified  by  the  Joint  Tagging
        Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports that it has agreed  to  the
        Bill.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on  Social  Services  on  the  Southern
    African  Development  Community  (SADC)  Protocol  on  Facilitation  of
    Movement of Persons, dated 27 November 2006:

        The Select Committee on  Social  Services,  having  considered  the
        request  for  approval  by  Parliament  of  the  Southern   African
        Development Community (SADC) Protocol on Facilitation  of  Movement
        of Persons, referred to it, recommends that the Council,  in  terms
        of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Protocol.


    Report to be considered.



CREDA INSERT REPORT 3 - Insert T061127E-insert – PAGES 2988-2997

                          TUESDAY, 28 NOVEMBER 2006
ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)     Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 28 November
        2006:


          a) Civil Union Bill [B 26B – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75).


