---
title: 'National Assembly - 24 August 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-08-24
---

THURSDAY, 24 AUGUST 2006

                                    ____





                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION


Ms J A SEMPLE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I will move:

   That this House debates the nonpayment of maintenance orders for the
   maintenance of children and the problems related thereto.

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Madam Deputy Chair, I hereby give notice that I intend
moving the following motion:
   That the House -


   (1)      censures the former Minister of Minerals and Energy, Ms Lindiwe
        Hendricks, for-


        (a)      misleading the public in her capacity as the
              responsible Minister by stating without reasonable cause that
              there was growing evidence that the Koeberg nuclear plant’s
              breakdown was wilfully perpetrated in resistance to the
              government’s transformation agenda;


        (b)      making the statement on 28 February 2006, on the eve of
              the local government elections; and


        (c)      not apologising for misleading the public in making this
              uninformed statement.


                PROGRESSIVE WOMEN’S MOVEMENT OF SOUTH AFRICA


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

  That the House-

     1) notes that from 5 to 8 August 2006 women representing various
        sectors of our country came together in Mangaung in the Free State
        province to fulfil the historic task of launching the Progressive
        Women’s Movement of South Africa;


     2) further notes that the patriarchal system of values and practices
        that underpins the organisation and structure of our society results
        in unequal power relations between women and men and the
        subordination of women in all spheres of life;


     3) recalls that over the years women in our country have played a
        significant role in the struggle against colonialism and apartheid;

     4) believes that by coming together in this manner, the women of our
        country have honoured the duty we have to work at all times for the
        unity of our people across race, class, gender and age divides and
        that they have provided our country with a vital weapon for the
        further consolidation of the gains made in the struggle for women
        emancipation;


     5) further believes that in our country many women have not yet tasted
        the fruits of our liberation, particularly working-class, rural and
        poor women and that, despite our democratic gains, women and the
        girl-child continue to be victims of domestic violence and abuse and
        that, in this context, the formation of the Progressive Women’s
        Movement of South Africa represents a momentous step in the journey
        towards the achievement of true equality among all the people of our
        country;


     6) acknowledges the movement’s commitment to taking the struggle of
        women to higher levels and consolidate the gains already achieved in
        pursuit of the establishment of a truly democratic, nonracial,
        nonsexist and prosperous South Africa;

     7) calls on all progressive women in our country to join hands and
        build a strong and enduring women’s movement;

     8) wishes the Progressive Women’s Movement of South Africa a heroic
        future and success in its work; and

     9) congratulates Madam Speaker and Mrs Noluthando Myende-Sibiya on
        their election as convenor and co-convenor of the movement.

[Applause.]

Agreed to.


   REMUNERATION OF PUBLIC OFFICE BEARERS ACT – PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC’S
                                REMUNERATION


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, on behalf of
the Chief Whip of the Majority Party, I move the draft resolution printed
in his name on the Order Paper, as follows:
   That the House resolves that -

   (1)      in terms of section 2(1) of the Remuneration of Public Office
        Bearers Act, 1998 (Act No 20 of 1998), and having due regard for
        the criteria listed in that subsection, the salary and motor
        vehicle allowance payable to the President of the Republic of South
        Africa be determined at eight hundred and eighty six thousand and
        seventy eight rand and fifty six cents (R886 078.56) and two
        hundred and ninety five thousand three hundred and fifty nine rand,
        forty four cents (R295 359.44) per annum, respectively, with effect
        from 1 April 2006; and

   (2)      in terms of section 2(2) of the said Act, the amount of forty
        thousand rand (R40 000) per annum be determined as that portion of
        the remuneration of the President to which section 8(1)(d) of the
        Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962), shall apply.

Agreed to.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The next item ... Mr Gibson?
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: I was just saying that I hope the Chief
Whip stays at Pollsmoor permanently.

                      DISAPPEARANCE OF CONSTABLE RASUGE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms L M MASHIANE (ANC): Deputy Speaker, on 27 August it will be two years
since Constable Frances Nyadi Rasuge disappeared. Her body has not yet been
found. This fact alone is a cruel reminder of crime in general and the
abuse of women in particular, and has placed huge strain, pain and stress
on the families who are praying daily in the hope of at least knowing what
has happened since that day.

We, as parliamentarians, wish to send a message of support to the family.
We wish them continual strength and faith in this long period of pain and
uncertainty. We want to assure you that those who committed this dastardly
act will be brought to book. We will work with the SA Police Service in
solving the crime. We would also like to congratulate the police officers
who are working tirelessly round the clock to solve the case. I thank you.
[Applause.]


        ACCOMPANYING OF TONY YENGENI BY SENIOR ANC MEMBERS TO PRISON


                            (Member’s Statement)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION (DA): Deputy Speaker, it is nothing short
of a disgrace that senior members of the ANC, including Western Cape
Premier Ebrahim Rasool, are accompanying Tony Yengeni to Pollsmoor Prison
as he reports to begin his sentence for fraud and corruption.
[Interjections.] Yes, why don’t you show solidarity with the victims of
crime instead of with the criminals?

This hero’s parade sets an appalling example to ANC members and to the rest
of the country, and flies in the face of President Mbeki’s stance on
corruption.

This morning on national radio the ANC’s provincial chairperson for the
Western Cape, James Ngculu, said that he did not think that Yengeni had
committed a serious crime because he did not steal anything, but only made
use of discounts. By so doing, this senior ANC leader has attempted to
justify and minimise Yengeni’s crime and to deflect the public’s attention
away from the seriousness of his transgressions, which included lying to
and misleading Parliament.

He abused the trust of the former Speaker of the National Assembly itself
and of the people of South Africa. It is disgraceful and disappointing that
senior figures in the ANC can treat Yengeni as a hero, when they should in
fact be using him as an example of how not to behave when in public office.
[Interjections.]

                APPOINTMENT OF BRIGADIER GENERAL ERNEST ZWANE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Madam Speaker, we in the IFP find it absolutely
shocking that the SA National Defence Force has seen fit to appoint
Brigadier General Ernest Zwane as their director of prosecutions,
considering his past criminal offences. Brigadier General Zwane was found
guilty last year on two counts of fraud for falsely claiming to have two
qualifications from the University of Fort Hare and also for the illegal
possession of a firearm and ammunition.

The employment process of the SANDF needs to be reviewed. I think that the
relevant authority needs to explain to us their reason for appointing
Brigadier General Zwane to such an important position. What special skills
or qualifications does he possess that would compel them to overlook his
past criminal actions and appoint him over the rest of the other
applicants?

We urge the Minister and his department to look urgently into this matter
and at the conduct, and to take correctional action, as well as to review
the employment process of the SANDF in order to avoid any further
controversial appointments in future. I thank you, Madam. [Applause.]


  CONGRATULATIONS TO WINNERS AND FINALISTS IN SA YOUTH WATER PRIZE PROJECT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Nkk P BHENGU (ANC): Umbutho wesizwe i-ANC ibahalalisela kakhulu abantwana
abangoThokozile, Thobile Mbanjwa kanye noNompilo Mahlobo ngempumelelo yabo
emncintiswaneni we-SA Youth Water Prize. Laba bantwana bafunda eMehlokazulu
High School eMgungundlovu. Bangabokuqala abamnyama besifazane ukunqoba
lomncintiswano wokongiwa kwamanzi ogqugquzelwe uMnyango wezaManzi
namaHlathi.

Le mpumelelo yalaba bantwana ibavulele ithuba lokuba bayomela izwe lethu e-
Stockholm emncintiswaneni ofanayo. Singumbutho i-ANC siwafisela impumelelo
lama qhawe asakhulayo. Sifisela nayo yonke intsha yezwe lakithi impumelelo
ekuzilungiseleleni kwayo kokuhlolwa kokuphela konyaka. Sithi inkunzi
isematholeni. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu member’s
statement follows.)

[Ms P BHENGU (ANC): The ANC congratulates the children whose names are
Thokozile, Thobile Mbanjwa and Nompilo Mahlobo for their successes achieved
in the SA Youth Water Prize competition. These children are learners at
Mehlokazulu High School in Pietermaritzburg. They are the first black
females to have won this competition on “water saving” which was organised
by the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry.

The success of these learners has opened an opportunity for them to
represent our country in the same competition in Stockholm. As the ANC, we
wish these emerging heroines all the best. We wish the youth of our country
success when they prepare for their end-of-year examination. We say,
“leadership is among the youth”. Thank you. [Applause.]]

                          PORNOGRAPHY ON CELLPHONES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Rev K R J MESHOE (ACDP): The ACDP is very concerned about findings that
indicate that in the Western Cape exposure to pornography on cellphones is
worse than on the Internet. Principals and teachers have reported that
pupils addicted to a service designed by a South African called “MXit” no
longer pay attention in class. Principals and teachers say that learners
are constantly glued to their cellphones as they access hardcore
pornography.

The Film and Publication Board’s communications manager said that more than
80% of learners were accessing adult material on their cellphones. He
concluded that MXit was dangerous, and we definitely agree with him.

The Immaculata High School principal, where pupils addicted to MXit are
getting support, was reported to have said that MXit was a drug and that
learners had become dependent on it. Some have stopped doing their homework
because they spend most of their days on MXit.

The ACDP appeals to government to deal urgently with this problem that does
not only negatively affect children’s schoolwork and moral behaviour, but
also destroys their future. Thank you.

                                  ARMS DEAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs P DE LILLE (ID): Madam Deputy Speaker, after numerous requests to the
ANC government to come clean on the arms deal corruption, these calls have
been repeatedly ignored to the detriment of the ruling party and the
country as a whole.

Pierre Maynot, the head of Thint, stated in an affidavit at the
Pietermaritzburg High Court that former Justice Minister Penuel Maduna did
some work for the company last year. If the allegation is accurate, Maduna
may well have had inside information on the charges against Zuma and Thint.

Even though the pieces of the puzzle are starting to fall into place, the
ANC government has still not answered my one question: In light of the
Scorpions’ grilling of former ambassador to France, Barbara Masekela, and
now that Minister Pahad has regained his lost memory and admitted to having
attended a meeting with the French company, South Africa would like to
know, who else attended this meeting and what was discussed?

An integral figure in this saga, Mr Jayendra Naidoo, is in the process of
suing me for raising this matter in Parliament. I wish him well.
[Laughter.] [Applause.]

                         THE EXAMPLE OF AMIR PASTER

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr T J BONHOMME (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC-led government will always
work tirelessly for the rights of all the people of the world to
independence and self-governance. It shall be the basis of our close
cooperation. Peace and friendship amongst all our people shall be secured
by upholding equal rights, opportunities and status for all.

This is the same objective that has influenced Captain Amir Paster, just 32
years old, an infantry officer and a student at the Tel Aviv University,
who stood up against the call to participate in a military campaign in
Lebanon. In his trial, Captain Amir Paster declared that it would be:
“Taking part in a war contrary to the values upon which I was brought up.”

The values that this captain referred to are peace and friendship amongst
all people, and the settling of all international disputes with
negotiations and not with war. The ANC urges all peace-loving South
Africans and the people of the Middle East and the world over to emulate
the example of this courageous soldier. We further call on all South
Africans who hold dual citizenship not to agree to be called up for
military duty in the Lebanon and Palestine crisis. I thank you.

                          MATATIELE WINS COURT CASE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S E M PHEKO (PAC): Madam Speaker, the PAC congratulates the people of
Matatiele for winning their court case against a decision to incorporate
them into the Eastern Cape. We welcome the decision of the Constitutional
Court on this matter in declaring the Constitution 12th Amendment Act and
Cross-boundary Municipal Law Repeal and Related Matters Act invalid.

The unwillingness of the people of Matatiele to move from KwaZulu-Natal has
something to do with inferior service delivery in Mount Fletcher. Mount
Fletcher, their main town in the Eastern Cape, is in shambles. There are no
banks, African business has collapsed, unemployment is high and the Taylor
Bequest Hospital is a hospital in name only. Roads are atrocious. There is
a need for equitable and rapid development of Mount Fletcher.

The Constitutional Court decision is a test for Khutsong in Gauteng, which
has been incorporated in the North West province without the consent of the
people. The court has soon good juries prudence in striking down the
unconstitutional government decision on Matatiele. Thank you.

                       COMPETENCY OF CABINET MINISTERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S SIMMONS (UPSA): Deputy Speaker, when a government department is
repeatedly showing inefficiency and then producing failing remedies for its
mismanagement, it is clear that drastic measures are needed to turn things
around in such a department.

Not so long ago I highlighted the crisis in the Department of Correctional
Services and subsequently requested specifically that the hon Minister
Balfour releases himself as Minister of this department in view of his
department’s performance. The general state of affairs in the Department of
Correctional Services and now its financial mismanagement is a reflection
of incompetence at the highest level in this department. It is not just the
Minister of Health that should vacate her office, as advocated by many, but
a number of others as well, starting with the hon Minister Balfour.
These unacceptable levels of poor performance by some Ministers can only be
turned around by firm and decisive action by the hon President. This action
should include a process of revisiting and re-examining the levels of
competencies among our Cabinet Ministers. I thank you.

                             THE 2010 WORLD CUP

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S J MASANGO (DA): Deputy Speaker, the DA wants the World Cup to work. We
want it to be the best World Cup tournament ever held. We want to show that
South Africa cannot only compete with the rest of the world, but can exceed
it. If this is going to happen, we need a committed well-organised and
carefully planned campaign.

This is particularly relevant to the building and improvement of new
stadiums. Construction takes great time and planning. In Mpumalanga, where
we are planning to build a stadium, there seems to be a number of problems
which now need to be urgently addressed if we are to make the World Cup a
success in this province. The council has failed to purchase the land where
the stadium is to be built. People now have to be moved before the land can
be bought. Two schools have to be demolished. It amounts to bad planning
and a lack of foresight. We should be busy constructing the stadium now and
not fighting for a piece of land on which to do so. If we are to excel, we
need to start at the bottom and work up. These sorts of problems need to be
sorted out now.

                       VICTIMS OF LIONS IN FREE STATE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M J G MZONDEKI (ANC): Deputy Speaker, this statement is about the
victims of lions in Hennenman in the Free State.

Mokgatlo wa ANC o lebisa kutlwelobohloko ho ba malapa a bafu, Mong Tatsi le
Mong Mpholo ba dulang Virginia le Welkom. Bontate bana ba bile mahlasipa a
ditau tse thobileng serapeng sa diphohofolo tse hlaha Hennemane, Freistata,
mohla 9 Phato 2006.

Bafu e ne e le bahlanka ba tshireletso seratswaneng seo, mme ba ile ba
hlaselwa ke ditau tse tharo tse tswileng seratswaneng ka lebaka la bofokodi
ba terata ya tshireletso. Re boetse ra fumana tlhahisoleseding ya hore,
monga seratswana sena, ha a na mangolo a tumello a ho ba le seratswana sa
mofuta ona, ebile o se a kile a kgalemellwa hona.

Re boetse ra fumana tlhahisoleseding ya hore, basebeletsi bao bane ba
lefshwa bonyane R430,00 ka kgwedi, ebile bane basa kwetlisetswa mosebetsi
oo. ANC e tshwela boitswaro bona bo swabisang ka mathe, ke bohlaswa le hona
ho se tsotelle maphelo a batho. Re etsa boipiletso ho mmuso hore o thibele
diketso tsa mofuta ona le nakong e tlang.

Re kopa hore ho etswe phuphutso mabapi le ketsahalo ena, ebile re kopa hore
diratswana tsohle tsa mofuta ona di fuputswe pele ho ka ntshwa mangolo a
tumello. Ho swabisa haholo ha e le mona diphoofolo tsa rona tsa bohahlaodi
mona Afrika Borwa di tlohelletswe matsohong a batho ba hlokang boikarabelo
ka mokgwa ona. (Translation of Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[The ANC would like to send our condolences to the families of the
deceased, Mr Tatsi and Mr Mpholo, who live in Virginia and Welkom
respectively. The two gentlemen were victims of lions that had escaped from
a game reserve in Hennenman in the Free State on 9 August 2006.

The deceased were security guards at the game reserve, and were attacked by
three lions which escaped from the game park as a result of a weak security
fence. We also uncovered information that the owner did not have a licence
to operate such a park, and was warned against such an operation.

Furthermore, we discovered that these employees were paid a meagre R430 a
month, and were not even trained to do this kind of work. The ANC views
this type of practice with the contempt it deserves, because it speaks of
careless and uncaring behaviour towards other people’s lives. We would
therefore like to implore the government to prevent such acts in the
future.

We ask that an investigation be set up regarding this matter, and also that
all game reserves of this nature be investigated before licences are
issued. It is very embarrassing that wild animals in South Africa should be
left in the hands of such irresponsible individuals.]

                         PLANNING IN CASE OF FLOODS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M W SIBUYANA (IFP): Deputy Speaker, although the winter months bring
much-needed rain to many areas, especially in the Cape Province, they also
cause devastation and hardship. The recent floods that ravaged parts of the
Eastern Cape caused damage and destruction in many areas. People had to be
evacuated from their homes and the roads were left damaged. We know that it
is impossible to plan against acts of nature, such as floods. We do,
however, believe that the relevant authorities can do more in anticipation
of these events. They know that winter brings rain in regions such as the
Cape Province and therefore there is a distinct possibility of flooding and
damages to roads and property. With thorough forward planning, the impact
of floods and the heavy rains can be lessened.

The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry should be innovative enough
and dynamic in its approach to find means of capturing and storing water
during the rainy seasons, as South Africa is not a country that is blessed
with abundant water resources. It is therefore imperative that we take full
advantage of the situation when we do get rain. We cannot stop these acts
of nature, but we can assist in easing the harsh effects of the two
extremes, flooding and drought, if we have the right plans and mechanisms
in place. I thank you.

          RACISM BETWEEN WHITE FARMERS AND THE PEOPLE OF THABAZIMBI

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms R J MASHIGO (ANC): Thank you, Deputy Speaker.

ANC e tshwenyegile thata ka ditiragalo tse di ntseng di tswelela tsa
bogagapa mo Thabazimbi mo Limpopo. Dipogo tse di tsweletseng di bontsha
gore modi wa ditiragalo tse di sa amogelesegeng tse, ke tsa go se
itshokelane, tsa semorafe magareng ga balemi ba basweu le batho ba mo
tikologong. Phitlhelelo e, e tlile morago ga kopano ya baagi. Tiragalo ya
sešeng ke ya molemi mongwe e leng rre Nel, yo tlhageletseng  kwa kgotla mme
a lokololwa ka beili fa a sena go bolaya  ka sethunya mosimane wa dingwaga
di le 11, a nagana gore ke ntšwa.

Ngwaga pele ga tiragalo e e setlhogo e, molemi mongwe e leng rre Pinaar o
thubile dikago tsa sekolo tsa polase go thibela bana ba bantsho ba tikologo
eo go tsena sekolo. ANC e tshitshinya gore Khomišene ya Ditshwanelo tsa
Botho e etele tikologo e ka bonako, go ya go batlisisa magatwe a semorafe a
a dirilweng ke baagi mo kopanong. Ke fela dipatlisiso tse di tseneletseng,
tsa ditshwaelo tsa baagi tse di tla letlang bathathi ba ba maleba go
batlisisa le go tlhagisa boteng jwa magatwe a a semorafe. Ke a leboga.
[Legofi.] (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[The ANC is so disturbed by the criminal activities in Thabazimbi in
Limpopo. The continuous harassment experienced shows that the cause of
these activities which are not welcomed, is as a result of intolerance and
racism between white farmers and the local community. These findings were
made after a community meeting was held. The latest event involves a white
farmer by the name of Mr Nel, who appeared in court for allegedly shooting
an 11 year old boy, whom he mistook for a dog, and was later released on
bail.

A year before this cruel act, a farmer known as Mr Pienaar, demolished a
primary school building on a farm to bar black children in the area from
attending school. The ANC has proposed to the Human Rights Commission to
visit the area at their earliest convenience, to investigate allegations of
racism made by the community at a meeting. It is only thorough
investigations and comments made by the community at a meeting which can
help the relevant authority to investigate and report on the substance of
the racial allegations. Thank you. [Applause.]]

                    PUBLIC PARTICIPATION AND LEGISLATION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr J T DELPORT (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, the Constitutional Court ruled
that if Parliament does not allow for proper public participation in
legislative processes, that fact may invalidate the legislation. It has
become a pattern for Ministers and departments to drag their feet, only
then to rush legislation through Parliament with undue haste. This makes a
mockery of the so-called “People’s Parliament”. It shows that for the ANC,
“people” means “the governing elite”.

Take the issue of same-sex marriages. This legislation must be passed
before 1 December 2006 in terms of the ruling by the Constitutional Court.
The subject is highly sensitive and calls out for in-depth participation.
This is simply not possible anymore if Parliament wants to meet the
deadline. There is nothing of any substance before the relevant portfolio
committee. The DA calls on the Minister of Home Affairs to apply to the
Constitutional Court for an extension of the deadline, stating inefficiency
on the part of the Minister and her department as the reason why Parliament
needs an extension. [Applause.]


                        MURDER OF TSHWANE COUNCILLOR


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr H P MALULEKA (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the ANC condemns the brutal murder
of political activists and councillors, for whatever reason, because the
murder of one human being is one too many. The murder of Councillor Komiki
Motubatse in Soshanguve, a member of the Tswane Metropolitan Council, last
week, is an act which must be condemned by all our people. The ANC would
like to send its condolences to the family of Councillor Motubatse, the
community and the Tswane Metropolitan Council on the loss of Councillor
Motubatse last week.

We in the ANC condemn this brutal act. Councillor Motubatse was a freedom
fighter and a community leader. He has selflessly contributed to bringing
about development in the area of Soshanguve. We are calling upon the
community to assist the police in fighting crime in our communities. It is
through the support of the community that police can apprehend perpetrators
of crime. The ANC reiterates its confidence in the SA Police Service. We
are confident that the perpetrators of these evil deeds will be apprehended
and brought to book. I thank you.


                        CONSTITUTIONAL COURT RULINGS


                             DISASTER MANAGEMENT


                             HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSE


                             SAME-SEX MARRIAGES


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Deputy Speaker,
there are three things that all of us know about the DA and its leadership.
One: they did not fight against apartheid. [Interjections.] Two: they were
not prepared to lay down their lives or their liberty in the interests of
the oppressed of this country. [Interjections.] Three: they have no
individual among their ranks who could be labelled a hero of the people.
[Interjections.] This is why they will never understand ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members!

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: ... why the Western Cape leadership decided not
to desert Tony Yengeni in his hour of need.

They are, in fact, so irrational that they believe a six-year-old can run
away. I never heard anything so ridiculous in my life. [Interjections.] You
are absolutely ridiculous. Your guilt makes you shout because you know what
I say is true. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

In response to the matter of the Constitutional Court rulings: Of course
the executive has taken note of the rulings, and certainly, public hearings
are an important part of the work that Parliament should undertake.
However, I think the rulings mustn’t be interpreted as saying that the laws
in their substance are unconstitutional. I suggest hon members read the
actual judgment by the Constitutional Court judges and the minority
reports, as well.

There isn’t a statement that the incorporation was unconstitutional; it is
in the application by Parliament of its particular role that questions have
been raised. Let’s not transmit the judges’ view and ruling into our own
perspective on the particular legislation and its substance.

With respect to disaster management, there are structures in place. The hon
member of the IFP will be aware, with respect to the Taung community and
the disaster experienced in the Bophirima district in the North West and
the rains we had recently, that there was speedy action by the disaster
management committee. The structures put in place through legislation
reacted fairly well and we have begun to see the rebuilding of the
infrastructure that was destroyed in those particular regions. We will be
seeking assistance in other provinces where there have been the sorts of
disasters that the hon member referred to.

We would fully agree that we perhaps need to be more anticipatory, but it
is very difficult to fortune-tell when bad weather will occur. We are doing
all we can to ensure that we do indeed ready ourselves to respond.

The matter that the hon member referred to with respect to Thabazimbi is,
of course, worrying. Any form of attack that could be construed as racial
is something we all should worry about, and of course we must never tire in
our efforts to build a society where we respect the human dignity, rights
and safety of all persons. So, certainly, we would say that more must be
done and, certainly, the Human Rights Commission, I’m sure, would want to
pay attention to those particular communities. We are fortunate in our
country that there are indeed few such communities. However, whenever we
have instances of racism, of abuse of the dignity of others, across all
colours and genders, whenever abuse occurs and it is seen as something that
is within the community or society, certainly the Human Rights Commission
must assist us by reacting and supporting the necessary building of a
nonracial society which respects and upholds the human dignity and equality
of all.

On the matter of same-sex marriages, I thought there was an announcement
yesterday of the Cabinet decision vis-à-vis the civil union legislation. I
think on that basis, Parliament would be able to set its timeframes and get
on with the work to actually deal with the legislation. I hope that the
Minister would have heard the statement from the hon member of the DA and
that steps will be taken in terms of Rule 159 to ensure that Parliament
indeed has a draft piece of legislation, so that it could begin to develop
its programme as to how it will address the legislation.

Given that there is a Constitutional Court ruling, I don’t think it was
Cabinet’s view that there should be an approach to the court to extend the
time. Rather, it was that we should ensure the legislation reaches
Parliament to ensure that both Houses have an adequate opportunity to deal
with the legislation and therefore to respond to the Constitutional Court
deadline of 1 December.

In conclusion, I would join hon members in condemning the murder of
Councillor Motubatse and expressing our sympathy to his family and the
community that he served. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon Minister. There is only opportunity for
two Ministers to respond to any of the items that were left out by the
Minister. All Ministers are happy. We now come to the subject for
discussion.

    THE 60TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE AFRICAN MINEWORKERS’ STRIKE OF 1946 – THE
  SIGNIFICANCE AND ROLE OF THE WORKING CLASS MOVEMENT IN THE TRANSFORMATION
                               OF OUR COUNTRY

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Mr G G OLIPHANT: Madam Deputy Speaker, thank you very much. In view of the
debate and the excitement I hear on my left, I will move a motion without
notice at the end of this debate. I will get responses to this and I am
sure we will even get support from those on my left.

Let me start by saying that the month of August 2006 marks very important
anniversaries in the political calendar of South African life. Firstly, 9
August 2006 marks the 50th anniversary of the women’s march to the Union
Buildings in pursuit of the establishment of a democratic, nonracial,
nonsexist South Africa. Secondly, 12 August 2006 marks the 60th anniversary
of the African mineworkers’ strike for better living and working conditions
in this industry, including the demand for a living wage.

It is in this context that we recognise that black women in the distant
lands of our country continue to raise families alone, as their husbands
are forced to toil in the mines, with no guarantee of safety from rock
falls or immunity from diseases such as HIV/Aids and TB.

My interest in this subject derives from personal experience as a
mineworker for about 14 years. We were part of the NUM membership, which
was formed in 1982, and the subsequent formation of Cosatu in 1985,
inspired by our forebears who formed the African Mineworkers’ Union in 1931
and the process that led to the heroic strike in 1946.

Members will recall that 2006 also marks 120 years of mining since the
discovery of precious metals in 1886. Mining is, therefore, still the
bedrock of the South African economy for manufacturing and other value
addition that is still conducted outside our shores, a matter that we still
have to address as a country. Since then, over 50 000 mineworkers have
died, more than a million permanently disabled on duty, and hundreds suffer
from occupational diseases.

In 1914 Sol Plaatje paid the following tribute to mineworkers:

   Two hundred thousand subterranean heroes who, by day and night, for a
   mere pittance lay down their lives to the familiar “fall of rock” ... in
   the bowels of the earth, sacrificed their lungs to the rock dust.

If time permits, we will also deal with the formation of the Communist
Party of SA in 1921 and the 1922 Rand Revolt, which had an enormous impact
on the mobilisation of African mineworkers in particular, culminating in
the formation of the African Mineworkers’ Union in 1931.

It was indeed in 1941 that the beginning of the first real mass trade union
for South African black mineworkers came to the fore. Such an initiative -
and I stress this - was from the executive of the ANC in the Transvaal.
Veteran leaders, Communist Party members and trade union leaders were
behind the proposal to sponsor the organisation of trade unions. Central to
that debate were communists like G Radebe, Thabo Edwin Mofutsanyane, Moses
Kotane, J B Marks, James Majoro and others.

During that time the ANC was also going through a period of reorganising
itself under the leadership of a new generation: Comrades Nelson Mandela,
Oliver Tambo, Duma Nokwe, Govan Mbeki and others. So, for the record, this
alliance was grounded in the struggle, and it is here to stay. Those who
wish it away, continue to dream on. [Applause.]

On 3 August 1941 the ANC conference pressed ahead to bring the
strengthening of the union to reality. By 1944 the membership of the
African Mineworkers’ Union grew into thousands. The response of the Smuts
government and the Chamber of Mines towards these developments was
lukewarm. In 1943 government set up the Lansdowne Commission to investigate
the living and working conditions of mineworkers in the industry. Even the
recommendations of the Wage Board to Parliament were simply turned down.

The union seized the opportunity to mobilise its members for comprehensive
demands, which included a living wage, the demolishing of the hostel
system, a reduction in the number of working hours to 40, the provision of
free safety equipment, and the improvement of food in the compound. I must
say that all these demands are still relevant today, 60 years later.

These demands were carried in a letter written by the union to the chamber
on 3 May 1946. Until today the chamber has never acknowledged receipt or
responded to that letter. This type of arrogance and insensitivity
displayed by mine bosses, together with their then government, precipitated
the heroic strike in 1946.

The NUM, in their memorandum to the Chamber of Mines this year on 12
August, referred to this persistent attitude that continues across
generations to the latter day. They further declared that the underlying
spirit of J B Marks, J J Majoro, Thabo Mofutsanyane and Moses Kotane will
continue to lead mineworkers in the current period and that, “With our
action now, we promise not to falter.”

The strike of 1946 was the biggest single strike in South Africa, estimated
to have had 76 000 African miners participating. During that period, nine
workers were killed, 120 were injured, many leaders were arrested, some
sacked, and the strike was broken. On the 40th anniversary of the
mineworkers’ strike, in a commemorative pamphlet of the SACP, “A distant
clap of thunder”, the party described the brutality of the regime in
suppressing the strike as follows:

  The atmosphere was not that of a labour dispute, as the term is
  understood elsewhere in the civilised world. It was rather that of a
  civil war; it was fought by police equipped like an army, with rifles and
  fixed bayonets; its operations conducted like military offensives against
  an enemy, ending in “surrender”, signified by raising of weaponless
  hands; the surrenders followed up by the “rounding up” of stragglers in
  hiding.

During the same period in 1986, Joe Slovo made the following observations:
that no monument has yet been built to these fallen heroes of labour; that
the fruits of their sacrifice can only be seen in the wealth accumulated by
a tiny minority; that the 1946 strikers’ courage must be an inspiration to
all workers to unite and fight for their rights.

Members will recall the collaborative effort between the Chamber of Mines
and government, and that the General Smuts government attacked the
communists as agitators of the strike, forcing those who were union leaders
out of the union, and the Communist Party was subsequently banned in 1950.
Simple demands of workers were met with brutal force.

Those who care to listen to music describing the living and working
conditions of mineworkers must visit these places or just listen to the
track by Bra Hugh Masekela called Stimela. He sings about the filthy,
funky, flea-ridden hostels, and about the mineworkers who go deep, deep
down into the belly of the earth every day to dig for that evasive piece of
metal underground, risking loss of life and limb; of families not knowing
if their loved ones will return after the choo-choo train has taken them
from all over the region - Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Lesotho and Botswana.

Our mothers used to sing the song “Ba ile banake, ba ile mosebetsing” [My
children are gone, they went to seek jobs] for the same reasons. Some have
never seen the graves of their sons, even until today. This economy was
built on the backs of mineworkers from all over the region, and we commend
the NUM for their working class solidarity programmes and co-operatives
within the areas mentioned above.

However, the struggle continues. In 1982 the National Union of Mineworkers
was formed under the leadership of Cyril Ramaphosa, James Motlatsi and
Elijah Barayi, to name but a few, picking up the fallen spear from the
African Mineworkers Union. Cosatu was then launched in 1985, taking forward
the torch from our forebears Sactu, with Elijah Barayi still as its first
president. I won’t go into the rest, as the rest is history.

In 1986 the apartheid state tried to do with us what their heroes did in
1946 to our ancestors. They banned the UDF and other progressive
formations, tried to restrict Cosatu, and introduced a state of emergency.
This time, however, we were ready for them, and they capitulated before we
could finish with them. The year 1987 saw the seven days that rocked the
chamber, and we decided to take control of our movement towards a better
South Africa.

They tried to change the labour laws, and we defied them. They tried with
the Labour Relations Amendment Act in 1988 and 1989, and we defied them. In
1989 the mineworkers elected Comrade President Mandela as their life
honorary president. Some of our demands were met in 1990. The 1994
democratic breakthrough brought about better conditions for workers and an
improvement in the lives of black people.

A lot has been achieved, even though we still have to realise the demands
of mineworkers in full. You will recall that in 1994 there was the
rationalisation of labour laws, and we passed the Nedlac Act. We went on to
pass the Labour Relations Act that is progressive. We have also passed the
Basic Conditions of Employment Act, the Skills Development Act and the
Employment Equity Act. Also, 100 or so years later - in 1996 - there was
the Mine Health and Safety Act that deals with this.

We in this Parliament still have to recognise the quality leadership of J B
Marks, Moses Kotane, J J Majoro and Edwin Mofutsanyane under very difficult
conditions. We salute them.

In conclusion, let me once more congratulate the women of South Africa on
the formation of the Progressive Women’s Movement, and the Speaker on her
election as a convener. Let me also congratulate the National Union of
Mineworkers on its significant role in the political landscape of Cosatu,
the country and the continent. The NUM still remains the biggest affiliate
of Cosatu and the biggest on the continent. We also wish Cosatu well in its
congress next month, and I can tell you now that this alliance is here to
stay. I thank you. [Applause.]

I, with leave, move without notice:

  That the House-


    1) notes that 12 August 2006 marks the 60th anniversary of the
       mineworkers’ strike of 1946;


    2) further notes the important role played by the mineworkers in the
       development of our economy and the transformation of our country;

    3) believes that the demands put forward by the African Mineworkers
       Union in 1946 were not fully addressed and are still relevant today;
       and

     4) resolves-

          a) that the living and working conditions of mineworkers be
             investigated further and be improved;


        b) to support the initiative to build a workers’ museum by the
           mineworkers;

          c) that Parliament establish a process of renaming some of its
             buildings after heroes like J B Marks, a leader of the African
             Mineworkers’ Union.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, the hon Mr Oliphant has moved a
motion without notice. Are there any objections to the motion being moved?

Hon MEMBERS: No!

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion will be put for a decision at the end of the
debate.

Mr C M LOWE: Thank you, Deputy Speaker and good afternoon, Deputy
President. In addressing you all this afternoon, I am indebted to the
writings of MP Naicker, Alex Hepple and James Philips, all of whom provide
a welcome redress and rebalance, perhaps, to the biased and one-sided
history I was disadvantaged enough to be taught when at school.

Sixty years ago, on 12 August 1946, the African mineworkers of the
Witwatersrand came out on strike in support of the demand for higher wages.
They continued to strike for a week in the face of the most savage police
terror in which officially nearly 1 300 were wounded and a very large
number - officially put at only nine - were reported killed. Lawless police
and army violence smashed the strike. The resources of the racist state
were mobilised, almost on a war footing, against the unarmed workmen.

The miners’ solidarity and defiant action should be commemorated by the
working class and the liberation movement and by democrats everywhere as a
heroic and historic event. It was a giant step forward towards freedom from
exploitation and oppression in South Africa.

Its most profound impact, however, was the effect it had on the political
thinking within the national liberation movement. Almost immediately, it
shifted significantly from a policy of concession to more dynamic and
militant forms of struggle. It transformed African politics overnight by
ending the compromising, concession-begging tendencies that had dominated
African politics until then.

Today, on the 60th anniversary of that strike, we honour the memory of
those African miners, of mineworkers and workers everywhere. We remember
and commend the cause for which they fought, and in whose name so many
died. In so doing, we commemorate their efforts and the efforts of all
brave South African men and women who went before them and who took up the
struggle in the decades after them. These men and women wanted and
ultimately demanded nothing more than what was their birthright in the face
of unconscionable prejudice, untold and overwhelming violence and often
utter hopelessness; to have their basic human rights acknowledged, to
receive equal consideration in an open society and to earn a decent living
wage.

The struggle of white miners in the unions from 1880 onwards, prevented the
solidarity between white and black workers, but it taught black workers the
importance of one thing - in order to win their demands, they had to
organise. After many successful attempts, as we’ve heard, on 3 August 1941,
the African Mineworkers’ Union was finally established; at a time when the
wage rate for African workers was R70 per year and for white workers R848.
By 1946, African wages were R87 and for whites the wage was R1 106, which
meant a gap of 12:1.

The Chamber of Mines refused to even acknowledge the existence of the
African Mineworkers’ Union, much less to negotiate with its leaders.

On Sunday, 4 August 1946, after months of futile attempts to reason with
the Chamber, over a thousand delegates gathered at an open-air conference
in the Newtown Market Square, and unanimously resolved to embark on a
general strike in support of the legitimate demands of the minimum wage of
eight shillings and better working conditions.

A last-minute appeal to the Chamber to negotiate was ignored, as usual. The
press and mass media did not print any news of the decision until the
Monday morning, 12 August, when the Rand Daily Mail came out with a front-
page story that the strike was a “complete failure”. Yet, the paper had
gone to print even before the strike had begun.

By that evening, tens of thousands of workers went out on strike. The Smuts
government had formed a special committee of Cabinet Ministers to “deal
with the situation” and thousands of police were mobilised and drafted into
the area.

They dealt with it by means of bloody violence. The police used batons and
bayonets and fired on the striking workers to force them down the
mineshafts. The full extent of the police action would probably never be
known, but reports from miners and some newspapers revealed intense
persecution, violence and terror during the week that followed.

A peaceful procession of workers began to march in Johannesburg on what
became known as Bloody Tuesday, 13 August, wanting their passes so that
they could go home. The police opened fire on the procession, killing a
number of workers. At one mine, workers who were forced to go down the mine
and started a sit-down strike underground. The police drove the workers up,
according to The Star newspaper, “stope by stope, level by level”, to the
surface. They then started to beat them up and chased them into the veld
with baton charges. Then, according to The Star, the workers were “re-
assembled” in the compound yard, and “volunteered to go back to work”.

By Friday 16 August, after five days of violence, terror, mass arrests and
propaganda, all 75 000 - or probably nearer to a 100 000 - striking workers
were bludgeoned and subdued to going back to work.

These are the facts of the events of the story of the 1946 strike, and the
story we must remember and honour because, through the efforts of so many,
including those mineworkers, we now live in a far better country with the
Constitution and labour legislation that recognises the rights of all
workers and guarantees them those rights and protections. That is how it
should be and that is what the DA supports.

However, while we honour the past, we must be careful of not living in it
too. Today’s debate should also be about building on that past, how we deal
with the realities of the present and what we are doing to confront the
challenges of the future. Today in honouring the past, trade unions need to
face up to the realities of the 21st century and change the way they
behave.
Addressing Parliament on 18 May, President Mbeki said that no cause is so
great that strikers can damage property or injure people during strike or
mass action. He was referring, of course, to the ongoing Satawu strike, a
grim reminder of the damage that is done when unions behave recklessly and
irresponsible. That strike saw more than nine people murdered, many more
injured and led to large-scale destruction of both private and public
property. All of it was carried out by people who, when at work, are
supposed to prevent violence and unlawfulness of this or any other sort.

Two days before, only metres away from these Parliament buildings, Cape
Town became a war zone. Journalists were attacked and stabbed, car
windscreens were smashed and cars badly damaged, shop windows were broken,
motorbikes turned on their sides and militant strikers, many armed with
steel pipes, pick-axe handles and sticks, marched through the city,
wreaking havoc and demonstrating the thuggery of some members of South
Africa’s trade unions.

Panic-stricken law-abiding citizens ran for cover, shop workers were
attacked, threatened and traumatised, and at least one person was thrown
through a plate glass window.
The DA recognises absolutely the right of all workers to strike, but we
cannot condone the behaviour of those thugs who are intent on terrorising
South Africans in an effort to put pressure on the employers. Workers have
rights; hard-won and hard-earned rights, but law-abiding citizens do too.
The DA believes that the constitutional right to strike must, in all
instances, be carried out in a legalised and organised manner that does not
infringe on the rights of those citizens and those workers who also carry
out their right to work.

To do otherwise, would be to betray the memory, the struggle and the
sacrifice of those who fought and died in the miners’ strike of 1946. By
his own admission, the President has agreed.

So the lesson of today is that our labour laws should be amended to prevent
a repeat of mass anarchy and wilful destruction of property and, as we have
said we would, the DA has introduced the Private Member’s Bill and the
Labour Relations Amendment Bill, which seeks to hold unions responsible for
their strikers who take the law into their hands, making them criminally
and civilly liable for damage caused.
In commemorating the historic 1946 miners’ strike, we acknowledge how far
we have come as a nation, how much we have shared and changed for the
better, and how deeply we are all bound together by the shared history of
our land; and just how far the road we still have to travel extends.
However, more than anything else, it teaches us that the past, however
brutal, illegitimate and unjust, really is another country.

We must remember and honour the past, but we must stop living in it.
Constantly using the past is an excuse for current shortcomings and
failings. We reflect badly on ourselves and we sully the memory of those
men and women who struggled to make South Africa free.

While we honour the past, it is to the future that we must look if we are
truly to honour the events of 1946 and their significance to us and the
generations that will follow. [Applause.]

Prince N E ZULU: Madam Speaker, indeed it was on Monday 12 August 1946 that
mineworkers in the Witwatersrand area went on strike and demanded a living
wage and basic human conditions in the work place. The following day, the
Transvaal Council of Non-European Trade Unions lent support to the general
strike of black workers. The scale of that action was unprecedented at the
time, notwithstanding the 1918 strike.

The Transvaal Chamber of Mines was paying R87 per month per black miner and
R1 106 per white counterpart, which means a ratio of 12:1. This was
appalling and the Chamber of Mines was not prepared to negotiate even a 10
shilling increase per month. I heard from my peers in the King’s palace
that the Regent, Prince Mshiyeni kaDinuzulu also sent a word of caution
from Nongoma to the Chamber of Mines before the strike, asking it to heed
the plea of his father’s people. That was not heeded. It was soon after
this that the Native Representative Council under Dr A B Xuma was dissolved
as a toytelephone and the political impetus in the country was heightened
as never before.

An outstanding feature of the strike was the manner in which it was
organised, yet there were no formal training at the time. It is for this
reason that we argue and say democracy is an integral phenomenon in Africa,
save for a few delinquents.

It was not until 13 August, which became known as Bloody Tuesday, that the
blood of the innocent was spilled and spattered on the streets, compound
gates and everywhere else as a result of the state unleashing its gruesome
vendetta upon the African miners under the instructions of a Cabinet
Committee of General Smuts’ government. It was not until the end of that
week that people were bludgeoned back to work, the leadership arrested and
charged with treason and sedition. This action proved beyond doubt how
rampant white South Africa was in defence of its cheap labour policy and
big dividends for the mining magnates. This action by the state fuelled
more vigour and determination among workers to organise and continue the
fight by other means, proving correct the assertion by iNkosi uLuthuli that
anger generates more and more courage.

Out of the evil system of the time, the African miners learnt how to
organise, how to forge solidarity among themselves and how to best
negotiate and bargain. The mine bosses were intransigent and the Smuts
government was also intransigent. Why do we still have so many industrial
actions now? Like yesterday, why did Cosatu call the wages paid in the
cleaning sector “slave wages?” Why is Nehawu calling for a second job
summit and then maybe a strike? Is our house in order? On the other hand,
Madam Speaker, white workers became the aristocrats of labour in South
Africa, being among the highest paid in the world. It is events such as
these that inspired the leader of the IFP in his youthful age to get
involved in human right activities up to this stage. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms O R KASIENYANE: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, hon Ministers, hon
members and members of the public, in 1946 the African mineworkers’ strike
marked a turning point in South Africa’s political history, in the sense
that it had a profound impact on both the country’s workers’ struggle for a
better life and in advancing the principles contained within the national
democratic revolution.

In this regard, as we celebrate the 60th anniversary of this significant
event in our nation’s history, we have to advance the rise of the South
African worker, as it is enshrined in our constitutional democracy. Even at
this relatively early stage of our society’s political evolution, the most
profound result of the strike, however, was the impact it had on the
political thinking within the national liberation movement.

In 1941, when the decision to launch the Mineworkers’ Union was first
mooted, the wage rate for African workers was a disgrace. I am not going to
mention the gap between the salaries for white and black people, because
two members had already mentioned it. With the formal establishment of the
union, organisational work began in earnest in the face of increased
harassment, arrests, dismissal, and the deportation of workers by the
police and the mine management. Nevertheless, the union grew in strength
and influence. The Chamber of Mines, however, refused to even acknowledge
the existence of the African Mineworkers’ Union, as has been alluded to
already by Comrade Oliphant, much less to negotiate with its
representatives. We have since moved a long way as the ANC, together with
the alliance partners, in raising awareness around horrific conditions in
mines and a lot has changed since then. In this regard, our alliance
partner, the South African Communist Party stated that although there has
been a significant improvement in the legislative framework, there is very
little change in terms of power relations on the shop floor. Management
continues to take unilateral decisions with very little involvement of
workers, except in those matters designated for collective bargaining.
This fact is also captured by the recent DuPont Report on safety management
and the progress evaluation of Sasol, which was presented to the Portfolio
Committee on Labour a few days ago. It was also recommended that an active
involvement of union personnel would help significantly. An appropriate
process needs to be investigated to optimise the involvement in developing
the safety culture.

Although we have made great progress in improving conditions in the mines
over the years, some of the challenges we still face include the escalating
rate of job losses in the mining industry and high levels of fatalities in
the mines. Be that as it may, the ANC-led government is working towards
transforming the mines in order to deal with challenges faced by the
sector.

The Mining Charter, which was also alluded to by Comrade Oliphant, and
which is a transformation strategy, addresses these challenges by
highlighting key transformation components such as employment equity,
skills development, procurement, leave conditions and community and rural
development that will also be accelerated through fast-tracking the land
reform process.

Some of the contributing factors are owed to industry-wide skill shortages,
which are now being addressed through the Accelerated and Shared Growth
Initiative for SA, Asgisa, which deals with these challenges through Jipsa,
as it addresses issues such as scarce skills in the different sectors via
different government departments.

As part of a commitment to building a better life for mineworkers, the Mine
Qualification Authority is aimed at developing appropriate knowledge and
skills in the mining, minerals and jewellery sectors to redress past
inequalities in education and training through the awarding of bursaries to
students for scarce skills and tertiary education assistance.

The challenge is, however, to place women in positions equivalent to men,
in other words, to be able to do manual labour associated with mining. In
this Month of Women, when celebrating the 50th Anniversary of the Women’s
March, we also celebrate women in mining. Hence we extend this celebration
to a tuneful contribution by women in mining projects, which has unrivalled
opportunities for all women. Malibongwe! [Praise!] The new emphasis is on
the development and the empowerment of women in the mining sector.

In order to create a developmental state that is biased towards the workers
and the poor National Union Mineworkers, alliance partners have to play a
central role. That will be the continuation of the role played by comrades,
including the likes of Cyril Ramaphosa - who was a Secretary General of the
National Union Mineworkers - who played an important role in the drafting
of the Constitution, in the establishment of institutions such as Nedlac,
and in formulating legislation such as the Labour Relations Act and the
Basic Conditions of Employment Act.

Indeed, we are confident with our present and past leaders. We talk about
the likes of Comrade Gwede Mantashe, one of the clear-sighted comrade
leaders who showed leadership. Of course the one who was mentioned by
Comrade Oliphant was J B Marks. I think all of us know or have heard about
J B Marks who was also a product of the African Mineworkers Union.

Chairperson and Madam Speaker, with regard to the late Comrade Joe Slovo, I
want to repeat what was said by Comrade Oliphant when he said that “no
monument has yet been built to acknowledge these fallen heroes of labour.
The fruits of their sacrifices can still only be seen in the massive wealth
accumulated by a tiny minority who came from foreign parts and enslaved the
whole nation”.

These words were uttered during the 40th anniversary of the 1946 mine
strike. Unfortunately, those words are still true today as we celebrate the
60th anniversary of the strike. As we celebrate this 60th anniversary of
the mineworkers’ strike, we owe it to those of our people who died during
this strike to ensure that the good pieces of legislation that this House
passes and its policies are implemented.

It is to ensure that never will our mineworkers lose their lives due to
working in unsafe work places. Never again will the mineworkers suffer the
indignity of being migrant workers. Of course, never and never again will
the children of these mineworkers lose their fathers due to tuberculosis
and phthisis. Never again will families cry and utter the words of
Oliphant, when he said: “Ba ile banake ba ile mosebetsing, rra-nko tia,
teng koo metsi a kgelelwang ka lenala” [My children have gone to work at
Rrankotia, a place where water is sparingly used because it is scarce.]
[Laughter.]

Mr J BICI: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President and hon members, the
significance of the African mineworkers’ strike of 1946 resides in its
double impact in terms of politics and economics. By that time the
foundations of colonialism and segregation were well established.
Importantly, the weakness of apartheid was already built into its
foundations even before the National Party set about building their regime.

The inherent flaw was that the masses of people that they sought to
marginalise politically were the same people that they were exploiting
economically as a labour force that formed a critical part of their
economy. The strike signalled to the mining houses and many politically
astute observers that this vital and indispensable economic group was now
in a commanding position to make demands and force concessions. Sadly, it
was inevitable that many were not willing to accept this and hence
successive apartheid governments resorted to increasingly draconian and
downright absurd measures.

The implication of that strike was clear: all of us in this country have a
shared destiny, because no artificial, physical or legal border can
separate us. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson, the ACDP pays tribute to the courage displayed
by the group of Witwatersrand mineworkers who, in 1946, took the initiative
to change the dire circumstances of their lives. The ACDP finds it
unfortunate that in many instances workers are not acknowledged for their
crucial contribution to the country’s development.

One of the factors that are slowing down transformation in this country is
the slow pace with which the benefits of BEE’s initiatives are filtering
down to the poor. We are now 12 years into our democracy, and whilst
government and big business have publicly declared their support for each
other, we have yet to see a similar display of camaraderie between
government and workers.

With reference to the present and the recent security worker strike, and
the Shoprite worker strike, which is taking place presently, one must
confess that it cannot be seen as contributing to the legacy of those
involved in the 1946 strike.

Voorsitter, daar is geen regverdiging in die stroping en wetteloosheid wat
met onlangse stakings gepaard gegaan het nie. Nie een van die rolspelers
kan wen nie. Dit ten spyte van die feit dat Suid-Afrika ‘n stabiele
politieke en ekonomiese tydperk beleef. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Chairperson, there is no justification for the plundering and lawlessness
that accompanied the recent strikes. Not one of the role players can win.
This, in spite of the fact that South Africa is experiencing a stable
political and economic period. [Time expired.]]

Mr M J G MZONDEKI: Chairperson, like my colleague Godfrey Oliphant, I feel
honoured to be part of this discussion as an ex-mineworker. I worked in the
mines during the time when the mineworkers were not organised, that is,
after they had been unsuccessful – after 1946 and when they had to
reorganise themselves. I was also able to work in the mines when the
mineworkers were organised.

So, unlike the DA, I’m able to speak from lived experience. I cannot be
confused by the media; I cannot be confused by the experts. Therefore I
cannot jump into thinking that the best thing to do is to make amendments.
I think that if amendments are to be done, they should be informed by what
transpires on the ground, which is what the ANC is informed by.

I have also lived through the experiences. I have been into the compounds;
I have lived in those conditions. I have also experienced what it means to
go underground, to wake up at two in the morning and have breakfast at that
time and to start queuing to go underground, only to have to wait for the
miner who will only go underground at six in the morning.

I’ve also experienced what it is like to then finish your work around 11
o’clock, but have to wait for all the whites to be lifted out from
underground because the black workers are finished with last. I have lived
through that. I have also lived through the situation of being a personal
assistant and having to sit in on a case with an alleged offender who had
no representation - in fact, I can almost say, without any disciplinary
procedure in place.
I have had to inform such an alleged offender as he came from underground
to go straight to the office to sit in a hearing without a representative.
Depending on the mood of the so-called presiding officer, he would be found
guilty without making a statement. Of course, as a poor personal assistant
you had to endorse his record. There was no appeal. He could not appeal. I
have had the experience of resigning about three times, because if the
white man decided to call me the “k” word, I could not complain anywhere.
So I have lived through those experiences.

It is thanks to the National Union of Mineworkers that in 1982 the workers
were reorganised and we started dealing again and taking over from where we
left off in 1946.

Comrade Joe Slovo once had this to say:

  Over 50 000 dead. More than a million permanently disabled. Hundreds of
  thousands diseased through inhaling the poison dust. Millions displaced
  from their homes, separated from their families and locked into a chain
  of guarded, high-walled labour camps. These are not the casualty figures
  for a major war; they are the price already paid by black miners for
  digging gold and coal from the bowels of South Africa’s earth.

  Today, our black working class, the creator and owner of all our
  country’s wealth, is in the forefront of mass forces which are poised to
  deal a deathblow to the tyranny of race rule and its roots in capitalist
  exploitation. Within this working class, the mines undoubtedly constitute
  the backbone of a rapidly growing trade union movement which has already
  demonstrated its massive potential in the liberation upsurge.


As I have said, I feel very honoured to participate in this very important
discussion today. I would like to note the important role played by the
former Transvaal president and Communist Party chairperson J B Marx, “Uncle
J B”. I further note the role played by the National Union of Mineworkers
in taking forward the legacy and spirit of 1946.

The immediate aftermath of that brutal suppression of the strike was the
systematic destruction of the union through collaboration between the
Chamber of Mines and the police. However, while the government of that time
succeeded in suppressing the strike, some important gains were made from
that strike. It set the tone for the radicalisation of the ANC and inspired
the Defiance Campaign of 1952, which enhanced the course of our struggle
forever. We surely owe our liberation and freedom to the 1946 strike heroes
who set the trend for the working class and for popular activism as the
bedrock of the national struggle?

Today the trade unions operate under different conditions. A legal
framework is in place that enables us to strike legally. There is also a
framework that should enable us to avoid strikes, provided that we
negotiate in good faith.

It is unfortunate that we continue to see strikes in our country, because
those who own everything - our minerals, our land and our factories - do
not want to share with those who own nothing but their power of labour.

Let me also note the role played by those that came from outside the
borders of our country and participated in our struggle. Many of them were
displaced from their homes, separated from their families and locked in
those high-walled labour camps. Many of them remain in our country, because
there is nothing for them to take home despite their contribution to the
wealth of this country.
Others go home badly maimed, owing to the dangerous conditions under which
mineworkers work. Thanks go to the role that the National Union of
Mineworkers continues to play in reaching out to those outside our borders
through programmes such as the Mineworkers Development Agency that enables
some ex-mineworkers, such as those in Lesotho, to continue to earn a living
through initiatives such as co-operatives and other skills provided by the
MDA. I hope our government will reach out and complement these efforts to
make such initiatives sustainable.

Initiatives such as clinics built outside our borders to cater for injured
ex-mineworkers in those countries are a result of pressure by the
mineworkers. A lot still needs to be done, though, and hence there is a
need to strengthen the trade union movement even more.

The trade unions continue to play a vital role even beyond the workplace.
We note their involvement in issues such as housing, education and health,
not only for their members, but also for the communities at large.

There is a need to strengthen unity amongst mineworkers. The emerging, new
fly-by-night unions are a matter of concern. Their agenda is questionable,
and we need a unified workforce that cannot be derailed by selfish motives.

The increasing number of accidents on the mines, such as at Sasol, needs
the strong voice of the workers to engage management on these matters. My
chairperson has already referred to reports like the DuPont Report. The
absence of a progressive trade union in such areas is a matter of concern.

Challenges such as retrenchments on mines that close or downscale need a
strong voice to ensure that processes such as the social plan, which may
avoid these retrenchments or at least reskill people, are properly
implemented. Challenges such as globalisation need a strong voice, so that
we can reskill mineworkers for new opportunities. Challenges in the
workplace, such as the slow implementation of employment equity, need the
strong voice of the workers.

The 1946 strike has taught us that whatever mountains there are, we will
climb them. The mineworkers at the time had obstacles such as different
cultural backgrounds. They came from rural and urban areas, while others
came from outside the borders of country speaking different languages, but
they united. There was also the strong collaboration between the Chamber of
Mines and the government of the day. Despite all that, the mineworkers came
out winners.

We need to continue with this battle until we are economically liberated.
We want to thank those wives who did not abandon their husbands, even when
they came home with very little to offer. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr W D SPIES: Mevrou die Voorsitter, die agb Oliphant het verwys na die
Randse staking van 1922 en hoe dit saam met ander gebeure bygedra het tot
die stigting van werkerorganisasies, en ook na die staking van 1946, wat
weer ’n bepalende rol gespeel het in die verdere geskiedenis van Suid-
Afrika.

Die verrassende uiteinde van die staking van 1922 is dat verarmde
Afrikanerwerkers saam met hulle swart kollegas in opstand gekom het teen
die werkomstandighede wat geldgierige mynbase op hulle afgedwing het. Dit
is interessant dat werkers nie net die gang van die geskiedenis in Suid-
Afrika verander het nie, maar ook dié van die wêreld.

Ons het gesien dat in Frankryk die bestorming van die Bastille deur werkers
geskied het. So het die bolsjewistiese republiek in Rusland tot stand gekom
na aanleiding van ’n werkeropstand, en ook in die VSA het werkers ’n
bepalende rol gespeel in die bevryding van die VSA van Britse oorheersing.

Die merkwaardige is egter nie die feit dat werkers die geskiedenis kan
verander en vryheid vir mense kan bring nie, dit is wat met daardie vryheid
gemaak word. Dit is waaroor die debat behoort te handel. Vandag is Suid-
Afrika weer eens midde-in ’n debat tussen die vakbondverenigings – ons sien
dit orals – wat op die voorpunt staan van ’n toutrekkery oor wat met die
vryheid gemaak moet word wat ons 12 jaar gelede ontvang het.

Laat ons dus nie net juig oor die verlede en die verandering van die
geskiedenis nie, maar laat ons luister na alle werkers, die meerderheid
sowel as die minderheid, oor hoe ons die toekoms ook beter kan maak. Ek
dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr W D SPIES: Madam Speaker, the hon Oliphant referred to the Rand strike
of 1922 which, together with other events, contributed to the establishment
of worker organisations, as well as to the strike of 1946, which in turn
played a defining role in the further history of South Africa.

The surprising result of the strike of 1922 was that impoverished Afrikaner
workers, together with their black colleagues, rebelled against the working
conditions which money-grabbing mine-owners enforced on them. What is
interesting is that workers not only changed the course of history in South
Africa, but all over the world as well.

We saw how workers in France stormed the Bastille. The Bolshevistic
republic came about in Russia following an uprising by workers, and in the
USA workers also played a defining role in liberating the USA from British
oppression.

What is remarkable, however, is not the fact that workers can change
history and bring freedom to people, but rather what is done with that
freedom. That is what the debate ought to be about. Today, once again,
South Africa is in the midst of a debate between trade unions – we see it
everywhere – who are about to squabble about what ought to be done with the
freedom that we achieved 12 years ago.

Therefore, let us not only rejoice about the past and the changing course
of history, but let us listen to all workers, the majority as well as the
minority, on how we can also improve the future. I thank you.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Chairperson, the 1946 mineworkers’ strike stands out as a
symbol against exploitation of workers. It is a reminder that the rapid
growth of capitalism in South Africa has created a situation where a CEO of
Shoprite Checkers can earn R59 million in a year while resisting an
increase of R300 for workers, with consequences of an economically damaging
workers’ strike to the country.

Millions of people, both employed and unemployed, are condemned to a life
of poverty by the twin evils of low pay and mass unemployment.
Unemployment, combined with HIV/Aids, constitutes one of the major social
challenges confronting our country today.

The right to work is a fundamental right that must be vigorously protected.
Work is life. In paying tribute to the 309 000 mineworkers who in 1946 were
forced to work six days a week with an average wage of 21c a shift, with no
overtime pay, no sick pay or holiday pay, our country must get rid of a
work environment that makes workers more insecure and forces them to work
in outsourced and subcontracts that do not provide benefits. Aluta
continua! [Time expired.]

Ms J L FUBBS: Madam Chair, hon members of the House, comrades and
colleagues, the mining sector forms the foundation of our economy and the
foundation of modern mass mobilisation in our country. It was a
mobilisation, as we have heard this afternoon in this House from the ANC in
particular and possibly a few others, that renewed the vigour of
socioeconomic and political freedoms in our country and effectively ensured
that all workers were recognised as the motive forces for the national
liberation movement.

I just want to indicate that with regard to the points made by the hon
Spies of the FF Plus, one would certainly want to support the total
recognition of workers that were pioneering change – what we in the ANC
alliance would call the motive forces for change - we certainly share that
view and hopefully you will soon be joining us.

Yes today, 60 years later, many of us enjoy those rights which the miners
fought for in 1946 and subsequent strikes, in particular those in the 80s.
However, you are asking: What on earth are people still fighting for today?
What are the strikes continuing about? We in the ANC certainly don’t
support any form of criminal activity during a strike. We never have, and
neither do the unions or any of our alliance partners. However, the reality
remains that what they fought for then – a 40-hour week, fair wages and
family housing - is today a figment of the imagination. Many same-sex
hostel types of accommodation exist. Where are the 40-hour week for such
dangerous heavy-duty jobs and the fair wages? I wouldn’t risk my life for
that. That’s for sure.

AN HON MEMBER: What about productivity?

Ms J L FUBBS: You talk about productivity. Let’s talk about productive
capital. I am coming to that.

Yet, miners who work in a sector that directly contributes nearly 7% the
GDP and labour under the most dangerous and difficult conditions, work
these long hours. It is not surprising with the type of accommodation they
have that HIV/Aids has a significant presence.

It is also worth noting that the total real contribution of the mining
industry to the GDP is effectively in the region of 16% or about a R153
billion. This is made up of a direct contribution of about 6,2% or R55
billion and a backward linkage GDP contribution of about 2,3% or R20,3
billion and a forward linkage of about 1,7% which is about R14 billion.
When you add this to a consequent induced contribution, you then get a
further 6% or R53 billion. Indeed, there are more than a million workers in
this sector.

What I have seen and read last year was that the mining industry is a
sunset industry. I am not sure whether they are at the North Pole or what.
That’s quite the contrary. Instead, both the Department of Minerals and
Energy and the Chamber of Mines recognise the key role of the mining
industry.

Also, what is significant - and makes one recall the strike of 1946 – was
the strong relationship between the SACP – the South African Communist
Party – the miners and their newly developed union, the ANC youth within
the broader political alliance of the ANC. This was a political and broader
alliance which sustained the struggle that the miners had then and now for
our society. It was a struggle built on social justice in which capital
served the people and it was not the people serving capital.

It was this solidarity of miners and the ideological linkages that have
directly contributed to the current economic transformation measures. The
commitment to deracialise the workplace, which was very evident in the
early struggles in the unions, has been broadened beyond the simple
transfer of ownership to black African miners to a fundamental
transformation of the economic landscape.

The ANC seeks to reach beyond the development of black elites, as our
President said – black elites who would simply replace the former white
mining magnates. Indeed, the ANC Secretary General put it very succinctly
when he said:

  We seek not only the deracialisation of ownership, but also the
  fundamental transformation of the economy to the benefit of the masses of
  our people who continue to live in conditions of poverty and
  underdevelopment ...


Comrade Motlanthe goes on to exhort all of us, not only those of us sitting
in this House but the broader community outside this House, to work
together not only as black entrepreneurs, the progressive union movement
but also the agencies of government to realise an authentically
transformative and broadbased approach to black economic empowerment.

Unfortunately, capitalists, for the most part, have neither the
inclination, nor it’s regrettable to say – the mindset to grapple alone
with this tremendous task. Instead it would be best to recognise this
limitation of the capitalists - let’s be realistic - and instead identify
what and how capital can be used in the process of this radical
transformation that is needed. On this note we can perhaps look at
progressive capital because we are well aware of the propensity of capital
to develop the forces of production. These include technical innovation,
skilling, and developing national and regional markets. Indeed, in this way
capital could accelerate job creation.

In so many ways, as one goes through this debate, you realise how it
illuminates the strength of the ANC alliance. For example, comrades who led
the debate spoke so eloquently about leaders Comrade Oliphant put the
motion on the table, about which I am very pleased. This brings to mind the
great role which J B Marks played which all workers are benefiting from.
Indeed, today as we move with greater deliberation and intensity to
transform the economic landscape, we see again the solidarity of the
alliance.

The ANC is calling on all South Africans to implement BEE and its sister
BBBEE in such a way that it will broaden the economic base and restructure
South African society. The party calls on all South Africans to use the
development of productive forces as the key criterion to identify such BEE
projects which can be supported.

In this way we would overcome fronting. Indeed, the unions are of course
demanding more than simply individual shareholding which would create these
elites, but rather the transformation of the ownership of production and
the boardroom. I think we are well aware of the tendency and capital to
identify one or two individuals to join an elite economic group and so
accumulate capital and eventually, such elite people coming from the
workers’ ranks a few of them. You simply find them using their fingers
scrolling across the stock market screens.

I want to look at this in a far more positive way. The muscle of the mining
industry, through its shareholding with the financial sector on the
Johannesburg Stock Exchange and other international exchanges, can
contribute beyond the confines of the statistical view and can become a
powerful instrument for change.

The lessons we have learnt from mining can also be put to use through the
legislation that has been passed in that area that industry. There is and
can be a greater recognition of the role human capital development can
play.

Another critical component of BEE is the access to finance, and indeed the
small-scale mining that has been opened up to create new opportunities for
new entrants who drastically need finance, human capital development and
the like.

I would just like to say that it’s very, very difficult when you look at
the decades that we have endured or rather the hundreds of years of
economic colonisation of the country. Today, we are faced with addressing
the restructuring of the economy of distortions which that economic
colonisation created. I do have faith and we do have hope in the season of
hope of this year that it is possible to change the mindsets of mining
magnates and others and to get them working together to grow the economy of
our country - South Africa – and in this way paying tribute to the blood
lost and injuries suffered by the miners of the 40s and the 80s, earlier
and later. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr G G OLIPHANT: Thank you very much, Madam Chair and all hon members who
participated in this debate. I also wish to thank those who are still
present - and those who have already left - for honouring us with their
presence during this very important discussion.

Having considered the inputs made, I wish to move an amendment to the
motion, as follows:

 In paragraph (4), to omit subparagraphs (b)  and  (c)  and  to  substitute
 with:


        (b)      to  support  the  initiative  by  the  National  Union  of
              Mineworkers to build a workers’ museum; and


        (c)      that Parliament gives consideration to naming some of  its
              buildings  after  J  B  Marks,  a  leader  of   the   African
              Mineworkers’ Union, and other heroes of the struggle.

Debate concluded.

Motion, as amended, agreed to, namely:

   That the House –


   (1)      notes that 12 August 2006 marks the 60th anniversary of the
        mineworkers’ strike of 1946;


   (2)      further notes the important role played by the mineworkers in
        the development of our economy and the transformation of our
        country;

   (3)      believes that the demands put forward by the African Mineworkers
        Union in 1946 were not fully addressed and are still relevant
        today; and


   (4)      resolves –


        (a)      that the living and working conditions of mineworkers be
              investigated further and be improved;


        (b)      to  support  the  initiative  by  the  National  Union  of
              Mineworkers to build a workers’ museum; and


        (c)      that Parliament gives consideration to naming some of  its
              buildings  after  J  B  Marks,  a  leader  of   the   African
              Mineworkers’ Union, and other heroes of the struggle.

The House adjourned at 15:45.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

CREDA INSERT REPORT - INSERT T060824E-insert – PAGES 1818-1849. PLEASE
INSERT FOOTNOTES ON THE SAME PAGES AS TEXT.

     b) Draft Notice and Schedule in terms of section 2(4)  of  the  Judges
        Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Act, 2001 (Act No  47  of
        2001), determining the  rate  at  which  salaries  are  payable  to
        Constitutional Court judges and judges annually, with effect from 1
        April 2006, for approval by Parliament.

    (c)     Draft Notice and Schedule in terms  of  section  12(3)  of  the
        Magistrates’ Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993), determining the rate at
        which salaries are payable to  magistrates  annually,  with  effect
        from 1 April 2006, for approval by Parliament.

        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice  and  Constitutional
        Development for consideration and report.

 1. Minister of Public Enterprises

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Transnet Limited for  2005-2006,
        including the Report of the Independent Auditors on  the  Financial
        Statements for 2005-2006.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

 National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy, dated 23
    August 2006:

    The Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy having held Public
    Hearings on 21 and 23 June 2006 on the viability of establishing a
    National RED/7th RED, reports as follows:



    1.      Background

    The Committee undertook to hold  hearings  on  exploring  stakeholders,
    interested and affected parties views on the viability of  establishing
    a National RED/7th RED as opposed to the existing Six  RED  model.  The
    hearings were held on 21 and 23 June respectively.  The  objectives  of
    the public hearing process were to:

     • provide an open platform for discourse around the REDs,
     • solicit suggestions on how to fast-track the REDs process,
     • gauge stakeholder sentiments around the  REDs  in  general  and  more
       particularly the National RED,
     • understand the challenges associated with the formation of the  REDs,
       and
     •  formulate  an  approach,  which,   is   inclusive   of   stakeholder
       preferences.
   The following organisations attended the hearings and made input  on  the
   subject:

    • Umhlathuze Municipality
    • eThekwini Municipality
    • Nelson Mandela Municipality
    • Southern Karoo Electricity Forum
    • Energy Intensive Users Group (EIUG)
    • Eskom
    • NERSA
    • CENTLEC
    • RED1
    • AMEU
    • SALGA
    • SOLIDARITY
    • IMATU
    • COSATU
    • Chamber of Mines of South Africa
   The remainder of  organisations  listed  below  forwarded  their  written
   comments:

    • Gauteng: Department of Local Government
    • Mogalakwena Municipality
    • Institute of Municipal Finance Officers (IMFO)


2.    Contextualising the developments leading up to the public hearings

2.1   The restructuring of the Electricity Distribution Industry (EDI) has
    been in the offing for over a decade.


2.2   Cabinet approved a Blueprint on EDI restructuring on 2 May 2001


2.3   EDI Holdings was established in 2003 to implement the directives of
    government on restructuring, through the Blueprint.


2.4   The Blueprint noted a number of outstanding issues which were to be
    finalized mid-course of establishment of EDI Holdings, notably the EDI
    Restructuring enabling legislation.


2.5   Prior to the establishment of first RED, namely RED1, which was
    centred around the City of Cape Town, EDI Holdings was instructed to
    establish it as a municipal entity within the confines of the municipal
    jurisdiction of the City of Cape Town including the concomitant Eskom
    distribution assets within the said jurisdiction, under existing
    municipal legislation, but excluding key industrial customers.


2.6   A number of stakeholder engagements ensued, which culminated in a
    proposal before Cabinet on 14 September 2005, to consider other means
    of establishing the REDs without    necessarily upsetting the financial
    viability of six Metropolitan Cities.


2.7   On the basis of the arguments presented before it, Cabinet took a
    decision to establish six Metropolitan REDs as municipal entities and
    made provision for the establishment of the National RED for the
    remainder of the municipalities subject to the necessary financial
    modelling and governance issues being concluded.


2.8   The Committee requested DME and EDI Holdings to make a presentation
    before it in order to equip itself to better understand the
    ramifications of the proposed route.


2.9   The Committee invited all stakeholders to make presentations and
    express their views regarding the viability of the National RED and the
    impact that it will have on the stakeholders concerned.


3.    Deliberations


3.1   Some indicated a preference for the National RED with a provision for
    clustering or regional REDs while others were in favour of the six wall-
    to-wall REDs. Some of the Metropolitan Cities would only support the
    National RED on condition that the Metro REDs would be allowed to buy
    electricity at wholesale price from Eskom Transmission rather   than at
    Retail Price from the National RED, which is seen as effectively, Eskom
    Distribution disguised. If the Metro REDs succeed in this regard, they
    will not be cross-subsidising the National RED.


3.2   In general, the views expressed by stakeholders were as follows:





3.2.1 Labour





      Cosatu supports the six wall-to-wall REDs. However, it believes that
      all the REDs must be under the control of one national holding company
      to ensure equal distribution of resources all over the country and to
      allow for cross-subsidisation.





      Solidarity believes that the National RED can meet the objectives of
      the government if properly modelled.



3.2.2.      Business





      In general business is happy with any model provided large customers
      are exempted from buying from the REDs, i.e. that key industrial
      customers buy electricity directly from Eskom Transmission and are
      serviced by Eskom, mainly for safety (mining houses), pricing and good
      quality of supply and service (productivity and competitiveness in
      export markets).  Currently customers consuming more than 100 GWh per
      annum can buy at wholesale price.





      In this regard, the Metros argue strongly that key industrial
      consumers within their jurisdictions should remain with the Metro
      REDs.





3.2.3.      Local Government


      Secondary and District Municipalities (UMhlathuze, South Central
      Karoo, Centlec (Mangaung)). These municipalities support the sub-
      regional REDs, especially those that are in existence and have proven
      to be sustainable.





      SALGA


      Local government, represented by SALGA seems to support the
      establishment of six wall-to-wall REDs while acknowledging that
      municipalities cannot be treated the same. They do recognise the need
      for cross-subsidisation.  This statement means that SALGA supports the
      6 wall-to- wall REDs including clustering.



      If a decision is to go  the  National  and  Metro  REDs  route,  SALGA
      supports the concept of Sub-Regional REDs as  favoured  by  the  above
      secondary municipalities.


      SALGA  supports  the  governance  of  the  REDs  under  the  municipal
      entities.


1 Other organizations


      Organisations such as AMEU and the NERSA believe that the six wall-to-
      wall REDs were properly modelled and there is  justification  for  the
      demarcation. They emphasised that the EDI is sustainable  on  its  own
      and  does  not  need  external  financial   support,   therefore   the
      restructuring should ensure that balance is maintained.


      They also believe that the REDs as  Public  Entities  will  be  easily
      Regulated by  NERSA  and  the  existing  National  Cross-subsidisation
      Framework could be maintained to help uplifting rural areas,  as  part
      of the objectives of EDI restructuring without much fiscal support.


      They believe that the National RED will not  be  viable  and  it  will
      create  challenges  of   financial   viability,   sustainability   and
      management going forward.


4.    Deductions drawn from the inputs received

    In general, most participants were in favour of  the  six  wall-to-wall
    REDs as per the  Blueprint.  Metros  support  the  Metro  REDs  with  a
    National RED on condition that customers within the Metros do not cross-
    subsidise the National RED.  It should be noted  that  the  electricity
    distribution business is  most  viable  around  the  Metros  and  large
    cities.


    The  six  wall-to-wall  approach  requires  cross-subsidization  within
    customer  categories  at  a  larger  scale  even  outside   the   Metro
    boundaries, thus minimising the need for  fiscal  intervention  in  the
    EDI.   This  model  lends  itself  to  easy  Regulation  by  NERSA  and
    governance if REDs are Public Entities.


    The Metro and National RED model places  Metros  in  a  poor  financial
    position due to having to cross-subsidise the previously  disadvantaged
    areas, thus creating the imbalance the Blueprint seeks to address.  The
    governance of the National RED poses a  challenge  due  to  its  multi-
    jurisdictional nature,  which  would  lead  to  further  constitutional
    challenges.

5.    Conclusion and Way forward

      • The Committee, yet again completed a comprehensive process  in  its
        attempt to understand the  new  developments  with  regard  to  the
        restructuring process. Over the past three years the Committee  had
        extensively interacted with the Department of Minerals and  Energy,
        and  key  stakeholders,  with  the  main  aim  of  discussing   and
        developing  a  common  understanding,  and  finding  solutions   to
        challenges with regard to the  electricity  restructuring  process,
        with specific focus on the six RED Model. The ultimate aim being to
        give effect to the restructuring process and ensure buy-in from the
        public.


      • Satisfied with its understanding of the six RED Model, and the aims
        to  achieve  governments’  objectives   by   providing   low   cost
        electricity to all consumers with equitable  tariffs  for  specific
        customer segments, providing reliable and high quality  service  to
        customers and meeting the country’s electrification targets in  the
        most cost-effective manner, the Committee fails to  understand  how
        the proposed National RED/7th RED can address these  objectives  in
        the absence of any evaluation which might prove  the  6  RED  Model
        ineffective.


      • The argument in favour of the National RED/7th RED  was  emphasised
        and made clear in the Eskom presentation, but  the  Committee  felt
        that the national objectives outlined were achievable  through  the
        Six  RED  Model.  The   Committee   found   it   problematic   that
        municipalities could be given  the  choice  to  join  the  National
        RED/7th RED or Metro  REDs.  The  Committee  does  not  favour  the
        National/RED7th RED option. This position is taken based  upon  two
        factors namely:


        1. the lack of convincing argument for  establishing  the  National
           RED/7th RED emanating from the hearings in particular  the  fact
           that almost none of the positions put forward could sustain  the
           argument around the financial viability of  a  National  RED/7th
           RED; and


        2. to eliminate any further delays in the restructuring process  by
           introducing new models, spending time and financial resources on
           it, but to rather commit to ensuring that the six RED  Model  is
           operational.


      • In advancing the restructuring agenda and  promoting  the  six  RED
        Model, the Committee recommends,  that  concerted  efforts  by  the
        relevant decision-makers be made to  speed  up  the  process,  that
        collaboration  amongst  the  Department  of  Provincial  and  Local
        Government, National Treasury, Department of  Minerals  and  Energy
        and the Department of Public Enterprises takes place to ensure that
        the  long,   unresolved   challenges   hampering   the   successful
        implementation of the six RED Model is addressed with urgency.

      • The Committee noted with concern the number of inputs which  called
        for legislative and policy direction to drive the restructuring  of
        the electricity distribution  industry.  The  Committee  recommends
        that the Department of Minerals and Energy speed up legislation  in
        order to accelerate with change in the industry.

      • The  Committee  recommends  that  National  Treasury  finalise  the
        process of providing clear policy guidelines  with  regard  to  the
        transfer of assets from Eskom to the municipalities.

      • The Committee recommends that The Department of Minerals and Energy
        provides clarity  with  regard  to  the  definitive  problems  with
        “reticulation”, “competition and contestable customers.”

    The  Committee  remains  steadfast  in  its  commitment  to  ensure  an
    accelerated REDs creation process and that all transformation processes
    remain informed by the needs of our country and its people.

Report to be considered.


