---
title: 'National Assembly - 16 August 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-08-16
---

WEDNESDAY, 16 AUGUST 2006
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____


The House met at 15:03.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.


ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

                       SOCIAL SERVICES AND GOVERNANCE
                                  Cluster 2

MINISTERS:

                 Progress made in eradicating bucket system

108.  Ms T E Lishivha (ANC) asked the Minister of Water Affairs and
       Forestry:

       (a)What progress has been made in eradicating the bucket system in
       sanitation by 2007 and (b) what are the challenges in this regard?
                                                                    N1088E


The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Madam Deputy Speaker, the
answer is as follows: It is estimated that there are approximately 165 000
buckets in use in formal establishments in South Africa. By formal
establishments we mean to those formal townships that are still using the
bucket system of sanitation, which is below RDP standards.

The President has committed to the eradication of these buckets by the end
of 2007. By December of this year, 63 602 buckets will be eradicated, and
the remaining 102 310 will be eradicated by December 2007.

In this financial year, R400 million has been allocated to bucket
eradication as compared to only R200 million that we got last year. A
further R600 million has been allocated to bucket eradication in the 2007-
08 financial year.

However, we are in discussions with National Treasury to try to bring
forward this allocation to enable us to meet the target of bucket
eradication by December 2007. I thank you.

Muf T E LISHIVHA: Ndo livhuwa. Ndi khou livhuwa Vho-Minisiṱa phindulo yavho
ye vha ṋea yone. Na u dovha hafhu nda takalela uri vho dovha vha wana
nyengedzedzo ya masheleni a swikaho R400 million ane vha ḓo shumana nao u
thusa u fhungudza mabunga a mabakete.

Mbudziso yanga ndi ya uri, naa muhasho wavho u na nḓila ine wa khou i
shumisa naa u vhona uri mabunga a mabakete a khou fheliswa nga u ṱavhanya,
nahone vha khou swikelela target naa? Hone-ha, hu na mvelaphanḓa ifhio zwa
zwino u vhona uri hu na vhukoni na nḓivho kha kushumisele kwa masheleni nga
u ṱavhanya. Ndo livhuwa. (Translation of Tshivenḓa paragraphs follows.)

[Ms T E LISHIVHA: I thank you. I thank the Minister for the reply. I am
also happy that the Minister got increased funds of about R400 million,
which will be used to eradicate the bucket system.

My question is: Does your department have a strategy to ensure that the
bucket system is eradicated fast and also are you reaching the target? Is
there any progress to show that there is ability and capacity in the
utilisation of the funds? I thank you.]

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Thank you, hon member. Yes, the
department is confident that with the expertise and capacity that we do
have, and the support we are giving to municipalities, we are going to
reach this target. It is necessary that the municipalities register the
projects in their localities to eliminate buckets.

These projects are registered under the municipal infrastructure grant unit
of the DPLG in order to receive funding, and we believe that by the end of
August this year all projects that require funding under the bucket
eradication programme will be registered.

Over and above that, in terms of capacity, the department has mobilised 21
engineers to support municipalities in all the phases of programme
implementation, starting with assisting in the development of technical
reports, including registration of projects as well as monitoring and
evaluation.

It is notable that Mpumalanga has made a major achievement in terms of
bucket eradication. They have made such significant progress that they
intend to completely eradicate their buckets in established settlements by
November 2006. So, hon member, we are confident that with all this
preparation, registration of projects, lending capacity to municipalities
but, more than ever, getting the necessary funding which we have submitted
to Treasury, buckets will be eradicated by 2007.

Ms J A SEMPLE: Thank you, Minister. In your reply you indicated that there
are still thousands of people who have to suffer the indignity of using the
bucket system, and this is particularly degrading to women and often
affects their security. So, it is quite right that we have set this target.

However, it would appear that at the current rate of application, some
municipalities are not actually going to meet the target. Now, you have
given us an indication of extra funding that is going to be applied for,
and also how you are going to address capacity with the 21 engineers.

But, are you sufficiently confident that this is actually going to help,
because there seems to be a chicken and egg situation here. Either the
municipalities say they don’t have enough money, or if they do have the
funds available, they don’t spend it, for example the MIG. Could you give
us the assurance that you think that this is going to happen by 2007? Thank
you.

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Thank you to the hon member.
There are obviously challenges in the municipalities that have been
identified with regard to bucket eradication – the nonavailability of
technical and financial programmes and the lack of project management
expertise in the municipalities. Our response to this challenge has been to
make the 21 engineers available to municipalities to provide hands-on
support.

There are obviously problems also with aligning sanitation with the housing
programme. The issue of funding that the hon member raised is not a problem
as we speak, as we have said that the amount of R400 million allocated to
us is going to enable us to deal with some of the backlog this year. But in
respect of the backlog to be eradicated by 2007, money allocated for next
year will have to be brought forward to this year for us to be able to
spend it in time to eradicate the bucket system in 2007.

So, this is not a shortage of money, but a question of capacity - the
department working through the regions supporting all municipalities. But
where we stand as the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, we are
confident that this target set by our President of eradicating the bucket
system in the formal establishments is going to be met. Thank you.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. The ACDP welcomes all efforts
and plans to eradicate the unhealthy and humiliating bucket system that is
still part of the new South Africa today, 12 years after the dawn of the
democratic order. This system seriously undermines the constitutional right
to dignity of our people.

In light of the fact that informal settlements are mushrooming all over the
country, how is government going to ensure that the target date for
eradicating this unhealthy system by 2007 is still achieved? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Hon Deputy Speaker, I think
that we need to understand what we are talking about when we talk about
eradication of the bucket system. There is inconsistent interpretation of
the eradication backlog definition. It should be clear that, through this
programme, we are addressing the eradication of buckets in the formal
establishments and the townships.

When it comes to new informal settlements that have sprung up and are not
being addressed by this programme, we hope to address those through the
housing and human settlement programmes, in which we are working with
Housing to ensure that as they upgrade or provide new houses for informal
settlements, the basic services which include sanitation needs are also
addressed and buckets are no longer used.

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Minister, a South African invention is a loo called the
Enviroloo, which has a vent to the exterior, and it enables the sewerage to
be dried and reused either as fuel or as compost. Is this one of the
alternatives that is being used to replace the bucket system? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Yes, it is indeed one of the
alternatives being used. It is being applied already in the country. But
what we have discovered is that, whilst this technology is useful because
in the long run it will assist not only with our sanitation problems but
could, if properly applied, lead to recycling of the matter, the only
challenge is that there is resistance from some communities and some
municipalities to using the system.

As a government department, we are looking at alternative systems which
will enable us to make sure that we give access to sanitation to our people
in the best possible way. So, we are talking to municipalities that are
working with the Department of Science and Technology to look at how we can
improve on whatever we have put in place as far as sanitation is concerned.
Thank you.

 Role of National Co-ordinating Committee (Nacoc) in organising and staging
                     national school sports tournaments

98.   Mr B M Komphela (ANC) asked the Minister of Sport and Recreation:

       (1)  What is the role of the National Co-ordinating Committee (Nacoc)
           in organising and staging national school sports tournaments in
           terms of the original memorandum of understanding with Sport and
           Recreation South Africa regarding this matter;




       (2)  whether, in light of the recently held national school sports
           events, his department and Nacoc have succeeded in implementing
           their stated policy objectives in terms of the funding and
           participation at such events; if not, why not; if so, what are
           the relevant details;




       (3)  whether any mechanisms are in place to monitor and rectify
           logistical challenges associated with organising national school
           sports events; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
           details?                                                 N1077E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, the role of the
National Co-ordinating Committee, Nacoc, is to sanction, co-ordinate,
manage and monitor all national competitive school sports programmes. Nacoc
has left the actual organisation and management of the tournaments to the
departments in conjunction with the provinces and the local organising
committee.

As far as the second part of the question is concerned, I believe that the
department has succeeded in implementing our stated policy objectives,
because since January 2006 the department has successfully hosted and
funded the following events: the National Primary Schools Aquatics
Championships in East London, Buffalo City; the National Secondary Schools
Aquatics Championships in Germiston, Ekhuruleni; the National Primary
Schools Athletics Championships in Durban, Ethekwini; the National
Secondary Schools Athletics Championships in Sasolburg; and the national
under-17 team participated in the Athletics Championships of the
Confederation of School Sports Associations of Southern Africa, Cossasa, in
Namibia this year.

In addition, there was the national all-ages tournament for soccer,
netball, volleyball and basketball, which was hosted in Rustenburg; the
national under-16s and under-18s hockey tournaments for boys and girls in
Potchefstroom and Pietermaritzburg; and Team SA’s participation in
athletics and aquatics at the International School Sports Federation
Gymnastraeda in Athens and Thessaloníki, Greece, this year.

All these tournaments went off smoothly, except for accommodation
challenges in Sasolburg and Rustenburg where there was limited
accommodation of an acceptable standard. However, problems were resolved
during the tournaments. We have committed ourselves not to centralise
national school sports events in the major cities, but rather to take them
to smaller towns and cities. We are, however, confronted by certain
challenges when we take these events to smaller cities.

As far as the third part of the question is concerned, based on the
experience of the past, the department will make sure that all events and
venues are inspected by the code convenors and provincial general managers
before each event. The department will also assign a more senior person to
be part of the local organising committee so that the organisation can be
monitored and the logistical challenges identified timeously. Thank you,
Madam Chair.

Mr C T FROLICK: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Thank you for the reply, Deputy
Minister. Earlier this year the portfolio committee had a delegation in the
Eastern Cape on a study tour. When we visited two schools in Port Elizabeth
– the Northern Lights School and another school for the physically
challenged in Mthatha - we were confronted with a situation in which they
were at odds, because they could simply not raise the necessary funds to
participate in a national event that was supposed to be held in the Free
State.

My question is: How far is the department from succeeding in ensuring that
all these different tournaments, that are organised under the auspices of
the department and the National Co-ordinating Committee, are funded so that
we can ensure that even those children who are physically challenged also
benefit from the policy that government has implemented? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson - thank you to the
hon Frolick - the funding is obviously a budgetary challenge that we are
all facing. As we speak, of the R70 million that we as a department had
available this year, R50 million was transferred to the provinces to make
the mass participation programme in school sports possible. That programme
will be launched very shortly in conjunction and collaboration with the
partners of this programme – the Department of Education. We have funded
the competitive school sports, as we mentioned, to the tune of R16,2
million. May I just mention that this didn’t cost any student who took part
a dime.

The other R20 million that we have left for the mass participation
programme this year will be used for training and supplying the necessary
equipment in all those areas. In a nutshell, it’s a budgetary challenge. We
did ask for more money in this coming circle, and let’s see what the
outcome will be. But as we speak, we are reaching 798 schools, mostly in
the poverty nodes in this country.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, may I rise on a point of order?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is your point of order, hon member?

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: The point of order is that I wish to congratulate
Madam Deputy Speaker on her birthday today. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, but that is not a point of order.
[Laughter.]

Mr S J MASANGO: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Deputy Minister, we know
that the United School Sports Association of SA, Ussasa, is the one that
was running school sports programmes. What I want to know is: whether the
school sports programmes currently run by the National Co-ordinating
Committee are far better than the one that was run by Ussasa? If not, why
not; if so, could you tell us what the benefits are of changing from Ussasa
to Nacoc?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Deputy Speaker, the hon
Masango may know that it was by mutual agreement that the structures of
Nacoc would accommodate and absorb the expertise that we had in Ussasa.
School sport, we believe, needs to be in the hands of the teachers because
they are the implementers of school sport. That is why in the agreement
that we have signed, we agreed that 70% of the people there would be
teachers.

May I just say that I don’t want to pronounce on how successful Ussasa was
or wasn’t. The only thing I am prepared to say is that Nacoc is co-
ordinating very well and that the tournaments that I attended this year
went smoothly and I see only a rosy future for Nacoc. Thank you.

Adv Z L MADASA: Thank you, hon Deputy Minister, for your reply. As you are
well aware, encouraging sport at school is a critical element of the
promotion of transformation in sport, because it increases the pool from
which selectors in various sporting codes can access sportspersons. So,
this is a critical programme for the national transformation of sport. That
is a comment. My question is whether you are of the opinion that there is a
sufficient budget to support this crucial aspect of transformation in
sport, especially with regard to infrastructure at various schools. Thank
you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Deputy Chair, we are in
absolute agreement with the hon Madasa ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Deputy Minister, you referred to “Chair” earlier on
and I thought it was a slip up, but now you are referring to the “Deputy
Chair”. Is there anything that you know that we don’t know? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: I apologise, Ma’am.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. ... especially on my birthday! Please don’t
demote me. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Deputy Speaker, we are in
absolute agreement with the hon Madasa that school sport and also physical
education in school form the absolute basis for transformation. They are,
in fact, the critical part of transformation. Linked to that is creating
opportunities for those that never had the opportunities before and were
excluded from those opportunities. By creating a bigger pool, we will see
the transformation coming through, as we are seeing in certain sporting
codes right now.

So, we are facing a challenge in terms of funding because the cake is only
so big. What we must do, and this is our challenge, is to see how we can
optimise the funds available in the municipal infrastructure grant and
therefore we will also have to engage the local authorities to see that we
put their facilities on a shared basis for schools and communities. We will
have to manage that.

Secondly, we will have to make very sure that the money we get from the
Treasury is optimised and stretched to the utmost so that we bring the
opportunities to those people that are much in need of that.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Deputy Speaker, happy birthday to you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, ma’am.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Minister, it is very encouraging to hear you say that so
much work is going to be done in schools. My question is: Do you feel that
if we build more infrastructure and have more recreation at schools, we
will be saving our children in that they will be indulging in sport and
recreation instead of having the time to do drugs and alcohol?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Deputy Speaker, to the hon
member, this goes much wider than only school-going children. It speaks to
communities and the entire population of this country. Yes, the more people
we get active the more often, the better it will be for this country and it
will definitely have an impact and also reflect on the budget of the
Department of Health. Thank you.

                     Khomanani HIV–prevention programme

92.   Mr G R Morgan (DA) asked the Minister of Health:

       (1)  With regard to her department’s flagship HIV-prevention
           programme Khomanani, (a) when did the most recent contract to
           administer this programme expire, (b) why was the contract
           allowed to expire before a new invitation to tender was
           advertised and (c) who is the person(s) responsible for
           advertising and administering the respective tender process and
           contract;




       (2)  whether her department had conducted an ongoing assessment of
           the Khomanani programme in order to outline the successes and
           failures of the campaign; if not, why not; if so, what are the
           relevant details?                            N989E


The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Question 92 has been asked by the hon G R Morgan of the
Minister of Health. However, I would like to inform the House that neither
the Minister nor the Deputy Minister is available to reply to the question.
The Minister is out of the country and the Deputy Minister has had a
bereavement in the family. The reply will be printed in Hansard.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, may I address you on that point please?
It’s the same issue as always when it comes to questions. We did hear that
the Minister was not available. We were told that the Deputy Minister would
be available, and it was only a matter of hours before Question Time took
place that we heard that the Deputy Minister would not be available. Again,
I urge the ANC to make sure that opposition parties are given plenty of
warning when Ministers are not available. Thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The only unfortunate thing is that bereavement doesn’t
give you any warning. It happens when you least expect it.

We now come to Question 117 which has been asked by the hon A M Mpontshane
of the Minister of Education.

   Allegations by National Teachers Union (NATU) regarding no-fee schools
                                   policy

  117. Mr A M Mpontshane (IFP) asked the Minister of Education:


        Whether her department plans to investigate the allegations recently
        made by the National Teachers Union (NATU) that the no-fee schools
        policy has seriously affected teaching at some rural schools and
        placed the lives of principals at risk; if not, why not; if so, what
        are the relevant details?  N1097E

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. May I join
other members in wishing you a happy birthday? In reply to the question: no
complaints have been lodged with my department or with myself. The
administration of no-fee schools is a provincial matter, and is being
managed by the KwaZulu-Natal education department. I did, however, note the
concern raised by Natu at their national conference.

The department’s payment of its no-fee contribution to some schools was
delayed, partly because of late communication from schools on funding
required for operating expenses, and partly because of delays in schools
setting up bank accounts. The KwaZulu-Natal education department has
assisted all nonsection 21 schools to open bank accounts and the necessary
transfers have now been effected.

Section 21 schools have been instructed to account for their failure to
submit audited annual financial statements as required by law, and to
submit annual financial statements on time in future. The department in
KwaZulu-Natal issued a press statement on 21 July to clarify policy around
no-fee schools. I would direct the hon Mpontshane to read an article in the
Daily Sun this morning. [Interjections.] Yes, Daily Sun, not Die Son, which
illustrates some of the positive impacts of the no-fee schools policy.

Prince N E ZULU: Siyabonga, Somlomo [Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.]
Minister, it is unfortunate that this is being experienced in the province
of KwaZulu-Natal. That is why there is an understanding now, or perhaps you
may call it a perception, that the province is being made a pilot province
in this no-fee schools policy. Do you agree to that or would you put it
differently?

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: I don’t know what the hon member means. We have
nine provinces in the country. Eight out of nine have voluntarily
implemented the no-fee schools policy. From next year all nine provinces
will be implementing it. There is no piloting of the policy, and there is
no experimentation with any province in the country.

Over 2 million children currently benefit from the no-fee schools policy.
So where the notion of piloting in a particular province arises, I am not
quite sure. But eight out of nine provinces have already implemented it. A
pilot usually refers to the selection of one out of many, but when the
majority does a thing, it cannot scientifically be termed a pilot.

Mr G G BOINAMO: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker, and happy birthday too.
Hon Minister, could you apologise for the mess that you and your department
have caused in the schools by not paying the subsidies so that the no-fee
schools can run properly? Thank you. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Mr Boinamo, you have used rather unfortunate
language. There is no mess. You would have to indicate where there is a
mess, particularly when I cite a school, which would normally ask parents
to pay R25 a year and which would find in that year that less than 10% of
the parents were able to pay. That school, in terms of the no-fee schools
policy, now receives the adequacy amount of R525 per child, when previously
it was R25 from parents who could not pay.

So, I do not know where the disadvantage accrues in such a context. What I
have indicated is that where there have been problems - and there are some
schools and some districts where there have been - we have addressed these.
I do not believe there is a mess, however. That is your choice of language
in order to sensationalise the empty question that you have asked.
[Applause.]

           Reported deficiencies in provision of quality education


100.  Mr R P Z van den Heever (ANC) asked the Minister of Education:

       (1)  Whether her department has a program of action to address the
           reported deficiencies in the provision of quality education as
           outlined by the Human Rights Commission; if not, what is the
           position in this regard; if so, what are the relevant details;

       (2)  whether she will make a statement on the matter?   N1079E

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Deputy Speaker, with respect to the
question, the reply is as follows: We have, as a department, paid serious
attention to the Human Rights Commission’s report on the public hearing on
the right to basic education. We have engaged fully with the
recommendations of the HRC. I have had a number of constructive meetings
with the chairperson and I indeed agree with many of the recommendations
that are proposed in the report.

My department is in the process of finalising a written response so that we
can give renewed force and attention to those areas in which work is
already under way and to initiate action where such action is required. As
soon as we finalise our response, the aspects that may require legislative
or regulatory attention will form part of the strategic plan of the
department.

I do not intend to make a statement at this stage, but will do so once we
finalise our report, which we have agreed with the HRC that we will present
to them in a meeting between my Ministry, the department and themselves.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now call on the hon Van den Heever.

Mr B MTHEMBU: Thank you, Deputy Speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are not Mr ... Oh alright. Hon member, please take
the floor.

Mr B MTHEMBU: Hon Minister, could you comment on the following assertion,
namely that the department’s intervention has resulted in more than 95% of
universal primary education and, therefore, that it will be possible to
reach the 100% target as a target set by Unesco with regard to the
Millennium Development Goals? This in itself indicates the department’s
commitment to basic education for all.

The department is spending more than 6% of GDP, which is the international
norm for spending, and in line with the Accra Agreement of 2000. However,
the challenge that we are facing seems to be that there is tension between
providing quality education while, simultaneously, addressing the huge
backlog left by the apartheid regime.

It is a question of either or and therefore the department has decided that
it would be better to set education for all as a priority – a question of
sequencing - and then progressively moving towards quality education for
all. This is because of the fact that there are limited resources and that
there are competing demands to address the backlogs. Your comment,
Minister?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Minister, your comment. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Well, I don’t think that that is a follow-up
question. From my reply I think those are far more complex set of issues
that have been raised. I think, Madam Deputy Speaker, we need to be fairly
wary of inserting in the recommendations of Unesco aspirations that we may
have as a nation.

For example, the belief that you can achieve 100% enrolment tends to
neglect a number of facts, such as the fact of children who don’t wish to
be in school, the fact of families and communities that might be nomadic.
So, there is a whole range of factors that impact upon the percentage that
might be out of school and for which you might need to make a range of
different provisions. We are looking at this category of what are termed
vulnerable children in order to see what form of flexible arrangement can
be made for them.

The second point is that certainly while there are backlogs, no system
should neglect the intention of achieving quality, because quality is
associated with learning. However, in South Africa one of the things we
need to accept is that we had 350 years of damage, and we are trying, in a
very short space of time, to ensure that we improve what is offered in our
schooling system. And, 12 years certainly cannot compete with 350 years,
despite the great progress we have made.

The third aspect is that our government invests a large amount of resources
in education. Over 20% of the national budget has been devoted to support
for the costs of education. What is, of course, a negative factor, in terms
of achieving our objectives and aspirations, is that in terms of cultural
capital - an ability to support education - the majority of the population
you are dealing with is poor, is not of a middle-class character, and
therefore cannot act as a partner to teachers and schooling to support
children in learning.

This means, in terms of resources available in schools, that you need to be
able to bridge the gap between the ability of parents, and the teaching and
resourcing in schools. We are attempting to do this with the provision of
infrastructure, learning, teaching, support materials and a range of other
measures. But what we have to realise is that changing our educational
system in order to achieve the level of quality that every society desires
is part of a long haul that we have to undertake as a society.

In general terms, I agree with the hon Mthembu’s statements as to where we
want to go in terms of achieving educational change in South Africa.

Mr V C GORE: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. On behalf of the ID we would
like to wish you a happy birthday as well.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

Mr V C GORE: Minister, I would like to thank you for your responses to
this. I would like to focus on a particular issue, which is very close to
my heart and to that of another 7 million people in South Africa and that
is the issue of education for people with disabilities.

We have exchanged ideas and we have engaged on this very serious issue in
the past, and I would like to thank you for those engagements, particularly
the hard work that has been done by your department in this regard,
especially the White Paper on Inclusive Education.

However, I would like to ask you, Madam Minister, whether the issues raised
in the Human Rights Commission’s report on basic education, particularly
around access to education for people with disabilities and special-needs
learners, have been taken note of by the department and whether the policy
programme, as envisaged by the Education White Paper on Inclusive
Education, will be speeded up, and what resources will be put into
improving the situation for learners with special needs or learners with
disabilities. I thank you.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you very much for that question. We
certainly are looking at the recommendations, as I have said, of the HRC
with respect to the education of children with disabilities. One of the
immediate steps we have taken is to assign a Heads of Education Departments
subcommittee to examine our progress with respect to inclusive education.

Secondly, we have engaged the support of policy-makers in New Zealand and
members of the education department in New Zealand who worked on inclusive
education. As you know, our policy mirrors very closely the New Zealand
policy.

In fact, on Monday I had a meeting with Professor Mitchell who is here in
South Africa from New Zealand, spending some weeks with us and looking at
our resource schools and at whether we are supporting them effectively to
really be the cluster support, as the schools begin to be inclusive schools
throughout the districts in the country.

He has indicated to me that our policies are, in fact, excellent policies
given that he is one of the crafters of the New Zealand policy. He would
say that. But he has alerted us to the fact that the distance between
policy and implementation can be very wide. But he believes our choice of
beginning with a set of schools rather than a full roll-out of the policy
is an important approach.

Therefore, the piloting of starting with these 30 fully resourced schools
and moving to 140 is, in his view, a very good approach that South Africa
has adopted. But he will be visiting every district, looking at each of the
centres we are establishing and then giving us an evaluation of our
progress.

While that is happening, we are of course continuing with our plans.
Teachers in schools are being trained in each of the districts. We are
beginning to select schools which should be more inclusive. But of course,
I have, as we discussed with you, indicated to the department that
inclusive education doesn’t mean that there isn’t a need to continue
supporting and resourcing special schools because children have different
disabilities.

You can’t just assume that any school should be open to accept a child that
might have a set of disabilities that require special support and so on. So
all of this forms part of the package that we are addressing.

Mr G R MORGAN: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Madam Minister, the delivery of
basic education is indeed critical for the success of our children’s future
and for creating a society of opportunity. The relevant Human Rights
Commission report referred to in the question says that without reliable
information, monitoring and gathering systems, the state will not be well
placed in many instances to counter challenges that are violating the right
to basic education. As the report says, each day we continue to fail many
of our country’s children.

Madam Minister, what efforts are being made to establish adequate and
reliable monitoring systems in all district offices that can be used to
assess the delivery of quality basic education? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Well, hon member, I hope in looking at our
Budget Votes last year and this year, you would have seen the provision we
have made to improve our education management information system.

I am very concerned that in order to adequately respond to the challenges
that you face in a system, you must have adequate data, and data that you
can manage in order to make decisions as to how to respond within a system.
So you would have noted one in the Western Cape, namely the records base
that we are building with respect to children in our schools. It’s
something we haven’t had.

You would have noted my responses earlier this year with respect to data on
teachers in the system subject areas they are teaching in. So efforts are
being made. We are working with the private sector - I wouldn’t want to
mention the companies by name – with companies that are renowned in other
countries for having assisted in the development of very well constructed
education management systems, which give you instantaneous data when you
need it.

I met with the head of education in New South Wales because they have a
very good system, that is their education management information system. So
this is something we are looking at. But we’ve gone a long way in the
department, because there has been years of building up this management
system in education.

I think that we are now at a point where we would be able to begin to
produce data on what is happening in our schools on a daily basis. I would
like us to get to that point. So we are investing in better information
technology systems, and also in the human resources that can manipulate and
extract the data as well as place it on the system.

We have changed the nature of the form that is sent out to schools to
collect information at the beginning of the year, in the middle of the
year, at the end of the year. Therefore, I think, a range of efforts is
being pursued to ensure that our Emis - the education management
information system - is of the first rank.

        Report of Van Zyl Slabbert Commission on SA electoral system

91.   Mrs P de Lille (ID) asked the Minister of Home Affairs:

      (1)   Whether the report of the Van Zyl Slabbert Commission on the
           South African electoral system has been evaluated; if not, why
           not; if so,




      (2)   whether the government has accepted the recommendations
           contained in this report; if not, why not; if so, what are the
           relevant details;




      (3)   whether the proposed new electoral system will be put in place
           by 2009; if not, what is the position in this regard; if so,
           what are the relevant details?               N929E

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Hon members, yes, indeed, government received
the report of the Van Zyl Slabbert commission and noted its contents on 5
March 2003. Subsequently, a statement was issued on behalf of our
government at a media briefing. As members may recall, Cabinet instructed
the then Minister of Home Affairs to distribute the document to the media
and the public, and this was done.

Furthermore, it was agreed that the current government, constituted on the
basis of the 2004 elections, would take responsibility for ensuring that
public engagement on the matter took place in preparation for the 2009
election. Now that the matter has been raised in this House, it is
incumbent upon us that we present it to Cabinet for further consideration,
and we will certainly report back to Parliament at the appropriate time.
Thank you.

Mrs P DE LILLE: Thank you, hon Minister, for your response. Is there any
way that you can indicate to us whether, in terms of the public
consultation process you are going to start now after the Cabinet decision,
that we will have some kind of review of our electoral system before 2009?
Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thanks, hon De Lille. I think that the first
step, now that you have raised the matter, would be for us to go to Cabinet
and remind it that the previous Cabinet gave us this mandate. Obviously,
the rest will now be the responsibility of the constituencies and political
parties to make representations. Obviously, we will have to set a process
in motion for people to give feedback from their constituencies.

Whether or not that will happen through a parliamentary process is a matter
that we will all have to agree on. I must say that we have not been seized
with the matter as yet, but obviously we will have to begin now because
2009 is just around the corner. Maybe that process would have to be agreed
on by the political parties represented here, because all of us received
this report in 2003.

I am sure that the process of consultation by political parties with their
constituencies must have happened over the past three years. So this is not
a process that should be decided upon by Cabinet, but Cabinet should just
take a decision about when that process should begin. Thank you.

Mr M SWART: Chair, I was very pleased with the reply of the Minister. We
are very pleased, Minister, that this matter is receiving attention. We
were just wondering whether it is the intention of government to work more
or less on the basis of the system that is currently used in local
government in terms of which ward councillors are responsible for their
wards and everybody knows in that ward who is responsible for that specific
ward, whether this is on the proportional side in that all parties are
virtually represented in the proportional system and whether the intention
of government is that we would have something of that operation.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Mr Swart, you didn’t understand me. I didn’t
say that the government is seized with this matter. I said government
received the report and took a decision that the incoming government after
the elections in 2004 would be the one that would take that process
forward.

I’m saying, now that Ms De Lille has raised that matter, that it is
incumbent upon us as parties to then take a decision after going to
Cabinet. This is because then I need to go back to Cabinet to remind
Cabinet that we had been mandated that once we were in office, we needed to
pursue this matter.

So we have not taken a decision about what should happen or what will
happen in 2009. But I must say that one of the things mentioned in the
statement that was issued by Cabinet at the time was that Cabinet was happy
about the recommendation to retain the 400 seats.

How we reach that is a matter that will be decided through consultation
with all the parties after this consultation process, which has been going
on between yourselves – political parties – and your constituencies. So I
have not committed myself as to how we will get to the 400 seats. I know
that next time you will say that I misled Parliament. So I’m very careful
with my words. Thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Thank you, Deputy Chair. Hon Minister, my question has
basically been covered by the previous question, but I would like to point
out to you that one of the complaints that does arise is the issue of
accountability of public representatives to the electorate. This was one of
the issues raised in the Van Zyl Slabbert commission. Obviously, one of the
recommendations was to look at the PR list/constituency system.

Now, I appreciate that this will be looked at, but in the meantime, how do
you feel, hon Minister? Can we be more accountable to our electorate,
bearing in mind and given that we have constituency offices and we also
have constituency periods? Is there not a greater sense that we can look at
this issue and possibly also look at the issue of floor-crossing,
concerning which a lot of voters feel that it results in voter apathy as
MPs are allowed to cross the floor? Thank you.
The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: I didn’t think that we were getting into a
political discussion about that matter. However, certainly, from my party,
all public representatives are held to account. I don’t know how you people
ensure accountability in your party.

Concerning the issue of floor-crossing, it is a matter that, as you know,
all of us are discussing and one that has been explained repeatedly how it
was arrived at and who proposed it. In fact, for us in the majority party,
it is a devil that we have to stick with, which actually we did not want
initially. We never wanted to get to the position we now find ourselves in.


So, I think, it is a matter that we must continue to engage in until we
reach some decision at some point. I don’t know where, how and when we
shall reach that decision. But the point is that we find ourselves in this
predicament because of some people who made this kind of proposal and
pushed to make sure that a decision was reached on it. Now we are stuck
with this issue of floor-crossing, and all of us are stuck in this
marriage.

Mr A HARDING: Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam Minister, as you said earlier,
2009 is around the corner. The question that immediately arises in my mind
is that given that changes to the electoral system may be very intricate
and may be very complicated, do you think that we will have enough time to
implement the system before the 2009 elections? Thank you.
The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Sure, we will. It is now 2006, and we have
three years to go. And if there is a need for any changes, we will
certainly, if it is agreed to, have to amend the Electoral Act. Thank you.

       Measures to ensure optimal benefits in forestry for previously
                            disadvantaged people

105.  Mr K Moonsamy (ANC) asked the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry:

      As the Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment Charter in forestry is
      being finalised, what measures are considered by her department to
      ensure that previously disadvantaged people will receive optimal
      benefits in forestry?                   N1085E

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Thank you, Chair. The forestry
sector, as we all know, is of strategic importance to the economy,
contributing about R14 billion annually, which represents about 1% of the
total GDP of our country and provides some 170 000 jobs to our people. Most
of these jobs are in the rural areas, where unemployment is high. If you
include family dependants, we can say that 870 000 people rely on this
sector for survival.

The problem, however, is that the forestry sector is still largely white
and male-dominated, and characterised by large disparities in access to
opportunities and benefits for black people, particularly women. That is
the reason the government saw fit to launch the forestry charter process,
in order to support the transformation of this sector. Forestry as a sector
is regulated by government and is subject to licensing by government, and
has to comply with our legislation as well as codes of good practice.

As government, we intend to use the regulatory tools we possess in the
issuing of licences, the regulation of the sector and through procurement
of goods to ensure that historically disadvantaged people benefit from
forestry activities and that the growing of trees benefits a broader
spectrum of the population along the value chain.

It is necessary therefore that through our broad-based BEE in the forestry
sector, we also stimulate growth of the sector and encourage beneficiation
and value addition downstream. To this end my department is committed to
streamlining ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Minister, will you conclude, please?

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: As a department, some of the
measures we are employing are to ensure that we streamline and speed up the
process of afforestation licensing to ensure that new forests are planted.
Thank you.
Mr K MOONSAMY: Thank you, Chairperson. Thank you, Comrade Minister, for
your elaborate response. Mine is a somewhat longwinded question. What plans
are being made by the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry to implement
sustainable broad-based black empowerment on a long-term basis, such as co-
operatives after the adoption of the forestry charter? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chairperson, I think the
forestry sector charter will play a critical role in ensuring sustainable
broad-based black economic empowerment in the forestry industry. Through
the charter we are looking at having support instruments, instruments that
will support skills development targets, which means that companies that
are operating in this industry will have to meet certain targets in terms
of the training and capacity-building of people involved in the industry,
particularly those that are participating in the acquisition of either
equity in existing companies or those that are participating as new owners
of new forests. We are expecting established companies to play a role here,
and there will be targets in the forestry charter to make sure that they
comply.

We also hope to use an instrument to support enterprise development
targets, which will include access to funds and financial services for
emerging black entrepreneurs; capacity-building and business support for
them; instruments to support preferential procurement targets which will
aim to ensure equitable and sustainable contracting; and employment
practices through the industry codes of good practice.

As you know, as a government we procure large products that are by-products
of the main products of forestry, and through our procurement systems we’ll
need to ensure that companies from whom we procure are transformed
companies and that they comply with the procurement targets that will be
set out in the charter. Do I still have time?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Twelve seconds.

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Well, financial instruments are
also going to be part of the charter process. We intend to investigate a
special fund that will assist emerging and small growers in the forestry
charter.

Ms J A SEMPLE: Thank you, Chair. Madam Minister, one of the major benefits
of BEE is its potential for growth. South Africa’s high unemployment can
only be addressed by a growth economy and the opportunity to create jobs.
How will the BEE charter in forestry contribute to such a growth
environment, which will create jobs and opportunities for previously
disadvantaged people in the industry?

I am referring particularly to areas such as the Southern Cape where
plantations have been closed down, causing hundreds of people in those
communities to lose their jobs and staff housing. What alternative measures
does the Minister envisage that are available to keep these people in
employment through the BEE process?

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Thank you, Chairperson. As part
of the charter process, obviously we are looking at established companies
to assist us in terms of transformation. As we transform, more people
become participants, especially people in the areas where forests are
situated. But we are also looking at afforestation, that is new forests
being planted in the areas of KwaZulu-Natal as well as in the Eastern Cape.
Through that we are hoping to create jobs and ensure that the forestry
industry grows.

The hon member has spoken about plantations that are closing down. We do
have forests that belong to government that we call category B and C, which
are forests that have not yet been made available to the private sector. We
intend to make sure that through our institutions that will be established
those forests either become part of the new afforestation or are brought to
a profit-making level so that they can then be transferred to the
historically disadvantaged people of our country.

We believe that the identification of forestry as one of the Asgisa
projects will enable us to target and deal with the challenges faced in
this area, which as the hon member says, is job creation and poverty
eradication in the rural areas.
     Updating of passport control facilities in light of 2010 World Cup
                                 tournament

102.  Mr F Beukman (ANC) asked the Minister of Home Affairs:

       Whether her department has embarked on a programme with Airports
       Company South Africa (ACSA) and SA Airways (SAA) to ensure that
       facilities for migration passport control are updated in light of the
       2010 World Cup tournament and the anticipated number of visitors; if
       not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                             N1081E

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, I would like to assure the hon
members that the department has indeed adopted a programme and plans for
the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup to ensure that our ports of entry are ready
for the anticipated high volumes of visitors.

These programmes are co-ordinated by our newly established 2010 office,
working together with the Border Control Operational Co-ordinating
Committee – BCOCC - which co-ordinates all stakeholders at various ports of
entry and includes the Airports Company of SA, Acsa. I have been in
constant consultation with the Board of Airline Representatives of SA –
Barsa - which includes SA Airways.

As part of the plan, we will be increasing our IT and human resource
capacity in our foreign offices to ensure that visitors are able to make
applications for the necessary permits and visas well in advance and
without any major hassles. Currently, we provide consular services in 46
missions abroad and we hope to increase this number by 2010.

It is true that with these platforms and structures we will continue to
engage our overall co-ordination for the implementation of the 2010 plans.
Thank you, Chair.

Mr F BEUKMAN: Thank you, Chair. Thank you, hon Minister, for the very
comprehensive reply. It’s evident that the department is doing its homework
with regard to the control challenges that we are going to face in 2010.
The ANC welcomes the proactive approach by the Minister and the department.
It is important that all political parties in this House give recognition
to the Minister and the department to ensure that the problems related to
migration control are tackled head-on.

There have been two major issues in the past few months: the personal
intervention of the Minister at the Beit Bridge crossing in April to ensure
that during the peak period there were sufficient resources to deal with
the huge number of visitors; and the establishment of the ministerial task
team to investigate the challenges facing migration control at the
international airports and to provide solutions.

We recognise that this proactive approach of the Minister is the correct
approach. Minister, in relation to your reply: What structures are
currently in place at the international airports to ensure that all
relevant stakeholders, especially Acsa, are working in unison with regard
to the challenges facing us with regard to migration control?

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon members, if you
visit an airport, particularly the two major international airports, namely
the Cape Town International Airport and the Johannesburg International
Airport, you will find that any time you are based there that there is a co-
ordinating structure to ensure that if there any hiccups in our immigration
systems there are people who will quickly come together to ascertain where
the bottlenecks are and try to resolve them.

Secondly, we have people who are stationed there at a supervisory level to
ensure that in the event of immigration officers having problems, they are
able to give guidance on how to tackle those problems. This is a measure we
did not have in the past in which, at times, immigration officers would not
have supervisors on the spot at senior managerial level who would be able
to intervene and give guidance in the event of an immigration officer
encountering problems which he or she could not resolve.

So, what you have on the ground are floor supervisors and a queue
management system. This is because some of the complaints we have had to
deal with are actually things which are very insignificant, for instance
people complaining about queue management. You now have queue managers and
supervisors who are even supervising those sorts of things, so that you
don’t have people standing in the queues longer than 30 minutes without
receiving the necessary attention.

Mr M SWART: Minister, one of the facilities your department has to provide
is a holding centre at the airports, which will be for the visitors and
migrants who enter the country with invalid travel documents such as
passports and visas.

During a recent visit to Johannesburg International Airport by the
portfolio committee, it was found that there were 20 males - 16 Ethiopians
and four Chinese - in one room. The linen and blankets provided did not
look fresh, the room had no ventilation either in the form of windows or
air-conditioning and the smell was not good. The persons who had been held
there had not been visited by a nurse or a doctor. Given that they are held
there until the next available flight back to their country of origin,
which might be anything up to a week, the possibility of infection is high
in such a contained environment.
In 2010 we may see an influx of thousands of fans with invalid travel
documents. What plans does the Minister have in place to upgrade holding
centres at all the international airports?

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Mr Swart, thank you for the visit to the
airport, and thank you for raising this matter. But, please, you have to
acknowledge the fact that we do not own the airport; it is a building,
which belongs to Acsa. There are really situations which are beyond our
control. But it is good to raise the matter because it is a matter of
concern.

If we had released those people, you would appreciate that by now they
would have disappeared and we would not have been able to track and trace
them. If you release some of the people or let them out of the airport, you
won’t be able to find them, but, on the other hand, you find that these are
instances when you can’t even send the people to Lindela. But we have to
take some measures to stop them from entering the country.

The challenge is to find space at the airport. And, as you can appreciate,
there are buildings, there is infrastructure that is being built right now
at the airport. So it is really a situation beyond the control of the
Department of Home Affairs. Thank you, Mr Swart, and thank you for visiting
the airport. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): We now proceed to Question 118.
Question 97 the Minister has requested to stand over. The member has been
consulted. Question 112 has been withdrawn. Therefore we come to Question
118 by the hon Skosana to the hon Minister for the Public Service and
Administration. Hon Minister? Oh, I saw that she was here. Shall we proceed
with the next question, Question 99, and we will come back to that question
if the Minister returns.

    Investigation into events surrounding postponement of Leila Ali fight


99.   Mr M M Dikgacwi (ANC) asked the Minister of Sport and Recreation:

      (1)   Whether his department has entered into discussions with Boxing
           South Africa to prevent a reoccurrence of the events surrounding
           the postponement of the Leila Ali fight; if not, why not; if so,
           what are the relevant details;




      (2)   whether an investigation will be instituted to establish the
            facts surrounding the abovementioned fight; if not, why not;



      (3)   whether the investigation will include the alleged fraudulent
           use of official stationery to solicit sponsorships and funding
           for the event; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
           details?                     N1078E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, with regard to
the first part of the question: yes, we are awaiting a formal and written
report from Boxing SA. The issues that we raised with Boxing SA were how
the promoter was given a licence given his record, which emerged post
facto; and, how the fight was authorised, given the circumstances around
Star-Trade and its integrity as a company.

With regard to the second part of the question, Boxing SA we are told that
Boxing SA has done the investigation, and the outcome of that investigation
will constitute the report that is still to be delivered to us.

With regard to the third part of the question: yes, the allegation of a
fraudulent signature of one of our officials is being investigated. The
matter is being investigated both in terms of the Public Service Act and in
terms of criminal law.

We are also investigating the fact that the departmental logo was used next
to that of Star-Trade. This is a criminal law investigation and we are
still awaiting the outcomes of all these investigations. Thank you.

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Thank you, Chair, and Deputy Minister. We will respect all
the processes that the department has put in place, but I think it would be
very interesting for the matter, at a later stage when it has been
concluded, to be heard, because it would have been a very good gesture for
women in our country had that fight materialised with that icon of women.
Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I’m not sure that there is a follow-
up question, Minister, so you are not obliged to respond. But you
apparently want to.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Deputy Chair, I’d just like to
say to the hon Komphela that we share the same sentiment and we will
definitely make the outcomes public.

Mr S J MASANGO: Thank you, Chairperson. Deputy Minister, I think you would
agree with me that this incident is an embarrassment to our country and
that it should not have occurred. What I want to know is: Do we have a
system in place that will prevent such an incident from occurring in
future? If not, are we going to devise another system that we can put in
place so that something like this doesn’t happen in future? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Deputy Chair, Boxing SA is a
public entity. They issue the licences. We have asked for a report of the
investigation, and we certainly did engage them to make sure that we don’t
have a recurrence of something of this nature in future.

May I just say that a sporting federation or a public entity is
independent, and government can only give guidance in that regard. We
cannot really take over and interfere directly. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Are there any further follow-up
questions? If not, then the hon Minister for the Public Service and
Administration, could we take Question 118 by the hon Skosana?

 Training and orientation of community development workers; and their impact
                 on alleviating poverty and underdevelopment


118.  Mr M B Skosana (IFP) asked the Minister for the Public Service and
       Administration:

       (1)  (a) What (i) aspects of training and orientation have community
            development workers been exposed to from the time they were
            first employed and (ii) support systems are they provided with
            and (b) in which communities are these systems established;

       (2)  whether community development workers have any measurable impact
            on alleviating rural and urban poverty and underdevelopment; if
            not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details;




       (3)  whether she will make a statement on the matter?   N1098E

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Yes, thank you,
Chairperson. As Mr Skosana would know, when you deal with community
development workers, there’s always a complexity of issues. I was just
dealing with a community-related issue outside, so my apologies for missing
my turn.

In terms of the training that community development workers are exposed to,
from the day they are recruited until the day they become fully fledged
community development workers, they are exposed to intensive training. As a
matter of fact, we have a year during which community development workers
are engaged in a rigorous learnership programme.

This particular programme covers areas such as dealing with the
developmental context, looking at the historical background of our country,
looking at the actual community that they are in and its economic factors
and partnerships, looking at the detail of government services that are
available, and looking at the specific dynamics relating to the community.

In their training they also deal with the specifics of development theory,
organisational development, financial management, conflict resolution and
work management. Their training also covers issues such as supporting small
business; it looks at local economic development and at laws and policies;
and it looks at legislation, which involves interpretation and
understanding to the benefit of the community.

Immediately after they have completed their yearlong learnership and post
their full employment, they are then taken further into other specific
areas of work. At that point in time, they engage in programmes such as
Wamkelekile – “Welcome to government” - an overview of government
functioning.

They look specifically at building a service-delivery culture in the Public
Service. They would have been exposed to the dynamics of intergovernmental
relationships, because they are a peculiar cadre, if I can call them that.
They are located in a local community, they work directly with local
government, they are employed by provincial government, and they have links
with the national government.

So, the training for community development workers is an ongoing process,
and provinces engage them in workshops to learn about the specifics of
individual departments. We’ve also seen in provinces, such as Gauteng and
the Western Cape, that they are put into programmes of advanced management
training, which I think is quite positive and this is, of course, for those
who have been fully employed.

I think it’s also necessary to state that they have supervisors who are
based at municipal level, and the municipalities provide them with access
to resources – offices, equipment and so on. Thank you very much.

Mr M B SKOSANA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I want to thank the Minister for
the comprehensive reply. In fact, she gave me a very, very long and
comprehensive reply in her statement, which makes me unable to engineer any
follow-up question for her.

I must say that the reason I asked the question is that at the inception of
these community development workers, when I didn’t see them, which may have
been my own omission, I thought they were going to be central to, or
underpin, a very strong co-operative development movement in urban and
rural areas, specifically for housing and agriculture. I’m glad that I will
learn as I read this. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you, hon Skosana. It’s not
obligatory to ask a follow-up question. You would like to respond,
Minister? You are welcome to.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: I actually want to
respond to that and say thanks for the complimentary remarks. I want to
give some examples in which they are actually involved very directly in
economic development. One such example is the Umsinga Municipality in
KwaZulu-Natal. I think, hon member, I should probably invite you to
accompany me at some point to go out to communities where the community
development workers are present so that you can be exposed to their work.

In terms of the Umsinga Municipality, the community development worker
there has assisted a group of 10 unemployed women and a man to establish a
food garden. This community development worker actually linked them up to
Ithala Bank in order to access a loan that assisted them with the further
development and expansion of their project. So, I think, that reflects on
the local economic development initiatives that they are engaged in. They
are not necessarily directly engaged in the co-operative movement as a
distinct component, but will play a supportive role as and where required.

In terms of the Eastern Cape, I can also give an example in which one of
the community development workers worked with a local councillor in
facilitating renovations at a local school. The school concerned was the
Sandile Primary School. The condition this school was in was not the
greatest. In terms of the normal initiatives by the community to actually
do something about this, the community development worker was quite
directly involved. So, I think, where they have been present, you do indeed
see a difference in communities. Thank you.

Mr M R SIKAKANE: Madam Minister, as the community development workers have
received this rigorous training, I would like to know and for this House to
understand the impact the CDWs will have on a single Public Service that
your department is about to formalise in terms of legislation before this
House. What is the difference they have brought about between a councillor
in the ward and a committee in the area? What is the difference that they
will bring about in order to have an impact as far as the delivery of
services in the community is concerned? Could you elaborate on that? Thank
you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Madam Minister, would you like to
respond?

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Yes, thank you very
much, Chairperson. I think, firstly, the community development worker
actually reflects exactly what we’d like to see in a single Public Service,
in which there will be the possibility of a public servant having access
across the different spheres of government.

Secondly, as I explained earlier, this is a special cadre that’s located
right in the community, lives in that community, speaks the language of
that community, is exposed to the complexities of that community, and has
access to resources across the spheres of government.

Hence, there is our insistence, at the level of local government, that they
need to have access to the office of the executive arm at the level of
local government, and also have access to the premier’s office in order to
be exposed to programmes that are of a crosscutting nature there, as well
as access at national government level at which we look at ensuring that
national government also facilitates the kinds of linkages between
different government programmes.

In terms of a single Public Service, we simply say that government services
must be made accessible in a seamless way to the citizen. So, the citizen
must not be bothered as to whether that service is provided at local
government level, or provincial government level, or national government
level. The issue is access to services by the citizen.

We hear through this cadre that has now been in existence for two years. We
are seeing this in operation in some ways in which the community
development worker also, in the instance of a disaster, is able to access
officials at provincial and even national level in terms of resource
requirements. So, it takes this forward. Thank you very much.

Mnr S E OPPERMAN: Minister, dit is belangrik dat die totale gemeenskap
voordeel trek uit die werksaamhede van die gemeenskapsontwikkelingswerkers.
Daarom is my vraag: kom die vergoeding van gemeenskapsontwikkelingswerkers
uit die geldkoffers van die ANC of die staat, en as dit uit die staatskas
kom, hoekom bedien die gemeenskapsontwikkelingswerkers net ANC-lede in
gemeenskappe? Baie dankie.

Die MINISTER VIR DIE STAATSDIENS EN ADMINISTRASIE: Agb lid, ek dink u het
’n groot probleem. Ons het tydens my begrotingspos oor hierdie saak gepraat
en nou praat ons weer eens daaroor. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr S E OPPERMAN: Minister, it is important that the entire community
benefits from the work of the community development workers. My question
therefore is: does the remuneration of community development workers come
from the coffers of the ANC or the State, and if it comes from the
treasury, why do community development workers only serve ANC members in
the communities? Thank you very much.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Hon member, I think
that you have a big problem. We discussed this matter during my budget vote
and now we are discussing it again.]

It’s not even an issue where the money comes from.

Dit kom uit die staatskas, en ek dink u moet ophou om net stories te vertel
hier. Bring tog asseblief bewyse aan my van waar daar gevalle is waar
hierdie gemeenskapsontwikkelingswerkers net vir die ANC werk, want as dit
die geval is, is dit verkeerd, en ek weet nie van enige gevalle waar dit
wel gebeur nie. U moet dus ophou om met skinderstories te kom. Bring feite
en plaas dit voor my sodat ons dit kan hanteer. Dankie. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[It comes from the treasury, and I think that you should refrain from
spreading rumours. Please bring me the evidence of instances where these
community development workers have only worked for the ANC, because if that
is the case, then it is wrong, and I do not know of any instances where
this has actually happened. You must therefore stop being a gossip-monger.
Bring me facts so that we can deal with it. Thank you.]

Mr W P DOMAN: Madam Chair, I just want to put it to the Minister that these
CDWs are actually an acknowledgement that other officials – civil servants
- are not doing their work in the communities. Why do the CDWs have to
access people in government services when there are officials that can do
their work and are being paid all the time?

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Thank you very
much. Quite honestly, this hon member is out of touch with himself and with
constituencies.

I think, first and foremost, we are talking here about a community cadre
who is able to go to the houses of members of the community that are unable
to reach services for various reasons. This worker would be able to point
out where Home Affairs should take its mobile services or where the Social
Development worker should go. This worker is there in addition to what
officials do. This is not due to officials not doing their work, but is
filling a gap.

This also identifies instances in which there is potential in the
community. We can bring together community resources with government
resources, and here we are talking about the business initiatives in the
community and otherwise.

We also want to grow the second economy. So, this is not about creating
dependency on government services as well, but about unleashing the
potential in communities and building on it. That cadre was never there in
the Public Service; that cadre is one that we are creating now.

So this is not about filling a gap; it’s about your lack of understanding
of what the needs are in communities at that point, because we are looking
at a catalyst that is there at the coalface of service delivery and can
actually step in and ensure that services are taken where they are not
being accessed at this point in time. Thank you. [Applause.]

    Steps to rectify shortcomings in Further Education and Training (FET)
                                 curriculum

110.  Mr G G Boinamo (DA) asked the Minister of Education:

       (1)  With regard to the fact that Grade 10 learners in the Western
             Cape had a sixty percent failure rate in their mid-year exams
             which was structured according to the Further Education and
             Training (FET) curriculum, (a) what is her department’s
             explanation for this result, (b) what are the shortcomings in
             the FET curriculum and (c) how does her department intend
             rectifying these shortcomings;

       (2)  whether there are any plans to review the training of teachers
             who have to implement the FET curriculum; if not, why not; if
             so, what plans?                             N1090E


TONA YA LEFAPHA LA THUTO: Ke a leboga Modulasetulo wa Ntlo. Rre Boinamo, ke
go bolelela ka metlha gore o seke wa tsaya dilo tshotlhe tse o di buisang
mo dikuranteng. Batho bao ga ba bue nnete. Fa o ka gakologelwa, ga gona
ditlhatlhobo tse di kwadilweng ke porofense yotlhe. Ntlha eo e fosagetse.
Ga go ise go nne le ditlhatlhobo tsa Kapa Bophirima e le nosi. Ka jalo, seo
ga se nnete. Go na le ditlhatlhobo tsa bogareng jwa ngwaga tse sekolo
sengwe le sengwe se itirelang tsona. Ga gona tlhatlhobo e e bidiwang
tlhatlhobo ya Kapa Bophirima.

Dikuranta di buile ka dikolo di le tharo fela. O ka sere go feitse 60% ya
bana ba Kapa Bophirima o lebisitse mo dikolong di le tharo fela. O seke wa
tsaa dikuranta tsia. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you, Chairperson. Mr Boinamo, I tell you
every day not to believe everything that you read in the newspapers. Those
people do not tell the truth. If you still remember, there are no
examinations that are written by the whole province. That statement is
incorrect. There has never been examinations for the Western Cape province
only. Hence, that is not true. Every school is responsible for its mid-term
examinations. There is no examination called a Western Cape province
examination.

The newspapers only referred to three schools, therefore you cannot say 60%
of the Western Cape learners failed and only refer to three schools. You
must not believe newspapers.]

Let me answer the question. The Western Cape education department reports
that the failure rate varied widely across schools, and my colleague MEC
Dugmore answered the question on the specific reasons for failure in the
provincial legislature, only yesterday. I draw your attention to the
response, but let me highlight two points that he made.

Firstly, as you would know, hon member, there are no higher and standard
grades any longer in the new curriculum. In the past, a higher grade
failure could be converted into a standard grade pass. So that’s important.
This can no longer happen. There is no such conversion.

In some schools, the poor pass rate in home language increased the number
of learners who failed in the dramatic fashion that has been reported. If
you had looked at the three schools in which this failure had been
recorded, you would have noted the trend in the three was in home language
as a subject. This subject is now compulsory; it’s not been before and, of
course, the whole pass-fail is compounded by what I said, the conversion,
which used to occur in the past.

Secondly, some schools reported on sections of assessment only and did not
include continuous assessment or oral marks as required. So in the reports
you read, what they were talking about was the achievement in the written
exams in those schools. It was not a compilation of the final mark, which
in our system includes continuous assessment as well as oral marks. This
also, of course, produces the kind of negative picture you read about.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Minister, because I have respect
for an ex-teacher I have allowed you to go on, but your time has expired.

Rre G G BOINAMO: Se se salang ke gore bona bana bao ba ba kwadileng
tlhatlhobo ya Mophato wa Bolesome, ga baa dira sentle; ba feitse ke nnete.
Jaanong potso ya me ke gore, a mo ngwangeng o, re tlile go bona go feila go
go fetang go re go boneng ka ditlhatlhobo tsa bogare jwa ngwaga kgotsa re
tlile go bona Tona kgotsa Lefapha la Thuto le nolofatsa ditlhatlhobo gore
bana ba Mophato wa Bolesome ba kgone go phasa botlhe? Ke a leboga.

TONA YA LEFAPHA LA THUTO: Go simolola ka karabo ya me, ke batla go
netefatsa gore ga re ne re theosa, mme re ya go tsholetsa maemo go
tsweletsa bana ba rona. Ke batla go netefatsa seo.
Sa bobedi se re tlileng go se dira ke go dirisana le barutabana le dikolo
go ba thusa gore ba tlhaloganye gore ba tshwanetse go dira jang go thusa
bana ba rona. Re setse re buile le ba mafapha otlhe a thuto mo Aforika
Borwa gore re tlile go tsaya dirutwa di le nne re ba nee pampiri e le nngwe
ya dirutwa tseo gore ba tle ba leke bana ka tsona, go kwalwe Tlhatlhobo ya
Bosetšhaba e e tshwanang kwa bofelong jwa Phatwe jaaka teko, gore re
tlhatlhobe gore totatota ke eng se bana ba sa se tlhaloganyeng fa ba
rutiwa. Re ya go dira dilo tseo e bile re ya go netefatsa gore katiso ya
rona e thuse barutabana gore ba itse gore kharikhulamo e e tlile go dira
jang.

Ke ile ka tshwenyega thata fa ke buisa ka ga mogokgo mongwe mo kuranteng a
bua gore – se ke ile ka se tsaya mo tlhogong ya me - bana ba gagwe ga baa
rutiwa jaaka re batla go dira mo Mophatong wa Bolesome. O buile gore ga baa
rutiwa ka kharikhulamo ya FET, ba rutiwa ka tsela e e sa tlhokeng
tlhaloganyo thata. Jaanong, re tlile go dirisana le dikolo gore ba
utlwisise gore re tlhoka tlhaloganyo ka dinako tsotlhe mo kharikhulamong
gore bana ba rona ba itse gore totatota re tlhoka maemo a a kwa godimodimo
mo go bona. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[Mr G G BOINAMO: The fact is that those learners who wrote the grade 12
examinations, underperformed - in fact, they failed. Now my question is:
Are we going to have an increased number of failures this year like in the
mid-year examinations or is the Minister or the Department of Education
going to simplify the matric examinations so that all can pass? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: In response, I would like to assure you that we
will not lower the standard, but instead we are going to raise the standard
to develop our children. I want to make that point clear.

Secondly, we are going to collaborate with the schools and teachers, to
help them understand the method to use in order for them to be able to help
our children. We have already spoken to all the departments of education of
South Africa and informed them that we will use four subjects and give them
one question paper from one of the four subjects to assess the learners
with.

A similar national examination will be written at the end of August as a
pilot study in order to find out what is it that the learners do not
understand when they are taught. We are going to do all those things and
ensure that our training helps the teachers to know how this curriculum is
going to work.

I got worried when I was reading a newspaper about a certain principal who
said - this is what I gathered in my mind - his children have not been
taught the way we want to teach the grade 12’s. He said that they were not
taught according to the FET curriculum, they were being taught in a way
that does not necessarily need their thinking skills. We are now going to
work together with schools so that they can understand that in this
curriculum we need their thinking skills at all times so that our children
should know that we need a very high standard from them.]

Mr B G MOSALA: I thank the Minister for a very detailed response that
highlights many salient issues with regard to the National Curriculum
Statement and progress made to date. The response also puts to rest the
myth that there is a crisis caused by the implementation of the new
curriculum in some schools in the Western Cape.

However, in spite of the concerns that were obviously based on a
misconception, what kind of feedback are you receiving generally with
regard to the implementation of the new curriculum? Finally, is the
training programme for Grades 10 to 12 teachers progressing according to
schedule? Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Minister, there are two
questions, not one.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Well, Madam Chair, you allowed them. Firstly, as
I have said with respect to the training of teachers, we are certainly
working on a review of our training programme, to ensure that teachers
fully understand the new curriculum. When we began our training of teachers
for the new curriculum, I think the training tended to focus more on the
methodology or the pedagogy that teachers should use, rather than really
looking in a detailed fashion at subject-content knowledge, which is
necessary for achievement in our new curriculum. So, we have strengthened
our training programme.

We now have 100 hours of training. We have incentives for attendance and
incentives with respect to knowledge acquisition. We are continuing our
programme to ensure that we prepare our teachers better for Grades 11 and
12 so that they will be more competent.

We also are working far more closely with the schools in terms of looking
at the forms of assessment that they utilise as a regular part of the
learning and teaching programme in schools. I think we have learnt lessons
from the introduction of the new curriculum. I am not in any way
disheartened.

We have spoken to the principals of the schools that were the concern and
subject of the articles in the newspapers two or three weeks ago. A number
of them were most unhappy about the manner in which their schools were
reported on. There was an exaggeration of the problems that they had
encountered and they have indicated their keenness to continue working with
the curriculum to ensure that this more demanding curriculum is implemented
appropriately in the country.

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Hon Minister, I am trying to see where you are. I am
personally involved with trying to offer resource material on outcomes-
based education to education departments in the country, because one hears
constantly that there is a shortage of materials for outcomes-based
education. The particular material that I am talking about has forewords by
two Ministers of Education. It has been shown to various educators and they
say the material is spot-on for what the country needs.

Yet, there’s a paralysis when it comes to the various provinces or the
people who are in charge of assigning material to the schools. There’s a
paralysis in their being able to find useful material and assign it to
schools and find a budget or a way to make it useful to pupils. So,
resource material that is evidently endorsed by ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): The question, hon Rabinowitz?

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Is there any way to overcome this problem and get
resources to the children who need them without going to the private
sector? Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Minister, I leave it to you to
respond. You know it’s not a follow-up question so you can choose if you
want to or not.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Mr Ellis will give me a very hard time if I
don’t respond, so I had better try. [Interjections.] You thought I might be
scared.

I think one of the things that has occurred with the introduction of the
new curriculum is that people have assumed and teachers, perhaps some
practitioners, think it’s a very complicated curriculum. I think that part
of that resulted from the curriculum’s introduction.

The original curriculum that was put before South Africa with the criterion
referencing, the very specific detail on outcomes and so on was a very
complex set of syllabus outlines for teachers, given the training that we
had in the country. I think the revised curriculum and certainly the
further education curriculum – further level: the senior high school - is
far better in terms of the way it outlines the curriculum and, I think,
uses a language that is more acceptable and accessible to teachers.

What outcomes-based education demands from a teacher is the ability to
creatively make use of any set of materials that you have available to you.
For example, it doesn’t matter even if it’s a textbook, newspapers,
magazines and journal articles. It is the set of questions that you put
which will elicit the outcomes you want - essay writing or critical
analysis that actually make the difference.

Part of our problem as well is that those who do the training are not as
fully trained as they should be. One of the things we intend to do is to
run a set of very well constructed programmes for the district officials
who are the facilitators of training, so that they are better able to
advise and support teachers.

A final point is that the selection of material from catalogues is a very
complex process. So, we’ve tried to develop a national selection process
and have developed a single catalogue from which all provinces and teachers
can make selections, rather than having nine or so catalogues. [Time
expired.]

      Steps to prevent receipt of further qualified audit by department

107.  Ms M N S  Manana  (ANC)  asked  the  Minister  of  Water  Affairs  and
       Forestry:


       Whether any progress has been made to ensure that her department does
       not receive a qualified audit again; if not, why not; if so, what are
       the relevant details?            N1087E

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Hon Chairperson, the Auditor-
General’s reports on the 2004-05 financial statements of the Department of
Water Affairs and Forestry were of concern to me, my predecessor, and the
management of the department with regard to the financial management
capacity of the department. As a result of these concerns, a number of
steps were taken to ensure that the financial management of the department
was improved and placed on a much firmer footing.

These actions, which we took during the latter half of the 2005-06
financial year, will not have a significant impact on the results of the
past financial year. This is already evident on the basis of our
preliminary discussions with the Office of the Auditor-General as well as
the AG management letters that the department has been getting.

For historical reasons, the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry is
involved in a number of trading activities, which include the sale of
water. There is a medium-term plan to migrate these activities out of Dwaf
to various institutions, including municipalities.

On the financial side, we will improve general financial management by
making the following interventions at head office - it’s a total
restructuring of our finance branch and the regional finance structures
through separating this trading account from the main account which is
money that we get from Treasury.

We have contracted a national accounting firm to provide temporary
resources to my department both at national and regional offices to improve
our financial management while we try to recruit suitable staff for an
internal audit.

We have the implementation of SAP as the preferred enterprise resource
planning system to support our trading activities. This system is expected
to go live at the end of September this year. This will mean that we will
be able to fully implement accrual accounting for the trading activities,
and comply with the provisions of section 41 of the Public Finance
Management Act of 1999. These, amongst other things, are the measures we
have taken to improve the situation.

Nk M N S MANANA: Sihlalo, angibonge kuNgqongqoshe ngempendulo anginikeze
yona. Ngithanda ukwazi ukuthi imaphi amasu uMnyango wakhe onawo
okuqinisekisa ukuthi izinsiza ziyafinyelela kubantu ngesikhathi uMnyango
wakhe usabhekene nokulungisa lezi zindaba zezimali?

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZAMANZI NEZAMAHLATHI: Sihlalo, ngiyabonga kwilungu
elihloniphekileyo ngombuzo eliwubuzile. Ngingasho ngithi njengoba sizama
ukulungisa lezi zindaba zezimali umsebenzi awumile. Uma ubheka nje,
uzothola ukuthi lo Mnyango ubunazo lezi zingxaki iminyaka emihlanu edlulile
kodwa akuzange kume ukutholakala kwezinsiza kubantu abazifunayo nalabo
ezibafanele.

Uma ubheka nje, uzothola ukuthi yizigidi ngezigidi zabantu asebenikwe
amanzi kanye nalabo asebenikwe izindlu zangasese phezu kwalezi zingxaki
esinazo. Uma ubheka iNingizimu Afrika, phakathi kwamanye amazwe, uzothola
ukuthi thina sesifinyelele kulokhu esikubiza sithi ama-millennium
development goals. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Ms M N S MANANA: Chairperson, I thank the hon Minister for her reply. I
want to know what strategies her department has employed to ensure that
services do reach the people whilst the department is still sorting out
budgetary issues.

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chairperson, I thank the hon
member for the question. I can confirm that service delivery is indeed
continuing while we are still sorting out budgetary issues. If you double-
check, you will find that this department did have these financial problems
in the past five years but access to service delivery did not stop for the
needy and deserving.

As we speak, you will find that there are millions and millions of people
who have received water and toilets notwithstanding the problems we have.
If one compares South Africa with other countries, one will find that we
have achieved the objectives of the Millennium Development Goals.]

We have achieved our Millennium Development Goals in spite of this problem.

Ngingasho-ke ngithi njengoba sizolungisa izincwadi zethu ukuze zifanelane
nomthetho we-Public Finance Management Act, asizukuyeka nokuqhubeka
nokuletha izinsiza ebantwini ngale ndlela ebesivele senza ngayo.

Ngiyaliqinisekisa ilungu elihloniphekileyo ukuthi umsebenzi wokuletha
izidingo awuzukuthinteka. Sizowuvikela njengokuthi uma kufika abantu
abazosisiza abahlola ukuphathwa kwezezimali bathi besebenza bebe besisiza
ngokuqeqeqsha laba bantu abasha esibaqashayo, khona manjalo umsebenzi ube
uhamba nawo. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[I can proudly say that as we are putting our financial statements in line
with the requirements of the Public Finance Management Act, service
delivery is continuing at a normal pace.

I therefore assure the hon member that service delivery will not be
affected. We will protect its cause in the sense that when auditors come
for auditing, we request them to coach the new personnel, while the work is
in progress. Thank you.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you, Minister. I have one name
as a follow-up, also from the ANC, the hon Khumalo. If not, it’s purely a
name on my monitor, I will then call on the hon Mfundisi. Sorry, I have no
record here on my monitor. If you have questions ... I now have the DA, but
also Mr Mfundisi, whom I recognised. Are there any others whom I haven’t
seen on the monitor? Thank you. I will then call on Mr Mfundisi and then Ms
Semple. Thank you.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Unfortunately, Chair, I was calling the service officers
...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): You were only waving to me! In that
case, it’s the hon Ms Semple.

Ms J A SEMPLE: Thank you, Deputy Chair, and thank you, Minister, for your
very candid response to the financial problems in your department. As we
know, it has not had a very good record in respect of the Auditor-General’s
reports over the past four years. Since 2002, there have been two adverse
reports, one qualified report and last year serious matters of emphasis
were raised.

You have addressed the issue about the water trading account, but could you
tell us what you intend to do about the equipment trading account which
received an adverse audit opinion as well? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: I think at the core of our
problem with the qualifications and the disclaimers is the issue of assets
that are held by this Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, and the
problem is the location of assets and the valuation of assets particularly
with the equipment that you mentioned. The problem is that the equipment is
recorded at values of many years ago and, despite the fact that as
government and municipalities we have been improving equipment and spending
money on it, the real value of that equipment hasn’t been reflected and
that has been the problem of the Auditor-General.

We are addressing that issue through ensuring that we train people at the
regional offices. We are actually upgrading the position, in the regions,
of people dealing with these accounts to director level to ensure that we
attract the necessary level of skill to deal with these issues.

As you can imagine, as we spend this money on improving and upgrading
equipment, somebody must capture that in the regions for it to reflect at
head office so that when we give a picture to the Auditor-General, we give
the actual picture of the state of our equipment and what the value is. So,
the valuation of assets and the linking up of our systems is going to be
very critical and we are working on that.

Question 111 withdrawn

  Possible prosecution of public servants for fraudulently obtaining social
                                   grants

93.   Mr M Waters (DA) asked the Minister of Social Development:

      (1)   How many public servants signed an admission of guilt for
           fraudulently obtaining social grants as at 31 July 2006;




      (2)   whether he will request the Special Investigating Unit (SIU) to
           submit all the names of public servants who fraudulently
           obtained social grants to the National Prosecuting Authority for
           possible prosecution; if not, (a) why not and (b) what action
           will be taken against these public servants; if so, when will
           this be done?    N990E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Thank you, Deputy Chair. The
answer is as follows. There are no public servants that have signed
admissions of guilt. About 700 public servants had pleaded guilty in court
and were convicted and sentenced for fraudulently obtaining social grants
by 31 July 2006.

With regard to prosecutions, the Special Investigating Unit reviewed 43 705
public servants registered on the social pension – Socpen - system. More
than 22 000 of the public servants are entitled to a social grant, and no
action will be taken against them. Nearly 22 000 public servants have been
found to be on the system irregularly and about 14 000 of them are being
considered for prosecution on charges ranging from fraud to offences in
terms of the Social Assistance Act by the National Prosecuting Authority.

In view of the large numbers of potential prosecutions, the National
Director of Public Prosecutions has delegated a special team of prosecutors
to deal with these cases. About 1 520 public servants had been brought to
court by 31 July 2006, and about another 2 000 cases will be brought before
court on criminal charges ranging from fraud to offences in terms of the
Social Assistance Act over the next year. It is important to appreciate
that the investigation into public servants is the first phase of a much
larger investigation.

The Special Investigating Unit has commenced the second phase of the
investigation that involves private citizens who are receiving grants
irregularly. More than 400 000 private citizens have already been
identified for further investigation and many more are likely to follow.
This phase is likely to result in hundreds of thousands of potential
prosecutions.

At present, the National Prosecuting Authority has prioritised the
prosecution of the most serious cases. But the large numbers may make it
difficult to prosecute all those who have infringed the law. This is a
matter with which the National Prosecuting Authority will deal in terms of
its normal processes.
With regard to disciplinary action, all public servants found to be on the
system irregularly will be referred to their departments for disciplinary
action even if there is a decision not to prosecute them.

With regard to recovering the amounts owing, normally the recovery of debt
is a cumbersome process as court litigation is required to compel the
debtor to repay and the court cannot compel debtors to repay more than they
can afford.

The Special Investigating Unit has tried to persuade those who are willing
and able to repay what they owe to do so. By 31 July 2006, about 3 330
public servants had signed formal acknowledgements of debt that are
enforceable in court should they default on the promised payments.

The acknowledgement of debt is not a settlement of the debt and no debt or
interest has been written off. Thus, the department or the Special
Investigating Unit can still use normal court processes to recover the full
amount owed, including interest.

From a recent assessment done by the Special Investigating Unit, it emerged
that 65% agreed to a repayment over three years or less, 91% agreed to a
repayment over five years or less, 97% agreed to a repayment over eight
years or less, and 3% agreed to a repayment over a period of eight years or
more.
From the above ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Deputy Minister, I have to stop you
there.

Ms H WEBER: Thank you, Madam Chair. Hon Deputy Minister, I would just like
to find out if these grants were only child support grants or if they were
over the whole spectrum of grants. Also, were these reported to Sars to
investigate the tax evasion aspects of them, and are other fraudulent
claimants, for instance for disability grants, being investigated; if not,
why not?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Deputy Minister, may I just help
you there. Hon Weber, a follow-up question is a follow-up question – not
several - and it consists only of two parts. I think there were about four
different questions there. So, I am going to ask the Deputy Minister
whether she would like to choose one to respond to.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: I’ll choose the one. There was
one to do with a large spectrum of grants – disability grants and other
kinds of grants. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you very much. The time
allocated for questions has expired. Outstanding replies received will be
printed in Hansard.
See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I hereby give notice
that on the next sitting day of the House, I will move as follows:

  That the House -

  (1) Noting -


        (a) with grave concern the developments in the Middle East;


        (b) Israel's collective punishment of both the Palestinian and
              Lebanese peoples;


        (c) the disproportionate response of Israel and the use of military
              force against civilian targets, resulting in hundreds of
              deaths and injuries, mainly of women, children and the
              elderly, the massive destruction of vital life-supporting
              infrastructure and the displacement of over a million people;


        (d) the catastrophic humanitarian crisis in Gaza and Lebanon, for
              which Israel's aggression is responsible;


        (e) the anger and concerns of many sectors of our people - including
              political parties, trade unions and religious leaders; and


        (f) the commencement of a UN-mandated ceasefire on Monday, 14 August
              2006;


  (2) believing –


        (a) that the threat of a regional war might become a reality, which
              will seriously endanger regional and international peace and
              security;


        (b) that the actions of Israel are against international law and the
              Geneva Convention;


        (c) that the Palestinian people have the right to self-determination
              and independence in the state of Palestine and that the state
              of Israel has the right to exist alongside the state of
              Palestine, within secure borders; and


        (d) that a negotiated final status agreement would best serve the
              peoples of Israel, Palestine and Lebanon, and more generally
              the cause for peace and security in the region; and


  (3) resolves -


        (a) to call upon all parties to desist from any actions which may
              exacerbate the conflict;


        (b) to call for the maintenance of a ceasefire by all sides;


        (c) to call for a negotiated solution of the Israeli, Palestinian
              and Lebanese prisoner issue;


        (d) to call upon the UN Security Council to discharge its
              responsibilities and act with urgency to enforce and maintain
              the full cessation of hostilities and Israel’s withdrawal of
              its troops at the earliest;


        (e) to call upon the UN, on the basis of various UN resolutions, to
              seek a peaceful, comprehensive solution; and


           f) to call upon the international community and the South
              African government and people to respond to the catastrophic
              humanitarian tragedy in the region.





   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF AD HOC COMMITTEE ON APPOINTMENT OF AUDITOR-
                                   GENERAL




There was no debate.

Question put: That the recommendation for the appointment of Mr Terrence
Mncedisi Nombembe as Auditor-General be approved.

  AYES - 246: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S
  E; Baloyi, M R; Bekker, H J; Benjamin, J; Beukman, F; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, M
  J; Biyela, B P ; Bloem, D V; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Boinamo, G G; Bonhomme, T
  J; Booi, M S; Botha, C-S; Botha, N G W; Burgess, C V; Cachalia, I M;
  Carrim, Y I; Cele, M A; Chalmers, J; Chang, E S; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L
  S; Chohan-Khota, F I; Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J P; Cupido, H B ; Cwele, S
  C; Davidson, I O; Davies, R H; Delport, J T; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T;
  Dikgacwi, M M; Direko, I W; Dithebe, S L; Dlali, D M; Doman, W P; Du Toit,
  D C ; Ellis, M J; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Frolick, C T; Fubbs, J
  L; Gabanakgosi, P S; Gaum, A H; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M N; Gololo, C L;
  Goniwe, M T; Groenewald, P J; Gumede, D M; Gumede, M M; Hajaig, F;
  Hendricks, L B; Hendrickse, P A C; Hogan, B A; Holomisa, S P; Huang, S;
  Jankielsohn, R; Jeffery, J H; Johnson, C B; Jordan, Z P; Julies, I F;
  Kasienyane, O R; Khoarai, L P; Khumalo, K K; Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P;
  King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Komphela, B M; Koornhof, G W; Kotwal, Z;
  Labuschagne, L B; Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G; Likotsi, M T; Lishivha, T E;
  Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Lowe, C M; Lucas, E J; Maake, J J; Mabe, L L;
  Mabena, D C; Mabudafhasi, T R; Madasa, Z L; Madella, A F; Maduma, L D;
  Madumise, M M; Magau, K R; Magubane, N E ; Magwanishe, G B; Mahlangu-
  Nkabinde, G L; Mahlawe, N M; Mahomed, F; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Maja, S J;
  Makasi, X C; Makgate, M W; Malahlela, M J; Maloyi, P D N; Maluleka, H P;
  Manana, M N S; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Mars, I; Masango, S J; Maserumule, F
  T; Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane, L M; Mashigo, R J; Masutha, T M; Mathebe, P
  M; Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H; Matsemela, M L; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F;
  Matsomela, M J J ; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Mbombo, N D; Mfundisi, I S;
  Mgabadeli, H C; Minnie, K J; Mnguni, B A; Mnyandu, B J; Moatshe, M S;
  Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mohlaloga, M R;
  Mokoena, A D; Molefe, C T; Monareng, O E; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K;
  Morgan, G R; Morobi, D M; Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B G;
  Moss, M I; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mulder, C
  P; Mzondeki, M J G; Nawa, Z N; Ndlovu, V B; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C; Nene,
  N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N;
  Ngculu, L V J; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, M L; Ngwenya, W; Nhlengethwa, D G;
  Njikelana, S J ; Njobe, M A A; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Nqakula, C; Ntuli,
  B M; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, R S; Ntuli, S B; Nwamitwa-Shilubana, T L P;
  Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N ; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G
  G; Oosthuizen, G C; Padayachie, R L; Pahad, A G H; Pahad, E G; Pandor, G N
  M; Phala, M J; Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R D; Rabinowitz, R; Rajbally, S ;
  Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Rasmeni, S M; Saloojee, E;
  Sayedali-Shah, M R; Schippers, J; Schneemann, G D; Seadimo, M D; Seaton, S
  A; Sefularo, M; Semple, J A; September, C C; Shabangu, S; Sibande, M P;
  Sibanyoni, J B; Siboza, S ; Sibuyana, M W; Sikakane, M R; Simmons, S;
  Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B; Smith, P F; Smuts, M; Solomon, G; Sosibo, J
  E; Sotyu, M M; Spies, W D; Steyn, A C; Surty, M E ; Swart, M; Swart, P S;
  Swathe, M M; Thabethe, E; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tobias, T V; Tolo, L J;
  Trent, E W; Tsenoli, S L; Tshivhase, T J; Van der Merwe, S C ; Van der
  Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Van Wyk, A; Vos, S C; Vundisa, S S; Wang, Y; Weber,
  H; Yengeni, L E; Zita, L; Zulu, N E.

Question agreed to.

Recommendation accordingly approved in accordance with section 193(5)(b) of
the Constitution.

 ORGANISATION FOR ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT (OECD) CONVENTION ON
   COMBATING BRIBERY OF FOREIGN PUBLIC OFFICIALS IN INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS
                                TRANSACTIONS

  (Consideration of request for approval by Parliament in terms of section
                         231(2) of the Constitution)
Mr K K KHUMALO: Chairperson, hon members, Ministers and Deputy Ministers,
honourable guests, I rise on behalf of the Portfolio Committee on Public
Service and Administration to submit this agreement on the Convention on
Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business
Transactions, as adopted by the negotiating conference on 21 November 1997,
to this House for adoption in the context of chapter 14, section 231 of the
general provisions of the Constitution, which provides as follows ... Oh,
I’d rather leave the provisions for now and continue. Otherwise I will take
very long.

Allow me to make a few recommendations on these agreements, before giving
an exposition on the relevance of the constitutional provisions with
respect to the processes of customary international law for the purpose of
adopting the aforementioned agreement as part of discharging our
international obligations.

It is common cause in all international instruments on this subject that
bribery is confirmed to be a manifestation of corruption. Bribing public
officials undermines the economy of the state or states with the result
that government programmes intended to better the lives of citizenry are
impeded, job creation is thwarted, pushing back the frontiers of poverty is
compromised, and the same applies to general service delivery to the
poorest of the poor. The integrity of the state is compromised, rendering
the state susceptible to instability.
This agreement is directed at regulating the conduct of foreign public
officials in international fiscal relations or transactions. This agreement
is designed to inculcate maximum ethical conduct in public officials when
transacting in dealings that impact on national and international
interests.

At our 51st conference in Stellenbosch in 2002, the ANC took the following
resolutions with respect to corruption: that the government must ensure
that legislation is speedily implemented to deal with corruption, including
the use of punitive measures; and also to embark on an awareness and
training campaign amongst public representatives and public servants about
mechanisms used or to be employed to avoid officials being corrupted or
compromised unwittingly.

Legislation referred to by the ANC was indeed enacted in the form of the
Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act, Act 12 of 2004. This
legislation in chapter 2 and article 5(1) creates an offence with respect
to the bribing of foreign public officials. It also acknowledges its
existence as drawing on international instruments such as the Southern
African Development Community Protocol adopted in Malawi on 14 August 2001.

This legislation also acknowledges the desire of the Republic of South
Africa to become party to the United Nations convention against corruption
adopted by the UN General Assembly on 31 October 2003. It is desirable to
“unbundle the crime of corruption in terms of which, in addition to the
creation of a general, broad all-encompassing offence of corruption,
various specific corrupt activities are criminalised”, includes part two
and section 5 of the Act.

The above provision reinforces the revised recommendations on combating
bribery in international business transactions adopted by the council of
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development on 23 May 1997,
which, inter alia, criminalises the bribing of foreign officials.

The provisions of the Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act,
Act 12 of 2004, are consistent with the provisions mentioned above.
Therefore, Act 12 renders the provisions of this agreement self-executing.

Section 232 of the Constitution provides that customary law in the Republic
is law unless it is inconsistent with the Constitution or an Act of
Parliament. It is submitted on behalf of the Portfolio Committee on Public
Service and Administration that no such inconsistency arises. Therefore the
agreement is presented to the House as part of our law in discharging our
international obligations. Thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Convention on
Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business
Transactions approved.

The House adjourned at 17:24.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Submission of Private Members’ Legislative Proposals

     (1)    The following private member’s legislative proposal was
         submitted to the Speaker on 14 June 2006, in accordance with Rule
         234:

            (a)  Labour Relations Amendment Bill (Mr C M Lowe)

            In accordance with Rule 235 the legislative proposal has been
         referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Legislative
         Proposals and Special Petitions.

TABLINGS

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker
    (1)    Request from the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
         Development for the National Assembly, in terms of section 193(5)
         of the Constitution, to recommend candidates from the nominations
         submitted for appointment by the President to the Commission for
         Gender Equality.

      Referred to the Ad Hoc Committee on Filling of Vacancies on the
         Commission for Gender Equality for consideration and report.

