---
title: 'National Assembly - 30 March 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-03-30
---

THURSDAY, 30 MARCH 2006
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY



                        THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC


 Consolidation of democracy and acceleration of integrated service delivery

1.    Ms P Bhengu (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:

      (a) To what extent have the local government elections held on 1 March
      2006 consolidated democracy and (b) what steps will the Government
      take to ensure the acceleration of integrated service delivery to
      ensure a better life for all?                N254E
The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, perhaps I should start by
extending our congratulations to the political parties, the organisations,
our people as a whole and to the IEC for the very successful local
government elections held earlier this month. [Applause.]

One of the founding values of our democracy, articulated in chapter 1,
section 1(d) of the Constitution, is universal adult suffrage, a national
common voters’ roll, regular elections and a multiparty system of
democratic government.

Since we attained our freedom in 1994, we have held three successful
national and provincial elections, and three successful local government
elections, including the last one. Voter turnout has consistently gone up
in each election, clearly demonstrating an irreversible process of the
consolidation of our democracy.

As hon members are aware, in terms of our electoral systems and laws, any
interested party may lodge with the Independent Electoral Commission any
objection that is material to the determination of the final results. But,
because of the smooth technical management of the elections, there were no
material objections to the running of these past elections. As a result,
these elections were declared free and fair, and credible in all respects.

However, democratic election management is more than an efficient and well-
managed technical process, and also includes an enabling constitutional and
political environment. Free and fair elections imply the presence of an
environment that ensures civil and political rights such as freedom of
expression, of movement, of association and of assembly; and participation
by all citizens, the absence of intimidation, and compliance with the rule
of law.

The fact that the March elections took place within this climate bears
testimony to our deepening democracy. We, nevertheless, need to say that
there was some violence, which resulted in the death of some people. So
this problem hasn’t quite disappeared totally.

Before the last local government elections, government conducted izimbizo
throughout the country to identify obstacles to the acceleration of
integrated service delivery, as well as to assess the necessary capacity
and readiness of municipalities in pursuit of a better life for all. We
have completed that assessment and have identified priorities that are
central to the consolidation of the system of local government that will
improve the living conditions of all our people.

On the basis of that assessment, the focus of the new municipal councils
will be around practical and critical technical and policy interventions in
the priority areas of institutional and skills development; acceleration of
basic service delivery and infrastructure investment; improving capacity
for economic development at district and metropolitan levels; improving
financial viability and financial management; and promoting good governance
and meaningful community participation.

We have prioritised the important challenges of institutional development,
because we have to give adequate support to municipalities to work out
credible and workable integrated development plans that are linked to the
provincial growth and development strategies, and the national spatial
development perspective.

In this regard, we will ensure the thorough hands-on support for all
municipalities by helping them to have in place the basic systems,
resources and staff for their effective and proper functioning. Government,
in partnership with Salga, will also embark on a training programme for
councillors as part of our effort to improve the capacity, the efficiency
and effectiveness of our municipalities.

Further, as we have announced in the past, in order to achieve universal
integrated service delivery, government will continue to build on the
progress made in broadening access to basic services and infrastructure;
and this includes maximum and efficient utilisation of the R2 billion
earmarked for the municipal infrastructure grant over the medium-term
period ending in 2007.
Indeed, priority actions to accelerate service delivery and infrastructure
investment also include ensuring that service delivery targets, with
respect to access to clean water, decent sanitation and electricity, and
the eradication of the bucket system, are on track. Creating favourable
conditions for accelerating service delivery and infrastructure is also
bound to have a positive impact on economic development opportunities
within the municipalities.

Over and above this, however, national government will work with
municipalities and provinces to strengthen and help stimulate local
economies. Shall I stop? This instrument before me says, “time”.

The SPEAKER: If, Mr President, you want to finish a sentence or two, the
Chair will oblige you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Well, Madam Speaker, as hon members know,
local government derives most of its income from its own revenue sources
such as property rates and service charges. Strengthening and supporting
municipal financial viability and financial management is thus crucial to
the proper functioning of local government. Specific measures have been put
in place to ensure that this is achieved through the provision of hands-on
support, capacity-building and financial support mechanisms, where
necessary. Let me stop there, Madam Speaker; this machine is confusing me.

Ms P BHENGU: Hon Speaker and hon President, we in the ANC are aware that
over the past period our government itself has embarked on Project
Consolidate to strengthen the capacity of local government. Hon President,
in your opinion, is it enough or will we have to look at and pursue other
initiatives such as private-public partnerships? If yes, how far are we in
this regard?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Project Consolidate has indeed made a very
important contribution in terms of identifying the problems and the
bottlenecks that exist within the system of local government. That
intervention was specific to municipalities. We, at this moment, have a
better sense of what is required in terms of, for instance, professional
people, technical people and other interventions that might be necessary.

The Development Bank of Southern Africa has been working with the Minister
of Finance and the Department of Provincial and Local Government to
identify people who would be required, as identified through that process
of Project Consolidate. I mentioned earlier in this House the proposals
that had been made by various people, including the FF Plus, in terms of
people that would be available for service.

As I was saying earlier, the work that has actually been done to assess the
real needs of the municipalities, individually, through Project Consolidate
and the various izimbizo that we held, has put us in a position where we
can respond to this matter. That includes bringing into the country, where
necessary, the people who can serve as mentors to our managers and our
municipal managers, mentors to our young engineers and so on, so that we
continue to build this capacity. That is the kind of intervention that will
be made.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, Mr President, the
democratic expression of the will of the people means that some
municipalities, like Cape Town and others, are governed by parties other
than the ANC. [Interjections.] Will the President encourage the national
and provincial governments to co-operate and work with whichever party is
in power at local government level to ensure service delivery to our
people?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: The hon member raises a very important
point. The outcome of the local government elections with its great variety
of parties and organisations that got voted in by the people indeed
demonstrates the strength of our democracy. It is critically important,
indeed, as the hon Gibson has said, that the national, provincial and local
governments, however they may be constituted politically, work together.
The whole system of co-operative governance, which is even in the
Constitution, requires that.

Indeed, I would hope that throughout the country, whoever happens to be in
power in our municipalities, both the provincial and the national
governments would work with them. That means that there must be a readiness
on the part of the local governments to work with the provincial and
national governments, regardless. [Applause.]

Mr B W DHLAMINI: Madam Speaker, President, in your answer you spoke about
the municipal infrastructure grant. My question to you is in relation to
the first question on service delivery by local government. Last year the
executive took a decision to take the building for sports programme, which
meant the building of facilities in poor communities, and make it part of
the municipal infrastructure grant.

We asked the Minister for Provincial and Local Government about this matter
and he gave us the assurance that it would be ring-fenced. Yesterday we got
a briefing that the department will not be able to do that because Treasury
would not allow them to do so. The worry is that while the programme was
under Sports and Recreation, it was able to build 104 sports facilities
throughout the country. Since it has been shifted, it has only been able to
build four. My worry is that, now that the money is not being ring-fenced,
we will not see any development in terms of providing sports facilities,
given our 2010 bid and the excitement that was created by that, concerning
our people.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, let me thank the hon member
for raising the question. This is the first time that I hear about it.
Indeed, I think it would be a cause for worry if we should reduce the
sports facilities that we build in the country. It cannot be correct.

Indeed, as government, we have been taking the position that it’s
critically important in these local communities that the youth must have
the possibility of participating in sport. That infrastructure is therefore
critically important. Thank you, hon member, for raising the matter. I will
follow up on it. Clearly, we cannot take a position that results in the
reduction of the capacity to build those sports facilities. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, hon President, greetings to you. Now that the
election is over, how does the Presidency foresee relations between the
executive sectors of the three spheres of government, in terms of engaging
in more active working relationships with one another to ensure better
delivery and nation-building at its best?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: The hon member knows that, among other
things, because of concern about, in some instances, weakness in terms of
the co-operation between the three spheres of government, this House
approved the intergovernmental framework legislation; precisely to ensure
that, apart from the voluntary co-operation that might exist between the
three spheres, there should be a legislative framework which requires those
three spheres to co-operate. It is going to be very important that we make
sure that it gets implemented.

I think the hon member would know that for some time already we have had an
institution in government, which brings together national government,
provinces and Salga - in the Presidential Consultative Forum - with those
three spheres of government. I think it is a matter of ensuring that we do
indeed implement legislation that has been approved and make sure that the
institutions that have been established for that purpose do actually work.

Those institutions also include, apart from this national structure I have
just spoken of, similar structures in the provinces for interaction between
the provinces and the municipalities. I think we have to make sure that
they do indeed work together. When that system does not work, it is the
people who suffer. We really do need to make sure that that does not
happen.


                Problems experienced at Koeberg power station


2.    Adv H C Schmidt (DA) asked the President of the Republic:

      (1)   Whether, in light of the statements made by the Minister for
           Public Enterprises on 28 February 2006 and 3 March 2006 with
           regard to the problems experienced at the Koeberg power station,
           he intends taking any steps against the Minister; if not, why
           not; if so, what steps;

      (2)   whether he will set up an independent commission of inquiry to
           establish the causes of the failure of the Government to meet
           South Africa’s national electricity capacity needs and to
           recommend appropriate action; if not, why not; if so, what are
           the relevant details?  N210E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, of course this question
relates to the matter of Eskom and the remarks that were made at some point
by the Minister for Public Enterprises. Therefore we presume the question
is in reference to the purported statements about sabotage.

The press conference on the eve of the election, where the alleged
inferences were made, was occasioned by failures of the system the night
before. A reference to the outage at Koeberg 1 arose due to the need to
clarify inaccurate speculation on the cause of the problem. The CEO of
Eskom and the Minister for Public Enterprises have at all times been
consistent in stating that the cause of the shutdown at the Koeberg 1 unit
is under investigation and, indeed, I’m receiving regular updates in this
regard.

Minister Erwin also dealt with this matter in hearings of the portfolio
committees on 14 March 2006 and he has made the commitment to make a
statement in Parliament once the investigation has been completed.

Now, as to the matter of setting up an independent commission to assess our
national electricity capacity needs and so on, the hon member is proceeding
from the wrong assumption that the government has failed to meet South
Africa’s electricity capacity needs.

On the same day, 14 March 2006, which I have just mentioned, Minister
Erwin, accompanied by the Deputy Minister of Minerals and Energy Lulama
Xingwana and the chairperson and CEO of Eskom, gave a comprehensive
briefing to a joint meeting of the portfolio committees. And as they dealt
with the situation comprehensively the hon members had a chance to ask
questions. I believe the situation is well known and understood.

Accordingly, I do not believe that any purpose would be served by the
appointment of a commission of inquiry. The parliamentary procedures
provide adequate means for members to obtain any information relating to
this matter.

As was made clear in that briefing, the situation in the Western Cape is
specific to issues around Koeberg. The process to deal with this has been
fully outlined and will require a full collaboration of all of those
concerned. And in this regard I would like to thank Premier Rasool of this
province for the hard work he and his team have undertaken to try to
mitigate the situation. The Premier is co-ordinating all stakeholders in
the Western Cape with the full co-operation of Eskom and the Minister for
Public Enterprises and more than seven meetings have already taken place
this year.

I am also pleased to announce that the SA Navy ship SAS Drakensberg is
currently making its way to Cape Town with a replacement rotor for the
rotor that was damaged at Koeberg. [Applause.] And I would like to thank
the government of France, Electricité de France, our Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, Ministry of Defence and the navy. We are fortunate in having the
capacity to carry out such an exercise.

I would also like to thank the staff at Koeberg who are working tirelessly
to try to deal with this very difficult situation. It is also my view that
Mr Gcabashe, the CEO of Eskom, and his team, have responded to this crisis
in the most expeditious and professional manner possible under the
circumstances. [Applause.] However, these events only serve to confirm the
urgency of investing in our infrastructure.

The increased pressure on the transmission lines to the Western Cape and on
the Cape Town city infrastructure have shown up weaknesses that are being
addressed with the necessary urgency. The position nationally is that we
have about 37 000 MW available, with an additional 2 000 MW available to
manage very high peaks. The projected demand is some 35 000 MW.
As has been indicated in the above-mentioned briefing to the portfolio
committees the situation is tighter than we would have preferred, this
being the result of the higher-than-projected rates of economic growth.
However, the Eskom built plan is already addressing the situation. Approved
projects, including those under construction, will add another 7 260 MW in
the next few years. Projects in the planning process will provide a further
10 382 MW, and the Minister for Public Enterprises has asked the Eskom
Board to provide for plans to fast-track this latter category of projects.

It is therefore evident that there is no crisis and that, on the contrary,
this very large built plan will have a major impact on the growth of the
economy. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr President, Eskom has been
blamed for the current power problems but, as a 100%-government-owned
parastatal, it was reigned in by this government years ago. This ANC
government refused Eskom permission to build more power stations in the
hope that it would increase the interest in funding of new power stations
by the private sector.

Mr President, this policy failed dismally. And South Africa now pays the
consequences of that failed policy. Will you apologise to South Africa for
that failure? [Interjections.] And, tell us what steps government intends
taking to ensure that Asgisa does not flounder as a result of recurring
power outages.
The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, obviously the hon member
prepared that question before he had heard me. [Laughter.][Applause.] Now,
the problem is, being bound to ask the question he didn’t listen to what I
was saying. [Laughter.] I have just indicated, for instance, that
nationally we have about
37 000 MW of electrical power available, with an additional 2 000 MW
available to manage very high peaks, and the projected demand is less than
that; it is 35 000 MW.

So, the problem that has partly affected the Western Cape – again, there is
a member who just asked a supplementary question here, Madam Speaker – also
has to do with transmission lines. That’s why I mentioned the issue of the
challenge of the infrastructure, because part of what has happened over the
years is clearly that we haven’t paid sufficient attention to this
particular issue.

It was not a shortage of electricity in other parts of the country, which
could have been sent to the Western Cape after the accident, or whatever it
was, at Koeberg, but it was the transmission infrastructure that needed
maintenance. So, no, hon member, the supply is there in terms of present
day demands and there is a very large building programme to add to that
supply and I’m quite certain that we’ll be able to meet the Asgisa goals.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr Y I CARRIM: Madam Speaker, Mr President, what’s your response to the
view that whatever our political views and backgrounds, we should actually
be working together to collectively deal with the challenges posed by the
regrettable outages in the Western Cape? In other words, the subtext of my
question is, don’t you think it is time the DA also saw the light? Thank
you. [Laughter.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: They will no doubt plead that they can’t see
the light when Eskom has switched off the lights. [Laughter.]

Certainly, hon member, we will come back to this question. There is another
question here, as you know, about particularly the Western Cape and,
indeed, you are quite correct. Fortunately, the province is responding in
the manner that we are indicating - the city, province, business, Eskom,
and the department are all working together to address this. But, indeed,
it is a correct approach to this matter.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Mr President, as stated by the Minister of Minerals and
Energy Lindiwe Hendricks, many of Koeberg's senior staff have left in the
past two years: eight out of the 60 senior professional engineers; 46
technical managers and five of the 30 non-technical managers. What impact
has this had on the overall efficiency of Koeberg and is the President
satisfied that measures have been put in place to ensure that junior
professional engineers replacing them receive adequate skills training to
improve their knowledge and efficiency?
At the same time, media reports also highlight that Eskom’s emergency plan
caters only for people living in the 16km radius of Koeberg. Furthermore,
these emergency plans are reportedly nearly identical to those that existed
24 years ago. How will the President ensure that Eskom has best possible
emergency plans that are fitting for the current conditions? Thank you.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, you do realise of course that there is a line-
function Minister to deal with some of those details? However, I will allow
the hon the President to deal with whatever he wants to deal with.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, great minds think alike.
[Laughter.] That’s what I was going to say, but apart from that, obviously
an important point of production of electricity like Koeberg has to be
properly staffed, with all of the people that it needs in terms of skill.

We have discussed the matter, even in the context of the installation of
the rotor that is on its way. We discussed it even in that context -
looking at what capacity we have to do that installation, given that the
power station is as old as it is. Therefore the matter of proper staffing
of the power station would be a priority matter, as would be all other
elements that have got to do with ensuring that the station operates
properly in a manner that is safe for all our people. Thank you.
Adv H C SCHMIDT: Madam Speaker, Mr President, I am not sure, but I don’t
think I’ve heard your apology, Mr President ... [Interjections.] ... and
secondly, I’m not sure whether you are aware of the constant power outages
in Johannesburg, in particular, which they have been suffering for the past
few years. Might I also, with due respect, remind you of Gear that was
introduced about 10 years ago, which indicated it’s 6% growth policy for
the economy.

Despite that, it seems that everyone seems to be very surprised that the
growth, after 10 years, has reached 4%, leading to a shortage in
electricity supply. Did government just believe its own figures in that
planning regard?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: We are back where we were, Madam Speaker.
[Laughter.] I’d said that it is clear that the projections about the rate
of growth in the economy were inaccurate. The economy grew faster than we
thought it would.

I do not know whether we should apologise for the fast rate of the rate of
growth of the economy, but that is what happened. This is what put pressure
on the electricity system and that would include Johannesburg. You would
have heard the Johannesburg metro and the city power talking about issues
that have to do with the maintenance of the infrastructure in Johannesburg,
which has been a central part of the problem of the outages that has
occurred in Johannesburg.

So, that’s what I had said. I said that we underestimated the rate at which
the economy would grow and cause particular pressures. The way to respond
to it is to make sure that if we say, let’s grow at 6% and above, we must
then make sure that the necessary power is there to be able to meet those
particular targets; which is precisely why I spoke about the built
programme that is now taking place. Thank you.

                  Impact of Asgisa on nonaffluent societies

3.    Prince N E Zulu (IFP) asked the President of the Republic:


      (1)   Whether the Government is on course to halve poverty by 2015; if
          not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details;

      (2)   whether the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South
          Africa, Asgisa, will have an impact on nonaffluent societies; if
          not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details;

      (3)   whether he will make a statement on the matter?         N213E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, with regard to this business
of halving poverty by 2015, Asgisa and so on, let me start by saying yes.
Yes, we are quite confident that we are on course to halve poverty by 2015
and, as members are aware, there are several ways of measuring poverty, the
three key components of poverty being income poverty, asset poverty and
human capital poverty. By all measures we can say with confidence that
poverty levels in South Africa are on the decline. Certainly, income
poverty is the most conventional measure. It is a measure of income by
household or by individual.

Target 1 of the Millennium Development Goals requires us –

... to halve between 1990 and 2015 the proportion of people whose income is
less than a dollar a day.

By this measure, in 2000, 11% of our people were living on less than a
dollar a day and one-third of households and 34% of individuals were living
on less than US$2 a day. Using the measure of US$2 a day with respect to
income poverty, our task is to reduce levels of poverty to less than one
sixth of individuals or households by 2015.

Asset poverty relates to the distribution of economic assets, particularly
land and housing. The hon members have access to the considerable progress
that we have made since 1994, and we expect to make even greater progress
by 2015 in this regard. The third element of poverty is human capital
poverty and we have already made major strides in reversing the damage that
apartheid did to the human capital through Bantu education. This progress
is continuing, even accelerating, and we expect to meet our targets by
2015.

A recent study, utilising a variety of techniques to measure poverty, in
this case incomes below R250, found that in recent years the proportion of
poor people has declined substantially from 18,5 billion in 2000 to 15,4
million in 2004. Over the same period the number of the nonpoor rose from
26,2 million in 2000 to 31 million in 2004.

The study also shows that per capita real incomes of individuals comprising
the poorest two population quintiles rose by more than 30% during the
period 2000-04. It is quite clear that our pro-poor socioeconomic policies
are meeting with success. This study I am referring to was done by Servaas
van der Berg, Ronelle Burger, Rulof Burger, Megan Louw and Derek Yu, and
was assisted by a Professor Haroon Borat.

As we have reported to this House, the main impact of the Accelerated and
Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa, Asgisa, on nonaffluent
communities in South Africa is through job creation, which is not only
important in helping us defeat unemployment but also in ensuring that we
are better able to increase household income. Indeed, this is the central
focus of Asgisa.

In addition to the direct impact of Asgisa through job creation the fact
that Asgisa supports the growth rate, rising to 6% and above, means that
the economy will generate additional resources some of which can be
redistributed through the fiscus in the form of, for example, better
schooling and health care access to water and roads, social grants
including pensions and the child support grant.

Further, there are numerous elements of Asgisa specifically designed to
address the challenges of poverty and unemployment. These include the
further extension of the Expanded Public Works Programme; further impetus
to providing access to credit and savings facilities for the poor; and a
range of skills interventions and industrial strategies designed to create
jobs, even for low-skilled workers.

A key mechanism is to use the leverage of the first economy to address the
challenges of the second. There are two key examples in Asgisa that I can
give in this regard. The first is to leverage the increased levels of
public expenditure, especially investment expenditure; to develop small
businesses and broad-based empowerment to address issues such as access to
finance, preferential procurement, sectors that are labour-intensive; and
to review of the impact of regulations on the sector.

As part of ensuring that the poor, the majority of whom are black, do
benefit from the growing economy we have, among other things, decided on a
procedure through which 10 products that are regularly sourced by
government would be set aside for procurement from smaller businesses,
including black-owned businesses.

Another form of leverage will be that all the sector strategies, such as
the strategy for tourism or business process outsourcing, will have
elements addressing developmental goals in the second economy; for example,
the economic cluster of government is committed to ensuring that at least
five of these business process outsourcing operations are established in
poor areas with relatively little economic activity and that the targeted
beneficiaries are youth and women. This clock is going in the other
direction, Madam Speaker!

Prince N E ZULU: Thank you, Mr President, for your response, especially to
the first part of the question. But, the second part still leaves us with
some questions. Asgisa seems not to provide a package for the rural poor
where poverty is greatest.

Under that heading, hon President, are we not going to see more and more
rural poor flocking to metropolitan areas in search of what Asgisa would be
offering?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: No. We perhaps need to find a way of passing
on more information to the hon member about this, because rural development
is actually central to what we are trying to do with regard to addressing
these issues of poverty and underdevelopment.

The hon member will remember, for instance, that we have established a
particular fund in order to fund small farmers. This was precisely because
it was our view that the Development Bank of Southern Africa was not
necessarily the appropriate financing institution for your small farmers in
those rural areas.

There is a different fund that was established in order to address this
particular matter and I am sure the hon member is aware of the work that
has been done to make sure that that fund is actually accessible to those
people in the rural areas.

The hon member, I am sure, would also be aware of the programmes that we
are carrying out and will carry out in the Expanded Public Works Programme,
which have to do with development of infrastructure in the rural areas. So,
it was not merely a matter of saying let us have an Expanded Public Works
Programme to create jobs, but also to say we need that Expanded Public
Works Programme in order to create infrastructure in these areas of our
country that are underdeveloped - roads, water, schools, health facilities,
all of these.

Hon member, I am saying perhaps what we need to do is to prepare a small
package to show you what the interventions are that are being done and you
will see that this particular matter of addressing the rural poor that you
raise, which is very important, is indeed a critically important part of
what has to be achieved as we work to achieve this higher level of
accelerated and shared growth. The rural poor must share in this growth.
Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Dr S M VAN DYK: Madam Speaker, hon Mr President, the ANC in its economic
document, Development and Underdevelopment, identified as one of the
constraints to the growth of our economy the lack of flexibility in respect
of our labour market policies. The document states:

  South Africa’s strategy has to be to raise the level of investment and
  economic activity while at the same time reforming the labour market, so
  that more labour is absorbed.

In this context the document speaks of allowing labour demand to be
expanded through more appropriate labour market policies. Here the option
of a dual labour market model is put forward as a means of raising
employment prospects. Is it the President’s intention to address the
question of labour market flexibility as part of Asgisa and, more
particularly, will the dual labour market model be considered as an option?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: The hon member, Madam Speaker, I am quite
certain - I am absolutely sure - knows that we asked the Minister of Labour
to look at these various questions and indeed he is doing that. I know, for
instance, that he is holding a multi-stakeholder conference on 6 April to
address all of this. [Laughter.] Yes indeed, hon member, these matters are
being addressed and I am quite certain that out of that multi-stakeholder
process, will come the kind of answers that we need to address this
particular issue. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Ms L L MABE: Thank you, hon President. I have heard you clearly about the
multi-stakeholder forum that is going to be held, but I want to indicate
that the ANC agrees fully that the factors of production, that is, labour
and capital, are crucial for the achievement of the objectives of Asgisa.

The private sector needs to be competitive. We fully agree that it needs to
be competitive to retain and increase the current level of growth that we
are experiencing as a country. But we are quite aware that the private
sector has been opting for capital intensity for various reasons. So, what
I want to understand is whether the private sector will go for more labour
intensity and increase its contribution to the expansion of scarce skills
to increase the sharing of benefits of the economic growth that we are
experiencing and that we might still continue to experience in future.
Thank you, Mr President.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon member, you are asking a difficult
question. It is difficult because it is too large to deal with. The various
sectors of the economy will differ with regard to their capacity to absorb
labour. Certainly, we have said we should, as part of the Asgisa process,
centrally focus on the matter of unemployment, and that means therefore
encouraging those sectors of the economy that would be labour intensive. We
have to do that. But there would be certain sectors of the economy that
would be capital intensive.

Indeed, if you talk about competitiveness, part of that competitiveness
relates precisely to this matter - the level of absorption of technology
and other things, capital intensity, and so on. So, I think what we really
need is to make sure that we achieve the proper balance with regard to all
of these things. With regard to the industries that are at a particular
technological level, we have to make sure that they keep up with the rest
of the world and outstrip the rest of the world. All these discussions we
are having, and the actions we are taking with regard to research and
development, have to do with those matters about technology, and we cannot
say that in order to build a motor car let us remove the machines and
capital intensity and let the workers carry these cars. We cannot do that.

But, I am saying that you need a proper balance between the two and most
certainly it is important that you draw attention to the matter, and, most
sadly, we have to make sure that we do not go merely in support of the
capital-intensive sectors of the economy, but also focus on the labour-
intensive ones. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

  Report by International Atomic Energy Agency on Islamic Republic of Iran

4.    Ms F Hajaig (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:

      In view of the latest report by the International Atomic Energy Agency
      to the United Nations Security Council on the matter of the Islamic
      Republic of Iran, what steps does the Government believe should be
      taken to resolve this matter?                N255E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, the position that our
government has adopted in relation to the matter of Iran’s implementation
of agreements concluded with the International Atomic Energy Agency, is
primarily informed by a principle contained in the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and that is that –
   ... the benefits of peaceful applications of nuclear technology,
   including any technological by-products which may be derived by nuclear-
   weapon states from the development of nuclear explosive devices, should
   be available for peaceful purposes to all parties to the treaty, whether
   nuclear-weapon or non-nuclear-weapon states.


This exploitation of nuclear technology offers humanity the possibility to
achieve its socioeconomic development goals in activities such as
electricity generation. And access to the benefits of nuclear technology
must be accompanied by a reciprocal pledge by all parties to the treaty to
prevent the diversion of nuclear materials from peaceful uses to nuclear
weapons or other nuclear explosive devices.

We are fully conscious of the devastation articulated in the preamble to
the treaty that would be visited upon all humanity by a nuclear war. We are
consequently duty-bound, acting in concert with the rest of the
international community inclusive of the Islamic Republic of Iran, to make
every effort to avert the danger of such a war and to take measures to
safeguard the security of the world’s population.

We believe that the verification of compliance or otherwise by Iran with
its commitments made under the NPT, as well as with the nuclear safety
standards developed by the International Atomic Energy Agency, should be
performed under the auspices of the board of the IAEA.

The hon member would, no doubt, be aware that the IAEA is internationally
regarded as the sole authority with the competence to verify and ensure
compliance with established safeguards. The Director-General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, Mohamed ElBaradei, noted in his last
introductory statement to the board of governors that as far as the Iranian
nuclear programme was concerned, the agency had not seen indications of
diversion of nuclear material to nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices.

He, however, expressed the concern that despite the rigorous verification
exercise conducted over a period of three years, the nature and extent of
Iran’s nuclear programme remained uncertain.

We are convinced that in order to remove these uncertainties, Iran should
be urged to co-operate fully with the IAEA, provide the maximum
transparency and instil confidence in the international community and the
IAEA about the manner in which they use their nuclear technology.

In our view, in order to resolve the tensions surrounding the issue of
Iran’s nuclear programme, it is of the utmost importance that all parties
work towards an all-inclusive, negotiated accord that respects the
legitimate interests of all countries, taking into account the principle
contained in the preamble to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons - that the benefits of peaceful applications of nuclear technology,
including any technological by-products which may be derived by nuclear-
weapon states, should be available for peaceful purposes to all parties to
the treaty, whether nuclear-weapon or non-nuclear-weapon states.
The correctness of the approach we have adopted is confirmed by Director-
General ElBaradei in remarks he made on 2 March this year, when welcoming
the high-level meeting between three Foreign Ministers of the EU, the high
representative of the EU and the Secretary-General of the Supreme National
Security Council of Iran, wherein he implored all parties to use this
opportunity to create the necessary conditions to return to negotiations.
He went on to call on Iran to take all the necessary confidence-building
measures required to assure the international community of the peaceful
nature of its nuclear programme.

In the remarks we are citing, Mohamed ElBaradei reminds us that only
through these two tracks, full transparency on the part of Iran and
negotiations with all concerned parties can confidence be established
regarding the nature of Iran’s nuclear programme and a durable solution
found.

We believe that the director-general is right, and we agree with the course
of action he proposes. The steps we must take should ensure that there is
indeed full transparency on the part of Iran and negotiations with all
concerned parties. Of course, as the hon members are aware, yesterday the
United Nations Security Council issued a statement on the matter we are
discussing, which called on Iran to stop its uranium-enrichment programme.

We will continue to engage Iran and all other role-players on this and the
related issues. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Ms F HAJAIG: Thank you, hon President. Our goal is to promote a nuclear-
weapons-free zone in all regions of the world. Sir, after analysing
information on this issue, it appears very clear that there exists a wider
political agenda in some countries. No nuclear weapons technology has been
found in Iran by the International Atomic Energy Agency’s investigation
thus far.

We, in South Africa, want to continue to produce nuclear energy for our
needs - so does any other country, including Iran – and have the right to
do so. Allow the IAEA, which has been set up precisely to monitor nuclear-
technology-producing countries, to complete its investigations before
taking matters to the UN Security Council.

Comrade President, what would the implications be for Iran, and other
countries that wish to develop nuclear capacity for developmental purposes,
if the IAEA is not allowed to complete its investigation and produce
comprehensive reports?

Sir, this whole episode smacks of the pre-Iraqi-war sensationalist build-up
for the invasion of Iraq ...

The SPEAKER: Hon member, your time for asking the question has expired.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, the point that the hon member
is raising is very important, which is why we quoted from the treaty itself
when it says that all states that are party to the treaty – and Iran is one
of those states that is party to the treaty – should have access to nuclear
technology for peaceful purposes. This is a critically important principle
to respect. We would not agree with a situation in which interventions are
made which seek to undermine respect for that principle because, indeed, as
the hon member says, it would also affect us.

You cannot have a situation in which all of us, countries of the world,
enter into a solemn treaty like this, subject ourselves to regular
inspection by the IAEA to ensure that there is no proliferation of nuclear
weapons and then, arbitrarily, are told that we cannot use this technology
for medical purposes, for electricity generation, and all sorts of other
purposes. That, obviously, would not be correct.

That is why, as permanent members of the board of the IAEA, we have been
dealing with this Iran matter for a number of years now. That is why we
have always insisted, as I have just indicated, that the rights of all
states that are party to the treaty should be respected and that includes
openness, the transparency, which Director-General ElBaradei is talking
about. This is the transparency that would ensure that all countries,
including Iran, that are using this nuclear technology, respect their
obligations with regard to the matter of nonproliferation.

I should say, finally, in response to this particular question, that as
government we are very concerned generally about the situation in the
Middle East. As everybody in the House knows, there is a lot of
instability. There is the Palestine-Israel problem; the Iraq problem;
tensions arising about Syria and Lebanon; and the situation in Afghanistan.

It would seem to us that the most sensible thing to do is not to increase
the trouble spots in the region, but to reduce them. In that context, we
believe that it would be important to find a proper resolution with Iran
with regard to this to ensure that everybody is reassured with regard to
this matter of proliferation, and not to advance to a situation in which
there is a confrontation between some countries and Iran, which would bode
very ill in terms of the prospect of peace, not only in the Middle East,
but, I think, in the world. Thanks, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Mr President, the IAEA and the UN Security Council are
constantly under pressure from the United States when it comes to the issue
of the nuclear technology pursuits of other countries.

What we see in practice, however, is that Iran is held to one set of
principles, India to another, and North Korea to yet another. It does
appear that the USA makes and breaks the rules as it goes along, and that
the UN and the rest of the world merely bend to its will.

In non-nuclear matters, the behaviour of the USA towards the rest of the
world is much the same. Our concern is not so much how they behave, but
rather the complicity of others in the USA’s pursuits of its own narrow
interests. For instance, wasn’t South Africa among the nations that
brokered peace in Liberia and promised Charles Taylor refuge in Nigeria, a
deal, however despicable it may have been, that was made and then broken at
the drop of a hat in Washington yesterday?

Umbuzo ke, Mkhuluwa, uthi: [The question is, my big brother:]

What is South Africa doing to ensure that the international regulation of
nuclear technology is done in terms of accepted principles, and not
according to self-serving interests of a single nation? Thank you.

USOMLOMO: Mhlekazi, ndiza kucela ukuba kwixa elizayo umbuzo uwubuze kumzuzu
wokuqala wexesha lakho. Ukubangaba usenexesha ungaqhubeka nentetho yakho;
ungaqali ngentetho, ubuze umbuzo kamva. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraph follows.)
[The SPEAKER: Sir, next time, please ask the question in the first minute
of the time allocated to you. If you still have time left you could
continue with your speech. Do not begin with a speech and conclude with the
question. [Applause.]]

You don’t have the floor, hon Holomisa.

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Ndakwenza njalo, Mama. Ndiyaphendula kuba kaloku
ububhekise kum ngqo. Kutheni ungafuni ukuphendulwa nje wena? [I will do so,
Madam. I am responding as you referred the question to me. Why do you
reject the reply?] [Laughter.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: No, let me agree fully, Madam Speaker, with
the hon member. Again, as I was indicating, as members of the board of the
IAEA, we have been insisting on the need to respect the provisions of the
treaty, and indeed including the need for this matter of Iran to continue
to be handled by the IAEA. That is the right place to deal with this issue.

We have to continue to insist on this, and I’m quite certain that as
government we will not depart from this. This doesn’t mean that we would
necessarily always win the votes on the board. We may very well lose in
some instances. But, certainly, I think it is critically important that we
should insist on this.


This is an important part also of addressing the more general question of
the international multilateral system of governance. I agree with the hon
member that it would be incorrect if there were to be any country that kind
of serves as a dictator towards others.

But since you mentioned this particular matter of Charles Taylor, hon
member, President Obasanjo informed me that he had received a request from
the President of Liberia that Charles Taylor should be returned to Liberia.
And, indeed, the point had been made much earlier that Charles Taylor would
only be handed over to a proper, democratically elected government of
Liberia. So, the request, as I was informed, came from the President of
Liberia to do that transfer.

This had nothing to do with President Obasanjo being in Washington
yesterday. He told me this when I saw him at least two Sundays ago: that he
had received this letter and would be obliged in that he couldn’t say to
the government of Liberia that they couldn’t have their citizen. So, I
think, those are the facts about that particular issue. Thanks, Madam
Speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon President, the guards have changed. It’s now the
Deputy Speaker.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: I must apologise for elevating you, Madam
Deputy Speaker. [Laughter.]
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I occasionally enjoy that. [Laughter.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Mr President, the UN Security Council has now put
Iran to terms in that it must terminate its nuclear programme. Now the
question is: If Iran refuses to do that, what happens then? It appears that
the UN may then consider imposing sanctions on Iran.

My question to you, sir, is: If sanctions are imposed on Iran, will South
Africa support them?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: As I indicated earlier, Madam Speaker,
indeed the hon Koos van der Merwe is correct about this Security Council
decision that was taken yesterday. I had said that we were going to engage
Iran and other interested parties with regard to that. We have to. This is
a matter that we will discuss with Iranians and other people to assess
where we are with regard to this matter. I would rather leave it at that
than take 10 steps forward before we resolve this particular issue.

I think that we will have to engage the Iranians and everybody else. And,
as I was trying to indicate earlier, we have been trying to insist that
this matter be solved in a way that addresses everybody’s concerns and
interests without any confrontation.
It is quite clear that if this matter were to escalate – which is part of
the reason we were insisting it should stay with the IAEA – you could have
a situation in which the matter gets to the Security Council and the
problem escalates, with consequences that are very difficult to foresee,
but which would be negative.
So I think, hon member, let’s take step number one: engage Iranians and
everybody else on the basis of the Security Council resolution and see what
happens next. Thanks, Madam Deputy Speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon President. We have a slot for the last
supplementary question.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam, I pressed the button right at the
beginning and I haven’t been seen. [Interjections.] May I proceed?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, please.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Mr President,
if I may say so, there was a perceptible difference between your very
measured response and the rather overheated question asked by the hon Ms
Hajaig.

Perhaps we should clear up what the situation is and the perception which
people have, and this is that the ANC government chooses to disbelieve
President Ahmadinejad when he says Iran wants one of its neighbouring
countries to be wiped off the map and then chooses to believe him when the
president of Iran says he wants nuclear power for peaceful purposes.
The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, we were discussing nuclear
weapons and this particular issue, which has now gone to the Security
Council. I’m sure if the hon member had been following the discussions ...
There is nobody, absolutely nobody - and that includes the United States –
who has been saying “sanctions”. Absolutely everybody has been saying that
it is important that this matter is resolved without resorting to
sanctions. Let’s avoid that. The phrase that is used is: Let’s find a
diplomatic solution to this matter. Everybody says that.

I would presume that the reason people are saying that is because nobody
feels that we are faced with a situation in which there is a nuclear bomb
there which is likely to be dropped on somebody’s head. People may indeed
have suspicions that there are plans to get to that point in the future. So
let’s respond in a way that we find these diplomatic solutions because of
the nature of the problem as it is perceived.

So I do not believe that South Africa is taking any position that is
different from that of everybody else with regard to this particular
matter. Naturally we would be against - it’s very fundamental to our
policy, as I’m sure the hon member knows – any attempt to destroy the state
of Israel. That is an established policy of our government.

We have been talking very regularly about a two-stage solution with regard
to that challenge. This question is coming up just now. I can assure the
hon member that the South African government is not about to join people
who are after the destruction of the state of Israel, and that’s a well-
known position. Thanks, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]


           Right of Israel to exist within safe and secure borders


5.    Rev K R J Meshoe (ACDP) asked the President of the Republic:

      (1)   Whether the Government will put pressure on Hamas to accept the
           right of Israel to exist within safe and secure borders, in line
           with similar calls from the international community; if not, why
           not; if so,


      (2)   whether the issue of suicide bombers will be discussed; if not,
           why not; if so, what are the relevant details?     N207E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Deputy Speaker, any intended
engagement with Hamas must, in the first place, be premised on the
recognition and unconditional acceptance of the reality that the people of
Palestine have freely and democratically elected Hamas to represent their
interests.

In the second instance, it is vitally important to bear in mind that our
efforts to lend whatever assistance we are called upon to provide the
people of Palestine to attain their long-cherished dream of an independent
and sovereign state must not be based on a false and ill-conceived notion
of our ability to place demands on the Palestinians and their leadership on
how to pursue their goals.

On the contrary, we are likely to make a meaningful contribution to the
peace process through constructive engagement with all the people of
Palestine, including Hamas. In this regard, we have taken note of and are
indeed encouraged by the post-election assurances given by one of the
leaders of Hamas, the current Prime Minister of the Palestinian National
Authority, Ismail Haniya, that his organisation is an aware and mature
movement that is, among other things, open to the international arena.

We accordingly seek to use that opening by conveying to Hamas that we hold
a firm view that the road to an independent Palestinian homeland is through
the prescripts of the Oslo Agreement, as well as the principles contained
in the road map for peace. Key among these principles is a two-state
solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, the outcome of which must be
the creation of an independent, democratic and viable Palestinian state,
coexisting side by side and in peace and security with an independent
Israel.

The recent statement by the Hamas political leader, Khaled Mishal, during
his visit to the Russian Federation, to the effect that they will deal with
existing agreements according to the interests of the Palestinian people,
is worth noting.

In our view, the recognition of the right of Israel to exist is not
inimical to the interests of the Palestinian people. On the contrary, we
believe that the cause of the Palestinians will be immensely enhanced if
they acknowledge the legitimate rights of the Israelis to their own
sovereign state.

It is obvious that the goals of the road map for peace that we have just
alluded to can only come to fruition in conditions in which the guns and
bombs that regularly echo in that troubled region are silenced.

Consequently, we deem as vitally important the demonstration of continued
commitment by both the Palestinian and Israeli leadership to the
termination of all acts of violence, as well as incitement against each
other’s peoples. In this context, we welcome the renewed undertaking by
Hamas to extend the ceasefire declared in March 2005, provided that Israel
reciprocates by refraining from launching attacks against the Palestinians.

These are some of the messages that we hope to convey to the Hamas
leadership, as and when we meet them, in accordance with the agreements we
reached prior to the Palestinian legislative elections.
We remain convinced that the approach stipulated in the three-phased road
map is likely to lead to the achievement of a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace settlement and historic reconciliation in the Middle
East.

This week witnesses another milestone in the history of our country, which
will be the historic address to the joint sitting of the Houses of
Parliament by the president of the Palestinian National Authority,
President Mahmoud Abbas. The visit signifies another phase in the deepening
of relations between the peoples of Palestine and South Africa. We would
expect that when he addresses us, President Abbas will, amongst other
things, provide us with insights into the journey thus far traversed by the
Palestinian people towards the vision that we have already spoken about, as
well as the challenges that they are yet to overcome.

We should accordingly be at the ready to respond positively to whatever
appeals may be made to us to assist and support the citizens of the region
to find a lasting solution to the conflict. In this regard, we welcome the
appeal to the Palestinians made by Ehud Olmert, the new Prime Minister of
Israel, in which he said, and I quote:

  We are prepared to compromise, to give up parts of our beloved land of
  Israel, to uproot painfully Jews who live there to allow you the
  conditions to achieve your dreams as well, and live in a state beside us,
  in harmony.


Thank you very much, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Thank you, hon President, for that answer. The
international community put pressure that included economic sanctions on
the apartheid government in order to force that regime to do two important
things: firstly, to recognise the right of liberation movements to operate
freely within the law; and secondly, to negotiate with them for a peaceful
transition to a democratic order. Will the hon President share with the
Hamas leadership, when they meet, how the South African liberation
movements managed to renounce political violence, including the planting of
bombs, and chose to negotiate with what was perceived to be an enemy?

Secondly, will the President offer this government’s willingness and
readiness to help Hamas transform itself into a political party that will
stop using suicide bombers to further its political objectives, and rather
use the power to negotiate? Thank you. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Order, hon members!

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Deputy Speaker, fortunately, Hamas is
very well educated about our history. [Laughter.] So, there shan’t be any
need for us to educate them about it.
It is important, first of all, to respect the will of the Palestinian
people. They elected Hamas. Historically, even the organisation that I come
from has never worked with Hamas. Nevertheless, we are saying that we need
to respect the will of the people of Palestine.

Secondly, as the hon member knows, we have been in regular engagement, both
with the Palestinian National Authority and the Israeli government over a
long period of time about this particular challenge. It is an interaction
that we will sustain.

Our task, as we talk to this new government of the Palestinian National
Authority, and the new government of Israel, must remain to offer such
assistance as we can give to find a solution, based on what I’ve just said
on the two-state solution, with two viable states living in peace and
harmony with each other. That is what we have got to do.

Whatever is necessary to communicate in that context, surely we will
communicate. Thank you very much, Madam Deputy Speaker.

Dr A N LUTHULI: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Mr President, I would like
to bring another angle to this discussion ... [Interjections.] Sorry.

I would like to bring another angle to this discussion of the Palestinians,
following the democratic election held recently. How do we get the
democratic world, especially the powerful nations, to respect the
democratic choice of the people of Palestine, following a free and fair
election, so as to assist the Palestinians to deepen their democracy and
overcome the huge developmental challenges they face? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: I wish we had the necessary influence to
persuade these powerful countries in the direction that the hon member
indicates.

I think that from the point of view of what we have to do, in as practical
a way as is possible, we have to engage the Palestinian National Authority,
which is led by Hamas, and to engage the Israeli government that is
currently being formed.

We need to remain with the positions that we have taken over many years. I
know that, as has happened, for instance, when the Hamas delegation visited
the Russian Federation, that there were people who were not happy about
that. It may very well be that there would be people who would be unhappy
with our engagement of Hamas also. I think that our experience says it is
not possible to find negotiated solutions unless you engage everybody. You
are not going to get to a negotiated agreement if you boycott some.

That is what we have got to do. Whether that would serve as an example and
inspiration to other countries, I don’t know, but I think our time would be
better spent engaging the Palestinians and the Israelis, and to let the
rest do what they believe is right. Thanks, Madam Deputy Speaker.

Mr W J SEREMANE: Thank you, Mr President, for your enlightening responses.
These are very serious matters.

Perhaps, for more clarification and in pursuit of a common ground on such
matters, could you agree that the DA’s approach to the Middle East crisis
is a sensible one, which I will explain? [Interjections.]

Our position is this: We support a peaceful solution to the continued
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We believe that this can only be achieved
through dialogue and negotiation. That solution also entails both a
Palestinian state and an Israeli state, which has already been mentioned by
you, sir.

It requires Hamas also to stop suicide bombings, and equally requires
Israel to desist from violence, whether pre-emptive or in retaliation.

The DA states that the South African government, including us, the
opposition parties, must use every bit of our collective power to try and
influence the conflict in that area towards a negotiated settlement. We
also have to observe the fact that it is of critical importance, this
principle, that credible peace-brokers should avoid taking sides with
either of the parties in conflict. Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: I am very, very glad that the hon member has
at least educated me about DA policy on this issue. It is the first time I
hear about it. [Laughter.] [Applause.] Thank you. I do appreciate it.

Mr W J SEREMANE: [Inaudible.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Yes, thank you, hon member. I would agree
with the points that the DA makes. Indeed, there should be a peaceful
solution and a two-state situation; peace; a stopping of violence on both
sides; and the use of our collective strength as a country to encourage
peace. I agree. Thanks, hon Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Mr President, we agree that South Africa, to the extent
that it is amongst the honest brokers in the matter, must do everything in
its power to convince all involved to pursue a peaceful co-existence.

This means that Hamas shares an equal burden and duty with all other
parties to honour the agreements entered into by its predecessors in
government. In fact, it must also be noted that the Hamas victory had a lot
to do with the Palestinian electorate’s frustration with regional
negotiations that dragged on without result and unilateral offensive
actions against them and their elected government.

For a people under siege, the unimplemented agreements and constant
unilateral amendments to those agreements must make the entire negotiation
process resemble a Trojan horse. The question is: What is the South African
government’s position with regard to ensuring that all parties to the
Middle Eastern negotiation process stick to agreements and resolutions that
have been made? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: The best we can do, which is the best we
have been trying, is to encourage the parties to this conflict to behave in
the way that the hon member indicates.

If you just take the matter of the Palestinian National Authority, now led
by Hamas, it is itself a product of negotiations. It is a product of the
Oslo Agreement. So, there is the Oslo Agreement, and it provided for the
creation of the Palestinian National Authority, and both sides kept to
that. The Palestinian Authority is still there. It is on this basis that
Hamas, today, is the government of Palestine. It is as a result of this
agreement.

I am citing that to say that you are indeed quite correct that to build
towards addressing these final status issues, with regard to these
negotiations, it is clear that it is important that what has been agreed
upon must be respected. That would include non-expansion of the settlements
on Palestinian territory by the Israelis and other matters of this kind.

But, as I say, the best we can do is to encourage both sides to say that
you cannot avoid this incremental progression towards a solution that, in
the end, is a two-state solution. So, it is important that previous
agreements must indeed be honoured, and we have to say that to both Hamas
and the Israeli government. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.


             Consequences of electricity outages in Western Cape


6.    Mr L W Greyling (ID) asked the President of the Republic:

      (1)   How have the recent electricity outages in the Western Cape
           affected South Africa’s (a) growth rate and (b) objectives of
           the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative of South Africa,
           Asgisa, to obtain the target of 6% economic growth;

      (2)   whether these outages have affected investor confidence in South
           Africa; if so, what plans does the Government have in place to
           (a) restore this confidence and (b) ensure a reliable long-term
           supply of electricity;
      (3)   whether the Government has put aside any funds for this
           unforeseen economic disaster in order to offer compensation to
           businesses that have lost substantial income through these
           electricity outages; if not, what is the position in this
           regard; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                             N214E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Deputy Speaker, we do not expect the
outages experienced in the Western Cape to derail the growth projections
outlined in Asgisa. As I have said earlier, the faster than expected
economic growth has required that we accelerate our built plan but expect
that Eskom’s capital expenditure of R84 billion will have a massive
positive impact on the economy and should sustain and drive a 6% growth
rate. And that built programme, Madam Deputy Speaker, is already under way.

I have indicated the amounts of additional electricity that we expect from
this new phase in an earlier answer. It is important to note that Eskom is
currently in the process of adding 1 050 MW of peaking capacity in the
Western Cape in the form of two gas turbine plants – one at Mossel Bay and
the other at Atlantis.

With regard to the matter about investor confidence in South Africa, we
have no evidence of any adverse impact on investment. Accordingly, the
notion that there has been a rush away from investment in South Africa is
not correct. Large users of electricity approach Eskom well in advance in
order to secure their supply. In the modern world where energy is in short
supply, we are, as government, aware of any major users in our country.

In regard to what was said about the purported aluminium smelter company,
that is looking elsewhere, we need to point out that that company has not
approached Eskom. In any event, the government is currently only
negotiating with one potential aluminium smelter investor. This is with
Alkahn. Regarding the establishment of an aluminium smelter at Coega, these
negotiations are very much on track.

Eskom is a flagship entity that has a solid track record internationally,
and there are very few countries in the world that could host a smelter of
such capacity. The fact that South Africa has been seriously considered
indicates a degree of confidence that international investors have in our
ability to provide sustainable, cost-effective electricity.

As to whether the government has put aside any funds for these unforeseen
economic problems in the province: The losses incurred by the Western Cape
businesses are indeed tragic and regrettable. It is imperative that
businesses are insured for national disasters, and we trust that the
insurance industry will provide the affected businesses with appropriate
compensation. But a joint task team under the leadership of Premier Ebrahim
Rasool is also considering mechanisms of support in this regard. And to
that extent we will respond to the work of that team, led by Ebrahim
Rasool, to give the necessary support to businesses. Thank you very much,
Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr L W GREYLING: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Hon President, it is
reported today that the cost to businesses in the Western Cape due to the
electricity outages was in the region of R5,5 billion. Many of the
businesses are small businesses that simply cannot afford to take the
financial knock that this imposed on them.

The ID has been inundated with calls from businesses whose food stock has
perished as a result of these outages or whose equipment has been damaged
and needs to be replaced. These businesses are in fact on the verge of
bankruptcy as a result. And if the government is committed to protecting
the small businesses in South Africa action needs to be taken.

The ID has already signalled its intent to bring a class action suit
against Eskom to compensate business for these losses. We would, however,
like to avoid such an action but we will only do so if government agrees to
provide adequate compensation. The ID believes that these outages should be
treated as a disaster, and disaster relief funds be put in place to
compensate these businesses. This will also restore the confidence of
investors who will then see that government is committed to taking
responsibility and rectifying its own mistakes.

Hon President, you mentioned the task team. Can the ID assist you in terms
of ensuring that adequate compensation is provided to these businesses so
that we can find an amicable solution to this problem that confronts us?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: I was going to suggest, Madam Deputy
Speaker, that I speak to Premier Rasool today and ask him to contact the
hon member. I’m quite certain that the ideas the hon member might have
would be very useful in that task force. So, I think he could make a
contribution to this in order to find a solution to the problem. Thanks,
Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Hon President, are we not
making too little use of our capacity to produce renewable energy to
provide power in an integrated fashion to relieve peak power burdens on
Eskom? At present, most of our focus in the use of renewables is for deep
rural areas, and there is a perception amongst advocates of renewables that
government’s commitment to renewable energy is largely token, because Eskom
must be protected.

Renewables now produce 100 gigawatts of energy. By 2012 government aims to
produce a hundred times more – that’s 10 000, a multiplication of 100 times
in six years. But it’s still only 4% of the total electricity demand and
only 8% of our total electricity supply. However, if government gave the
same support to research and development in such power sources as solar and
wave - of which we have huge capacity in South Africa - as it does to coal
and nuclear, it is claimed that those could provide up 50% of our energy
supply.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: What should I say, Madam Deputy Speaker?
There is a project looking at solar power that was financed by the
government at the University of Johannesburg. As I remember, for that
particular project, the government put R50 million towards dealing
specifically with this matter of solar power. I have seen the work that the
scientists and the engineers have done there, and indeed it is very, very
good and would, from the way they explain it, help us to expand the use of
solar power in the country. I wouldn’t describe that as lack of attention
by government with regard to solar power.

I am not sure that I would agree with these people who observe in the
manner that you have indicated, and I was giving this particular example at
the University of Johannesburg, because that example does not indicate that
we are in any way not paying sufficient attention to the matter of
renewable sources of energy. Indeed, what has been said in terms of Asgisa,
other liquid fuels that we would produce; not from hydrocarbons, but from
sugar or whatever, is a very big part. And again, you are talking about
renewable sources of energy.

So, I wouldn’t know, practically, what the notion is based upon – that we
are not paying sufficient attention to this matter - because the practical
examples that I know point in the opposite direction.

Prof B TUROK: Hon President, may I take this opportunity to bring a bit of
reassurance to the slightly hysterical outburst we had from the ID a few
minutes ago. This House has been debating the budget in the last period and
we have learnt that growth in South Africa is very broad-based, that it’s
actually located in primary commodity prices and a consumer boom and that a
temporary outage of electricity here and there cannot affect the national
growth rate, which the question implies.

Certainly, I do also want to say that the ANC government has released the
springs of growth on a national basis and on a very sustainable basis and
it is far broader - our growth - than the question implies.

My question is, however, about a long view on further growth and whether we
are going to depend primarily on a single main source of energy or whether
we are planning for a diversity of energy sources which will indeed tap a
whole range of possibilities. I wonder if you would comment on that?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yes, we have to,
hon Ben Turok. Indeed, we have to go for this diversity of energy sources,
quite clearly. The issue that was raised by the hon Rabinowitz is part of
this, and it was an important question. So, we’ve got to continue to focus
on that matter of renewable sources of energy, in all their forms, clearly.

You will see, in the response that I gave earlier with regard to the Eskom
plants - talking about gas-fired power stations rather than the majority of
coal-fired power stations we have - that that’s another form of energy.
We’ve got to develop the energy that would be generated as a result of the
usage of sugar and all of these things to produce other things.

The work that is being done with regard to the pebble bed modular reactor
is very important because it’s quite clear now that many people around the
world have again recognised the importance of nuclear power and the work
that is being done with regard to the pebble bed would make an important
contribution in this regard. So, yes, indeed, we have to.

The agreement that has been reached in the region with regard to the
generation of hydro-electricity from the Congo and getting it here and to
other countries is another intervention that would be important with regard
to our sources of energy.

Yes, indeed, we have to diversify in the context of which we have to
address the problem that is generated from the point of view of the Kyoto
Protocol. The matter of the problem generated by the fact that so many of
our power stations are coal-fired must also be addressed.

So, I’m saying, yes, the hon member is correct. We have to diversify our
sources of energy, and indeed that is what is happening. Thank you, Madam
Deputy Speaker.

Mr M STEPHENS: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Regarding investor
confidence, does the President agree that local and foreign investors’
confidence in a sufficient and uninterrupted power supply is vital? And,
given the recent power failures, it’s also vital that transparent
contingency plans and fail-safe mechanisms be introduced that could deal
with failures of the size and scope of these latter ones.

We have already been informed by the line Minister that such plans as were
in place did not foresee and could not deal with the size and scope of the
failures that actually occurred and that the expense of putting them in
place is going to be such that we would not be able to deal with it at
provincial level but it will have be dealt with on national level.

The question is thus whether such contingency plans and mechanisms are
there presently in process; and if not, does the President realise that one
more screw-up in the works like the last one will let all investors bolt
for the exits?
The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I think this is ordinary
common sense. Indeed it is vital and obvious that all investors must have
some assurance about the supply of energy, as is the matter of what the hon
member refers to as contingency plans and mechanisms to deal with whatever
situations. Yes, we agree very much with this, hon member.

But I would, like the hon Ben Turok, who spoke just now, also urge that we
shouldn’t frighten ourselves too much. I had indicated earlier the
quantities of electricity supplies that are available in the country, and
the work that is being done further to expand the availability of
electricity in the country.

We shouldn’t be holding out a threat to these local and foreign investors
that something disastrous is going to happen with regard to energy and
therefore, as it were, they must be on their toes. I think the message we
ought to be communicating is that there is indeed a sufficient supply of
electricity in the country. There are particular challenges that arose at
Koeberg. There are particular challenges that have arisen with regard to
maintenance, like the transmission lines, like all manner of facilities in
a city like Johannesburg, and like the modernisation of the equipment in
the hands of the City of Cape Town, with regard to electricity
distribution.

There are challenges like these which are being worked on and which will be
solved. And I think we ought to be communicating this to local and foreign
investors; to say, yes, indeed, there was a problem and there were
regrettable losses suffered by many businesses, but there is no crisis.
Whatever needs to be done to make sure that the economy grows and the new
investors come into the economy is being done on energy and other issues.
Thank you very much, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                          DIVISION OF REVENUE BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

There was no debate.

The Chief Whip of the Majority Party moved:

That the Bill be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.

                         ELECTRICITY REGULATION BILL
                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

There was no debate.

The Chief Whip of the Majority Party moved:

  That the Bill, as amended, be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill, as amended, accordingly passed.


                      REMARKS MADE BY MR R JANKIELSOHN


                                  (Ruling)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, please take your seats.

Before we conclude the business of the day, I wish to give a ruling on a
point of order raised by Adv Masutha on Tuesday, 28 March 2006, about a
remark made by Mr Jankielsohn in his member’s statement on that day. Adv
Masutha asked whether it was parliamentary for the hon member to accuse
government of being a network of syndicates of crime.

I indicated at the time that the remark was a broad one in the way it was
given. I nevertheless undertook to go back to the statement and check if
there was any element of it that was unparliamentary and to then come back
to the House on the issue.

Having now had the opportunity to study the unrevised Hansard, I wish to
rule, as follows: Government is a broad concept, and reflections on it are
generally acceptable - just as in practice reflections on political parties
have been accepted. I therefore stand by my earlier ruling that the
contested remark was in order.

However, in studying the statement I found that the remark by Mr
Jankielsohn that “the ANC uses its majority in legislatures to sweep
allegations of wrong-doing under the carpet”, could be interpreted either
to be a reference to a party, in this case the ANC, or it could be
interpreted to reflect on the integrity of members of the House. Given the
ambiguity of this remark, I have decided to grant Mr Jankielsohn the
benefit of the doubt, and will therefore not ask him to withdraw the
remark.
However, I do want to appeal to members, as public representatives, to
moderate their language and to refrain from using expressions that detract
from the dignity and decorum of this House. Even, given the leeway that
exists already with regard to references to parties, we do not want to
encourage such remarks because they are invariably disruptive in their
effect and do not contribute meaningfully to the debate. Let us maintain
the standing in which this House would always seek to be held.

The House adjourned at 15:50.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

        1) National Credit Bill [B 18D – 2005] – Act No 34 of 2005
           (assented to and signed by President on 10 March 2006).

2.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent
     (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly on 30 March 2006:


          a) Division of Revenue Bill [B 3B – 2006] (National Assembly –
             sec 76)
          b) Electricity Regulation Bill [B 29D – 2005] (National Assembly
             – sec 75).




TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Safety and Security


     a) Strategic Plan of the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD) for
        2006-2009 [RP 28-2006].


National Assembly


1.    The Speaker

      a) Reply from the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development
         to a recommendation in the report of the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development on the Provisional
         Suspension from Office of Magistrate I W O M Morake, as adopted by
         the House on 16 November 2005.

         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development.

      b) Report of the Public Service Commission on Citizen Satisfaction
         Survey: Overview Report of the Criminal Justice Sector for October
         2005 [RP 70-2005].


