---
title: 'Joint Sitting - 03 February 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: Joint Sitting
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/joint-sitting/parliamentary-debates-JS-2006-02-03
---

FRIDAY, 3 FEBRUARY 2006
                                    ____


                      PROCEEDINGS OF THE JOINT SITTING

                                    ____

Members of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces
assembled in the Chamber of the National Assembly at 11:00.

The Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces took the Chair.

The Speaker of the National Assembly requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.


                          CALLING OF JOINT SITTING


The Speaker of the National Assembly announced that the President had
called a Joint Sitting of the National Assembly and the National Council of
Provinces in terms of Joint Rule 7(1), on Friday, 3 February 2002, at
11:00, to enable him to deliver his annual address to Parliament.


                    ADDRESS BY PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC


The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker of the National Assembly,
Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Deputy Speaker and Deputy
Chairperson of the National Assembly and the NCOP, Deputy President of the
Republic, hon leaders of our political parties and hon members of
Parliament, Ministers and Deputy Ministers, our esteemed Chief Justice and
members of the judiciary, heads of our Security Services, Governor of the
Reserve Bank, the hon F W de Klerk and Mrs de Klerk, Mrs Graça Machel, Mr
Jacob Zuma, distinguished Premiers and Speakers of our provinces, mayors
and leaders in our system of local government, our honoured traditional
leaders, heads of the state organs supporting our democratic system,
directors-general and other leaders of the Public Service, Your
Excellencies Ambassadors and High Commissioners, distinguished guests,
friends and comrades, people of South Africa, first of all I would like to
acknowledge and welcome on this occasion some distinguished personalities
who are sitting in the gallery of this hallowed Chamber. I am referring
here to the esteemed Graça Machel, whom I mention in particular because
this year we will commemorate the death of the first president of
independent Mozambique, Samora Machel, who died in a mysterious plane crash
at Mbuzini in Mpumalanga 20 years ago this year. [Applause.]

I am referring also to the Reverend Fathers, Revs Mgojo and Xundu, and
Yasmin Sooka, who served the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in various
capacities, and some of those who petitioned the commission to promote the
noble cause of peace, truth and reconciliation in our country. [Applause.]

I refer also to Ella Gandhi, granddaughter of the irreplaceable Mahatma
Gandhi, who, one hundred years ago, here in South Africa, launched
Satyagraha, the unique nonviolent struggle that liberated India and
inspired millions of freedom fighters everywhere else in the world.
[Applause.]

We take this opportunity to remember the martyrs who were brutally murdered
- assassinated - in Matola, in Mozambique, and welcome their relatives who
are with us today ... [Applause.] ... and remember the leader of our people
Joe Gqabi who was killed in Zimbabwe. [Applause.]

Present among us also are Inkosi Zondi and Oscar Zondi, patriots from
KwaZulu-Natal who are working to ensure that the nation honours the Bambata
Rebellion of a century ago in a fitting manner. [Applause.]

We are also honoured to have in our midst Sophie de Bruyn and others
present in the House who were part of the heroic women who marched on the
Union Buildings in Pretoria 50 years ago on August 9, 1956 ... [Applause.]
... thus placing the women of our country in the frontline of our struggle
for national liberation.

The representatives of the youth that rose up in revolt 30 years ago, in
the Soweto Uprising, sit everywhere in this House . . . [Applause.] ...
including on the benches of the ruling party, and have therefore had no
need to have special representatives sitting in the gallery of the House.
[Laughter.]

I am honoured to acknowledge the presence in the gallery of an outstanding
human being and friend of our country and people, the leading Indian
Bollywood actor Anil Kapoor. [Applause.]

All of us are deeply moved that Anil Kapoor, a citizen of the beloved land
of Mahatma Gandhi, has agreed to serve as one of South Africa’s global
brand ambassadors committed to mobilise the peoples of the world to support
our efforts to make a success of our liberation. [Applause.]

On behalf of our government and all our people, I extend our heartfelt
welcome to all these distinguished guests and thank them for honouring our
nation today by their presence on this important national occasion.

Speaking at the very first annual regular opening of our democratic
Parliament, on 24 May 1994, almost a month after the historic April 27
elections in which, for the first time ever, the people of our country
freely decided together who should govern our country, the hon Nelson
Mandela issued an historic challenge that, and I quote:

    ... we must, constrained by and yet regardless of the accumulated effect
   of our historical burdens, seize the time to define for ourselves what we
   want to make of our shared destiny.


Perhaps what the nation has done and not done during the years of the
democratic epoch, that have accumulated since Nelson Mandela delivered the
first State of the Nation Address on 24 May 1994, have created the
possibility for us to reiterate the call he made on that day to all of us
as South Africans, nearly twelve years ago, together “to define for
ourselves what we want to make of our shared destiny”.

On that day in May 1994, the hon Nelson Mandela evoked the haunting memory
of an extraordinary South African, Ingrid Jonker, who committed suicide
just over 40 years ago, in the same sea waters that isolated his former
involuntary temporary home, Robben Island, from our mainland, as she was
isolated from and by her kith and kin. Of her he said:

   In the midst of despair, she celebrated hope. Confronted with death, she
   asserted the beauty of life. In the dark days when all seemed hopeless in
   our country, when many refused to hear her resonant voice, she took her
   own life.


   To her and others like her, we owe a debt to life itself. To her and
   others like her, we owe a commitment to the poor, the oppressed, the
   wretched and the despised.

Nelson Mandela said that, in the aftermath of the massacre at the anti-pass
demonstrations in Sharpeville, Langa and Nyanga, she wrote:

   Die kind is nie dood nie
   die kind lig sy vuiste teen sy moeder
   wat Afrika skreeu ...


   die kind wat net wou speel in die son by Nyanga is orals
   die kind wat 'n man geword het trek deur die ganse Afrika
   die kind wat 'n reus geword het reis deur die hele wêreld



   Sonder 'n pas


   The child is not dead
   the child lifts his fists against his mother
   who shouts Africa ...


   this child who only wanted to play in the sun at Nyanga is everywhere
   the child grown to a man treks on through all Africa
   the child grown to a giant journeys through the whole world
   Without a pass!


Nelson Mandela continued:


   And in this glorious vision (Ingrid Jonker) instructs that our endeavours
   must be about the liberation of the woman, the emancipation of the man
   and the liberty of the child. It is these things that we must achieve to
   give meaning to our presence in this Chamber and give purpose to our
   occupancy of the seat of government.


   And so we must, constrained by and yet regardless of the accumulated
   effect of our historical burdens, seize the time to define for ourselves
   what we want to make of our shared destiny.


Confronted by this historic challenge, I dare say that no one in our
country can, like Shakespeare’s Macbeth, grieve that in the period since
that distinguished son of our people, Nelson Mandela, delivered our first
State of the Nation Address, all we can truthfully say, with Macbeth, about
our country’s fate is:

   To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow,
   Creeps in this petty pace from day to day
   To the last syllable of recorded time,
   And all our yesterdays have lighted fools
   The way to dusty death ...
Indeed I believe that for many of us our country’s evolution away from its
apartheid past seems to have moved at such a hectic pace that even some of
the seminal moments marking the birth of our democracy, which is less than
two decades old, present themselves in the subconscious mind as being mere
chapters in an aging historical record of a distant past.

Nothing that has happened during the age of democracy could justify the
conclusion, similar to the one that Macbeth arrived at, that any of our
yesterdays has only served to guide fools to avoidable catastrophe.

On the contrary, the age of democracy has given itself moral legitimacy by
ensuring that Ingrid Jonker lives on, a heroine to all our people. The
child, she knew, had not died, despite the apartheid bullet through its
head, and is now grown to a giant and treks on through all Africa and the
whole world, without a pass! [Applause.]

This year we will have occasion to remind ourselves of, and celebrate, two
of the seminal moments to which I have referred. One of these is the 15th
anniversary of the holding of the first meeting of Codesa on 20 December
1991, and the adoption of the vitally important Declaration of Intent the
following day. The other is the 10th anniversary of the adoption of our
Constitution on 8 May 1996.

Among other things, the Codesa Declaration of Intent said:

   We ... declare our solemn commitment to bring about an undivided South
   Africa with one nation sharing a common citizenship, patriotism and
   loyalty, pursuing amidst our diversity freedom, equality and security for
   all irrespective of race, colour, sex or creed; a country free from
   apartheid or any other form of discrimination or domination.

The importance of this particular moment in our history, both for our
country and the peoples of the world, was underlined by the presence at
Codesa of international observers from the United Nations, the Organisation
of African Unity, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the
Commonwealth.

In a joint statement, these representatives of important international
organisations said:

   Codesa must herald the dawn of a new era of peace and justice. The broad
   objectives expressed in the Declaration of Intent are a most constructive
   and auspicious beginning for Codesa and give promise of attainment of a
   true democracy for South Africa ... We hope that all the representatives
   of the South African people will join in the rebuilding of their country.

Periods of a decade and a decade and a half are but fleeting moments in the
life of any nation. In our case we have lived through these years conscious
of the enormous effort it would require of all of us to unshackle our
country from the heavy chains that tie it to its past.

We have known that it would take considerable time before we could say we
have eradicated the legacy of the past. We have expected that the
circumstances handed down to us by our history would indeed condemn us to a
“petty pace” of progress towards the achievement of the goal of a better
life for all.

And yet today, as I stand here to speak to the hon members of our national,
provincial and local legislatures, an important component part of our
national political leadership, other echelons of that leadership, and our
international guests, I feel emboldened to appropriate for our people the
promise contained in the Book of the Prophet Isaiah, when God said:

   For you shall go out with joy,
   and be led out in peace;
   the mountains and the hills
   shall break forth into singing before you,
   and all the trees of the field shall clap their hands.


[Applause.]


   Instead of the thorn shall come up the cypress tree


   And instead of the brier shall come up the myrtle tree ...


   Kuba niya kuphuma ninovuyo,
   Nithundezwe ninoxolo.
   Iintaba neenduli ziya kugqabhuka
   Zimemelele phambi kwenu,
   Imithi yasendle ibethe izandla.


   Esikhundleni somqaqoba kuya kuphuma imisedare,
   Esikhundleni serhawu kuya kunyuka imirtile ...

What has been achieved since Nelson Mandela delivered his first State of
the Nation Address, and what we can do, given the larger resources that
have since been generated, has surely given hope to the masses of our
people, that it is possible for all Africa to hear the mountains and the
hills singing before them.

When he addressed the United Nations General Assembly 14 years ago on 18
February 1992, a mere two months after our nation established Codesa, the
then chairperson of the United Nations Special Committee against Apartheid
said:

   During the next few months, the Special Committee will need to closely
   monitor developments, in order to identify all factors threatening to
   derail the process in South Africa and to issue early warnings
   accordingly. We will thus pay particular attention to the underlying
   causes of violence. The level and the nature of violence continue to be
   extremely disturbing. More than 2 600 persons lost their lives in 1991 as
   a result of politically related violence.

Reading this today, wondering what could have gone wrong that so many
people had to lose their lives needlessly, it becomes difficult to avoid
the conclusion that “yesterday was another country!”

And yet during the very same year that we adopted our Constitution, Amnesty
International could still report that:

   At least 500 people were killed in continuing political violence in
   KwaZulu-Natal; some appeared to have been extrajudicially executed.
   Reports of torture and ill-treatment in police custody continued. Four
   people were killed by right-wing opponents of the government. Further
   evidence emerged, through court proceedings and Truth and Reconciliation
   Commission hearings, of official involvement in human rights violations
   under the former government.


Fifteen years ago the international community was expressing deep concern
about factors threatening to derail the process in our country towards
ending white minority rule, including the violence then claiming too many
lives, and found it necessary to appeal to all our people to act together
to end apartheid and rebuild the country.

The peoples of the world could have reiterated their concern about
political violence in our country even five years later, as we took a giant
step forward by adopting our Constitution.

Happily, in time, we managed to break free of the uncertainty about a
bright future for our country, dramatically represented by the large
numbers of people killed throughout the years from 1990 to 1996, when we
were engaged in negotiations to establish our democratic order.

This year opened with the inspiring news that our people were highly
optimistic about their future and the future of our country, ranking eighth
in the world on the optimism index. Gallup International, which issued this
report, said we had three times more optimists than pessimists, and that
the optimism figure had even doubled since 2002. [Applause.]

This compared sharply with the situation in 1993, when our country was
still in the grip of the crisis that had been of so much concern to the
international community and us. That year, our country had more pessimists
than optimists, signifying the prevalence of a mood of despair generated in
part by the cold-blooded assassination that year of one of our outstanding
leaders, Chris Hani.

The results obtained by Gallup International have been confirmed by a
recent domestic poll conducted by Markinor. According to this poll, 65% of
our people believe that our country is going in the right direction, 84%
think that our country holds out a happy future for all racial groups ...
[Applause.] ... and 71% believe that government is performing well.
[Applause.]

With regard to the economy, late last month the Grant Thornton
International Business Owners Survey reported that 84% of South Africa’s
business owners are optimistic about the year ahead, making them the third
most optimistic internationally. [Applause.] Again last month, the First
National Bank and the Bureau for Economic Research reported that the
consumer confidence index was at its highest in 25 years. [Applause.]

What all these figures signify is that our people are firmly convinced that
our country has entered its Age of Hope. They are convinced that we have
created the conditions to achieve more rapid progress towards the
realisation of their dreams. They are certain that we are indeed a winning
nation. [Applause.]

Through our national effort they can see the relevance to our situation of
God’s blessings communicated in the Book of the Prophet Isaiah:

   For you shall go out with joy,
   and be led out in peace;
   the mountains and the hills
   shall break forth into singing before you,
   and all the trees of the field shall clap their hands.


[Applause.]

The inspiring perspective about our future shared by the majority of our
people derives from what our country has achieved first to overcome the
obstacles to freedom we faced before 1994, the advances we have made since
then to consolidate our democracy while promoting nonracism and nonsexism,
the progress we have made to alleviate the poverty afflicting millions of
our people, and the strides we have made to expand and modernise our
economy.

We owe these outstanding achievements to the sterling efforts made by all
our people in all walks of life. To that extent I would like to take the
opportunity of this State of the Nation Address to salute and thank all our
people for responding to the call made by Nelson Mandela in 1994 from this
podium, when he said:

      We must, constrained by and yet regardless of the accumulated
      effect of our historical burdens, seize the time to define for
      ourselves what we want to make of our shared destiny.


[Applause.]

Millions did indeed seize the time and, in action, defined ours as a shared
destiny of peace, democracy, nonracism, nonsexism, shared prosperity and a
better life for all. It is because of what these millions did that our
people know from their own experience that today is better than yesterday,
and are confident that tomorrow will be better than today. [Applause.]

While we must indeed celebrate the high levels of optimism that inspire our
people, who are convinced that our country has entered its Age of Hope, we
must also focus on and pay particular attention to the implications of
those high levels of optimism with regard to what we must do together to
achieve the objective of a better life for all our people. We have to
respond to the hopes of the people by doing everything possible to meet
their expectations.

And here I include among those who have to respond to the high expectations
of our people not just the government, but also the private sector, the
labour unions and the rest of civil society, and patriotic individuals.

In the period ahead of us, we have to sustain the multifaceted national
effort that enabled us to realise the advances that have inspired so much
confidence among our people for a better tomorrow. On behalf of our
government I would therefore like to use this important landmark in our
national life to repeat the appeal made by Nelson Mandela 12 years ago,
that together “we must ... seize the time to define for ourselves what we
want to make of our shared destiny”.

And I dare say that essentially all of us are very familiar with what the
people expect, which would confirm that they were not wrong to conclude
that our country has entered its Age of Hope.

The Markinor survey to which we have referred indicates some of the
concerns of our people. Whereas, as we have indicated, 71% believe that the
government is generally performing well, only 56% think the government is
responding well to our economic challenges, with the figure dropping to 54%
with regard to the cluster of Justice functions.

We must also note that the government’s approval rating with regard to the
economy moves in tandem with the levels of income. Significantly, 72%
approve of the government’s efforts in various areas of social delivery. In
contrast, only 45% believe that the sphere of local government is
performing well.

The hon members will also be pleased to know that a survey conducted by the
Government Communication and Information System shows that 90% of our
population is proud of our country, our flag and national anthem, while 60%
consider Freedom Day, 27 April, as the most important national day.

The outcomes of these surveys communicate the unequivocal message that our
people expect that:

    • we should move faster to address the challenges of poverty,
      underdevelopment and marginalisation confronting those caught within
      the Second Economy, to ensure that the poor in our country share in
      our growing prosperity;


    • we should make the necessary interventions with regard to the First
      Economy to accelerate progress towards the achievement of higher
      levels of economic growth and development of at least 6% a year;

    • we must sustain and improve the effectiveness of our social
      development programmes targeted at providing a cushion of support to
      those most exposed to the threat of abject poverty;

    • we must act more aggressively with regard to our criminal justice
      system to improve the safety and security of our people, especially by
      improving the functioning of our courts and increasing our conviction
      rates to strengthen the message that crime does not pay;

    • we must ensure that the machinery of government, especially the local
      government sphere, discharges its responsibilities effectively and
      efficiently, honouring the precepts of Batho Pele; and

    • we must harness the Proudly South African spirit that is abroad among
      the people to build the strongest possible partnership between all
      sections of our population to accelerate our advance towards the
      realisation of the important goal of a better life for all.

Our government is committed to respond with all necessary seriousness and
determination to all these challenges, and play its role to give new
content to our Age of Hope. I am honoured to have this opportunity to
announce some of the elements of the programme of our government to honour
that commitment.

The hon members and the country at large are aware that, under the
leadership of Deputy President Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, the three spheres of
government have been working together for some months now to elaborate the
specific interventions that will ensure that Asgisa, the Accelerated and
Shared Growth Initiative of South Africa, succeeds in its purposes, which
include the reduction of the unemployment levels.

In this regard I would like to thank the members of the private sector, the
trade union movement, women, youth and civil society who have participated
in this process, making valuable input into an important initiative that
must be owned and implemented by our people as a whole.

I must also take advantage of this occasion to explain that Asgisa is not
intended to cover all elements of a comprehensive development plan. Rather
it consists of a limited set of interventions that are intended to serve as
catalysts to accelerated and shared growth and development.

Otherwise we will continue to engage the nation and all social partners to
address other elements of a comprehensive development plan to improve our
current programmes, and deal with other issues, such as the comprehensive
industrial policy, keeping in mind the objective to halve poverty and
unemployment by 2014.

Our government is convinced that favourable conditions exist for us to
achieve the accelerated and shared growth to which we are committed. For
instance, on 3 January this year, the newspaper Business Day commented
that:

   In South Africa, this promises to be the dawn of a golden age of growth
   ... We have now had more than five years of sustained growth – an upswing
   longer than the boom of the 1960s and indeed longer than anything in the
   postwar period ... We are reaping the benefits of years of sound
   financial and monetary policy as well as of structural reform in the
   economy.


    ... we are set fairer than we have been in decades to raise the growth
   rate on a sustainable basis. The trouble is, not all of it is within our
   control, as much depends on the vagaries of world markets and the global
   economy ...


   But, make no mistake ... [T]his economy and this market start to look
   very different to anything we are used to. And it is certainly a
   different good, not a different bad.

[Applause.]

We fully agree with these observations, and would add that that “different
good” has included significant job creation, a trend that we seek to
enhance through Asgisa and our other development programmes.

To implement Asgisa, state-owned enterprises and the public sector as a
whole, working in some instances through public-private partnerships, will
make large investments in various sectors: to meet the demand for
electricity; to provide an efficient and competitive logistics
infrastructure; to expand and modernise the telecommunications
infrastructure; and to satisfy the demand for water.

The public sector will also accelerate infrastructure investment in the
underdeveloped urban and rural areas of our country through the Municipal
Infrastructure Grant, the Expanded Public Works Programme and other
infrastructure funds to improve service delivery in the areas of the Second
Economy, including the provision of roads and rail; water; energy; housing,
schools and clinics; business premises and business support centres; sports
facilities; and multipurpose government service centres, including police
stations and courts.

An amount of R372 billion will be provided for both these sets of
programmes over the next three years.

As hon members would expect, we will continue to pay particular attention
to the Expanded Public Works Programme as an important bridge between the
two economies and a significant part of our poverty alleviation programme.
Among other things, resources for the public works programmes will be
pooled to ensure maximum impact both in terms of products delivered, and
employment and skills-training opportunities.

Better supervision of infrastructure projects undertaken by government will
be introduced to ensure that capital budgets are spent without roll-overs
and that labour-intensive methods are prioritised, and the necessary
training of workers is carried out to provide them with skills.

Asgisa has also identified particular sectors of our economy for
accelerated growth, building on the work already done within the context of
our existing Microeconomic Reform Programme. These include: business
process outsourcing; tourism; chemicals; biofuels; metals and metallurgy;
wood, pulp and paper; agriculture; the creative industries; and clothing
and textiles.

In this regard, work is proceeding apace to address such challenges as the
cost of telecommunications, and import parity pricing with regard to steel
and chemicals. We have already reached agreement with the People’s Republic
of China to protect our clothing and textile sector. [Applause.] The second
national telecommunications operator should become operational later this
year. [Applause.]

For Asgisa to succeed, it is clear that the machinery of state, and
especially local government, should function effectively and efficiently.
During the past year, our government has undertaken a detailed assessment
to determine what we need to do to improve the capacity of our system of
local government.

As we announced last year, we have been engaged in assessing the capacity
of government to discharge its responsibility to help accelerate the
process of social transformation. Proceeding from the particular to the
general, the audit of a number of national departments has been completed.

These include housing, health, education and trade and industry. Across all
these, issues of skills, vacancies, delegation of responsibilities to
managers of delivery agencies and relationships between national and
provincial departments have emerged as being among the most critical areas
requiring attention. Assessments of the other departments will be carried
out.

The government will make the necessary interventions to address the issues
raised by these assessments, bearing in mind the critical role that
government must play as one of our country’s most important developmental
agencies. We cannot allow that government departments become an obstacle to
the achievement of the goal of a better life for all because of
insufficient attention to the critical issue of effective and speedy
delivery of services. [Applause.]

In this context, we will continue the work towards the creation of one
Public Service covering all spheres of government, fully conscious of the
complexity of this matter and the need to secure the agreement of all
relevant stakeholders. We will also continue to pay the necessary attention
to the important issues of the inclusion of women and people with
disabilities at decision-making levels of the Public Service. [Applause.]

Everything we have said so far concerning Asgisa points to the inescapable
conclusion that, to meet our objectives, we will have to pay particular
attention to the issue of scarce skills that will negatively affect the
capacity of both the public and the private sectors to meet the goals set
by Asgisa.

In this regard, I would therefore like to assure hon members and the
country as a whole that, together with our social partners, we have agreed
to a vigorous and wide-ranging skills development and acquisition programme
to meet any shortfalls we may experience.

Among other things, we have already agreed to establish within a few weeks
a multistakeholder working group, Jipsa, the Joint Initiative on Priority
Skills Acquisition, through which government, business, labour and civil
society will act jointly to respond to the skills challenge in as practical
a manner as possible.

I would like to extend the sincere thanks of our Deputy President and
government as a whole for the response of the Freedom Front Plus and other
formations and individuals, who have responded to our appeal for South
Africans with the necessary skills to make themselves available to provide
the required expertise in project management and other areas. [Applause.]
The first group of the 90 already identified and assessed will be deployed
in their new posts in May. [Applause.]

We will, of course, also make other interventions in the area of education
and training. These include eliminating fees for the poorest quintile of
primary schools, targeting 529 schools to double the Mathematics and
Science graduate output to 50 000 by 2008, and re-equipping and financing
the Further Education and Training colleges. [Applause.]

Last year, we completed the task of registering unemployed graduates, with
over 60 000 in the database. We wish to express our appreciation to the
many companies that last December pledged to employ some of these
graduates. An intensive campaign to link up these graduates with these and
other companies will be undertaken this year.

During this year, when we celebrate the 90th anniversary of the
establishment of the University of Fort Hare, we will continue to engage
the leadership of our tertiary institutions, focused on working with them
to meet the nation’s expectations with regard to teaching and research. For
its part, the government is determined to increase the resource allocation
for research, development and innovation, and to increase the pool of young
researchers.

Asgisa identified other constraints to growth and development, apart from
the issue of skills, the cost of doing business and the unnecessarily high
cost of intermediate inputs. Work is proceeding to address all these
constraints, including the limited domestic market and monetary and
financial issues.

Asgisa has once more confirmed the need for us to expand our micro, small
and medium enterprise sector, paying particular attention in this regard to
broad-based black economic empowerment, and the development of women and
the youth.

We will therefore take the necessary measures to ensure the effectiveness
of such existing programmes as the Apex (Micro-credit) Fund, Mafisa (for
agricultural development), Seda, the Small Enterprise Development Agency,
Khula, the Msobomvu Youth Fund, the IDC Small Business Initiative, and
others to make sure that all of these programmes function effectively. We
will also intensify our engagement of the Financial Services Charter
signatories to help generate the necessary resources for the development of
the SMME sector.

Our experience with regard to the development of this sector indicates that
we must pay particular attention to issues of access to capital,
entrepreneurial training, assistance with marketing, and the development of
co-operatives. Further, to contribute to the growth of this sector, the
government will reform its procurement programme to access some of its
goods and services from small and medium businesses, ensuring that it pays
for what it purchases promptly. [Applause.]

We will also speed up the consultative process to determine the measures we
must take to improve the regulatory climate to facilitate the expansion of
this sector. This intervention will form part of the overall programme to
introduce a regulatory impact assessment system to enable the government
regularly to assess the impact of its policies on economic activity in the
country.

The years of freedom have been very good for business. I believe that this
should have convinced the investor community by now that, in its own
interests and as part of the national effort, it has to invest in the
expansion of that freedom ... [Applause.] ... especially by actively and
consciously contributing towards the achievement of the goal of halving
poverty and unemployment by 2014.

Asgisa, which builds on the results of the Growth and Development Summit,
GDS, offers this investor community an excellent opportunity to respond to
this challenge in a deliberate and consistent manner, in its own interest.

Similarly, and also as part of the national effort, the trade union
movement and civil society as a whole face the challenge to translate into
action the commitment they made with the other social partners at the
Growth and Development Summit “to a common vision for promoting rising
levels of growth, investment, job creation, and people-centred
development”.

Asgisa provides a golden opportunity for the social partners to undertake
the “collaborative action” they visualised at the Growth and Development
Summit focused on “Promoting and mobilising investment and creating decent
work for all”.

The impressive growth rates achieved by our economy in the current period
have been driven in good measure by high consumer demand, significantly
financed through credit. This has increased our imports more than our
exports, and despite high commodity prices, the resultant balance of
payments deficit has been financed by inflows of foreign capital.

Through Asgisa we will increase the significance of the supply-side drivers
of our growth. A corollary of this is, of course, that we must ensure the
international competitiveness of the goods and services we produce.

This speaks directly to the common objective agreed by the social partners
at the Growth and Development Summit, to “promote rising levels of growth,
investment, job creation, and people-centred development.”

I have already mentioned the fact that to meet our developmental
objectives, which must respond to the high expectations of our people, we
will pay special attention to the critical task of strengthening local
government.

Our government considers this to be especially important at this stage of
our evolution. After the 1 March local government elections all three
spheres of government will therefore continue working together to ensure
that each and every district and metro municipality is properly positioned
to discharge its responsibility to the people.

In particular, this will mean that each of these municipalities has a
realistic integrated development plan, a credible local economic
development programme, and the material and human resources, as well as the
management and operational systems to implement these IDPs and LEDs.

Integration of planning and implementation across the government spheres is
therefore one of the prime areas of focus in our programme for the next
term of local government. In this regard we will be guided by the
Intergovernmental Relations Framework Act.

We must in practice respect the system of co-operative governance, and
within this context ensure that we empower local government to discharge
its developmental and service delivery obligations, drawing on the lessons
provided by Project Consolidate.

As many of us are aware by now, Project Consolidate has identified serious
capacity constraints in many of our municipalities, arising from a shortage
of properly qualified managers, and professional and technical personnel.
We have taken the necessary decisions to attend to this urgent matter.

To improve the ability, particularly of local government, to meet the needs
of the people, by March this year we shall have deployed 3 000 community
development workers.

Even as we implement the programmes focused on accelerated and shared
growth, with its important element of job creation, we cannot forget that
the social wage plays a vital role in our continuing efforts to address the
challenges of poverty.

For instance, 7 million children now receive the child support grant. A
total of 10 million of our citizens receive social grants. Real social
expenditure per person increased by 60% between 1983 and 2003. Detailed
evidence from a study conducted by Haroon Bhorat, Prakash Naidoo and
Carlene van der Westhuizen indicates that there has been a consistent shift
in expenditure in favour of poorer households.

To improve delivery in this area, we will continue to implement our
comprehensive antifraud strategy. Already many of those who have been
stealing social grants have been brought to book. [Applause.] This work
will improve with the launch of the National Social Security Agency.

In the area of health, over 1 300 clinics have benefited from the upgrading
programme and more have received additional equipment; and the programme to
revitalise hospitals is proceeding apace. The extension of community
service to a range of health professionals has ensured that at any one time
over 2 000 such professionals are available in public health institutions.

Our future plans in this area include the further expansion of the health
infrastructure, the refurbishment of existing clinics and hospitals, and
the reopening of nursing colleges to increase the numbers of these
important professionals. [Applause.]

To improve service delivery in our hospitals, by September this year we
will ensure that hospital managers are delegated authority and held
accountable for the functioning of hospitals, with policy issues regarding
training, job grading and accountability managed by the provincial health
departments, which themselves will need restructuring properly to play
their role.

The Operational Plan for Comprehensive Prevention, Treatment and Care of
HIV and Aids has resulted in the upgrading of hundreds of facilities. To
date, over 100 000 patients are receiving antiretroviral treatment and,
combined with patients in the private sector, South Africa has one of the
largest such treatment programmes in the world. [Applause.]

During the course of this year, in addition to accelerating the expansion
of our housing stock to address the needs of the homeless, we will take
concrete steps to ensure that housing development contributes to
eliminating the duality of living spaces inherited from apartheid.

Already, the Ministry of Housing and the SA Local Government Association
have reached an agreement on the sale of land for housing development.
Through this agreement, municipalities will allocate land close to economic
centres for housing development for middle- and lower-income people.
[Applause.]

In addition, as part of our effort to help the poor to access housing
finance, the National Housing Finance Corporation will be transformed into
a Housing Corporation that will provide finance to the poor and middle-
income groups. [Applause.]

In this context, we expect our Minister of Housing and the leadership of
the financial institutions to reach final agreement without further delay
on the modalities for utilising the R42 billion set aside by the financial
institutions for housing development for poor and middle-income groups,
thus contributing to the National Effort.

This is central to the attainment of a society free of shack settlements,
in which all our people enjoy decent housing. In this context, I should
also mention that government has decided that we must completely eradicate,
in the established settlements, the “bucket toilets” by the end of 2007.
[Applause.]

Land reform and land restitution are critical to the transformation of our
society. Accordingly, the state will play a more central role in the land
reform programme, ensuring that the restitution programme is accelerated,
further contributing to the empowerment of the poor, especially in the
rural areas.

The Minister of Agriculture and Land Affairs will, during 2006:
review the willing-buyer, willing-seller policy ... [Applause.] ... review
land acquisition models and possible manipulation of land prices; and
regulate conditions under which foreigners buy land. [Applause.] This will
be done in line with international norms and practices.

The Minister and the department will also ensure that the land
redistribution programme is aligned to the Provincial Growth and
Development Strategies as well as the Integrated Development Plans of
municipalities, as well as attend to the proper use of the funds that have
been made available for the productive utilisation of the land.

When we talk about the land question, we must not forget that this year we
will commemorate the centenary of the Bambata Uprising in the present day
KwaZulu-Natal, which was occasioned by the imposition of a poll tax to
drive the people off the land, forcing them to join the ranks of the
proletariat. In praise of Bambata it was said:

   Ingqungqulu eshaya amaphiko
   Kwadilika izixhobo eHlenyane.
   Izulu eliphose umbane phansi eHlenyane,
   Kwacandeka imisululu.
   Kwadilika izindonga.


   Usibamba nkunzana
   Ekade beyesaba
   Ngoba ebambe abamhlophe
   Umhlane ubelethe amagwala!

[Applause.]

In this year of the 30th anniversary of the Soweto Uprising, we shall
ensure that the focus on youth development is intensified in all spheres of
government. Among other things, during the next financial year we will set
up 100 new youth advisory centres, enrol at least 10 000 young people in
the National Youth Service Programme and enrol 5 000 volunteers to act as
mentors to vulnerable children. [Applause.]

We will also expand the reach of our business support system to young
people and intensify the Youth Co-operatives Programme. We will closely
monitor the impact of our programmes on youth skills training and business
empowerment as part of our national effort.

The Asgisa process has also helped us greatly by exposing us to the
concerns of women with regard to their economic prospects. Among other
things, the women have pointed to the need for us to focus on issues of
access to finance, development of co-operatives, fast-tracking women
artisans and providing “set-asides” for women in government and public
enterprise procurement programmes. [Applause.]
I believe that the very fact that this year we will celebrate the 50th
anniversary of the Women’s March underlines the need for us to ensure that
these issues receive the necessary attention in the implementation of our
development programmes.

The government will continue to focus on the critical challenge of further
improving our criminal justice system. Among other things, we will focus on
integrated law enforcement operations in priority areas, reducing the
number of illegal firearms and ensuring better processing of applications
for firearm licences, reducing drug trafficking and substance abuse, and
implementing social crime prevention measures.

We will further improve caseload management in our courts, build four
additional correctional facilities, reduce the number of children in
custody, and implement the recommendations of the Jali Commission.

Other important matters include the post-TRC management of cases pertaining
to conflicts of the past, processing of legislation on matters pertaining
to the rationalisation of our courts, consideration of the recommendations
of the Khampepe Commission on the Directorate of Special Operations, and
strengthening our intelligence structures to support law enforcement
agencies and ensure the security of the state and its citizens.

Perhaps, needless to say, the government will remain focused on the
challenge to fight corruption in the public sector and in society at large.
We will continue to intensify our offensive on this front, fully aware of
the fact that much that happens in our society encourages the entrenchment
of a value system based on personal acquisition of wealth by all means and
at all costs.

Five months from now, the fifa Soccer World Cup tournament, hosted by
Germany, will come to its triumphant end with the passage of the host’s
baton to our country. From then on, until 2010, the whole world will watch
us carefully to judge whether we will be a worthy host of this prestigious
tournament.

I am afraid that our performance in the current African Cup of Nations in
Egypt did nothing to advertise our strengths as a winning nation.
[Interjections.] However, starting today, the nation must bend every effort
to ensure that we meet all the expectations of fifa and the world of
soccer, so that we host the best Soccer World Cup ever.

Simultaneously, as we work together to restore the sport of soccer in our
country to full health, and prepare a winning national team, we must ensure
that we work full steam ahead to get everything else ready for a successful
Soccer World Cup.

This will encompass the stadia, broadcast facilities, including high-
definition television, the necessary transport and hospitality
infrastructure, safety and security, popular support for soccer and the
World Cup, and selfless dedication by the local organisers of the
tournament.

The 2010 Soccer World Cup will make an important contribution to our effort
to accelerate our progress towards the achievement of the goal of a better
life for our people. Similarly, as an African Soccer World Cup, it will
give additional impetus to our struggle to achieve Africa’s renaissance.

In return for these irreplaceable benefits, we owe it to fifa and the rest
of the soccer world to prepare properly for 2010. I trust that the domestic
world of soccer will respond to this challenge with all necessary
seriousness, commitment and patriotism.

During 2006 we will continue to engage the African challenges, focusing on
peace and democracy in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Côte d’Ivoire and
Sudan, the strengthening of the African Union and the acceleration of the
process of the implementation of the Nepad programmes. In this context we
have to ensure that we conduct a successful self-assessment process as we
prepare our national report for the African Peer Review Mechanism.

As the current chair of the G77 plus China, we will do everything possible
to advance the interests of the South, including in the context of the
continuing WTO negotiations, and the urgent challenge to reform the United
Nations, including the Security Council.

We remain actively engaged to help find solutions to the various matters
relating to the Israel-Palestine and Iranian issues. We are committed to
the pursuit of negotiated agreements in this regard, consistent with our
long-held views in favour of the formation of a State of Palestine,
security for Israel, nonproliferation of nuclear weapons and the use of
nuclear technology for peaceful purposes.

Two anniversaries that we will commemorate this year will serve to
emphasise the bonds that tie us to the rest of the world. These are the
centenary of Satyagraha, the nonviolent struggle started by Mahatma Gandhi
in our country in 1906 and continued in India, and the 20th anniversary of
the violent death of President Samora Machel in our country in 1986 in a
plane crash that still requires a satisfactory explanation. [Applause.]

Next week we will host a meeting of the Progressive Governance Group, which
will bring to our country important leaders from all corners of the globe.
Their presence in our country will communicate the message that we cannot
and will not walk away from our internationalist responsibility to add our
voice to the global effort to create a better world of peace, democracy, a
just world order and prosperity for all nations.

Clearly the masses of our people are convinced that our country has entered
its Age of Hope. They believe that the country they love, their only
homeland, will not disappoint their expectation of an accelerated advance
towards the day when they will be liberated from the suffocating tentacles
of the legacy of colonialism and apartheid.

They are confident that what our country has done to move us away from our
apartheid past has created the conditions for them to appropriate God’s
blessing to the Prophet Isaiah:


   For you shall go out with joy,
   and be led out in peace;
   the mountains and the hills
   shall break forth into singing before you,
   and all the trees of the field shall clap their hands.

[Applause.]

It is up to all of us, through our National Effort, to build a winning
nation, to do all the things that will ensure that the mountains and the
hills of our country break forth into singing before all our people, and
all the trees of the field clap their hands to applaud the people’s season
of joy.

I thank you very much. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order, hon members. I thank the hon President.

The Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces adjourned the Joint
Sitting at 12:06.


