---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 31 October 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2006-10-31
---

TUESDAY, 31 OCTOBER 2006
                                    ____




              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:02.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon members, I would
like to welcome all the hon national Ministers and Deputy Ministers present
here this afternoon. Please feel welcome.

I have been informed that the Whippery has agreed that there will be no
Notices of Motion or Motions without Notice today. Before we proceed to
Questions, I would like to inform members that the Minister of Health and
the Minister of Social Development are unable to attend the plenary owing
to other commitments. However, arrangements have been made that the
questions will be responded to in writing, and copies will be circulated
amongst members.


QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY


                       SOCIAL SERVICES AND GOVERNANCE
                                  Cluster 2

MINISTERS:

        Payment of bonuses to Project Consolidate municipal managers

48.   Kgoshi M L Mokoena asked the Minister for Provincial and Local
      Government:

      Whether his department will review the paying of bonuses to managers
      in municipalities that fall under Project Consolidate; if not, why
      not; if so, what are the relevant details?         C155E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Hon Chairperson,
hon members, the answer to the question from the hon Kgoshi Mokoena is as
follows: Bonuses paid to managers in municipalities are based on employment
contracts between municipalities as employers and managers as employees.
These are subject to performance management systems applicable within
municipalities.

The local government municipal performance regulations for municipal
managers and managers directly accountable to municipal managers, which
were promulgated on 1 August 2006, provide for a performance management
system for managers. Based on the outcome of an evaluation of performance,
a performance bonus may be paid in recognition of outstanding performance.

In the light of the aforegoing, it is not possible to reverse decisions
taken by the employers. However, in future we will monitor the application
by those very municipalities of the 2006 regulations.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, I want to thank the Deputy Minister for
the response to my question, which I appreciate very much.

Arising from the response, I want to find out from my Deputy Minister if
this regulation would also apply to those managers whose municipalities
have received qualified reports every year, for the past five years. Do
they also qualify for these incentives?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, I
hear what the hon member is asking, whether those municipalities would pay
their managers even though the Auditor has actually declared that they have
had qualified audit reports. It basically depends on each municipality,
whether to pay them the bonuses. There is no way that we can impose
ourselves on every municipality. But, as I said in the latter statement, we
will, however, monitor how the various municipalities apply this
regulation.

    Report on municipalities that have not appointed CFOs and steps taken

49.   Kgoshi M L Mokoena asked the Minister for Provincial and Local
      Government:

      Whether he will table a report on municipalities that have not
      appointed chief financial officers and the steps that are being taken
      by them to address the matter; if not, why not; if so, what measures?
                                                         C156E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Madam Chair, the
answer to question 49 by the hon Kgoshi Mokoena is: There is a joint
programme of support managed by National Treasury and the Department of
Provincial and Local Government, in conjunction with the Development Bank
of SA DBSA.

The National Treasury has, in respect of metros and secondary cities,
appointed experienced financial managers to act as mentors to chief
financial officers. On the other hand, the Department of Provincial and
Local Government, DPLG, and the DBSA have employed retired town clerks as
mentors to chief financial officers in the smaller municipalities.
All municipalities have been advised to employ CFOs as part of our
monitoring work, as DPLG reports will be compiled on an ongoing basis
regarding progress made by municipalities in this regard.

Mr T S RALANE: Deputy Minister, in view of the fact that the municipal
systems improvement grant has been underperforming for the past three
years, precisely because of the CFOs not being employed in municipalities,
what is the department doing about this?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, the
question is a new one. Therefore I advise the hon member to table the
question for the next sitting.


           Number of learners fed through School Nutrition Scheme


50.   Ms N F Mazibuko asked the Minister of Education:

      (a) How many learners have been fed through the School Nutrition
      Scheme at primary and secondary schools and (b) what percentage of the
      budget has already been utilised to feed these learners?
                                                   C196E

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, the question concerns the number of
learners that are being fed through the School Nutrition Scheme at primary
and secondary levels. The reply is as follows: The School Nutrition Scheme
provides school meals for 5 996 050 learners at 18 039 schools.

The programme targets primary school learners in areas where poverty levels
are greatest. However, the Northern Cape and the Western Cape have extended
the programme to some secondary schools. The Western Cape provides school
meals to 21 000 learners in a total of 116 quintile 1 and quintile 2
secondary schools, while the Northern Cape provides school meals to 59 862
learners in 101 quintiles 1 and 2 secondary schools. That deals with the
first part of the question.

With respect to the allocation for the programme in this financial year the
allocation is R1,9 billion of which 47,9% has been spent to date.

Mr E M SOGONI: Thank you, Deputy Chairperson. Hon Minister, do all
provinces feed children every day, because some provinces have indicated
that they only feed them three days a week? If that is the case, is the
department doing anything to rectify that?

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: The majority of provinces provide food every
day. Some provide the feeding through the scheme itself, while others
utilise goods that are generated from school gardens. We encourage schools
to establish school gardens and to use the produce from there for
additional meals that would be provided to children.

However, provinces are only able to feed school children in terms of the
budget that they have available to them for this purpose. So, some may be
constrained through budget issues in terms of providing food each day of
the school year.

One of the provinces that may find itself in this difficulty is the Eastern
Cape, but I know that the province has added more funding in order to try
and improve access to nutrition for children in its primary schools.

Mr B J TOLO: Chairperson, I just want to find out from the Minister if the
number of learners that she has actually quoted that is on this nutrition
programme, if it includes all the deserving learners?

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: The chairperson of the select committee asks a
very important question. The number is probably not indicative in terms of
all deserving learners because there may very well be children from the
same home - one in a primary school that has the feeding scheme and another
one in a secondary school that does not have it.

As you have heard, two provinces, the Western Cape and the Northern Cape,
are feeding learners up to the primary school level in quintiles 1 and 2
schools. So, children in the other provinces, who are deserving of
nutritional support but are at secondary school, would not enjoy such
access.
If by “deserving” you refer to children from the same poor family, but who
are in different parts of the schooling system, clearly we are not feeding
all children who are poor. But we do believe that those children in primary
schools who are receiving food, the R5,9 million almost R6 million now, are
children who deserve to be fed and who are in need of nutrition.

Mr T S RALANE: Chairperson, I hope this question is not unfair. Has the
department or have the provinces done a study just to establish the reasons
why, for instance, if you look at the report of the Intergovernmental
Fiscal Relations, especially on school nutrition, the Free State’s grows
phenomenally – it is about 39% - and yet Mpumalanga decreases by –2%. Why
are there these kind of disparities?

And why, for instance, do you have so many of these numbers going very,
very low and many of these provinces going very high in the context of this
nutrition? Has the national department and provinces done a study to
establish what exactly the reasons are for these growths and decreases in
terms of feeding?

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, we have not done a study and
probably it would be important to do one. There are all sorts of reasons
that may impact on levels of funding allocated to the feeding scheme and
the fluctuations could be due to student movement numbers. So, one would
have to investigate why there are such shifts. The Free State, for example,
has had a large migration of students to other provinces. So, one would
have to study why it has an increase in its budget.

Also, of course, the fluctuations could be due to the fact that the
Department of Education took over the national nutrition programme in 2004
and at the beginning we couldn’t offer the scheme to all schools that
merited having the scheme available to them.

So, it would have taken quite some time to get to a point where we would be
able to reach all the schools that we needed to reach, and that may be
another reason why the Free State is reaching many more farm schools than
it might have done in the last financial year.

So, there is a range of reasons that one could look at. It was our view
that after two years of implementing the programme we are not at a point
where we would feel we could carry out a definitive study. But certainly we
would study the intergovernmental review report.

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, the Minister explained to us that the
Northern Cape and the Western Cape are already feeding some of the
secondary schools learners. I would just like to know from the hon
Minister, is there perhaps a possibility that in the near future the other
provinces could also do likewise by implementing the nutrition programme in
secondary schools?
The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, of course, one of the things we
should recognise is that the two provinces we are referring to have the
lowest numbers of learners in the country and therefore they should reach
many more children.

In terms of extending, what we have done is that we have a number of food
gardens established at all the schools that are part of the scheme and we
encourage them to share their produce with schools in the vicinity.
Therefore secondary schools that may need such assistance would get it.

But, certainly, where there is great need it would be the view of the
Department of Education that we should try and find means to assist. We
have also asked that what schools should do is where a primary school has a
garden and a secondary school doesn’t, the primary school children,
interestingly, should work with the secondary school children to help them
start a garden.

So, that is the kind of learning we have seen and that is what we really
would want to encourage.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Minister, I would just like to ask, in the past there
were problems with certain service providers getting their payments
timeously. Have those problems been sorted out or are they still
experiencing the same problems and, if so, could you please indicate in
which provinces those problems occur?
The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, I think there has been significant
improvement in the payment of invoices, because we have tried to use a
different system in contrast to the past. Of course, our Public Finance
Management Act regulations do require that we pay in a set time. So, we
have had improvements.

There has been some investigation in the Eastern Cape with respect to
service providers; the use of co-operatives as contrasted with established
businesses. But, even that didn’t lead to a stop in payments.

We are really cognisant of the fact that late payment of invoices can lead
to the failure of a small or medium-sized business. Therefore, we really
try to get our systems right to ensure that we do meet our obligations on
time.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon
Minister of Education. I would like to remind the members of the House that
only four supplementary questions are allowed per question and nothing
more.

 The Second National Operator, Telkom infrastructure, better services and/or
                                lower prices

52.   Mr J M Sibiya asked the Minister of Communications:

      (1)   When will the Second National Operator (SNO) become operational;

      (2)   whether the SNO has any plans to roll out its own
           infrastructure; if so, what plans; if not,

      (3)   whether the SNO will piggy-back off Telkom’s infrastructure; if
           so, why;

      (4)   whether consumers can expect more and better services and/or
           lower prices once the SNO becomes operational; if not, why not;
           if so, what are the relevant details?        C220E

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Thank you, Chairperson. The reply to
Question 52 is as follows: The Second National Operator, called Neotel, was
launched on 31 August 2006, so it is in operation. This Second National
Operator’s licence stipulates that the licensee shall be entitled to
construct, to maintain and to use the public switched telephone network in
the country.

However, the company is also allowed to use the telecommunications
facilities of Telkom for a period of two years, as is stated in its licence
or where we actually asked for an ITA, an invitation to apply. This allows
it to use the facilities for two years under what is called a facilities
leasing agreement. After the period of two years, the licensee can still
use Telkom’s facilities according to commercial agreements and certain
stipulated regulations that are then set by the Independent Communications
Authority of SA.

The answer to the fourth part of the question is that the introduction of
the Second National Operator will give consumers more choice in terms of
the services being offered by other operators. The prices to be offered are
not yet available. However, the prices are to be approved by the
communications authority based on what are called the COA/CAM regulations,
which are regulations in terms of Commonwealth standards. Thank you,
Chairperson.

Mr S SHICEKA: Thank you, Deputy Chair. I’d like to ask the Minister of
Communications what the other benefits are that the consumers or customers
could expect from the telecommunications industry after Neotel has been
rolled out, as it has already been launched.

The other question is: Has any study been conducted to check whether South
Africans are more interested in using their land lines as opposed to mobile
telecommunications, given the fact that many people are using mobiles? If
you go to the rural areas, the bundus or anywhere, people are using mobiles
because they can have their mobiles with them all the time. Is there any
possibility that this industry will develop the landlines, or is this
industry on its last legs, so to speak? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Thank you, Chairperson. There may not be
immediate benefits that ordinary people will see. But, certainly, in the
business sector, those differences will be felt and seen almost
immediately.

The benefits will be in terms of prices, but there will also be benefits in
terms of the different kinds of services offered. We are already
experiencing a rush for the provision of different kinds of services to
people and that, hopefully, will bring prices down.

We will have much greater competition, because the laws that we passed
earlier this year allow now for greater competition and do make a
distinction between those that work on different kinds of technologies,
including the possibility of using some of the spectra that were normally
allocated for different purposes. This opens up the market. So this may not
necessarily be as a result of the SNO, but because of the liberalisation of
the regulations.

We are likely to see some drastic reductions in prices, which will be of
benefit. The second operator is certainly very aggressive in terms of the
kinds of competition it wants to introduce, and that is why it took its
time. Between August and now we have not been able to see that immediately,
but I’m sure that towards Christmas time we will begin to experience some
of the benefits.

With regard to the second question, we have not commissioned a study, but
it is something that is constantly being looked at. It is quite clear that
there has been a downturn in the use of land lines and a tremendous upswing
in the use of cellular telephony, because it is much more convenient for
people. The infrastructure that you have to lay out is a very different
kind of infrastructure that is much cheaper.

The fact that mobiles have what is called the prepaid system, as everyone
knows, has also made access for people much easier as they are able to
determine how much airtime they want to use and how much they want to pay.

This has extended the use of mobile telephony by enormous proportions, not
only in South Africa but also on the whole of the continent. This is
because the infrastructure on the continent not having been as well
developed has meant that mobile telephony has burgeoned in Africa much more
than in any other part of the world. So we do see more of that. Thank you.

              Roll-out of affordable broadband in South Africa

53.   Ms N D Ntwanambi asked the Minister of Communications:

      (1)   (a) What has been done to expedite the roll-out of affordable
           broadband in South Africa, (b) what are the timeframes and (c)
           what are the social and economic implications;

      (2)   whether broadband will be accessible and affordable to ordinary
           South Africans, especially to people located in marginalised and
           rural areas; if not, why not?                C221E

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: This question deals with the rolling out of
affordable broadband in South Africa. As I mentioned earlier on, we have
set the legislative and regulatory framework in place for people to be able
to construct their own infrastructure or facilities, for example if you
have a licence. Not many of the people have as yet taken it up, but clearly
when competition comes in, they will.

You will have noticed from the Minister of Finance’s budget speeches that
government itself has decided that it should also put in some resources
into the building of a massive infrastructure called “Your Highway”. Once
that is internalised, we will certainly see much more expansion of
broadband. The legislative environment has now been created.

However, because of the technicality and complexity of the interconnection
of what is called the local loop - the last stop before you arrive home is
called the local loop - ... to unbundle that is a complex thing. We have
set up a committee regarding broadband called the Local Loop Unbundling
Committee, to make sure that when we do that we don’t cause undue
difficulties in the communications industry. The committee has been set up;
it is working and it will give us recommendations as to how we can unbundle
the local loop. This will very likely, drastically reduce the prices.

Most of the people who will feel the reduction of the prices in the local
loop will be those that are actually on the fixed lines, and so on. It will
certainly also spread to other areas. We believe that this will also
catalyse the second economy, because more people will then be able to use
broadband and, therefore, bring different kinds of services that have
traditionally not been used by the second economy. In doing so and by
having this kind of broadband, it will also reduce the cost of doing
business in South Africa because that has been a great challenge for us.

Once the things that I have mentioned have been done, the broadband will be
accessible to ordinary people. We must understand that we will have two
types – we will have the fixed broadband and the mobile broadband. The
former will come in the form of, for example, your fibre optics and the
second one will be your wireless broadband.

That wireless broadband can be in smaller areas and larger areas, for
example five or 10 km a maximum and then those that would be 50 km. The
smaller one would be broadband, for example, over a particular city area or
over a building, which would then allow for the use of that broadband,
whereas the 50 km would be like a small town. So, in that way, ordinary
people will be able to have access to that broadband and be able to use it
in their businesses, hopefully in the schools, clinics, etc. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr J M SIBIYA: Thank you, Chair. ICT, Information and Communication
Technology, Minister, is a very important thing in terms of ensuring that
as South Africa and Africa, we are able to jump the digital divide. Are
there any discussions that have been conducted in this respect to ensure
... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Will all members
please switch off their cellphones.

Mr J M SIBIYA: ... in Africa as a whole the issue of broadband - because it
is very critical that it is at the centre of activities - is also brought
on board? As you know, South Africa is one of the leading countries in
ensuring that Africa is able to communicate with itself and the world. Now,
if there is any structure of the Ministers that discusses issues of the
ICT, are there any discussions, in that structure, which it has conducted
in respect of the broadband being extended to the whole of Africa? I thank
you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Yes, hon member, there have been such
discussions within South Africa, but also continentwide. As you also know
that under the AU we have what is called regional economic sections – five
of them. So, with us, even in SADC, certainly, this has been actively
pursued; but also within Eastern and Southern Africa this has been actively
pursued.

You will also have heard that we have embarked on an undersea cable to link
up parts of East Africa. However, the project also says that countries that
are landlocked should be able to be partners in the undersea cable, even if
they are not situated on the coast itself, so that they can, once they are
linked to that cable, develop a terrestrial cable either jointly or within
their countries.

This will help us to have this connection among or between African
countries in the region, but between all other African countries
irrespective of which regions they come from and, therefore, also link them
to the outside world.

So, there is something being done on the Eastern side and so there is
already one that is being conceptualised, because there is one that exists
on the Western side. It is almost at full capacity and people are already
thinking about the second cable that can be linked. We will be able to
connect faster, the East, West, North and South. So, there have been
discussions.

The importance of this for us as South Africans is that with the broadband
you will not only be able to communicate but also send enormous amounts of
data, images, in other words pictures, etc. What it would mean for ordinary
people is that they could be in a clinic where their X-rays are being sent
through to Cape Town, Bloemfontein or Johannesburg. Suppose all doctors had
this in their hospitals and let’s say they have a complicated case that
they need to discuss, they could all discuss it because the new
infrastructure would make it possible for them to do so.

It is also for the financial services sectors where moneys have to be
transferred. So, it will help ordinary people to be able to have money
transferred from banks, etc, even in rural areas, once the broadband can
reach those areas. I thank you. [Applause.]


         Palliative care as component of social work qualifications


55.   Ms H Lamoela asked the Minister of Education:

      Whether, in light of the growing need for social workers to manage the
      consequences of the HIV/Aids epidemic, it is required that degrees and
      diplomas for social work include a specific component on palliative
      care; if not, (a) why not and (b) what steps are being taken to
      rectify this situation; if so, what are the relevant details?
                             C276E

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, the response to both parts of the
question is that the curriculum for higher education programmes, including
social work, is determined by universities themselves, of course in
conjunction and collaboration with the relevant professional bodies as
appropriate. Therefore I, as Minister, do not determine the content of
academic programmes at universities.

However, I am aware that most institutions are increasingly responding to
the need to include issues relating to HIV and Aids in all academic
programmes that they offer. In this regard, the Department of Education and
the higher education sector through Higher Education South Africa, Hesa,
are running a donor-funded programme – Higher Education Aids - which is
addressing a whole range of matters on this subject that impinge on
university students, university life, as well as looking at how you
integrate HIV and Aids matters into the curriculum.

Mr S SHICEKA: Minister, are the institutions of higher learning being
sensitised to be able to respond to the challenges that the country is
experiencing and is facing? My only experience is that - including the
issues that have been raised here - you find that you are taught old things
because people sit in universities without having practical experience of
what is happening. Is there any way of ensuring that they are grounded and
responsive to the needs of the country?
The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, usually universities are leaders in
intellectual thought in most societies of the world. So they shouldn’t need
to be pushed to lead in terms of development of particular programmes,
modernising of curricular, as well as responsiveness to national need and
interest.

We, of course, come from a particular history where we’ve not always had
such responsiveness. We are working with institutions to strengthen the
ability of higher education to act in a manner that supports the
developmental objectives of South Africa. We are engaged with institutions
on a consistent basis. I have regular meetings with the leadership of Hesa.
We do meet with student organisations and student leaders from the various
campuses. And these matters are the subjects of a great deal of discussion.

Just yesterday, we had a half-day seminar with the leadership in higher
education where a paper was presented concerning throughput and success
rates in higher education. It really began to alert our universities to the
need to look at the current curriculum frameworks and the degree to which
they may be unresponsive to emerging needs in the country. So, these are
matters that are alive and which we do deliberate upon.

    Steps to clarify results of interpretation of latest Upper Limits of
                   Remuneration for Municipal Councillors

  57. Mr A Watson asked the Minister for Provincial and Local
      Government:


      Whether his department is taking any steps to clarify the confusion
      and consequential inconsistent interpretation of the latest
      publication of the Upper Limits of Remuneration for Municipal
      Councillors; if not, why not; if so, what steps?   C281E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Madam Chairperson,
I would like to firstly reassure the hon Mr Watson that there is no
confusion. The hon member has not provided us with the information and the
basis on which he has formed an opinion. However, our department is always
available to offer assistance to those municipalities which on certain
occasions do experience difficulty with the implementation of a Government
Notice, relating to the termination of upper limits for the remuneration of
councillors.

Whenever such instances do arise, the department clarifies matters at
formal meetings of the relevant intergovernmental relations structures and
through correspondence.

Mr A WATSON: Hon Minister, I would have thought that since the confusion is
so well known throughout the country, the department would also be aware of
it. An example is that the new determinations have also changed the format
for determining whether a municipality is a grade one, two, three, four,
five or six regarding the purpose of determining salaries.

In doing that, all grade five municipalities, or most of them – certainly
all of them in Mpumalanga - have been reduced to grade four, which in
effect means that councillors now get less than what they got before the
increased salaries. This is causing a lot of problems. If the department is
not aware of it, then I can understand why there’s confusion in so many
municipalities concerning other matters. It’s really an urgent thing. The
department must give attention to it and clarify the matter.

Councillors have been paid wrong salaries. They already have to pay back
between R20 000 and R50 000 at this stage. So please don’t tell me there’s
no confusion.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Hon Chairperson, I
still maintain that the department clarifies matters at formal meetings of
the relevant intergovernmental relations structures and through
correspondence. Government has adopted an intergovernmental framework, and
that’s where matters are clarified.

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, please let me ask the Deputy Minister for the
third time to answer my question. The Constitution, despite any formal
meetings or bodies that exist, determines that the executive has to be
responsive to Parliament in the first place. And I am fully entitled to ask
the Deputy Minister and her department a question. If they can’t answer the
question, it is better to say so rather than to come with circumvents.

Now, for the third time, would the Minister please answer me by telling me
what steps have been taken to rectify the confusion that exists regarding
this publication?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Hon Chairperson, I
don’t know how to answer this question. Maybe I should speak in Sesotho
because initially I had said that Mr Watson must bring concrete evidence.
We have not been provided with that evidence so that the department can
look into the matter – whether it’s in Mpumalanga or Gauteng. That kind of
information that I’ve actually asked from Mr Watson has not been submitted.
So I don’t understand when he raves on and says that we are refusing to
answer him. We can’t answer on something that we don’t have concrete
information about.

Mr A WATSON: I will make a follow-up with a written question.

   Decline in learner enrolment in Free State and possible redeployment of
                                  educators

59.   Mr T S Setona asked the Minister of Education:

      (1)   What is the cause of the decline in the enrolment of learners in
           some schools in the Free State, necessitating possible
           redeployment of educators to other schools;

      (2)   whether her department has conducted any research into this
           phenomenon; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
           details?
                 C286E

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: I was a bit confused for a moment, because the
Question Paper has different numbering, Chairperson. It did cause us some
difficulty, this change in numbering, but here is the response.

According to the Free State Department of Education, the drop in learner
enrolments is mainly attributable to families moving from the Free State to
Gauteng and other provinces, in pursuit of new employment opportunities. In
particular, the department points out that this may be related to the fact
that there has been a decline in mining activity in the Free State, and
therefore it is a great loss of persons previously employed in the mining
industry.

The information that I referred to has been provided to the Department of
Education by school principals. At this point we have not conducted any
research with regard to changing enrolments due to internal migration.

I would like to add to the question the matter of migration of students and
the changing enrolment patterns, which tends to occur at the beginning of
the year without any notice to the Department of Education. It is often
those parents who appear in schools just as the schools open and demand
that the children be registered.

What we are doing is developing a national learner records database as the
national Department of Education, in collaboration with the provincial
departments of education, so that, for the first time, once we have this
database, we will be able to track children if they move from one school to
another. At the moment you cannot. It is very difficult. You need a
national tracking system, which allows you to actually know from year to
year what the changing patterns of enrolment are, and how to organise the
system so that it can effectively meet the administrative and other
challenges relating to enrolment patterns.


                Single Public Service and placement of staff


62.   Mr Z C Ntuli asked the Minister for the Public Service and
      Administration:

      When will (a) there be a single Public Service and (b) the placement
      of staff be completed?                                        C297E

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Thank you very
much, Chairperson. On this particular question I would like to start by
ensuring that we have a common understanding of the single Public Service.

I want to state that what we are looking at is ensuring that we get the
Department of Public Service and the Department of Local Government to work
together, in order to facilitate a single integrated type of service
delivery, and again in order to ensure that citizens receive services at
their convenience, in a manner in which the fragmentation that is currently
there in instances of service delivery does not occur.

Now for this to happen there is a need for co-operative institutional
arrangements and that is the issue that I will come back to later.

Central to the establishment of a single Public Service is the enactment of
enabling legislation. Significant progress has been made in this regard and
a draft Bill is currently being finalised in consultation with the
concerned departments, and it is the intention that we submit this
legislation to Cabinet later in November 2006.

Subsequent to this, obviously the Bill will be published for stakeholder
comment, and we foresee that consultation will take place over the period
of January and February 2007 - prior to it being resubmitted to Cabinet and
then submitted to Parliament. Clearly it is a matter that the NCOP will
have to engage itself in. Arising from the adoption of such legislation by
Parliament, we see ourselves as publishing regulations and there is a
complete timetable for this.

Our anticipation is that the single Public Service Act and regulations will
commence in about March 2009. I think one should emphasise that this will
be informed by the nature of consultations and inputs that come out of the
public consultation process.

Parallel to the legislative process itself, there are task teams
responsible for implementation of the work plan for a single Public
Service. They have commenced their work, where they were looking at the
norms and standards on information and communication technology. They are
looking at human resource management and human resource development, as
well as service delivery and anticorruption work.

Work has also commenced on cascading Batho Pele to the local government
level - as you are aware - and because Batho Pele has been adopted by the
Department of Public Service and Administration it was seen as something
not necessarily applicable to the Department of Local Government. But I
think one can say that what is very positive, is the fact that it is
cascading down to local government departments and it has been given
impetus in terms of its implementation within the Public Service.
The single Public Service legislation will enable common norms and
standards for human resource management and development, as I have stated
earlier, as well as remuneration and conditions of service within the
single Public Service. There is also going to be the complexity and
challenge of dealing with labour relations within this framework, because
we would have to look at how that is managed.

I think there is bit of nervousness from some of the unions who are
operating in the local government sphere, who may just be concerned about
their status. But there is no intention to disrupt the role of those
unions, and I want to emphasise that we are neither looking at changing the
Public Service, nor changing the Constitution necessarily. What we are
looking at is how we could facilitate a better way of ensuring integrated
service delivery.

And for that to happen we should be able to facilitate greater mobility of
public servants across the various spheres of government. If we talk about
co-operative governance, we also need to ensure that our legal and
regulatory framework facilitates that.

Mr Z C NTULI: Chairperson, on subsection (b), I just need to find out
whether the placement has been completed?

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: On subsection (b),
in terms of the broader human resource component of the Public Service,
there has not been a completion of the placement of all staff, but in terms
of those departments such as Water Affairs, Health and others, that process
has virtually been completed.

There are specific departments that were looking at relocation of staff in
the local government sphere. There are still some challenges that are being
resolved, but in terms of the regulatory environment for their placement,
that has been resolved some time ago.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, arising from the Hon Minister’s appetising
reply, could I find out, through the hon Chairperson, whether the staff in
question will include, I repeat, will include staff in the offices of
traditional leaders?

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: This is quite a
challenging question. I have not done a review or an assessment of the
staff in the offices of the traditional authorities, so it is quite
difficult to look at it. When we look clearly at a single Public Service,
our endeavour is to actually deepen and develop our human resource base, so
we would like to ensure that we have the most competent people placed
correctly across the Public Service.

At this point in time we may have people located at the national level who
may add greater value in the municipality or probably within the
traditional authority. Similarly, we may have someone in the traditional
authority who we feel should instead be a chief executive officer of a
parastatal; but we will only be able to determine that once we have done an
audit of what their skills and competencies are across the various arms of
government, if I may put it in that way.

Mr S SHICEKA: Chairperson, the issue of the single Public Service is quite
a fascinating one, about which we can even learn from our neighbours in
Botswana on what they are doing in terms of horizontal and vertical
mobility. However, I was with the Public Service Commission today. What is
going to be the role of the Public Service Commission, because at the local
level there is no Public Service Commission? When I raised the question in
the meeting they were not clear about what is expected of them as an
institution in that eventuality.

The last point is on the issue of other consequences and what has been
planned around them. One of them, for example, is the disparity of
salaries, especially since the Department of Provincial and Local
Government is paying better salaries compared to other spheres of
government. How long is it going to take to ensure that there is parity in
terms of the vision around planning? In that respect are we going to be
able to see that single Public Service within our lifetime?

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, it
depends on whether the hon Shiceka intends living a short life or a long
one ... [Laughter.] ... but we will give him the benefit of the doubt.

First and foremost, I will agree that the single Public Service is quite
complex and fascinating. It is complex in terms of how we configure it, but
in terms of the outcome, I think it is quite straightforward. We want
integrated service delivery to the citizens and it does not matter whether
citizens enter a local government office or a provincial office, the
provision of services should be there, irrespective of the type of service
the citizens want to reach. It is about being able to receive the chain of
services from birth to death, whether we use the ICTs for development and
accessibilities, or otherwise.

That is why we would like to see a situation whereby the multipurpose
community centres become exactly that, and that is providing services or
the basket of services that the citizens require. What is the role of the
Public Service Commission? I do not know if they have informed you that I
had just done a briefing to them at the last plenary meeting, on the single
Public Service.

Yes, indeed, if they narrowly followed the Constitutional mandate, their
mandate is to be responsible for the Public Service, which is national and
provincial government. However, I think we cannot build Chinese walls, and
I would humbly say that the Public Service Commission has a role to play at
local government level if we were to look at the provision of services.

Already we have had a situation where commissioners have engaged in
questions relating to Batho Pele and otherwise. They are dealing with this
vexed question.

But remember, it is Parliament that reviews the mandates of chapter 9 and
10 institutions. It is not for me as a member of the executive to do so,
but as a parliamentarian I could advise and if I could advise, I would see
it through logically. If we talk about integrated and similar service
delivery, let there be a role for the commission at local authority level
as well.

In terms of parity in relation to remuneration or salaries, we clearly have
... and I have stated earlier that we are hoping that by January 2009, the
single Public Service regulations will be, in principle, considered for
approval and that possibly by January 2009 it could be gazetted.

This depends on the engagement that we will have next year, and the year
after that on the legislation. Remember that you will have a big role; it
is not going to be an easy task, because there are a number of stakeholders
here and I do not think that all stakeholders are equally comfortable with
the concept of a single Public Service. The reason is because some see it
as taking the rights and powers away from them, which is not the intention
of a single Public Service. We would then be able to talk, not necessarily
about parity, but about the alignment, because I think we must have
flexibility around salary bands and remuneration.

If you look at the metros and you look at the Public Service, directors-
general and others, there is definitely a situation where your municipal
managers get paid considerably more than directors- general in national and
provincial departments. It is not across all municipalities horizontally,
where their salaries are more than that in the Public Service, but the hon
member having operated at provincial level around local government, knows
that it depends on the size of the municipalities and so on, and that
impacts on the salary levels.

But this is a matter that we are considering. It is a matter for discussion
that we do want to take forward. Is it going to happen in our lifetime, if
this House is active it should, and if our lifetime is the electoral
period, let us see what we can do?

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Chairperson, hon Minister, this is a rather controversial
issue, but it does exist. I want to firstly deal with the question of
employment giving opportunities to the local people. This will call for
good training in our further education and training colleges or nursing or
whatever college which exist, or even at our universities.

There are these jealousies when people think that those people who do not
belong to a place seem to be taking their positions. A case that comes to
mind is the one about the nurses who were in the Eastern Cape province and
who came from the KwaZulu-Natal province. They could not perform their
duties simply because they came from outside the Eastern Cape province, and
the question was how could nurses from KwaZulu-Natal be employed in the
Eastern Cape when there are unemployed nurses in the Eastern Cape?

I do not know how we are going to handle this, but it will be necessary for
our legislation to state that the local people should come forward first
and be interviewed and, if at all, they do not qualify, then we can
consider those who come from outside the area in question.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, I
think the one thing that I would like to raise is that when you talk about
the mobility of public servants, let us talk about the police services.
With the Police Service you are generally employed to the Service and not
to a particular post at a police station.

I think we would always want to be able to retain the fact that you want to
have the mobility of your forces. We have seen that when we look at our
history, and that is something which some people want to forget, sometimes
you have the problem that if you have people in a particular area who may
just become a bit contaminated by local problems and realities, then you
need to move them out to actually give them a broader scope and experience
by going to other places, and bringing in a fresh and different team into a
particular area.

The whole issue of mobility in the Public Service is not to deprive local
people from access to employment, but it is in order to bring a different
set of experiences; a different skills base; and if there may be an absence
of those skills, and so on.

I do not think that you will have the same nervousness now when you bring
in nurses from KwaZulu-Natal to the Eastern Cape or vice versa. We have a
shortage of nurses at this point in time. When you look at our medical
personnel, we have brought in doctors from different parts of the world
into certain areas, and they have actually learned isiXhosa surprisingly
well, and they speak it better than some of us who have been around, so
that they know what the heart and the kidneys are in isiXhosa, and so on.

There has never been any intention to replace the role of the local skills
set and that is what we would like to see ideally. We would also want to
have a situation were we move people in order for them to gain experiences
or to bring in experience or scarce skills that may not be available, but
with the intention to ensure skills transfer as well.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, as far as Question 60,
to the hon Minister of Housing, is concerned, I am informed that the hon
Minister is sick and therefore the question will stand over. We will go
back to Question 61, to the Minister for Provincial and Local Government.

       Project Consolidate and improved performance by municipalities

61.   Mr S Shiceka asked the Minister for Provincial and Local Government:

      (1)   For how long will Project Consolidate be in place in
           municipalities;

      (2)   whether any process of evaluating and rating municipalities as
           to whether they are improving their performance under this
           project is in place; if not, why not; if so, how many
           municipalities (a) are about to come out of Project Consolidate
           and (b) will continue to be supported?       C294E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Madam Chair, the
answer to question 61 from the hon Shiceka is as follows: Project
Consolidate was launched in October 2004 as an extraordinary two-year
initiative to build up and strengthen the capacity of targeted
municipalities. Thus, Project Consolidate in its current form will cease to
exist before the end of 2006. Currently, it is being wound down, and it
will be replaced by a new programme in terms of the five-year plan for the
provision of hands-on support to the various municipalities.

Secondly, key performance indicators have been developed to assess the
capacity, capability and the performance of targeted municipalities. These
relate to municipal transformation and institutional development; to basic
services and infrastructure; to local economic development, financial
viability and financial management; and, lastly, to good governance and
public participation.

A comprehensive assessment of progress by each of these municipalities is
currently under way. Current indications are that some municipalities are
making significant progress, while others are still experiencing
difficulties. Poorly performing municipalities are being closely monitored
by the national government and the relevant provincial departments.

Lastly, all the relevant details will be included in the assessment report
of Project Consolidate, which will be available in January 2007.
Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, I thank the Minister for the concise
reply. Arising from the reply, I want to find out from the hon Deputy
Minister if the envisaged new programme to replace Project Consolidate is
going to be implemented by the same managers in those municipalities, or
are there other mechanisms to make sure that it is going to be implemented
by people who are well trained?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, hon
Kgoshi Mokoena, in terms of the Project Consolidate programme, the
department has, as we speak, in fact deployed many skilled personnel to the
various municipalities, particularly to the struggling municipalities,
whether they are highly skilled people who can actually look after the
finances of the municipalities, etc. They are already on the ground and are
assisting the local municipalities with the lack of skills that we have
been experiencing.

What would happen with the new programme is that we will maintain those
highly skilled personnel that we have actually called upon throughout the
country to continue assisting those municipalities. Some of the
municipalities are not as bad, but others are quite bad. We will then do
this audit, and see where these skills need to be maintained and also for
this new programme to kick in.

Mr T S RALANE: Chair, I would like to ask the Minister whether Siyenzamanje
is a duplication of Project Consolidate or a value added to Project
Consolidate.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Siyenzamanje is an
integrated programme that involves various government departments and not
just the Department of Provincial and Local Government. This is because
what we have to do in terms of the intergovernmental relations formula is
integrated in our programmes so that, for instance, the Department of Water
Affairs and Forestry does not work in one little corner, while the
Department of Provincial and Local Government works alone in another little
corner.

This is so that whenever we do service delivery it makes an impact in a
particular area. But, if we do it individually, it won’t necessarily carry
the impact that we would like to see in improving the lives of our ordinary
people.

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Chairperson, hon Minister, in terms of the pulling out
from the areas in the municipalities that are helped by Project
Consolidate, I wonder if it wouldn’t be better to have the report first and
to assess the performance of whatever has been done before pulling out.
This is because one may find that the people haven’t actually been
satisfied.

If we pull out before the report is written, people will not trust us
anymore. They will say that we come with a programme that leaves them
hanging in the air, and then we pull out, leaving them and throwing them
into something else. I am just wondering if there couldn’t be evaluation
first before pulling out?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, I
think I did say at the end of my response that the report on the assessment
of Project Consolidate would be tabled in January 2007. I did say that in
my response. I think we shouldn’t really view the end of Project
Consolidate’s life term as pulling out. We have a responsibility to our
people to improve their lives.
I did say, in my response as well, that there was a new programme that
would be implemented.

We will then take from that assessment report how we have fared in the
various municipalities with their various problems. This is because
municipalities don’t necessarily have the same problems. They vary in terms
of their problems, and they vary in terms of their lack of skills. So,
let’s wait until January 2007. Once the report has been tabled, we will
then make a proper assessment from an informed position.

 Samdi contribution to skills development and role in building a skills base

63.   Ms F Nyanda asked the Minister for the Public Service and
      Administration:

      (1)   What are the contributions of the SA Management Development
           Institute (Samdi) to skills development;

(2)   whether Samdi is properly capacitated to play its role of building a
skills base in respect of all the citizens; if not, why not; if so, what
are the relevant details?         C298E

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, in
terms of the first part of the question, I think that it is necessary to
state that Samdi has a legal mandate and central role to undertake, or
cause to be undertaken, capacity-building in the Public Service, with
particular focus on developing the professional competence of managers at
various levels.

The strategic priorities of the public sector human resource development
strategy in the current period to which Samdi is seeking to respond, are as
follows: To refine and accelerate the implementation of government’s
comprehensive outcomes-focused programme for capacity development; to
improve the coherence, co-ordination and efficacy of all government’s
policies, institutions and mechanisms responsible for training and capacity
development of the Public Service; and to implement a credible and
comprehensive programme to address strategically scarce skills such as
financial management, communication skills and project management; and, to
ensure that the programme pays attention to the critically important areas
of norms, values, attitudes and orientations that are consistent with the
objectives of the developmental state.

The 2005-06 Samdi annual report indicates that within that financial year,
15 000 officers were trained by Samdi over a total of approximately 80 000
person training days, which is a 21% increase on training days for the
previous year.

Three quarters of the training and development services were delivered by
Samdi itself, or at least by its list of selected, independent training
contractors.

One quarter of the training and development services, especially with
regard to the senior levels of the integrated management development
programme, were rendered by external service providers such as universities
or private sector training organisations appointed by tenders through the
procurement processes.

The second part of the question is whether Samdi is properly capacitated to
play its role of building the skills base. The mandate of Samdi is that of
the Public Service rather than the citizenry as a whole. Government is,
however, as we are all aware, the largest employer in the country, with
over a million people working in national government, in provincial
governments and with approximately 300 000 in local government. The
development of the skills base of the cadres of government employees thus
contributes significantly to the overall skills base of the nation.

Samdi currently applies different modes of delivery to build capacity in
the Public Service, and it has its own core of approximately 20 full-time
trainers. It screens and trains a complement of approximately 120 part-time
associates.

In addition, Samdi has recently established a comprehensive network of
strategic partnerships with a wide range of higher education institutions.
These include the universities of Pretoria, Cape Town, North West, the Free
State, Stellenbosch and Fort Hare, as well as the Tshwane University of
Technology and Unisa. Altogether the work done by these partners has
contributed to the 80 000 person training days that were referred to
earlier.

Now, in terms of how adequate this volume is, on the one hand, it compares
favourably to similar sized schools of government in other countries, for
example in the United Kingdom, albeit that they train people at a more
senior level, and the total of on-board trainers plus associates at Samdi
is similar to that, for example, of Canada.

However, we are involved in a review process right now in which a
ministerial committee has been set up, and they have completed their
report. We are going to consult with the institutions of higher education
on the kind of model proposed; where we are actually looking at Samdi and
reviewing its current model in terms of the way in which it is structured
institutionally.

Mr T S RALANE: Chair, thank you very much. Regarding the Vulindlela Academy
at the DPSA, to what extend is it talking to Samdi in terms of doing the
very same things that they are doing; in other words, the kind of
integration that we see between the two structures?

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: There have been
overtures from the Vulindlela Academy, but I don’t think that we could ...
[Interjections.] I don’t know what has created the laughter here ... maybe
I’ve missed something.

I should say that I don’t think that there is duplication in any way. I
think if we look at the broad needs, there is the ability for everyone to
work in specific environments. But, I don’t get the sense that the
Vulindlela Academy and Samdi’s work are either a duplication or
contradictory in any way whatsoever.

Mr A J L MOSEKI: Chairperson, this is a very tempting continental question.
There is a tendency among our public servants to move to other countries.
This question has to do with when that situation prevails - once the DRC is
free and they go to work there. I just want to check with the Minister if
we are getting ready for that eventuality, because we may lose some of
these public servants.
The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: I think the hon
member is raising a very important question. I think our problem is not
only when the DRC’s presidential election is resolved, and the mobility
thereafter. We currently have a situation with the global environment of
more open labour markets. We’ve seen the mobility of public servants.

We can talk about various sectors, the health sector, for example, in which
the movement is not necessarily on the continent, but to more developed
countries where people follow either the petrodollar, or they go to Europe,
North America and elsewhere. Are we dealing with this eventuality in terms
of skills training?

I think, if I talk specifically about the health sector, you know that
we’ve opened all the nursing colleges. We are reopening them. This was a
Cabinet decision in January this year, and this is very clearly an attempt
for us to do training in order to be able to fill the vacancies that are
there in the various health institutions.

We also need to prepare for the fact that, very clearly, the skills that we
have in South Africa are seen as marketable, and that we should look at
dealing with the fact that people move. But, on the other hand, we’ve also
engaged with developed countries in specific instances and said that we
have problems with this seepage. So this is not just to the developing
world.

Coming back to the issue of the DRC: We‘ve actually placed public servants
to specifically work on collaborative programmes there. We hope that won’t
lead them to leave us, but rather that they’ll develop a new set of skills
and come back to utilise them in South Africa. Thank you.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, let me thank the Minister for the
calculated and well-thought-out response. Arising from the initial response
and in terms of appreciating what Samdi is doing in trying to train our
managers, what are we going to do with those officials, of course looking
at a sunset clause, who have reached the ceiling and are no longer
trainable. Samdi can do whatever it can but, for lack of a better word,
here is this deadwood that is no longer trainable. What are we doing, hon
Minister?

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: The hon Kgoshi is
asking interesting and difficult questions this afternoon. This is broader
than the issue of specifically training by Samdi, but it is a vexed human
resource issue.

Hon member, we do not want to see ourselves as carrying deadwood in the
Public Service. Yesterday I was involved in an imbizo on the West Rand,
specifically in Kagiso. There were about 1 500 public servants attending
that meeting. The nature of the engagement there was very interesting.

We had public servants on the one side of the spectrum who, very clearly,
were interested in how they could better capacitate themselves in service
delivery. This included service workers, cleaners in hospitals, etc, who
were saying, “We would like to be exposed to further skills development; we
want to get into the Abet programmes; we would like to improve our skills.”


On the other side of the spectrum, we had public servants who were just
interested in seeing how they could get better salaries and conditions of
service and, at heart, had no interest in the citizen.

In essence, in response there, I said; “We don’t want to keep within the
Public Service those who cannot bring value.” I think that that is even
more of an issue of training. You correctly said that some of them are
untrainable. Some of them are actually quite indifferent. This is because
an untrainable person suggests that the human mind is no longer open to
stimulation, and I don’t think of people in that way necessarily. But I do
believe that there are people that have an attitude; that they are just
there to draw a salary and don’t have any real contribution to make. We
want those people to bow out.

Now, we do have an instrument at the moment that encourages people to go of
their own volition. This is what we call the employee-initiated severance
package. This package is one in which an employee can actually apply to his
or her supervisor to be discharged. We have had a number of people who have
applied.

The difference between this package and the voluntary severance package is
that unlike the VSP where we could not refuse people who decided to leave,
with the employee-initiated package we can actually refuse and say, “No,
you are not deadwood. We actually think that you have a contribution to
make, but Jack or Sipho sitting next to you is deadwood.” We can’t say this
in that way, but that person would be encouraged to leave.

The leaving of the deadwood is dependent on supervisors and managers doing
very good performance reviews, because if we performance-manage people
well, then we should get rid of them. The theory that people have of it
being difficult to fire people from the Public Service, is because they
refuse to really study the human resource framework that is there and to
use the tools that you can use to discharge people from the Public Service.

Examples of that are quite clear. We’ve actually refined the instrument. If
you were to ask the Public Service Commission, they will tell you that it
is easier to discharge people who are not doing their work. But if managers
don’t want to do the tough things ... They say, “Well, you know there is
the labour relations framework within the Public Service.” That’s just a
cop-out. It’s people who are not willing to manage properly.
Ms A N T MCHUNU: Hon Chairperson, I would like to thank the Minister for
the booklet that was produced on the code of conduct. It is very helpful
indeed.

Now, looking at managers and their role and helping their employees, I
wonder if the training could not include basic epidemiology because we are
haunted by particularly TB and HIV. Epidemiology deals with the diseases
that are prevalent in an area and how they spread.

In this way, each and every manager could be a health educator of sorts
too, because we cannot leave it to health personnel only to deal with the
extent of diseases that are spreading in our country.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Hon member, you
want to say that every public servant must be a health worker: One public
servant, one health worker. I hear that, and I am sure the Minister of
Health will be very positive about this as well.

I do want to say that we do have a health and wellness workplace programme,
and we do have specialised personnel who look at this area of work in terms
of human resource practitioners who look at this issue. I am sure that we
should look at how we deal with these issues.

But, I think, it would be rather difficult for me to make a commitment on
how this is done. I’m sure there could be consideration under some of the
induction programmes that look more broadly at issues around values and so
on. I am not sure whether we can bring that in. But let us think about it.
Let me not make a commitment here today. I do note the concern that was
raised.

    SA impact on public service in Africa and the world and post-conflict
                                 challenges

64.   Mr S Shiceka asked the Minister for the Public Service and
      Administration:

      (1)   What impact does South Africa have on (a) Africa and (b) the
           world in the field of public service;

      (2)   what are the successes and challenges that are particular to
           countries after conflicts have ended?              C299E

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, in
answer to the question, “What impact does South Africa have on Africa and
the world in the field of public service?” I would say that we are playing
a fairly significant role in the area of public service on our continent. I
am currently the Chair of the African Ministers for the public and civil
service. South Africa is playing a role in developing and strengthening the
conceptual framework that determines methods of service delivery.

I think it is also necessary to say that when we look at the level of Ipsa
– International Political Science Association - we also try and look at
developing an alternative approach and theory towards reinventing
government, public administration and governance, with the whole thrust of
taking into account our approach to building a developmental state, and
bearing in mind that it is not the developmental state as defined by the
East Asian Tigers and so on, but one that is very clearly based on the
principles in our Constitution.

The Pan-African Ministers’ programme, chaired by South Africa, has inspired
African member states to focus on the following key governance and public
administration issues. We have looked at the implementation of the African
Public Service Charter. I must say that it was quite a step to have taken,
because the public service across the continent is not homogenous.

We must bear in mind that we also come from different colonial histories,
where we have Francophone Africa, Anglophone Africa and Lusophone Africa,
and different legal and constitutional frameworks informing the nature of
the legal and administrative environment in those countries. But we believe
that there are certain normative values that underpin the Public Service.
Secondly, we are looking at strengthening public sector effectiveness;
rationalising the role of the regional economic communities; improving
human resource development; strengthening anticorruption issues; developing
measures on information and communication technology; as well as supporting
post-conflict reconstruction and management. Regarding that, we have played
a specific role in the DRC, the Sudan, Burundi and so on. We have worked
collaboratively with those countries, as per their request. We don’t lead;
they lead the initiatives and we support that work, in addition to the work
on the Ministers’ committee.

Then there has also been the launch of the African Management Development
Institutes Network. This is the schools of government across the continent
as well as universities, and then of course there has been the recognition
of Public Service Day as well.

In addition to that, regarding the world more broadly, we have also engaged
in both of the UN bodies, that is, firstly, the committee of experts on
public administration. We are playing a role there. We also play an active
role in the International Institute of Administrative Sciences that is
located in Brazil and Belgium. South Africa has just taken over the
presidency of the Commonwealth Association for Public Administration and
Management. We enjoy bilateral relationships with several countries, and I
have referred to Ipsa as well.

What are the successes and challenges that are particular to countries
where the conflict has ended? As a government, our assistance to post-
conflict countries is aimed at rebuilding the Public Service as a critical
contribution to promotion and strengthening of democracy on our continent,
and the building of peace, stability and prosperity.

One example where we have been actively engaged as a government at a
bilateral level has been in assisting the government of southern Sudan.
This is, working very closely with the Department of Foreign Affairs to
resolve conflict and striving for a peaceful and democratically governed
state. There has been collaboration between Samdi in that instance, and the
Department of Foreign Affairs and Unisa to train senior officials from
Southern Sudan in a range of public administration competencies.

In February this year, we had a 31-member delegation that visited for
practical training. They visited both Samdi and DPSA. We had another group
of 38 which completed practical training in September 2006. You are aware
that we are doing very extensive work in the DRC. One of the pieces of work
has been the Public Service census. We have helped them to do their census.
They have been able to uncover ghosts within their Public Service and so
on.

We have also worked on the anti-corruption initiatives. We were involved in
assisting them to establish a school of public service and so on. There is
a lot more that I can talk about, but I would say that our challenge in
certain instances has been the language, in some of these countries. We
clearly need to learn French in order to be able to engage. There are of
course South Africans who do speak French, but within the Public Service we
are grappling with 11 languages and we need to go beyond that.

We would also say that these initiatives are not without challenges, in the
sense that to secure adequate and sustained international support and
funding is one of the most important preconditions for meeting the goals of
post-conflict reconstruction. Let me pause there. We will engage in the
discussion that ensues.

Mr S SHICEKA: Chairperson, the Minister got a bit concerned about the issue
that Vulindlela is making overtures. That was about the use of the term,
nothing else. Ms Matyolo knows what overtures means in our Pondo language.
[Interjections.]

The question that I am raising is whether there is any investment in the
area of research and development, so that we are able to use the cutting-
edge methods and technologies around the public service in Africa and also
benefit from the South-South relations between ourselves, Brazil, India and
so on?

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, maybe
it was an unfortunate language usage, because I am sure that the word
overtures means the same in English as when it is used by the Pondos. I was
not talking about the person Vulindlela, but about the institution, and I
thought that the overture would be less likely in that instance. I will be
sensitive to the hon member’s consideration in future.

In terms of investment in the area of research and development, indeed that
is the area that we are looking at. You are right about cutting-edge
technologies in South-South relations. We can look at this in various ways.
There is an attempt to develop collaboration at the level of governance
that will take this into account.

If you would go back to the Stellenbosch declaration of May 2003, we said,
as one of the points in the declaration, that we would challenge African
academics and intellectual leaders to actively engage with the approach and
content of the programme to ensure that vigorous debate is generated,
assumptions questioned and the programme enriched and improved.

The next point says “request the current work of regional and subregional
institutions to focus on public sector research; data collection and
analysis, knowledge management and learning to be supported and
incorporated in the overall governance and public administration
programme”.

So indeed we are looking at it. We haven’t adequately built that research
capacity. Even regarding South Africa, India and Brazil, we are looking at
how we can do this collaboratively. You are right, regarding the cutting-
edge stuff and there is a lot to be captured, even if we look at the area
of ICT and its usage for rolling out service delivery and so on.

I have just recently been with colleagues from other African countries. I
can talk about the deputy Prime Minister of Namibia, the Minister for the
public service from Kenya, the Minister from Gambia, and a few others.

In terms of the issues that have come up, what is absent is us having a
common research reservoir where we can exchange experiences, because there
are challenges that all of us may face either around capacity-building,
human resource development, or even just on recruitment of staff. We have
experiences to share regarding these matters. Instead of people going to
look at the North for answers, they can find that within the continent.

Chairperson, in response to this issue, one would say that it is something
that we have identified but haven’t done sufficient work to establish.

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Chairperson, this is the last one. If there are voluntary
NGOs here, for instance ministers of religion who are referred to perhaps
as ministers’ fraternities, who are prepared to go and help in any part of
Africa, but then do not have the financial means, would the department be
in a position to assist them with finances to go and help there? They
wouldn’t be working for pay, but just as volunteers.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, I
think that that is the matter that we should place before the door of the
Department of Foreign Affairs. We have not really involved NGOs in the work
and training that we have engaged in on the continent. As I said, we have
collaborated with Unisa in a specific area.

No, we have not done that type of work. We also don’t have resources in our
budget to be able to cover costs, specifically. The instance where we have
seen a large collaboration that has involved NGOs is through election
observer missions. I think you are aware that in the most recent elections
in the DRC we have really seen South Africans taking up the responsibility
of going to monitor those elections. We have seen people across society,
from religious sector to all other sectors, including Members of
Parliament, getting involved.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

The Council adjourned at 15:48.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                           FRIDAY, 27 OCTOBER 2006



TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Finance


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Ombud for
        Financial Services Providers for 2005-2006, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Government Employees Pension
        Fund (GEPF) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 211-2006].

2.    The Minister for Public Enterprises


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Denel Proprietary Limited for
        2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     a) Free Trade Agreement between the European Free Trade Association
        (EFTA) and the Southern African Customs Union (SACU), tabled in
        terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


     b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Free Trade Agreement between the
        European Free Trade Association (EFTA) and the Southern African
        Customs Union (SACU).


4.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


     a) Memorandum of Understanding on the Trilateral and Allied Fields
        between the Governments of the Republic of South Africa, the
        Federal Republic of Brazil and the Republic of India under the
        India-Brazil-South Africa (IBSA) Dialogue Forum, tabled in terms of
        section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


                           MONDAY, 30 OCTOBER 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Council of Provinces


The Chairperson


1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled
    (1)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Economic and Foreign Affairs for consideration:

        (a)      Report of the Auditor-General on the findings identified
             during an investigation into procurement at the Companies and
             Intellectual Property Registration Office (CIPRO) – September
             2006 [RP 245-2006].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Small Enterprises
             Development Agency for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General for the fifteen month period ended on 31 March
             2006.

    (2)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Castle of Good Hope
             for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 214-2005].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Castle of Good Hope
             for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 219-2005].


    (3)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Alexkor Limited for 2005-
             2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


    (4)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises and the Select Committee on Local
        Government and Administration for consideration and report:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Local Government Sector
             Education and Training Authority (LG-Seta) for 2005-2006,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 79-2006].


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Defence


     (a)    Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
        Republic of South Africa and the African Union Contributing
        Resources to the African Union Mission in Burundi (AMIB), tabled in
        terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
        between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
        African Union Contributing Resources to the African Union Mission
        in Burundi (AMIB).


     (c)    Protocol between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
        and the Government of the Republic of Angola on Defence
        Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
        1996.


     (d)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Protocol between the Government of
        the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
        Angola on Defence Co-operation.


     (e)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
        and the Government of the Republic of Belarus on Military-Technical
        Co-operation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
        Constitution, 1996.


     (f)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
        of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic
        of Belarus on Military-Technical Co-operation.

     (g)    Agreement between The Republic of South Africa and the Kingdom
        of Belgium on A Military Partnership, tabled in terms of section
        231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


       h) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Republic of
          South Africa and the Kingdom of Belgium on A Military Partnership.



                          TUESDAY, 31 OCTOBER 2006




ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)     The JTM on 24 October 2006 in terms of Joint Rule 160(3)
        classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:

        a) Transnet Pension Fund Amendment Bill [B 30 – 2006] (National
           Assembly – sec 75)

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration and report:

        (a)      Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the
               Diversity of Cultural Expressions, tabled in terms of
               section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention on the Protection
               and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expression.
    (2)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Economic and Foreign Affairs for consideration and report:

        (a)      Free Trade Agreement between the European Free Trade
              Association (EFTA) and the Southern African Customs Union
              (SACU), tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
              Constitution, 1996.


        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Free Trade Agreement between
              the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) and the Southern
              African Customs Union (SACU).

    (3)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:

           a) A report on the withholding of remuneration of Mr M Matereke,
              an additional magistrate at the Magistrates Court,
              Johannesburg, who is under provisional suspension, in terms
              of section 13(4A)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90
              of 1993).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


       a) Special Report of the Auditor-General on his term of office, 1999
          to 2006 – In support of Democracy [RP 224-2006].


2.    The Minister of Defence

     (a)    Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
          Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
          Chile on Defence Co-operation, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
          of the Constitution, 1996.


     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
          between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
          Government of the Republic of Chile on Defence Co-operation.


     (c)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
          and the Government of the Czech Republic concerning the
          Protection of Classified Defence Information, tabled in terms of
          section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (d)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
          of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Czech
          Republic concerning the Protection of Classified Defence
          Information.


     (e)    Supplementary Arrangement between the Government of the Republic
          of South Africa through its Department of Defence and the Federal
          Ministry of Defence of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning
          the Provision of Support during Exercise Good Hope from 6
          February 2006 to 20 March 2006, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
          of the Constitution, 1996.


     (f)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Supplementary Arrangement between
          the Government of the Republic of South Africa through its
          Department of Defence and the Federal Ministry of Defence of the
          Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Provision of Support
          during Exercise Good Hope from 6 February 2006 to 20 March 2006.


     (g)    Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
          Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
          India concerning the Training of South African Navy Personnel by
          the Indian Navy, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
          Constitution, 1996.


     (h)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
          between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
          Government of the Republic of India concerning the Training of
          South African Navy Personnel by the Indian Navy.


     (i)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
          and the Government of the Republic of India on Supplies of
          Defence Equipment, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
          Constitution, 1996.


     (j)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
          of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the
          Republic of India on Supplies of Defence Equipment.


     (k)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
          as represented by the South African Department of Defence and the
          Government of the Republic of Mali as represented by the Malian
          Ministry of Defence and War Veterans on Defence and Technical Co-
          operation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
          1996.


     (l)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
          of the Republic of South Africa as represented by the South
          African Department of Defence and the Government of the Republic
          of Mali as represented by the Malian Ministry of Defence and War
          Veterans on Defence and Technical Co-operation.


     (m)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
          and the Government of the Russian Federation on Reciprocal
          Protection of Intellectual Property Rights used and established
          in the course of Bilateral Defence-Industrial Co-operation,
          tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (n)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
          of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Russian
          Federation on Reciprocal Protection of Intellectual Property
          Rights used and established in the course of Bilateral Defence-
          Industrial Co-operation.


     (o)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
          and the Government of the Russian Federation concerning
          Protection of Classified Defence and Defence-Industrial related
          Information, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
          Constitution, 1996.


     (p)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
          of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Russian
          Federation concerning Protection of Classified Defence and
          Defence-Industrial related Information.


     (q)    Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
          Republic of South Africa through its Department of Defence and
          The Ministry of National Defence of the Republic of Tunisia
          concerning Military Co-operation, tabled in terms of section
          231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (r)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
          between the Government of the Republic of South Africa through
          its Department of Defence and The Ministry of National Defence of
          the Republic of Tunisia concerning Military Co-operation.


     (s)    Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
          Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
          Uganda concerning Defence Co-operation, tabled in terms of
          section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (t)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
          between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
          Government of the Republic of Uganda concerning Defence Co-
          operation.


     (u)    Supplementary Arrangement between the Government of the Republic
          of South Africa and the Government of the of the United Kingdom
          of Great Britain and Northern Ireland concerning the provision of
          support during Exercises, Training and Operations, tabled in
          terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (v)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Supplementary Arrangement between
          the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
          of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
          concerning the provision of support during Exercises, Training
          and Operations.


     (w)    Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
          Republic of South Africa and the Government of the United Kingdom
          of Great Britain and Northern Ireland concerning the provision of
          personnel of the United Kingdom Armed Forces and the United
          Kingdom Ministry of Defence to advise the Department of Defence
          of the Republic of South Africa on aspects of Democratic Defence
          Management and Peace Support Operations, tabled in terms of
          section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (x)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
          between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
          Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
          Ireland concerning the provision of personnel of the United
          Kingdom Armed Forces and the United Kingdom Ministry of Defence
          to advise the Department of Defence of the Republic of South
          Africa on aspects of Democratic Defence Management and Peace
          Support Operations.


     (y)    Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
          Republic of South Africa and the Government of the United Kingdom
          of Great Britain and Northern Ireland concerning the provision of
          personnel of the United Kingdom Armed Forces and the United
          Kingdom Ministry of Defence to advise the Department of Defence
          of the Republic of South Africa on aspects of Democratic Defence
          Management and Peace Support Operations, tabled in terms of
          section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.
     (z)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
          between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
          Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
          Ireland concerning the provision of personnel of the United
          Kingdom Armed Forces and the United Kingdom Ministry of Defence
          to advise the Department of Defence of the Republic of South
          Africa on aspects of Democratic Defence Management and Peace
          Support Operations.


     (aa)   Memorandum of Understanding between the United Nations and the
          Government of the Republic of South Africa contributing Resources
          to “United Nations Operation in Burundi” (ONUB), tabled in terms
          of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (bb)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
          between the United Nations and the Government of the Republic of
          South Africa contributing Resources to “United Nations Operation
          in Burundi” (ONUB).


     (cc)   Declaration of Understanding between the Government of the
          Republic of South Africa and the Government of the United States
          of America concerning the Provision of Equipment and Training
          from the Department of State of the United States of America
          under the African Contingency Operations Training and Assistance
          Programme to the South African Department of Defence, tabled in
          terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (dd)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Declaration of Understanding
          between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
          Government of the United States of America concerning the
          Provision of Equipment and Training from the Department of State
          of the United States of America under the African Contingency
          Operations Training and Assistance Programme to the South African
          Department of Defence.


     (ee)   Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
          Republic of South Africa as represented by its Department of
          Defence and the Ministry of Defence of the Socialist Republic of
          Vietnam concerning Defence Co-operation, tabled in terms of
          section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (ff)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
          between the Government of the Republic of South Africa as
          represented by its Department of Defence and the Ministry of
          Defence of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam concerning Defence
          Co-operation.


     (gg)   Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
          Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
          Zimbabwe concerning the Secondment of the Air Force of Zimbabwe
          Personnel to the South African Department of Defence, tabled in
          terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (hh)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
          between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
          Government of the Republic of Zimbabwe concerning the Secondment
          of the Air Force of Zimbabwe Personnel to the South African
          Department of Defence.
3.    The Minister of Finance


     (a)    Consolidated Financial Information for year ended 31 March 2006
         [RP 241-2006], tabled in terms of section 8(1)(a) of the Public
         Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).



