---
title: 'National Assembly - 06 June 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-06-06
---

TUESDAY, 06 JUNE 2006
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 10:01.

House Chairperson Mr G Q M Doidge took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, I give notice that I shall move:


   That this House debates the state’s compliance with its constitutional
   duty to ensure that everyone has a right to basic education.


                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                        (The late Dr Sabera Bhamjee)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MIJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without
notice:

  That this House -

  (1) notes with shock and profound sadness the untimely death of Dr Sabera
        Bhamjee, wife of the Hon Yusuf Bhamjee, who was murdered on Friday,
        2 June 2006;


  (2) further notes that Dr Sabera Bhamjee was a progressive gynaecologist
        practising at St Anne’s Hospital Medical Centre in Pietermaritzburg;


  (3) calls on the South African Police Service to investigate this crime
        thoroughly and bring to book all those responsible for this heinous
        crime; and


  (4) conveys its condolences to Hon Yusuf Bhamjee, their children and the
        entire Bhamjee family.


Agreed to.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): The message of condolence will be
conveyed to the Bhamjee family, and I would like to add on behalf of the
Presiding Officers of Parliament, our concurrence with the motion.
                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                           (The late Uriah Maleka)

The CHIEF WHIP OF The MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That this House -


   (1)      notes with great sadness and regret the passing away on Sunday,
        4 June 2006, of the struggle veteran Uriah Maleka;


   (2)      further notes that Comrade Uriah was a founder member of
        Umkhonto we Sizwe and was involved in many of its activities;

   (3)      recalls that Comrade Uriah left the country in 1964 to join some
        of his comrades in exile and served the people of this country in
        various capacities over the years;

   (4)      recognises that Comrade Uriah was a South African patriot who
        lived a selfless life, made an enormous contribution to the
        struggle for democracy in this country, and also served as the ANC
        representative in Angola and several other countries;

   (5)      believes that Comrade Uriah leaves a legacy of heroism and
        dedicated service to the people of South Africa; and
   (6)      conveys its condolences to the entire Maleka family, his loved
        ones and the ANC.

Agreed to.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): The motion will be conveyed to the
family with the sentiments of the Presiding Officers in terms of the
condolence.


                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE


                           (The late Eric Molobi)

The CHIEF WHIP OF The MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That this House –


   (1)      notes with sadness the untimely death of Comrade Eric Molobi,
        who passed away on Sunday, 4 June 2006;


   (2)      further notes that Comrade Eric was an activist in the fight
        against apartheid and was amongst the scores of anti-apartheid
        activists who were imprisoned on Robben Island;


    (3)     recognises that after his release from Robben Island, he was
        recruited by the South African Council of Churches to set up a
        community development programme, that in 1990 he joined Kagiso
        Trust as chief executive where he was responsible for raising funds
        from foreign government agencies to channel into educational and
        community development projects in South Africa, and that he also
        served on the boards of many companies;


    (4)     recalls that, for his contribution in the struggle against
        apartheid and his role in community development, the French
        government awarded Comrade Eric the prestigious Ordre National de
        la Legion d’Hónneur in 1994; and


    (5)     expresses its condolences to his family and friends.

Agreed to.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): The motion will be conveyed to the
family together with the sentiments of the Presiding Officers.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 27 – Environmental Affairs and Tourism:

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Chairperson and hon
members, hope is the firm hand of the fisheries officer who risks life and
limb to keep fish in the sea, and put poachers behind bars.

Hope is the fence that falls between the parks of two countries, once in
conflict, now partnered in conservation. It is the tread of the lion, the
leopard and the cheetah, free from shameful death.

Hope is the sure and steady breathing of children's lungs no longer
battling airborne poisons. It is the exhilaration of the community that
once stood and watched as travellers drove past, and who now stand proud as
hosts and guides.

Hope is the whispered promise of all of this, preserved for the benefit,
enjoyment and pride of generations yet unborn.

There are few emotions more powerful or more infectious than hope. It
springs to life at even the most desolate of times, endures conditions of
great adversity and thrives when nourished by the glimpse of a better
future. It is the union of faith, potential, expectation and optimism and,
in South Africa, it has come to define the character of our people. The
fundamental commitment of our department is clear: better tourism and a
better environment to build the age of hope.

There have been few years in which more was achieved in South Africa, both
in tourism and the environment, than the one now past. It has seen South
Africa become recognised as a global “champion of the earth” by the United
Nations. We welcomed more international travellers than at any time in our
history. Major new parks were proclaimed, three new World Heritage Sites
inscribed and the Black Economic Empowerment Charter and scorecard for
tourism was finalised.

These and so many other achievements have been the successes, not of
government alone, but of every community, organisation and individual
involved in tourism and the environment. They form a track record of trust
and a firm foundation on which we will continue to build the age of hope.

We know that there are many communities for whom the environment has been
anything but a source of hope. This is where the interests of people and
the interests of our environment converge. We must ensure that the
development so critically needed by our people is balanced by
considerations of the long-term impact of development, not only on our
environment, but also on the health of our communities. This is also why we
promulgated the Environmental Impact Assessment regulations in April. I am
pleased to announce that we have created a specially funded unit to build
EIA capacity and to provide the necessary support to provincial
authorities.

From EIA regulations to the regulations for threatened and protected
species and norms and standards for hunting, we have seen much legislative
and regulatory progress this year. I am pleased to announce today the first-
ever South African National Standards for Ambient Air Quality that are
specifically aimed at protecting people's right to air that is not harmful
to health and wellbeing. We are now defining the specific levels of air
pollutants like benzene, sulphur dioxide and particulate matter that South
Africa considers harmful to health.

Apart from giving teeth to our air quality legislation and effect to our
constitutional protections, this will also help us to decide the types of
development and technology that will be acceptable in specific areas.
Developed in partnership with the South African Bureau of Standards, the
standards will be published for public comment for 90 days in the
Government Gazette on Friday. We will also be hosting the first annual
National Air Quality Governance lekgotla in October, bringing together
officials from all spheres of government to address air quality issues and
to help us clean up the air in all communities. [Applause.]

Thank you. The department informed me that the detailed document will be on
the website of the department later this morning.

A concern often raised by hon members and by the broader public when
government has passed important legislation is how it will be enforced. I
would like today to ask this House to recognise the presence, in the
visitor’s gallery, of the men and women of our Environmental Management
Inspectorate, the so-called EMIs, our “Green Scorpions” who appear today
for the first time in their official enforcement uniforms and branding.
[Applause.]

Are they here? There they are, to the right. Thank you, Melissa.

We have already appointed more than 630 EMIs within South African National
Parks, but this is not enough. We know how vital it is to ensure compliance
and enforcement, and how challenging. This is why we have trained another
175 EMIs who will be appointed by the provinces in the next three months.
By the end of this financial year, at least 800 EMIs will form the sharp
end of the spear that enforces compliance with our environmental laws.

On the marine and coastal management front, our national operation, Orca,
which was initiated in August last year, has seen marine products to the
value of almost R38 million seized, along with 35 vehicles, three vessels
and a number of other assets. There have been 78 convictions, breakthroughs
into four syndicate operations and the first-ever, long-term, direct
imprisonment for seven years for possession and transport of perlemoen.

Our environmental protection fleet led by our flagship, the Sarah Baartman,
is now fully operational. In 510 sea days last year, 714 vessels were
inspected, 13 rescue operations undertaken, 25 arrests made and 50 fines
issued. We plan to boost these operations to at least 700 sea days with at
least one SADC patrol per quarter.

With the closure in July by the Department of Justice of the specialised
courts, all environmental cases will now be heard within their own
districts. From 1 August, a new dedicated unit will be established by our
department and the Department of Justice to attend to all cases in the
Western Cape – we will start here - with officials seconded from the
department to join a unit prosecuting these cases in district courts,
regional courts and the High Court. By the end of this financial year, more
than 100 prosecutors will also have received specialised training in the
prosecution of environmental crimes relating to marine, wildlife and
pollution matters.

Jobs, growth and hope are the core business of every South African. Through
our social responsibility projects and programmes, we have created more
than 16 800 job opportunities, 254 permanent jobs and almost 103 000
training days last year alone. [Applause.] This year, we will be launching
a social impact study to review the direct results of these programmes, and
we aim to create a further 12 500 job opportunities, another 300 permanent
jobs and more than 130 000 training days. [Applause.]

The conference bags hon members have received today are just one of the
examples of the fruits of our social responsibility programmes. These bags
are produced by a craft group of about 80 rural women called Thubaleth'
elihle, our good opportunity, in KwaZulu-Natal. The bags are woven from
indigenous, water-loving sedge, known as Ikhwane, which is the most
abundant plant in the 400-hectare Mbongolwane wetland. Production of crafts
from Ikhwane growing in this area forms part of an ongoing, integrated
initiative to assist the local community in sustainably using the wetland
under increasing social and economic pressures.

There is little doubt as to why tourism has been identified as one of the
immediate priority sectors within the Accelerated and Shared Growth
Initiative for South Africa, the programme that the Deputy President leads,
as it remains one of the most dynamic sectors in our economy. Lest we
forget, in the two decades before 1990, we received less than one million
annual foreign arrivals. Last year, we shattered every target we set for
ourselves, welcoming no less than 7,3 million international visitors.
[Applause.]

As part of the growth platform targeted by Asgisa, tourism has been set
some very steep goals for the next five years: 500 000 new jobs; 8,5
million international arrivals annually - and we are looking at these
targets because we believe we can do even better; and a contribution to the
gross domestic product of at least R100 billion a year.
Our challenge in reaching these goals will be to ensure that this growth
translates into real benefits for the people trapped in poverty and in the
second economy.

In addition to the work that we are currently doing, I have instructed the
department to develop, within the next two months, a comprehensive
programme of second-economy interventions. I am also pleased today to
announce the creation of a new R20 million tourism equity fund by our
department. This fund will provide access to much-needed support for small
and medium-sized wheel and tour operators and it will provide tourism SMMEs
with a real boost for further growth.

To further strengthen the growth in tourism, we will be strongly focused on
seven key priorities: transport, safety and security, product and business
development, market growth, information, BEE and skills. In order to
address the skills gap specifically, we have allocated R7,5 million to a
partnership between our department, the Tourism, Hospitality and Sport
Education and Training Authority, Theta, which is our Seta, and the
National Business Initiative and the Tourism Business Council of SA, to
build a consensus skills plan, revise the existing curricula and streamline
the process of accreditation and certification. In October we will host a
national tourism skills conference to discuss the results of a skills audit
currently under way.

Another focal point for our interventions to support the first economy,
grow the second economy and build real hope has been the long-term fishing
rights allocations. Members may not be aware that in total 8 028
applications were received for these long-term commercial rights, roughly
double the number anticipated. With 1 516 successful applicants thus far
awarded rights to catch about 600 000 tons of fish, the major hallmark of
the process has been real empowerment.

Three examples are: 29% of the deep-sea hake trawl catch – and this is very
capital-intensive, highly lucrative fishing - is now black-controlled; up
from 14% in 2001. So we have achieved the target that we set for ourselves
there, that is before we dealt with the appeals. With regard to pilchards,
it is 66% now, up from 64% in 2001; and, with regard to West Coast rock
lobster offshore this is up from 51% to 61%.

Ons het Sondag ’n aankondiging gemaak na die appèlle teen die
vlakwaterkreef of die Weskuskreef. Ek weet hier is van ons vrouens van die
Weskus wat kwotas gekry het - hulle noem hulself Kleinbegin – Mavis Bailey,
Christa Kuilders en Lina van Wyk is ook hier. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[On Sunday we made an announcement after the appeals regarding the West
Coast Rock Lobster. I know there are some of our women from the West Coast
who received quotas - they call themselves Kleinbegin – Mavis Bailey,
Christa Kuilders and Lina van Wyk are also here. [Applause.]]

We have not forgotten our very poorest communities in the rights
allocations either, specifically those coastal fishers who depend on the
sea for their own food needs and the most basic of incomes. To regulate
this activity and to ensure a fair share for these fishers, we will be
publishing by August for comment and review, two new policies, one for
subsistence fishing and one for small-scale commercial fishing. We would
like to invite, and we urge, all interested parties especially NGOs and our
provincial and local authorities to contribute to this process.

This year we will also be tabling the new Integrated Coastal Management
Bill in Parliament, which will promote co-ordinated and integrated coastal
management, one of the benefits of which will be ensuring access to the
coast for coastal communities that are increasingly being restricted by
development rights granted to companies and private individuals.

There are signs that our environmental concerns are fast becoming part of
the daily lives of South Africans. A good example of an environmental
battle that is being taken up by communities across South Africa is our
effort to combat and adapt to the worst effects of climate change. The
agricultural sector – and I see that the Deputy Minister is here - is
already in the process of developing its plan; the Department of Science
and Technology – I see their Deputy Minister is here - is crafting a
national research and development strategy. Minerals and Energy has just
released appliance energy efficiency labelling; and our own department is
in the process of updating South Africa's Greenhouse Gas Inventory in
partnership with Business Unity SA.

This year will also see long-term planning for climate change, initiated to
assist us in directing investments in major sectors such as energy,
transport and even tourism. We will, for example, be engaging with the
tourism sector through the Tourism Grading Council to develop standards for
waste recycling, reducing energy consumption and introducing green
technology.

Our aim is to ensure that the 2010 Soccer World Cup, for instance, leaves
our country with a legacy of green tourism infrastructure and practices. In
this regard I would like to issue a challenge to the industry, especially
in the accommodation sector, that their contribution to the 2010 legacy is
that all new accommodation establishments to be built be guided by the
principle of energy efficiency. [Applause.] I will be interacting with the
industry – that is the previous Minister of Minerals and Energy - in the
next six months in order to decide on a mutually agreeable approach.

Perhaps the most visible embodiment of our environmental success and the
points of greatest contact with our communities are our national parks and
protected areas. I invite hon members to join us this year in celebrating a
number of very important milestones, like the 80th anniversary of the
Kruger National Park, the 75th anniversary of the Addo, Bontebok and
Kalahari Gemsbok National Parks, and the 40th anniversary of Augrabies.

To honour these celebrations we will launch South Africa's National
Register of Protected Areas in terms of the Protected Areas Act by the end
of November. We do not have a complete and accurate record of all protected
areas in South Africa – it’s unbelievable but its true - and this register
will meet that need as an interactive electronic database.

In 2002 we set a goal for South Africa to increase the land under formal
protection from 5,3% to 8% by 2010. Over the next three years we have
budgeted more than R175 million for further land purchases, and I will give
details of another 230 000 hectares of newly acquired protected areas in
the National Council of Provinces on Thursday.

The expansion of the conservation estate and the quest to have a
representative park system are important, but what is equally important is
how well we manage our parks. In 2004 Parliament promulgated the Protected
Areas Act. This Act gives us the power to institute a performance-
management system of our parks. We will be announcing in the financial year
a new park performance-management system, which will guide our decision-
making system and set the standards for the management of our national
heritage.

I would also like to announce that to further improve the quality of the
experience that visitors have in our national parks and to expand our
ability to make conservation a driver of jobs and growth, we will be
investing another R395 million in park infrastructure over the next three
years.

This will concentrate on, amongst other projects, the upgrading of 520
existing accommodation units thereby creating and supplying 100 new
accommodation units, upgrading and constructing 320 kilometres of tourist
roads, developing five new camping sites, and improving or creating seven
new park entrances. [Applause.] I think many people in the agricultural
community will welcome the fact that new fences will be erected, or that
some of the fences will be repaired.

In conclusion, I would like to take a moment to reflect on a few of the
many positive changes that our department has undergone to ensure that we
protect, build and expand South Africa's age of hope. At the forefront of
this change have been our Director-General Pamela Yako and her management
team. They are in the benches right behind me.

Management and operational structures have been streamlined with, for
instance, the creation of new capacity like the specialised unit to drive
our international co-ordination and liaison, the new Directorate:
Litigation and Law Reform that was much needed, and the new Chief
Directorate: Integrated Coastal Management, as well as the bolstering of
our research capacity in marine and coastal management.

They have also led the charge in terms of improving the representation of
women in senior management positions, which by the end of March stood at
38% and for which we have set a target of 46% by the end of this financial
year. [Applause.] Their leadership has set the pace for our departmental
achievements for which they are highly commended.

I would also like to express my thanks to our Deputy Minister, Rejoice
Mabudafhasi – she will participate in the debate a bit later - for her hard
work and support this year; to the hon Langa Zita – here he is now in the
waiting bench - he assumed the chairpersonship of our portfolio committee;
to every member of our committee, which remains one of the most involved,
committed and active in Parliament; and to our hard-working and greatly
effective statutory bodies, which are also represented in the benches
behind me.

It was Beyers Naudé who observed that hope is more fundamental than either
pessimism or optimism. In South Africa it sustained the cause of our long-
sought freedom and now empowers the cause of our burgeoning prosperity. As
we continue together to intensify our efforts, redouble our commitment and
exceed even our own expectations, we will ensure a better environment and
better tourism to build the age of hope.

Ngiyabonga! Ndiyabulela! Ke a leboga! Enkosi! [Kwaqhwatywa.] [I thank you
very much. [Applause.]]

Mr L ZITA: Comrade Minister, Deputy President, Deputy Minister and
colleagues, Ari Sitas, the professor and working-class poet, on being
invited to the opening of the KwaZulu-Natal Legislature last year, had this
to say about transformation in delivery:

   Knowing that politics and poetry do not mix, poets want tax   exemptions
   for those in love, for those who love each other. Poets want quotas for
   the reduction of tears. Poets want public tears for each woman waking up
   in drudgery, in fear. Poets want dance to leap beyond despair; they want
   performance indicators that drive politicians to drink to rum, to beers.

I will admit that we have not yet been able to legislate tax exemptions for
those in love, but we have nonetheless reached an age of hope with the
people of our country.

The strategic goals of the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
are to promote the conservation and sustainable use of our natural
resources, tourism growth, to protect and improve the quality and safety of
the environment, the pursuit of global sustainable development agenda as
well as the socioeconomic transformation of our country.

The department has six core programmes. The administration conducts the
overall management of the department and provides centralised support
services. Due to the creation of a branch under the international co-
operation and resources subprogramme, expenditure is expected to increase
from R184,8 million in 2005-06 to R213,8 million in 2008-09 over the MTEF -
an average annual increase of 5%. The International Cooperation and
Resources branch was created to engage internationally on an environmental
sustainable development, marine and biodiversity agreements and to co-
ordinate the national implementation of these agreements.

Environmental Quality and Protection aims to protect the constitutional
right of all South Africans to an environment that is not harmful to health
and well-being. Spending is expected to increase from R102, 2 million in
2002-03 to R194, 9 million in 2008-09 at a rate of 7% - as a result of the
current focus on implementing and enforcing pollution in waste management
legislation.

Also contributing to the growth is the fact that the National Environment
Management: Air Quality Act became effective in 2005. The Act enforces air
quality standards and procedures as well as the enhancement of
environmental compliance and enforcement capacity. Through the memorandum
of understanding signed with the representatives of the glass industry and
various pilot waste management projects in selected provinces, attempts
have been made to minimise waste. The Environmental Impact Assessment was
set up, revised EIA regulations were drafted, a computerised authorisation
system is in place and various guidelines and information booklets have
also been developed.

We however would like to call upon the department to accelerate its work
with regard to the capacitating of other spheres of government to deal with
EIAs speedily and effectively.

Expenditure on Marine and Coastal Management increased from R261, 3 million
in 2002-03 to R354, 4 million in 2004-05 and then declined to R272 million
in 2005-06. The total cost of the four new patrol vessels is R473 million,
down from the projected cost of R501 million. Expenditure further decreases
to R260, 7 million in 2006-07 due to the termination of the allocation for
land, buildings and structures for the Marion Island base building project
between 2003-04 and 2005-06 under the Antarctic and Island Research
programme.

As the ANC, we are pleased with the fact that for the first time, ten-year,
long-term fishing rights were allocated in the large pelagic fishery. The
15-year, long-term commercial rights have been expanded to 19 existing
fisheries. All four fisheries patrol vessels, that is the Lillian Ngoyi,
Ruth First, Sarah Baartman and Victoria Mxenge, have now been delivered.

Two new marine protected areas, Stilbaai and East London, will be declared
in an effort to meet the target of 20% of South Africa’s marine areas being
protected areas.

A national oil contingency plan has been finalised in order to enable the
department to respond to all spill disasters at sea. Last week I addressed
a group of fishermen from around Jeffery’s Bay. Some of these workers earn
less than a thousand rand a month and they have no medical or pension fund.
They also complain about fronting in the industry.

This situation is unacceptable and needs urgent attention. As the ANC, we
look forward to engaging with the National Environment Management: Air
Quality Act and Coastal Zone Management Bill, which we think should also
address the issue of access to and enjoyment of the sea and beaches by
black people and the working class communities. [Applause.]

The tourism budget has increased steadily over the seven-year period,
rising from R237,7 million in 2002-03 to R696,1 million in 2008-09 at an
annual average growth rate of 19,6%. Transfers take up the majority of this
programme’s allocation to tourism agencies, particularly South African
Tourism, which gets 86,6% of this total expenditure.

The tourism development subgroup increases significantly from   R4,7
million in 2002-03 to R93,3 million in 2008-09 at a rate of 64,6%. The
growth is due to the increased allocation for the Tourism Enterprise
Programme, ,TEP, tourism SMME development and the Tourism Satellite
Account. International tourism marketing grows by R8 million in 2006-07, by
R45 million in 2007-08 and by R83 million in 2008-09. As part of the
broader transformation agenda of the tourism industry, the department has
finalised and launched the tourism BEE charter and also appointed the BEE
Charter Council. The TEP enabled the creation of 6 577 tourism jobs in 2005
while the sector as a whole increased the number of jobs to 539 017 in
2005.

The department successfully implemented the Sho’t Left domestic marketing
campaign, generating over R40 million from a R20 million investment. The
campaign promoted affordability, thus increasing the number of South
Africans accessing tourism products and services.

Despite these breakthroughs, a lot needs to be done to share the wealth of
tourism amongst all the people of the country. We need to ensure, in the
spirit of affirmative procurement, that government employees utilise bread
and breakfast hospitality in our townships as well as BEE-rated hotels for
the hospitality needs.

Spending on the Biodiversity and Conservation Programme has increased
rapidly over the seven-year period, rising from R183,7 million in 2002-03
to R637,4 million in 2008-09 at an annual increase of 23%. The increases
are mainly due to transfer payments to the three public entities: the
Greater St Lucia Wetland Park Authority, South African National Parks,
SANP, and the South African National Biodiversity Institute - SANBI. In
all, transfer payments average 86,9% of the total expenditure and this
covers the infrastructure in SanParks and research and development in
SANBI.

As the ANC, we are heartened by the fact that during 2005, the National
Environmental Management: Protected Areas Amendment Act of 2004 came into
effect and regulations for the proper administration of protected areas and
world heritage sites were drawn-up. We also welcome the steps taken to give
effect to the implementation of the National Environmental Management:
Biodiversity Act of 2004 – the lists of threatened and alien species and
their regulations. These have been developed and published for public
comment.

In the same vein, we welcome the establishment of a biosafety directorate –
a critical element of the National Environmental Management: Biodiversity
Act of 2004 which strengthens the department’s ability to respond to the
impact of genetically modified organisms on the environment.

We welcome the adoption of the strategy that positions transfrontier
conservation areas in nine South African Development Community countries as
a premier national tourism destination as well as the proclamation since
April 2005 of 79 009 ha of land into the national parks system. This
includes the new Camdeboo National Park at Graaff Reinet and the
development of a memorandum of agreement between the department and the
Department of Land Affairs to provide a framework for the restitution of
land claims in protected areas.

Social Responsibility and Projects is part of the Expanded Public Works
Programme, which provides for projects that are targeted at infrastructure
development, job creation and community training within the contexts of
tourism and environment.

Spending has increased steadily over the seven-year period, rising from
R241 million in 2002-03 to R569, 5 million in 2008-09 at an annual average
increase of 15,4%. Of this, 91,8% has gone to the Expanded Public Works
Programme and the Working for Wetlands project.

During 2005, 7 665 job opportunities were created, of which 149 are
permanent jobs, while 58 722 days were spent on training. Thirty-five per
cent of the programme’s budget was spent on SMMEs and BEEs in the
implementation of projects. The challenge remains to ensure that these
projects can be sustainable beyond the government-funded phase.
Indeed, we are not far from the clarion call of Ari Sitas in which it will
no longer be possible for us to have, “the birds whose wings are singed by
oil on fire, the peasants whose bread and yam is soaked in gas, the land
that flares from burnt-up tyre.” Indeed, “the cindered land of greed will
be appeased as the gods that stir life’s wisened, snared-up, old desire
shall intervene through our hands to redraft the landscape green there will
be a better day wherein politicians want tax exemptions for those in love.”
This budget takes us in that direction. The ANC supports it. [Applause.]

Mr M SWART: Chair, hon Deputy President, the new buzzword in Parliament is
Asgisa. The DA supports the objectives of Asgisa, and it would in fact be
wonderful to achieve them. However, the saying, “Talk is cheap but it takes
money to buy whiskey,” remains pertinent. The question is: Will the
objectives be met, or do we just have another talk show?

Asgisa, inter alia, proposes that the contribution by tourism to GDP be
increased from 8% to 12%. In this way, and if this objective is achieved,
an additional 400 000 jobs can be created in the economy. It would
therefore indeed be a wonderful achievement.

In the programme itself, however, three factors are highlighted which would
hamper the achievement of the Asgisa goals. They are skills development,
air access and safety. The Minister referred to skills development, but it
is particularly in the case of the first two factors - air access and
safety - that there seems to be a lack of action.

In Travel News Weekly of 24 May 2006 – that’s last week - the problems
experienced by an airline wanting air access to South Africa are
highlighted, and I quote from the article:

  Travel 5-Live wants to launch charter flights from Manchester and Gatwick
  to Cape Town from November to April 2007, but after more than a year of
  negotiations still hasn’t secured landing rights from SA transport
  authorities. These initial flights are part of a planned three-year
  programme that could see as many as 50 000 British tourists travel to
  South Africa annually.


  “It is peculiar that it is taking such a long time for something
  relatively simple,” says managing director Brian Murfin. “I find it
  peculiar, in the difficult global holiday market and with a massive
  variety of choices on offer, that tour operators have to struggle against
  the seeming intransigence of the South African Department of Transport,
  who don’t seem troubled about tourism,” he says.


The red tape and protectionist policies practised by SAA, to keep low-cost
competitors out are, therefore, totally unacceptable. This is certainly not
the way to ensure air access. In a similar application in Egypt recently,
it took the airline exactly three days to obtain an operator’s licence to
fly to Egypt. I would therefore be pleased if the Minister could indicate
what steps he proposes to take to resolve the issue, so that air access to
South Africa is made easier and simpler. In his annual report he said he
tried, but he failed.

At this time I would be pleased if the Minister could indicate what steps
he proposes to take, in conjunction with his colleague from the Department
of Safety and Security, to resolve the high incidence of attacks on
tourists in South Africa. These attacks attract considerable attention in
the overseas media and have a negative effect on the growth of the
industry.

If, for example, the more than 100 attacks on tourists that occurred just
in the Table Mountain Park is considered, the necessity to safeguard the
lives and properties of tourists becomes paramount. Unfortunately, I don’t
think you will get much assistance from the Minister of Safety and
Security, as he said that we should stop complaining about crime and rather
leave the country. This is, of course, exactly what the tourists will do.

Die agb Minister het ’n groot verantwoordelikheid om die Asgisa-doelwitte
ten opsigte van toerisme te bereik, en dit is dan veral die veiligheid van
toeriste en die oopstelling van ons lugweë wat die Minister se dringende
aandag vereis. Terselfdertyd bring dit my by ’n ander verantwoordelikheid
van die agb Minister, naamlik visserye. Hier is daar groot probleme, agb
Minister.
Die toepassing van die beleid van langtermynvisvangregte het en sal
veroorsaak dat derduisende mense hul enigste heenkome verloor. Wat sê u
vennoot in die ANC-Cosatu alliansie hieroor? En ek haal aan: (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The hon Minister has a great responsibility to achieve the Asgisa
objectives in respect of tourism, and so the safety of tourists and the
opening of the airways in particular require the Minister’s urgent
attention. At the same time this leads me to another of the Minister’s
responsibilities, namely fisheries. Here, hon Minister, there are major
problems.

The implementation of the long-term fishing rights policy has had and will
have the effect of thousands of people losing their only means of
livelihood. What did your partner in the ANC-Cosatu alliance have to say
about this? And I quote:]

   Cosatu wants to see the fishing rights returned to the true people of the
   sea as these communities have an inbred sense of conservation and the sea
   is their world and the focus of their dreams and aspirations. If these
   people are simply left to perish, our country will have lost a treasure
   that cannot be replaced.


Net om die doelstellings van regstellende aksie te bereik, het persone wat
nog nooit in die bedryf was nie, nou regte bekom, terwyl baie ander wat nog
altyd op ’n eerbare wyse uit die see geleef het, hulle nou tot onwettige
bedrywighede sal moet wend, ten einde ’n bestaan te kan maak. Dit is dus
geen wonder nie dat nagenoeg 5 000 vissers hulle tot die gelykheidshof moes
wend om hul regte te verdedig. U departement se reaksie op hierdie stap het
ongelukkig veel te wense oorgelaat toe u besluit het om, teenstrydig met
die aanbeveling van die regter van die Gelykheidshof en sonder toestemming
van die Appèlhof, die aangeleentheid verder te voer.

Heel tereg was die uitspraak van die Appèlhof dat u nie vissers wat visvang
om hul gesinne aan die lewe te hou hul dag in die hof kan ontneem nie. Die
uiteindelike uitspraak van die Gelykheidshof of die Hooggeregshof word met
belangstelling afgewag, maar is, en bly die vraag: hoeveel het hierdie stap
van u departement die belastingbetaler uit die sak gejaag en wie gaan vir
die koste aanspreeklik gehou word? Vrae in hierdie verband is reeds aan u
kantoor gerig.

Een van die doelwitte van die visvangbeleid was ook om die vroue te
bemagtig, sodat hulle hierdie bedryf kan betree. Ook hier het die
toepassing van u beleid veel te wense oorgelaat. Ek dra kennis van drie
vroue wat elk meer as 10 jaar in die bedryf doenig is, wat nou hul
visvangregte verloor het, omdat hul mans, en nie hulself nie, op die bote
is. Dit is ’n nuwe vereiste. Hulle het ’n bemanning van meer as 30 persone
wat ook nou werkloos is.

Minder as twee jaar gelede het u departement aan hierdie drie vroue die reg
verleen om nuwe bote te koop teen R500 000 stuk, wat hulle dan ook gedoen
het en wat hulle nou moet betaal sonder enige inkomste uit die see. Toe die
departement aan hulle toestemming verleen het om die bote te bou, is daar
geen vereiste gestel dat daar byvoorbeeld ’n toilet vir dames aan boord
moet wees nie. En is daar nou nog nie so ’n vereiste nie. Verwag die
departement dat dames sonder so ’n fasiliteit vir ’n dag lank see toe moet
gaan of dat hulle so ’n fasiliteit op die boot moet aanbring, sonder
sekerheid oor die toestaan van ’n permit?

As mense hul regte om vis te vang ontneem word, is dit tog sekerlik die
plig van die departement om ’n ander heenkome vir die vissers te
bewerkstellig. In hierdie verband moes die departement lank gelede reeds
met grootskaalse akwakultuurprojekte begin het, waar alternatiewe
werkgeleenthede beskikbaar gemaak kon word. Sodoende sou daar ’n ander
heenkome wees vir mense wat hul visvangregte verloor het.

Die volgende ernstige probleem is die grootskaalse stropery van ons
maritieme bronne. Nog meer kommerwekkend is die bewerings dat
bemanningslede aan boord die Sarah Baartman vir perlemoenstropers inlig oor
anti-stroperyvaartuie. Suksesvolle anti-stropery-organisasies soos die
Marines van Hermanus is ontbind, sonder dat ’n behoorlike plaasvervangende
organisasie ingestel is. Die instandhouding van die hof wat spesiaal
ingestel is om die stroperysake te hanteer, is van die uiterste belang en
die aankondiging van die Minister in hierdie verband word verwelkom.
Stropery word oral ooglopend toegelaat en neem veral ernstige afmetings in
die Oos-Kaap aan. Die stappe wat die Minister beoog om die probleem hok te
slaan, moet verwelkom word, maar dis die dringende instelling van die
maatreëls wat nodig is.

As die algemene toepassing van die nuwe visvangbeleid in oënskou geneem
word, is daar baie ooglopende probleme en verbaas dit ons dus nie dat
hofsake en optogte die gevolg van u beleid is nie. Ek dank u. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[For the sole purpose of meeting affirmative action targets, permits have
now been given to people who have never been in the industry, while many of
those who have always made an honest living from the sea now have to turn
to illegal activities to make ends meet. It is therefore no wonder that
approximately 5 000 fishermen were compelled to turn to the Equality Court
in order to defend their rights. Your department’s reaction to this move
unfortunately left much to be desired, since, contrary to the Judge’s
recommendation in the Equality Court and without the permission of the
Appeal Court, you decided to take the matter further.

Quite rightly the Appeal Court ruled that you cannot deny fishermen, who
practise their craft in order to feed their families, their day in court.
The final verdict of the Equality Court or the High Court is awaited with
great interest, but the question remains: How much money did this action on
the part of your department cost the taxpayer, and who will be held liable
for the costs? Questions in this regard have already been addressed to your
office.

The fishing policy had the further objective of empowering women, so that
they could enter this industry. Here, too, the implementation of your
policy has left much to be desired. I am aware of three women, each of whom
has been active in the industry for more than 10 years, who have now lost
their fishing permits because it is in fact their husbands, and not the
women themselves, who are on the boats. This is a new requirement. They
have a crew of more than 30 people, who are now also unemployed.

Less than two years ago your department granted these women the right to
buy new boats at R500 000 each, which they did, and which they now have to
pay without any income from the sea. When the department granted them the
permission to build the boats, no requirement was imposed that there
should, for instance, be a ladies’ toilet on board. And even now there is
no such requirement. Does the department expect that the ladies will spend
a day at sea without such a facility, or that they will have to install
such a facility on the boat without any assurance as to the granting of a
licence?

If people are denied their right to fish, surely it is the department’s
responsibility to provide them with alternative sustenance. In this regard
the department should have initiated large-scale aquaculture projects a
long time ago, where alternative employment could have been generated. In
this way there could have been alternative sustenance for people who have
been deprived of their fishing rights.

A further serious problem is the large-scale poaching of our maritime
resources. Even more alarming are allegations that crew members on board
the Sarah Baartman are warning abalone poachers of antipoaching vessels.
Successful antipoaching organisations such as the Marines of Hermanus have
been disbanded, without a proper alternative organisation having been put
in place. The maintenance of the specially established court for handling
poaching matters is of the utmost importance, and the Minister’s
announcement in this regard is welcome. Poaching is openly tolerated
everywhere, and in the Eastern Cape in particular it has taken on serious
proportions. The steps the Minister is contemplating to curb this problem
must be welcomed, but what is needed is the urgent implementation of the
necessary measures.

If one looks at the general implementation of the new fishing policy there
are many obvious problems, and it is therefore not surprising that your
policy has resulted in court cases and protest marches. I thank you.
[Applause.]]
Mrs J CHALMERS: Chairperson, hon Deputy President, hon Minister, hon Deputy
Minister, members of this House, I have taken part in the budget debates of
this committee on a number of occasions, and I have always found the
research involved in preparing my speech edifying and exciting, whether it
be on biodiversity, marine issues, climate change or one of the many other
relevant issues. This time, however, my Chairperson gave me the task of
speaking on the administration of the department. Administration! I
thought: How boring! I complained to my Chair. His response was: “Just do
it, it’s very important.”

And, of course, it is critically important, for without effective and
efficient administrative management and systems the best, most carefully
drafted legislation and the most visionary and innovative policies will
become bogged down, unable to translate those laws and policies, so
necessary for the management of our country’s environment, into concrete
reality.

Indeed, on close reinspection, I found myself quite awed by the diversity
and magnitude of the challenges and responsibilities Programme One indeed
has to manage.

I have no doubt, as our government tries by all means to transform our
country into a state where we have achieved a better life for all our
people, that fundamental to that better life is an environment where good
air quality and an efficient waste system are the norm; where our
marvellous coastline and the richness of the sea are well cared for and
where our unique biodiversity is preserved for future generations.

The great challenge, of course, is how to manage these fantastic natural
resources sustainably, whilst at the same time using them to reduce
poverty, create jobs and, in fact, to attain the objectives set out so
cogently in Asgisa.

Programme One of this department has two objectives, and I quote:


  To provide for the strategic leadership of the department, as well as a
  variety of essential support services, such as environmental information,
  financial and administrative support and human resource management.

In fact it is the glue that keeps all six programmes of the department,
diverse as they are, together.

It also determines working methods and procedures, as well as providing
costs for the head office. Environmental reporting into global networks has
become increasingly important and South Africa is now amongst the 10
leading countries in the world in terms of reporting on the state of the
environment.

Global warming is a critical issue worldwide as the poles and other
climatic indicators show unmistakable signs of change and meltdown. And it
is vitally important that up-to-date information is available to keep track
of these and other relevant factors.

South Africa’s state of the environment report is constantly being updated,
including facts on the links between environment and poverty. Exciting too
is a new document, the Youth State of Environment Outlook, which is being
prepared as part of the UN environmental programmes focused on children,
youth, sport and environment.

The department also has to interact with the various provinces, other
departments and other stakeholders in order to ensure that co-operative
governance and administrative justice are maintained.  That challenge was
recognised and dealt with when the National Environmental Management Act
was drafted and passed way back in 1998, but the proposed mechanism to
manage it has taken an awfully long time to become a reality. Now, however,
the National Environmental Advisory Forum is in place in its role as an
advisory body to the Minister with representation from labour, community-
based organisations, NGOs and business, as well as the Committee for
Environmental Co-ordination.

This last structure facilitates discussion on environmental issues between
various spheres of government. Convened quarterly, it provides a useful
platform for engagement on issues that have a crosscutting impact,
including the climate change response strategy and the national strategy
for sustainable development.

Arguably the greatest challenge facing South Africa right now is the
problem of unemployment in our society. Wherever one goes the cry is the
same: “We need jobs.” But skills are also in great demand and creative ways
have to be found to cross the divide between skills required and the lack
thereof.

The Department of Environmental Affairs is rising to meet this challenge in
a serious and committed way, with its internship programme. This programme
employs graduates for a year whilst paying them a stipend, thus offering
them and jobless, qualified individuals an opportunity to gain work
experience and exposure.

A total of 65 interns and 70 bursars are currently enrolled in critical and
valuable skills areas, as well as 60 learners in environmental education
and training and development practice.

They are given life skills as well as computer training, presentation and
facilitation skills, and instruction in business writing, project
management and Batho Pele at a time when, whatever a graduate’s
qualifications are, if he or she does not have experience, his or her
chances of getting a post are fairly slim. This is the reason this sort of
on-the-job experience can make all the difference to a young person’s
career path.

And whilst I’m talking about skills and careers, I have a concern that I
would like to voice here. South Africa is held in high regard
internationally for the quality of work our scientists are involved in -
research that is adding to our own and global knowledge on a whole range of
environmental issues.

Much of what they are doing is original, groundbreaking and exciting
studies underpinned by decades of experience in the field. Recently,
however, I attended a national biodiversity conference where anxiety was
voiced across the board about the fact that our scientists working in the
various fields are getting older, and there’s a noticeable lack of younger
scientists coming up to continue with their vital work.

This is a situation that needs to be noted and proactively addressed, even
to the extent of seeking out promising students at school and enabling them
to have the option of a career in one of the environmental sciences.

Programme One of the department provides for the strategic leadership of
the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, DEAT, and this extends
to the sphere of international relations as well. To facilitate this
requirement, it has a special unit whose job is, amongst other things, to
translate the various multilateral international agreements into national
action and public awareness at all levels of government. This is no easy
task, and it does a great job.

I know from having attended some of these conferences how South Africa’s
input is regarded with great respect, and I hope that we’ll continue to
attend to that and also to some of the vital interim meetings where often
the really important decisions are taken. This is where our influence can
really make a difference to the direction being followed at a global level
and where the environment is coming under increasing pressure, with a
growing population demanding more food, more energy, more household
products, fresh water, places to live, cars and roads.

Yet another challenge being dealt with by the department is meeting
transformation targets, and here too DEAT is making steady progress, as the
Minister has mentioned, in achieving equity, including a 46% target in SMS
and 2% of the disabled. However, I think that last year’s figures could be
improved on.

To support the Black Empowerment Act, DEAT has collected a database of BEE
companies and SMMEs and is using its purchasing power to boost these
companies by procuring 50% of all goods and services needed by the
department from this database.
Finally, I would like to pay a brief tribute to our hard-working Minister
and Deputy Minister, who are constantly on the move and are showing by
their commitment, matched by an equally committed department, that South
Africa is totally dedicated to playing a forceful and meaningful role in
what is probably the most serious challenge facing this earth of ours, that
of managing it sustainably for future generations. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA: Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Minister and
honourable members, the overall aim of the Department of Environmental
Affairs and Tourism is to lead the sustainable development of our country’s
environment and tourism industry. This is indeed a laudable goal and we
support the department’s various efforts to reach its objectives. The IFP
will support the increase of 13% in the department’s 2006-07 budget. We
welcome the increased allocation to international tourism marketing, the
tourism enterprise programme, the SA National Parks infrastructure and
combating coastal erosion. However, we have to raise certain concerns about
the environment and tourism in general.

The first concern relates to air quality ad air pollution. We welcome the
fact that the 2004 Air Quality Act became effective last year to create a
coherent air quality management system. However we have to recognise that
the successful implementation of this system will depend on constant
monitoring and enforcement of compliance with air quality standards. It is
therefore disappointing that only 700 environmental management inspectors
will be deployed to enforce the law. This should be viewed against the
background of communities in Durban South, Secunda and Zamdela who complain
about air pollution from local industry and its adverse effects on their
health.

The second concern deals with fishing rights. We accept that the department
has to find the correct balance between protecting marine resources and
providing the ability to alleviate poverty and create jobs for fishing
communities. This is not an easy task. While some improvements have been
made to the rights application process and its cost, we feel that too many
traditional coastal fishing communities can no longer provide for their
families and their communities because they have been deprived of the right
to fish for a living.

We applaud the department’s efforts at empowerment in the fishing industry,
but this should never be done at the expense of communities that depend on
fishing for a living. To grant these communities fishing rights would not
be inconsistent with empowerment objectives and in fact would empower those
communities to help themselves.

Finally, I would like to deal with tourism. We accept that foreign tourism
brings huge amounts of money into the country and creates much-needed jobs.
However, as much as foreigners are welcomed to visit our beautiful country,
we should also look inwards to the promotion of domestic tourism. Currently
accommodation and other prices are set in dollar terms for foreign
tourists, but this means that for many South Africans, a holiday in their
own country is too expensive. It might even be more affordable to visit a
neighbouring country.

Chairperson, it is therefore vital that the industry’s prices take into
account that not all tourists are foreigners and that domestic tourism can
be vital to the long-term sustainability of the tourism sector. The IFP
supports the budget. I thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Deputy Chair,
Deputy President, Ministers, Deputy Ministers, hon members and our
distinguished guests, it is with pleasure that I address you on this Budget
Vote, which in essence depicts the achievements of this department over the
past financial year.

I will, of course, not only reflect on our achievements, but also on some
of the challenges that we have faced and continue to face. Additionally,
I’ll also reflect on the programme for this year, and how we intend to
achieve some of the deliverables as defined in the departmental business
plan.

It was indeed a challenging year, which saw us deal with women leadership
and empowerment, land degradation, wetlands, invasive aliens plant species,
the fight against poverty, democratisation and transformation of protected
areas, providing an effective and efficient weather service and
establishing partnerships and capacity for better waste management in this
country.

As we will be celebrating, in August this year, the 50th anniversary of the
women’s protest march, which took place in 1956, I am reminded of Chief
Albert Luthuli’s words when he paid tribute to women and declared that, and
I quote:

  When the women begin to take an active part in the struggle, as they are
  doing now, no power on earth can stop us from achieving freedom in our
  lifetime.

As a department we have to protect women and children from harsh
environmental conditions. These conditions range from exposure to toxic
chemicals, breathing polluted air to drinking unsafe water.

As part of celebrating the 50th anniversary of the women’s march, our
department will be holding the second women and the environment conference.
Drawing from the strength of the commemoration of the 30th anniversary of
16 June, a side event for the youth will also be held on the margins of
this conference. By the way, mothers never forget their children.

At international level, we have responded to gender equality and equity
challenges by establishing a network for women Ministers of environment,
which is co-chaired by South Africa and Sweden. This network will focus on
implementing the United Nations Environment Programme’s decision on gender
equality in the areas of climate change, desertification, waste management
and sustainable development.

The United Nations General Assembly declared 2006 as the International Year
of the Deserts and Desertification, with the theme: “Desertification a
threat to humanity.”

To signify our commitment, we have already launched our campaign for the
celebration of 2006 as the International Year of the Deserts and
Desertification. We launched this campaign by unveiling a soil conservation
project to the tune of R5 million on 16 March in the Madibeng area, within
the Sekhukhune District Municipality in Limpopo.

There are several provincial initiatives that are being rolled out in
celebration of 2006 as the International Year of the Deserts and
Desertification. By the way, we know that our provinces, especially those
that are very rural, depend on agriculture. Land degradation is a big enemy
for them as it threatens food security.

Through Working for Wetlands, our department will continue to invest funds
in the rehabilitation of degraded ecosystems. We’ll continue to partner the
Department of Water Affairs and Forestry in their Working for Water
project, which has been very successful in clearing invasive species.

As part of the Nepad environment initiative South Africa co-ordinates the
invasive alien species programme. Of the 14 projects identified, the
following three are being prioritised: Preventing waterweeds from choking
Africa’s water bodies; preventing invasive alien species from ruining
Africa’s productive land and preventing invasive alien species from
entering Africa.

As an important step towards ensuring that communities living adjacent to
protected areas assume ownership of and take an active part in decision-
making processes and the management activities of protected areas, we
established a People and Parks Forum, which met for the first time in the
year 2004. An important outcome of this meeting was the development of a
comprehensive and ambitious action plan to address issues such as access
and benefit sharing, co-management and establishment of partnerships.

Later this year we’ll be holding a second meeting of the People and Parks
Forum. We felt it’s very unfair that people have been living on the land
and yet they don’t take any decisions regarding the parks, and they don’t
own them. They should know that these are their own parks.

On that note, not many people have access to parks as they cannot afford
the entry fees. As a department we created and launched what we call the
“Wild Card”. Once you’ve got your Wild Card, for which you pay only R200,
you can get access to all the parks, anywhere in South Africa, for the rest
of the year. [Applause.]

Some of the ramifications of climate change include the adverse weather
conditions that threaten the lives of people and their belongings. Last
year the SA Weather Service issued over 150 adverse weather warnings
through its website and the most prominent media.

To increase its nowcasting capabilities the SA Weather Service is going to
spend in excess of R6 million to expand its weather radar network this
year. We are already sharing weather radar data with Mozambique, with a
long-term goal of establishing a regional weather radar network involving
all our neighbours in SADC.

One weather phenomenon that causes major damage and loss of life in South
Africa is lightning. In the past financial year the SA Weather Service
installed a state-of-the-art lightning detection network that covers
Lesotho and Swaziland entirely, extending to some parts of Namibia,
Zimbabwe, Botswana and Mozambique, closer to our borders.
However, as a scientific organisation the SA Weather Service has a daunting
challenge of competing with several other scientific organisations for
scarce-skilled scientific personnel. To attract and keep skilled scientific
cadres the SA Weather Service is finalising its reward and remuneration
strategy.
In line with Jipsa, the Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition,
this strategy will also include increased investment in skills development
programmes in order to produce more meteorologists and atmospheric science
graduates.

The challenges of limited financial resources to meet the needs of a
developing country through Asgisa, the Accelerated and Shared Growth
Initiative for South Africa, against the backdrop of government’s
commitment to the people’s contract, have pressured the SA Weather Service
into walking a very tight rope between the public good and revenue
generation.

Over the past few years the SA Weather Service has embarked on a focused
commercialisation of some of its products and services. Its commercial
revenue now contributes more than 30% of the total revenue and it plans on
improving this situation.

As part of the implementation of the waste minimisation strategy, our
department is in the process of forging strategic partnerships with
industries involved in various waste streams. These partnerships are aimed
at encouraging voluntary compliance by the industry, thus creating an
enabling environment for the promulgation of the Waste Management Bill in
the near future.

We signed a memorandum of understanding with the glass industry last year,
in addition to the one we signed with the plastic bag industry. We aim to
sign another one with the tyre industry in the near future.

At the Reduce, Reuse and Recycle ministerial conference in Japan last year
we made a commitment globally to manage waste in a holistic fashion. South
Africa is one of the seven countries that have signed a grant agreement on
the African stockpile programme with the World Bank. We have called upon
everyone involved to declare obsolete pesticide stocks in their possession
so that these could be disposed of, using funding from the World Bank.

We notice that some farmers are still afraid to come forward, or maybe they
didn’t get the message. Please pass on the message. They won’t be arrested.
We know that there are some pesticides that have expired out there. Farmers
should come forward and contact their provincial offices. We are going to
use this money to assist them.

South Africa is also a developing country that has already initiated the
process of developing guidelines for the implementation of the Globally
Harmonised System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals.
In July 2004 we launched the West Indian Ocean land-based activities in
Madagascar. We took a robust approach in raising awareness and educating
the coastal communities on the importance of protecting marine environment
from pollution caused by land-based activities.

We’ve established task teams to deal with municipal water, physical
alteration and destruction of habitat. We are also starting to assess the
impact of litter from rivers on our oceans.

South Africa hosted the Global General Assembly for the Foundation for
Environmental Education, which is responsible for the Blue Flag and eco-
schools programme. The Blue Flag programme ensures that our beaches and
oceans are clean and safe for tourists and for our communities, while
generating employment and skills development opportunities for the local
people.

Allow me to conclude by thanking our Minister for his leadership, the
portfolio committee for the support and the oversight role that it plays,
sometimes under very difficult conditions.

I also wish to thank the director-general and her officials for their
tireless efforts to find better and innovative solutions to ensure a
healthier and safer environment for all.

A wise woman, Ruth Lilongula of the Solomon Islands, once said that -
   ... biodiversity is invaluable. We value our surroundings as our
   identity, as who we are, and our inheritance that is given to us. Our
   environment is many things, a classroom, a pharmacy and a supermarket.

Ndi a livhuwa. [I thank you.] [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister, the National Environmental
Management Act requires an environmental impact assessment to be carried
out before certain developments may be built. There can be no doubt that
there has been poor oversight by persons performing these assessments, and
this has been an area of concern to environmentalists.

The ACDP consequently welcomes the new EIA regulations, which are due to
take effect from 1 July. We trust that these new regulations, which are
streamlined to prevent unnecessary costs and delays, will also result in a
consistent application of statutory provisions relating to assessments.
These new regulations oblige the department to finalise decisions within 45
to 105 days. Questions have, however, arisen as to the department’s
capacity to cope with these shorter timeframes.

We must also ensure that politicians do not unlawfully interfere in the
process, for example, by personally approving a property development
application that should be left to officials to decide on, whether for
personal gain, which obviously would be illegal; or to gain support for a
political party, which would similarly be both undesirable and unlawful.

As far as fishing quotas are concerned, the ACDP welcomes the admission
that possible errors of judgement and policy have been made by the
department, which has caused damage to the fishing industry. We agree that
as far as possible, fishing rights should be returned to the true people of
the sea; those communities who have a natural sense of conservation of the
very resources they depend on for survival.

Poaching remains a significant problem, and thank you for alluding to that.
We are particularly concerned at allegations that law enforcement
officials, including officials from marine services and marine protection
vessels, are allegedly tipping off poachers.

As far as tourism is concerned, we welcome the increase in the contribution
for international tourism marketing, which will increase from R150 million
to R298 million in the 2008-09 year. In conclusion, the ACDP wishes to
commend and thank all dedicated members of this department. The ACDP will
support this Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs R A NDZANGA: Thank you, Chairperson. Whenever our members from the
opposite side speak ...
... bathetha ngathi ngabaseNgilane, asingabo bantu balapha. Bagxeka yonke
into eyenziwa ngulo rhulumente endaweni yokuba bamxhase. Kambe bafanele
ngobabamkelwa kuwo onke la mazwe. Bangaya eNgilane, eBritane, eAustralia
naphi na. Thina bantu abanje, ikhaya lethu linye, yiAfrika ukusukela eKapa
ukuya kutsho eCairo. [Kwaqhwatywa.] Yiyo loo nto kufuneka simxhasile
urhulumente wethu. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[... they speak like British citizens, but we are not people from there.
They criticise everything that’s being done by this government instead of
supporting it. However, they are justified in their behaviour and thinking
because they are welcomed in all these countries, be it England, Britain or
Australia. To people like me, there is only one home and that is Africa,
from Cape to Cairo. [Applause.] That is why we need to support our
government.]

Over the past decade, South Africa has enacted some of the world’s most
progressive environmental legislation. The aim of the legislation has been
to safeguard the country’s biodiversity based on the principles of equity,
accountability, participation, the right to clean and healthy environment,
and the right to have their environment protected.

In addition to a comprehensive body of legislation, South Africa has
implemented a number of policies designed to ensure more equitable access
to natural resources, and the entrenchment of the principles of
environmental sustainability. Protected areas coverage has tripled over the
past years, and has provided society with immeasurable benefits such as
clean water, fish stocks, flood protection and reduction of poverty through
supporting sustainable livelihoods.

Increasingly, protected areas are encouraged to join process for
sustainable international friendship, peace and security, through rapidly
growing transfrontier conservation area initiatives across the world.

As the ANC our message is to emphasise the urgent need to fill existing
gaps in the global protected areas system. There is also the need to ensure
participation and equitable sharing of the benefits of protected areas,
particularly with indigenous people and the local communities, and the need
to create the necessary enabling conditions, including appropriate
institutions and human capacity, policy, and legal framework and support.

We should also recognise that protected areas provide a number of valuable
ecosystem services in addition to protecting threatened species, and play
an important role in relation to mitigation and adaptation to climate
change.

Over recent decades the indigenous forests of South Africa have become much
reduced in area and highly fragmented, resulting in the gradual loss of
biodiversity from the region. However, the ecological effects of area loss,
fragmentation and environmental disturbances on forest communities remain
poorly understood.

The conservation of fresh water and fresh water resources will be among the
most pressing environmental issues facing us during the 21st century. Given
this scenario, it is not surprising that there is a tremendous need for
fresh water biologists to work with people and address these problems. A
multidisciplinary approach is truly required as the major threat to the
survival of fresh water is overfishing. But more often, this stems from
inappropriate land use practices, including deforestation, industry and
human pollution.

These activities that ultimately affect major rivers and lakes could arise
many hundreds of kilometres from the point where they kill the fish or
cause major deterioration of water quality. Clearly, the challenges to
conserve the world’s fresh water biodiversity are of enormous urgency,
requiring the intellectual energy of many wise students.

If you are interested in botany, you will never want to leave South Africa.
We have the third largest level of biodiversity in the world, and ours is
the only country to contain an entire floral kingdom. South Africa has
plant species that the whole British Isles or New Zealand do not have.
Species of plants occur within South African boundaries, of which 80% occur
nowhere else in the world.
Our incredible biodiversity is due to our unique physical features. Most of
the country is situated on a high-lying plateau, between two different
oceans. The Indian Ocean, on the east, is warmed by the Mozambique current,
which flows down from the tropics, while the icy Benguela current cools the
Atlantic, on the west coast, which comes up from Antarctica.

These two different oceans and the prevailing winds of South Africa,
combine to create lush forests and subtropical savannah on the east coast,
gradually changing to desert or semidesert on the south. Unfortunately this
immense natural wealth is under extreme pressure resulting from human
demand placed on the environment through economic development and
urbanisation.

Alien vegetation and the trade in wild life also contribute to the problem.
We must continuously remind each other that poverty, displacement, hunger,
degradation and climate change are a threat to this heritage. We must be
continuously reminded that we are living in a period in which poverty and
the ever-increasing gap between the developed and the developing worlds
pose a major threat to both global prosperity and environmental integrity.

We must be reminded of our shared future, our responsibility to one
another, to the great community and to life, and to our children. As a
vital contribution to the achievement of the millennium development goals
and the sustainable development targets set in the Johannesburg plan of
implementation, an expanded and comprehensive worldwide system of protected
areas must be mainstreamed within the framework of a pro-people and pro-
development agenda aimed at socioeconomic development and poverty
reduction.

It must have the full support and participation of local communities, the
youth and women, in decision-making processes that take account of their
rights, aspirations, cultures and interests. It must recognise and
strengthen community conservation areas, which have over the ages been
conserved through a traditional culture of our people.

In order to achieve the multiple goals of biodiversity and conservation ...
[Time expired.]

Bagaetsho, ke a leboga. A pula e ne! [Mahofi.] [My fellow South Africans,
thank you! [Applause.]]

Mr M U KALAKO: Deputy Chairperson, hon members, in looking into
achievements made by the marine and coastal management branch of the
Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, we see that in its efforts
to transform the fishing industry, it has put in place measures and is
building capacity to protect our marine living resources so as to preserve
them for future generations. As we assess and analyse challenges that are
faced by the department as a result of these developments, we have to
remind ourselves of some of the objectives and principles of the Marine
Living Resources Act, to see if we have in our implementation processes
followed the Act to the letter.

Among these objectives and principles I want to mention just a few.
Firstly, there is the need to conserve marine living resources for both
present and future generations. Secondly, there is the need to apply
precautionary approaches in respect of the management and development of
marine living resources and thirdly, the need to restructure the fishing
industry to address historical imbalances and to achieve equity within all
branches of the fishing industry.

It is against these objectives and principles that we must assess the
progress made by marine coastal management in transforming this industry.
With the passing of the Marine Living Resources Act of 1998, which was set
up to govern, among other things, the management of protected areas, we
have witnessed the gradual process of transforming the fishing industry in
all its aspects, not withstanding the resistance mounted by those who
previously enjoyed, under apartheid, monopoly control and ownership of our
marine resources.

This was done through taking the department and the Minister to court to
challenge the government’s transformation policies. But the department
never capitulated in its efforts to pursue the transformation agenda of the
government, which resulted in the broadening of ownership and participation
in our marine resources. The department must be commended for such steps.

While we commend and encourage the department in its endeavours to
transform the industry, transformation has brought new challenges that
confront the marine and coastal management. Amongst these we can mention
the threat to our species by overfishing or fish species that are becoming
extinct either through poaching or climate change.

The migration of some fisheries from our West Coast fishing towns resulted
in high levels of unemployment in these areas. All of this points to a
dilemma that is faced by the marine coastal management whenever it is time
for rights allocations, and that is decreasing levels of our marine living
resources and the rapid increase of participants.

In order to meet these challenges the department must accelerate its
efforts to look for new fisheries. It has an obligation to make sure that
it concludes the development of subsistence fisheries policies in order to
assist coastal communities. This together with the development of an
aquaculture policy will assist in providing a sustainable livelihood for
these coastal communities. These efforts together with the creation of
economic opportunities in fishing harbours will go a long way in assisting
our coastal communities.

Last week, Minister, there have been disturbing reports about collaboration
of the MCM law enforcers with poachers taking place on board the Sarah
Baartman vessel. It has been reported that officers on board are passing
information to poachers about the movement of the vessels that are
protecting our marine resources. As this has been brought to your
attention, Minister, we hope those officials will be disciplined and be
dismissed from the department.

There is a growing tendency on the part of exclusive residential and
golfing estates situated at the coast, to prohibit access to beaches and
the sea to ordinary people. Communities along the Garden Route especially
along the coast around Knysna, Plettenberg Bay and Noetzie are angry
because they are barred from enjoying natural amenities used by their
families for generations. People in these areas are beginning to suspect
that this type of coastal development is used as a new form of economic
apartheid to create an elite area. This denies these communities their
livelihood. The department must find ways to prevent coastal development
from being used as a mechanism for social exclusion and must ensure
unhindered public access to the coast. The committee and the ANC support
this budget. I thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Madam Chair. It remains our greatest challenge to
maintain and develop our environment, while at the same time improving the
quality of life for all South Africans. To balance these two systems it is
necessary for us to maintain a functional ecosystem, stabilize biodiversity
and manage a successful system of waste, pollutants and resource
extractions.

The strategic objectives of the department to maintain such ends are
clearly spelled out in its programme commitments and the numerous
activities and initiative it has undertaken. However, though the department
has a clear intention to preserve our environment, progress needs to be
made to achieve sustainable development.

Tourism is one of our greatest sources of revenue and it is important for
our economy that tourism is maintained at a peak and that South Africa
remains a favoured tourist destination. The MF seeks the department’s
embarking on initiatives with the Department of Safety and Security to
ensure the safety of our tourists. I would further like to be briefed on
the department’s initiatives to assist black-owned tourism enterprises.

In terms of the budget the MF supports the increase made to the department.
However, noting that 72% of the department’s budget is dispensed through
subsidies and transfer payments, the MF enquires as to whether
organisations promoting tourism have been monitored for their success in
that arena.

The Environmental Quality and Protection Programme, through legislation,
plays a vital role in protecting our constitutional right to an environment
that is not harmful to our health. In the light of the National Air Quality
Act of 1994, we ask whether the department is monitoring industries’
compliance with these provisions. We acknowledge that the department also
manages our marine sector and the MF’s response to the Marine and Coastal
Management Programme asks whether the National Oil Spill Contingency Plan
will take over the rescue and rehabilitation of sea birds. We do feel that
it is incumbent upon government to perform this duty and assistance should
be allowed from NGOs that previously took it upon themselves to assist
these helpless creatures.

The MF is confident that this year’s budget shall sufficiently assist the
department in fulfilling its objectives for the sector. The MF supports the
budget.

Mr I M CACHALIA: Madam Chair, Minister, Deputy Minister, ladies and
gentlemen. Global climate change, often referred to as global warming, is
possibly the greatest challenge facing the world this century. It emanates
from the build-up of human emissions and heat-trapping gasses in the
atmosphere.

The resulting greenhouse effect can thereby cause long-term climate change.
There are two main mechanisms to counteract this process. The Kyoto
Protocol adopted in Kyoto in Japan in 1997 and the United Nations Framework
on Climate Change established in 1992. South Africa is a signatory to this
initiative. The Kyoto Protocol commits countries like the United States and
Canada to legally binding targets to reduce these emissions to at least the
levels of 1990 during the period 2008-12.

South Africa ratified the Kyoto Protocol in March 2002, becoming the 52nd
country to do so. The starkest evidence of climate change is the shrinking
of the icecaps and the melting of the glaciers. Less specific signs include
rising average temperatures and changing weather patterns. Polar bears
could disappear by 2100.

There could be serious consequences for bird, plant and animal life, for
rising sea levels will flood low-lying lands. More extreme weather
conditions will precipitate hurricanes and tropical storms of greater
intensity. Heating of the Arctic threatens the livelihood of millions of
people. In the region were the Inuit people live, one resident, ruefully
casting his gaze into the future, stated, “Some day we will not have any
snow; someday there will not be Eskimos.”

Global climate change is a serious threat to sustainable development
especially in the developing world and could further undermine global power
to alleviation efforts, and will have severe implications for food
security, clean energy supply, environmental health and human settlement.

African research suggests that 25% of people on this continent will be
affected by a significant decrease in rainfall and water availability by
2070. South Africa’s economy is vulnerable to the possible response
measures to global warming, since the economy is highly dependent on income
from the production, processing, export and consumption of coal. This
vulnerability extends fatally to all facets of the energy sector. Sir David
King, the British scientist and adviser to Prime Minister Tony Blair,
stated:

  If you could stabilise the atmosphere carbon dioxide concentration at some
  reliably low levels, there is still a good chance of mitigating the worst
  effects of climate change.

As a result of these emissions millions of more people around the world may
in future be exposed to the risk of hunger, drought, flooding and
debilitating diseases such as malaria. The United States is the world’s
greatest polluter of greenhouse gases on the planet. It is responsible for
more than 20% of the world’s pollution, yet harbours only 4% of its
population.

In 2001 the United States walked away from the Protocol at the behest of
George Bush, a climate change denialist, arguing that its curbs on
greenhouse emissions were too costly and unfairly excluded developing
countries.

Guy Midgeley of the SA Biodiversity Institute says, “Climate change is the
real and significant threat to biodiversity”. This threat has also the
potential to damage poor tourism, which contributes R100 billion every year
to our economy. To quote The Sunday Independent of 6 February 2005:

  Global meltdown will hit South Africa hard. Catastrophic loss of animal
  species and water shortages, hunger and diseases lie in wait as
  temperatures rise.

The Sunday Independent newspaper continues:

  The forests of the world act as a carbon sink, soaking up green houses
  gases from the atmosphere. The place where Sister Dorothy Strang lost her
  life fighting to protect the Amazon forest is marked by a simple wooden
  cross pushed into the mud of a track running deep though the jungle.

  A few plastic flowers were scattered all over the ground with a young
  sapling in a plastic grow bag. It is just about a year since sister
  Dorothy was murdered, allegedly shot by a gunman hired by a local rancher.
  The cause to which she devoted 30 years of her life remains imperilled as
  ever.

Quoting from The Star of 13 February 2005, it is said that –

  Even the simple act of planting trees could help and will play a part in
  absorbing harmful gases and the care demonstrated this way may expose
  those greedy destroyers of the world’s remaining forests and other natural
  habitats for the selfish creatures they are.

Our Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, Mr Martinus van
Schalkwyk said in August 2005:

  Climate change is a very powerful threatening reality. If South Africa
  does not act immediately it will cost the country 1,5% of its GDP by 2050;
  roughly equivalent to the total direct investment in South Africa.

It is critically important that South Africa addresses the issue of climate
change, as lack of action in this sphere could have serious consequences
for South Africa and for the poor, marginalised communities in particular.
Climate change could impact negatively on agriculture, putting food
security in peril and threatening the livelihood and the very survival of
the rural poor.

Our coastal areas could be vulnerable to rising sea levels and become prone
to flooding, posing a danger not only to those dependent on the sea and
marine culture for a living, but also to their very lives. Severe weather
events such as heat waves and hurricanes are a potential risk to all.

The technology to halt global warming already exists, and implementing the
same in our county and elsewhere in the world should start immediately.
Large-scale use of technology will reduce the emissions by at least 1
billion tons by 2004.

The recent ICLEI conference on local government for sustainability held in
Cape Town showcased wideranging benefits for municipalities of tapping into
local renewal energy sources, including reducing the strain on electricity
grids, reducing gas emissions and saving money for both municipalities and
consumers.

Local renewables are energy resources unique or suited to a particular
locality and include solar energy. These forms of energy are clean and do
not release harmful gases into the atmosphere. Under the Kyoto Protocol the
clean development mechanism allows industrialised countries with emission
reduction targets to meet part of those commitments by investing in project
development in countries such as South Africa.

A TV campaign by the advertising council and an environmental group, uses
stark imagery of a child about to be run over by a train to drive home its
point on global warming. There is no time to remove the child. In order to
save the child you have to stop the train; in order to save the world we
have to stop global warming.

The debate now is no longer about what we are going to do about it. Just a
decade ago on a winter’s day in Kliptown we adopted the Freedom Charter and
said South Africa belongs to all who live in it. Today we in the ANC-led
government in the Parliament of South Africa say to those nations that have
failed to honour the protocol that this world belong to all who live in it.
They must heed the dire signs and the warnings of the consequences of
climate change and heed and respect the international concerns and
conventions, and implement immediate measures to counteract the
consequences of global warming. It is incumbent upon us to save and protect
our world from the disastrous consequences of the already present and
looming threat posed by this phenomenon.

We need to do this for our children and for all the future generations to
come. It is the right thing to do. We support the budget.

Mr S SIMMONS: Chair, hon Minister and colleagues, the Department of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism is probably the department that is the
most underestimated by ordinary people in terms of its socioeconomic role.
This is despite the fact that tourism has clearly outperformed other
sectors of our economy and still holds great potential for further
socioeconomic growth. This industry is, nevertheless, showing signs that
leave reason for concern. One such distressing issue is the manner in which
tourism seems to be exploited by some operators who inflate prices beyond
what should be seen as fair. This needs to be attended to by the
department.

The situation within the fishing industry is one for which this department
seems unable to find an acceptable solution. It is not acceptable to have a
few PR exercises claiming to have addressed the problem of fishing quotas
among our fishing communities, just to see the very same people not having
the situation adequately addressed.

The same fishing communities are still suffering because of inconsistent
access to marine resources, and under the current political leadership
there seems to be no reasonable prospect of these people’s situation
changing significantly in the near future. I am not surprised at this.

U moet onthou, agb Voorsitter, die agb Minister het nie juis ’n positiewe
rekord wat betref opbou nie. Inteendeel, die agb Minister se rekord is
vervuil met die afbreek van goeie strukture, die afbreek van ’n
jeugorganisasie wat goed gefunksioneer het, toe die afbreek van die NNP en
nou die afbreek van die sosioekonomiese vooruitgang van ons
vissersgemeenskappe.

Die jongste imbizo is die grootste klug, want die agb Minister was nooit
gretig om te luister na die mening van die mense na wie se belange hy moet
omsien nie. So het die agb Minister die wense van die NNP-lede en sy
ondersteuners om nie by die ANC aan te sluit nie totaal geïgnoreer. Agb
Voorsitter, die agb Minister sal die wense van die vissersgemeenskappe ook
ignoreer en sorg dat hulle verder in armoede krepeer. Nieteenstaande
voorvermelde, ondersteun die United Party of South Africa die
begrotingspos. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[You must bear in mind, hon Chairperson, that the hon Minister does not
exactly have a positive record of reconstruction. On the contrary, the hon
Minister’s record is littered with examples of the destruction of good
structures, the destruction of a youth organisation that functioned well,
then the destruction of the NNP and now of socioeconomic progress of our
fishing communities.

The latest imbizo is the greatest farce, because the hon Minister was never
eager to listen to the views of the people whose interests he must serve.
In the same way the hon Minister ignored the wishes of the NNP members and
his supporters not to join the ANC. Hon Chairperson, the hon Minister will
also ignore the wishes of the fishing communities and will ensure that they
will continue to live in abject poverty. Notwithstanding the
abovementioned, the United Party of South Africa supports the budget Vote.
I thank you.]

Ms M M NTULI: Chairperson, Minister, Deputy Minister, Ministers and Deputy
Ministers present in the House, Members of Parliament and honourable
guests, I am very honoured indeed to participate in this Budget Vote
debate. The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism is huge, and
I’m going to refer to its Programme 6: Social Responsibility and Projects
that is part of broader government objectives to alleviate poverty and
create employment opportunities through government expenditure.

Programme 6: Social Responsibility and Projects is very important, more
particularly in changing people’s lives. This has been witnessed by this
year’s budget, as it constitutes the second largest figure within the
entire budget for the year 2006 in the Department of Environmental Affairs
and Tourism. Now, the big question facing us is whether the poorest of the
poor will benefit directly from this budget.

Kuyiqiniso ukuthi abesifazane nentsha basalokhu besalele ngasemuva,
ikakhulukazi uma kuthinta intuthuko nomnotho wakuleli. Kunezinhlelo
ezisunguliwe ezifukula umnotho ezinjengo-Accelerated and Shared Growth
Initiative for South Africa, Asgisa, no-Joint Initiative for Priority
Skills Acquisition, Jipsa, okucacayo ukuthi kusadinga kuqiniswe uma
kuthinta imiphakathi empofu, ngoba uma kungenjalo kuyobe kulokhu
kunesikhala phakathi kwalaba abadla izambane likampondo nalaba abadla
imbuya ngothi. I-Sector Education Traning Authority, Seta, futhi nayo
kufanele isebenze ubusuku nemini ukukhanyisela thina okusahlwile ngoba
lentuthuko esikhuluma ngayo siyoyikhomba uma singaqeqeshwa kuleyo mikhakha
esingena kuyo. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[It is true that women and youth are still trailing behind when it comes to
economic development in this country. There are programmes in place that
have been established specifically to develop economic growth, such as the
Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative of South Africa, Asgisa, and the
Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition, Jipsa. It is therefore
clear that we still need to do more when it comes to the empowerment of the
poor, because if we do not do that there will be a lasting lacuna between
the first economy and the second economy. The Sector Education and Training
Authority, Seta, should work day and night training those of us who do not
have knowledge, because we will not enjoy the fruits of this democracy if
we are not trained for the businesses we start.]

This budget should talk to the previously disadvantaged people more than to
the stinking rich ones. The President has announced the rural nodes, and I
believe that this budget should also play a big role in this regard. During
our oversight visit, we came across initiated projects. Although some of
these projects reflected a lack of capacity and skills, it is true that
today is better than yesterday and that tomorrow will be better than today,
and surely this is the age of hope.

Some projects were doing well, but for others the sustainability was not
clear. For instance, there was a garden project at KwaMnqobokazi in KwaZulu-
Natal in which the seeds were overdue and not properly planted. Again, the
irrigation was not arranged in time, and you could see that the team was
not prepared for the project even though they were full of enthusiasm.
Another good project was at KwaJobe in the same province in which women had
very good handcraft under a big tree. When you begin to compare hot, rainy
and cold weather, you can imagine what happens to this good project on such
days. Today, with such a good budget, those are the people to be uplifted,
so that one day they can operate under sheltered conditions.

There are so many ways and means in which the previously disadvantaged can
benefit, but they are totally indirect. If we look at Klip River running
through Soweto and Kliptown to the Vaal River, it is a priceless jewel that
can be developed into a viable tourist attraction, which can benefit our
communities. This needs the collaboration of the three spheres of
government to do research in this regard. This could bring business and
projects to the banks of this river, like restaurants, vegetable gardens -
you name them. This could create a lot of jobs and broaden the tax base for
the relevant municipality.

Other important issues are ways and means of waste awareness such as the
cleanest town competition, a national initiative that can capacitate people
around waste management, recycling programmes and environmental awareness.
This also emphasises the three R’s, that is reducing, reusing and
recycling; and these involve people on the ground.

Uma ngingake ngicaphune lapha kwezemvelo nezokuvakasha, kubuhlungu
ngaphakathi ukubona imisebenzi emihle yomama eklele e-Beach Front eThekwini
okuthi ngokuhlwa kume owomdabu waseNdiya noma isiqumama esithile esimhlophe
neveni sesizoqoqa. Kuhle kucace ukuthi labo mama bamele omunye umuntu okuba
uyena ohlomulayo bona bathole izimvuthu. Sithi-ke lesi sabiwomali asisize
kubantu abanjengalaba ukuze bakwazi ukuzimela. Kunjalo nje sibheke kwiNdebe
yoMhlaba yebhola likanobhutshuzwayo ka-2010 kuleli lakithi. Kuyoba kuhle
uma nemiphakathi empofu iyohlomula nalapho, kube ukuthi umkhakha nomkhakha
uyayiqeqesha lemiphakathi empofu ukuzilungiselela phela ukuze u-2010 ufike
sesimi ngomumo. Ngiyaphinda ngithi namhlanje kungcono kunayizolo futhi
nakusasa kuyobe kungcono kunanamhlanje ngoba phela kunohla lwemisebenzi
emikhulu esungulwe uMnyango wezeMvelo nezokuVakasha elwisana nobuphofu.
Nansi eminye yawo:
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[If I can touch on the issue of environmental affairs and tourism, it is
very sad to see the beautiful craftwork of women displayed at the Beach
Front in eThekwini being loaded into bakkies by wealthy men of Indian
origin or white tycoons. It must be said that these women are the shadows
of certain rich people who are really the ones who make money out of the
women’s craftwork and they simply get a few cents of that. We therefore say
that this budget should help these women so that they can become
independent. And again we are looking forward to the 2010 World Cup here in
South Africa. How good it would be if these poor people could also get
something out of it. These women would have to be trained so that when 2010
comes, they will be well-armed and ready to rock and roll. I say again that
today is better than yesterday and tomorrow will be better than today,
because a lot of projects are brought about by this Department of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism which fight poverty. Some of them are
...]

... working on waste, people and parks, sustainable land-based livelihoods,
working for tourism, working for the coast ...

... njalo, njalo. Ngenxa yale misebenzi kusunguleke izinkulungwane
zamathuba emisebenzi kwaze kwaqeqeshwa nabantu emiphakathini yethu.
Lemisebenzi-ke isezifundazweni ezehlukahlukene futhi ihlelwe ukusetshenzwa
ngezandla kunemishini okubizwa phecelezi nge-Labour Intensive. Injalo nje
ihlose ukwelekelela ekuvikeleni imvelo kanye nokweseka izinhlelo
zokuvakasha nokungcebeleka. Ngobungako bayo lemisebenzi ihlangabeza
nokwashiwo uMongameli wakuleli, uThabo Mbeki, owagcizelela enkulumweni
yakhe yesizwe ngokuqinisekisa ngohlelo lomsebenzi womphakathi olweluliwe
olubizwa nge-Expanded Public Works Programme.

Sengigcina ngifisa ukuthi thina sonke asiphume siyoshumayela emiphakahtini
yakithi ukuthi impumelelo isezandleni zethu. Nanti ifa lemvelo uMdali
asipha lona, asilisebenzise. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[... etc. Because of these projects there are a lot of job opportunities
that were created and many people were trained. These projects are in
different provinces and they are labour intensive. These projects are also
aimed at securing the environment and also supporting tourism and
recreation. These projects also meet what President Thabo Mbeki said in his
State of the Nation address, when he spoke of the Expanded Public Works
Programme.

In conclusion, I wish to say that we all need to go out and preach to our
people that success is in our hands. Here is the inheritance that God gave
us, let us use it.]

The ANC supports the Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Mr G R MORGAN: Chair, Minister, hon members, let me say at the outset that
Minister Van Schalkwyk continues to place his media profile ahead of public
accountability. Instead of using the appropriate forum of this House to
announce his department’s plans for the upcoming year, he chose to make the
announcements at a media briefing this morning. This serves only to
undermine this House when a Minister believes the media is more important
than the representatives of the people. [Interjections.]

Having said that, Mr Minister, your media profile in your second year of
office was considerably lower than in your first year. I can only imagine
that your new party leader has been forced to slap you down in recent
months, something with which you are not unfamiliar.

Government’s Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa maps
out ambitious plans that aim to take this country to upwards of 6% growth
per annum. A cornerstone of this policy is the massive infrastructure-
building programme. This is an exciting policy and is to be welcomed, but
we must at all times balance the needs of development with the needs of the
environment.

Over the coming months and years the rigorous use of environmental impact
assessments will become crucial to ensuring that good development is
promoted. Government’s new EIA regulations are to be welcomed provided they
live up to everything they are meant to be. The biggest problems relating
to EIAs are, firstly, insufficient and poorly trained staff in provincial
environment departments and, secondly, the lack of independence of some
environmental assessment practitioners.

No matter how good the new EIA regulations are, the so-called streamlined
process of applications could be a disaster if incompetent departmental
staff oversees the process. Further, the environmental assessment
practitioners in the private sector must move swiftly, with the
encouragement of the Minister, to complete the regulation of their own
profession to ensure that practitioners are qualified and registered with
the governing body.
I would like to lend my support to the call made earlier this year by the
Endangered Wildlife Trust for a national strategic environmental
assessment. This would not be a hindrance to development projects. In many
ways, it could advance development, as such an assessment would readily
highlight those areas of our country that can sustain various types of
development.

It would have been preferable in these days, when Asgisa is on the lips of
every government official, for the national strategy for sustainable
development to have already been completed. I’ve seen a draft copy of the
report and must commend its wide-ranging scope and honest assessment of the
challenges. The debate must now start, however, about which authority
should implement the strategy. While Cabinet tasked the Department of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism with drawing up the strategy, I do not
believe that the Minister has the necessary political clout to be its co-
ordinator.

The national strategy for sustainable development needs a champion higher
than the Minister. It is a strategy that should sit alongside Asgisa and
for this reason, it should be housed in the Office of the Deputy President.

The training and roll-out of new environmental management inspectors is to
be welcomed as well. Over the past two years I have stood up in this budget
debate and praised the quality of our environmental laws, but bemoaned the
fact that enforcement remained sketchy at all three levels of government.

The new inspectors will improve enforcement, but don’t stop now, Mr
Minister, we need even more inspectors and I’m glad you have set yourself a
timeline for the improvement; and they need to be accessible to the public.
There are thousands of illegal building projects and environmental hazards
that need to be investigated and prosecuted in this country. I think,
particularly here, of the numerous cases of acid-mine drainage in Gauteng
and Kwa-Zulu Natal that threaten water quality, the dirty Jukskei River and
other rivers that remain a dumping ground for polluters, not to mention the
thousands of tons of coal dust with a high sulphur content that have been
lying around the precincts of Richards Bay Harbour for five years. More
inspectors and prosecutors and more of your beloved Green Scorpions would
restore the image of environmental enforcement at all levels of government.

The move to ban canned hunting has progressed steadily since last year. The
new hunting and threatened species policies provide the necessary framework
to manage these sectors, but provinces remain the ultimate enforcers of
these laws. I’m confident that these new regulations will be successful if
provincial officials act in the best interests of conservation. A warning
though: a by-product of ending the canned hunting industry will be an
animal welfare crisis for thousands of captive-bred predators that are
currently intended to fuel the industry. Government must plan to deal with
the more than 2 500 lions and other predators that will need homes in the
near future.

Mr Minister, I urge you to finalise the elephant management policy for the
country. We need good science to back up management decisions concerning
this species of charismatic megafauna. On the same note concerning hunting,
I ask you to seriously consider banning the use of gin traps.

Turning to the Great Limpopo Transfrontier Park, something that you did not
mention in your speech at all, there has been little progress with regard
to dealing with the Zimbabwean portion of the park. The fact that Minister
Van Schalkwyk claims to have flown over Gonarezhou National Park and not
noticed any illegal settlers does not mean that there are not any settlers.
Even the Zimbabwean environment Minister, Francis Nhema, admits there are
illegal settlers in the park and says, to make matters worse, that he has
no plans to move them - and so Minister Van Schalkwyk’s denialism
continues.

In closing, Mr Minister, while practically all the directorates and
entities under you are fiscally well run, there is one that is of serious
concern, the SA Weather Service. The procurement procedures of the Weather
Service have been severely flawed over the past two years. It seems that
they believe they can exempt themselves from certain procurement procedures
due to reasons of emergency, and, believe me, these emergencies are not
earthquakes, tsunamis or storms. In most cases, emergencies at the Weather
Service mean bad planning and incompetence. I’m happy that the Weather
Service will be called before Scopa in the coming weeks.

Yes, hope, Minister, hope: Tourists hope that they will not be mugged in
the Table Mountain National Park. Law-abiding citizens in the Eastern Cape
hope that you’ll put an end to abalone poaching. The farmer living
downstream from an illegal dam hopes that you will remove the dam. You like
to quote Beyers Naudé, Mr Minister, on hope. Well, I prefer Benjamin
Franklin: “He that lives upon hope will die fasting.” Mr Minister, let’s
not hope; let’s do. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A D MOKOENA: Chairperson, Minister, Deputy Minister, officials of the
department and Members of Parliament, it is an honour and privilege for me
to participate in this Budget Vote as a member of the portfolio committee,
speaking on behalf of the ANC in support of the R2, 6 billion appropriated
by this Parliament to the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism,
DEAT, to carry out its mandate.

My input will be based on tourism. I have identified nine areas of focus;
the first is transformation. After the ushering in of the democratic
dispensation in our country in 1994, we had a political duty to democratise
society. This meant that there had to be drastic changes in various sectors
of society.

Every government department came under pressure and scrutiny from MPs to
ensure that transformation took place. Tragically, the crescendo of
transformation is gradually diminishing, perhaps because the vocalisation
and campaign have become trite and too commonplace. We must rekindle the
campaign of transformation. The ANC is serious about transformation.

We must not take for granted the democracy we have achieved. Democracy
without economic empowerment is a hollow achievement and has a potential to
threaten democracy itself.

We are happy with the blackening of the staff complement and gender
representation in the department. This must, however, filter down to
provinces and municipalities. However, the challenge still remains on the
part of the tourism industry. This sector of our economy virtually resists
transformation. To them, despite 27 April 1994, it is business as usual.

The white captains of the tourism industry are the architects of an
economic laager to keep all wealth to themselves, thus leaving even white
women, let alone black entrepreneurs, out in the cold.

South Africa is a developmental state and we have a moral and political
duty to intervene decisively, hon Minister, through installing legislative
measures that are couched in economic incentives that are more far-reaching
than the carrot we are currently dangling.

A spectacular example of lack of transformation in the tourism industry is
the tourism indaba that was recently held in Durban, where the industry
exhibited its wherewithal. The categories of competition virtually excluded
blacks, women and people living with disability. Only white males,
predictably, were announced as winners.

Secondly, there is the Sho’t Left campaign. Hon Minister, the concept of
Sho’t Left has its roots in the township as a jargon between commuters and
taxi drivers to indicate an impromptu stop for the passenger to alight. It
was an ingenious idea for the department to adopt this township
transportation jargon in order to promote domestic tourism. This creative
strategy was regrettably hijacked by big players in the tourism industry
and flew like a kite virtually above the heads of black tourism operators.

The big white tour operators own luxury vehicles, which they use for the
Sho’t Left campaign, whereas SMME tour operators cannot afford them unless
boosted by such a campaign. These white captains of the tourism industry
subsequently engaged in self-congratulation and pride themselves on how
they collaborate with government.

No, far from it, they are actually inhibiting a noble plan of government,
to promote domestic tourism by lifting up black tour operators so that they
can taste the fruits of liberation through tourism, which they are involved
in.

SA Tourism must invite the taxi leadership and work out strategies on
involving taxi owners in the Sho’t Left campaign in order to broaden the
commuter market share and thus reduce the prevalent incidence of taxi
violence.

Thirdly, I come to the BEE Charter and scorecard. At the tourism indaba
that was held in Durban last year our Minister launched the BEE Charter,
the essence of which is to encourage white tourism entrepreneurs to make
available 30% of their companies to blacks as a way of enabling them to be
part of the tourism cake. In return, tourism businesses that adhere to this
charter would qualify for and access government tenders and patronage.

We were present as MPs and participated in the launch, and congratulate the
Minister and the department for taking such a significant step. This is
what we mean by desirable and decisive government intervention in black
economic empowerment and transformation as a whole.

Fourthly, I’ll talk about Mebuso ya selehae – local government. Adjust your
listening devices for the interpretation, please.

Letona le hlomphehileng, maetong a komiti ya rona ya palamente ha re ne re
etela dibaka tse fapaneng, bo-mmasepala ba bangata ba ile ba bontsha
takatso le tjheseho e kgolo ho ikakgeleng ka setotswana mererong ya
bohahlaodi. Empa bothata ba bona ke hobane ba sena ditekanyetso tsa
ditjhelete, ho ntshetsa pele merero ya lefapha lena la bohahlaodi.

Jwale he Letona, ke etsa boipiletso ho wena hore o buisane le mosebetsi
mmoho le wena, eleng letona la mebuso ya selehae hore le rale maano a ho
hlwekisa makeishene hore a tle a be le tikoloho e kgahlehang. Hona ho tla
phahamisa maemo a bohahlaodi ka hare ho naha hobane makeishene ke sefahleho
sa naha, ebile a ka sehloohong mabapi le leano la ho matlafatsa batho
moruong.

Etswe batjha le bona ba tla qala ho elellwa hore bahahlaodi ke batho ba
bohlokwa ho phahamiseng moruo le ho ntshetseng pele mesebetsi naheng ena ya
rona. Makeishene a se ke a nkuwa feela e le dibaka tse tlase tsa batho ba
sotlehang, ba lokelang ho hauhelwa. (Translation of Sesotho paragraphs
follows.)

[Hon members, when our parliamentary committee visited various places, many
municipalities showed an interest in committing themselves to the tourism
programmes. But their problem is that they don’t have a budget to carry on
with these programmes.

Therefore I appeal to you to approach your colleague, the hon Minister for
Provincial and Local Government, so that you can make plans to clean up the
townships to create an attractive environment. This will improve the
standard of tourism in the townships, because they are the face of the
country and come first in the programme of developing the people’s economy.

Furthermore, young people will start to realise that tourists are very
important in improving the level of the economy and developing job
opportunities in the country. Townships mustn’t be downgraded to places for
poor and helpless people.]

Fifth, with regard to Asgisa and Jipsa, the campaign for accelerating
skills development to ensure economic prosperity is exciting and imperative
- a holistic programme of government that must be embraced by all.

Theta, as our sectoral education and training authority, must come up with
concrete plans on how it is going to instrumentalise Asgisa and Jipsa. The
portfolio committee will invite Theta soon as part of our oversight
function.

Sixth, I address myself to 2010 Soccer World Cup readiness. Minister, it is
heartening indeed to learn from you that DEAT is well geared to playing its
role in the 2010 Soccer World Cup, which our country will be hosting. The
portfolio committee compliments Sis Pam, the Director-General, Dr Patrick
Matlau, the Deputy Director-General, and Mr Moeketsi Mosola, the CEO of SA
Tourism, for their proactive endeavours in regard to tourism.

Seventh, with regard to women and youth for tourism, I would like to
propose to you, hon Minister, that you should consider introducing and
launching a new campaign: “Women and youth for tourism”, as part of our
strategy to boost domestic tourism in particular, in the context of
celebrating the 30th anniversary of June 16 this year.

The campaign could produce women and youth who can become tour guides and
operators, the details of which can be worked out by the department.
[Applause.]

Eighth, I come to the development of the Soweto Klipriver waterway.
Minister, I received, with great excitement, a novel idea from Comrade
David Maluleke, an MP, who is also the whip of the portfolio committee. His
idea is to develop the Klipriver that runs across Soweto and spills into
the Vaal River to become a spectacular waterway similar to the Waterfront.

Such a development could be handled jointly by the Department of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism and the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry, and has an enormous potential to serve as an excellent tourist
attraction, as well as create many job opportunities across a wide spectrum
of the economy. This idea gels with the strategies the Department of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism of revitalising the ecosystem of the Vaal
River. [Interjections.] I will deal with you. You should put on your
listening devices.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, I hope you have already
dealt with point nine, because your time has expired.

Mr A D MOKOENA: The ANC supports this Vote. It’s a pity that the member is
spared discipline. [Interjections.] Don’t envy the position of the
Minister. [Interjections.] He has executive authority to execute his task.
Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Thank you, Chairperson,
I would like to thank those parties that expressed support for the Budget,
for the support expressed. I will deal with some of the comments made,
inter alia, by the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee, by hon members
Ndzanga, Ntuli, hon members Chalmers, Mr Swart from the ACDP and Mr Swart
from the DA as well.

Let me first deal with the issue of tourism: We appreciate the comments.
Over the next three years we’ve budgeted an additional R136 million for the
marketing part of South African Tourism’s budget. What we will be doing is
obviously to continue to concentrate on our key traditional markets:
Britain, the Netherlands, France and so on. They have always been strong
markets and they will continue to be strong and important markets. However,
our focus will now be broadening.

We will be concentrating on some countries where South African Tourism
hasn’t had offices in the past. We’ve opened offices in China, as well as
in Japan and those two markets will be two very important markets for us in
future. So we are investing in them and we are quite sure that they will
continue, not to grow steadily, but I believe, quite dramatically.

With regard to Africa – that is also a key market for us – the figures for
the last year look quite promising. Just an interesting fact: some of the
latest research shows that the bigger spenders per capita in this country
are no longer international tourists from the US, but from a country very
close to us – Angola. Some of the hon members referred to the fact that it
is the fastest growing sector of the economy and we intend to make sure
that for the next few years it stays that way.

One issue that was raised by the hon Mr Swart, was the issue of air access
– we agree with you. We think it is an important issue that we need to
solve. The one example that you mentioned of charter flights, is one where
we had to intervene in one or two instances, but the problem there was –
and I cannot remember if it is the same example that you mentioned here –
that some of the safety documents that had to be supplied by the charter
company was not supplied in time. Now, obviously, safety of people flying
to this country is a very important issue to us and we would like to make
sure that we adhere to the international regulations in that regard.

The President has instructed the key departments, the Department of
Transport, ourselves, Public Enterprises and Trade and Industry, to come
back to Cabinet on the issue of air access and I hope we will be able to
crack that issue, because we have to balance the fact that we have a
national carrier also with is in our national interest in terms of tourists
coming to South Africa at the best available prices. So we will report back
to Parliament on that issue, obviously.

Then, on the issue of the Environmental Impact Assessment regulations that
was raised by Mr Swart and other members here: We announced the new EIA
regulations a few weeks ago and we are quite confident that they will make
a huge difference. It is not often that government commits itself to
timeframes – the hon member referred to that – and we will obviously do our
best to keep within those timeframes. At national level I can give the
unqualified assurance that we will be able to do that. We have already
increased our capacity. It is at provincial level where the major challenge
is, in four or five of the provinces. I referred to the fact that we have
created a specially funded unit to assist provinces and to support
provinces in applying the new regulations.

Then, on the issue of the profession itself: That is the third dimension -
I see that Prof Seaman is in the gallery - he is leading the process to
make sure that we unite all the stakeholders. Anybody can be an
environmental consultant or practitioner. We would like an authority that
we can recognise with standards and with a code of conduct with teeth. So,
hopefully, this will happen within the next few months – not hopefully; we
expect that from the industry. If they do not do it, we said we would do it
for them, but all the indications are that from their process they will
come to us with proposals that we can seriously consider and then move
forward.

On the issue of international agreements that was raised by some of the hon
members, I think the hon member Chalmers was the first to raise it: Yes,
there are 28 international and regional treaties, conventions and protocols
related to the environment; 33 bilateral agreements; six international and
regional tourism agreements; and four TFCA agreements. The hon member
referred to the fact that we now have the branch dedicated to servicing
those agreements in treaties and protocols, but the challenge is also to
make sure that, as a country, intellectually, we can always contribute and
play a leadership role. I have no doubt that the record, as the hon member
pointed out, is supporting that.

On the issue of the fishing industry and the Coastal Zone Bill: It is quite
interesting to me that the DA has become very fond of quoting Cosatu and
the SACP when it suits them. [Interjections.] We can provide them with a
long list of quotes that they can come and quote here in Parliament. It is
very often an indication, when people are not really sure if they believe
strongly enough in their own convictions, to quote somebody else.
[Interjections.] [Applause.] Let me deal with those two issues.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order, please! Order, members!

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: In the fishing industry
the record of this government in making sure that we restore the rights of
people who are historically fishermen and women is an exemplary record.
Just look at what happened over the last few years in traditional line
fishing and what is happening with regard to West Coast Rock Lobster. But
there is a challenge, and the challenge is that there are some fisheries
where you need huge investments to go in and fish tens and hundreds of
millions of rands.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Minister, may I interrupt you,
please? Hon members, please give the Minister an opportunity to use his
speaking time. [Interjections.] You are interrupting quite unnecessarily.

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: There our approach has
been to make sure that we achieve those BEE targets that I referred to
previously. And I would like to inform the House that very soon we will
have a meeting with some of the bigger companies to investigate what their
BEE component really is. [Interjections.] Is it only chequebook investors
or is it really an empowerment exercise? And we said we really want an
empowerment exercise.

On the issue of – one of the DA members here raised it – other people
coming here and getting quotas, teachers and businessmen from Gauteng, and
so on ... [Interjections.] No, just see what the reaction was. I haven’t
heard, up to now, of one fisherperson coming up and saying: “Listen, I
haven’t received a quota, because somebody who is not a fisherman did.”

Because, what did we do this time around? For the first time ever, we
published a prefinal list in the communities so that people can go there
and say “Nee, nee, nee! Hierdie mnr Witbooi of mev So-en-so is nie ’n
visserman of ’n visservrou nie. Hulle kom van buite af.”  [“No, no, no!
This Mr Witbooi or Mrs So-and-so is not a fisherman or a fisherwoman. They
come from outside.”]

This was a transparent process, and we did that twice. I said that I gave
the undertaking that by August we will publish the subsistence fisheries
policies and also the small-scale commercial fisheries policy, and I
believe that will take us forward.

Maar ons het ’n groot uitdaging om mee te handel. [But we have a great
challenge with which to deal.]

We have a big challenge: Hake and West Coast Rock Lobster, let me just use
those two fisheries as an example. Fifty years ago, we had 1,5 million tons
of hake to fish, now we have a total allowable catch of 150 000 tons. That
is all – it has decreased ten times. That is the reality that we have to
deal with.

Let me use West Coast Rock Lobster, because there are many members here
going around and whipping up emotions. Thirty years ago, 70% of catches for
West Coast Rock Lobster, “Weskuskreef”, was caught between Saldanha Bay and
Port Nolloth, and the total allowable catch was much more than what it is
now. Now 90% of West Coast Rock Lobster catches are caught between Dassen
Island and the Cape Peninsula. So the resource is shifting around Cape Town
and up to Kleinmond and Hermanus. We have a problem, colleagues, the
resource is shifting and that is what is happening. However, I believe the
announcement that we made over the weekend with regard to West Coast Rock
lobster will deal with many of the problems, but it is impossible to
allocate rights where there really are no lobster, or for that case, any
other fishery stocks any longer.

Let me also deal with the workers in the factory, the issue that the hon
Chairperson of the Committee raised, as well as the Coastal Zone Bill. It
was interesting when the members of the DA raised issues. They raised other
issues, but not one of them responded to that issue that the hon
Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee raised. [Interjections.] Not one.
Because, if you go to some of the factories and you see the long lines of
people standing there, working from early in the morning until late at
night, and they continue to boo temporary or seasonal workers, we think it
is something that needs to be addressed. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

In the same vein the DA now says to us, “Deal with the other issues”, and
they didn’t mention this one. I think they should quote Cosatu on this one.
[Applause.] Maybe you would like to quote Cosatu? On that issue, please go
to the owners of those factories and, with the same vigour when you raise
money for the election, tell them that you think we must deal with that
issue. [Applause.] I challenge you to do that.

The hon member, Mr Morgan, raised some issues here. And I think, hon
members, when I observed this member, there is a special clause in the DA
that when you arrive as a new member you must dress and talk like the
leader. [Laughter.] But, the problem is ...
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order, please, order! Not you,
Minister.

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: The problem is, if that
continues to be your approach in politics, very soon, hon member, you will
have to start wearing dresses – if you don’t already do that in your free
time. [Interjections.] [Applause.] Because the leader of the DA in the
National Assembly now is only the de jure leader, the de facto leader of
the DA is the present Mayor of Cape Town – that is the de facto leader. And
politics has a way of dealing with that. You need one leader, de facto and
de jure. Thank you, members, for your support for this Budget. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Business suspended at 12:27 and resumed at 14:02.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 2 – Parliament:

HON MEMBERS: Malibongwe! [Praise.]

The SPEAKER: Igama lenu. [Let your name be praised.]
The hon Chairperson, hon Deputy President and members of the executive, hon
Members of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen in the gallery, this year on 8
May 2006 we celebrated the 10th anniversary of our Constitution. The
Constitution lays the foundation for a democratic and open society in which
government is based on the will of the people and in which all citizens
have equal rights, and are equally protected by the law. The Constitution,
being the supreme law of the Republic, helps us to establish a society that
strives to achieve equality.

It is in that spirit that Parliament has adopted “All shall have equal
rights” as the theme for this year. Under this theme we have a campaign to
review the impact of equality legislation passed by Parliament. The
campaign is focusing on gender and disability. Through this we seek to
examine what progress or otherwise we are experiencing as a society on the
basis of the legislation this Parliament has passed. The campaign will help
us know if there are legislative or other measures we need to effect to
improve the situation on the ground.

The chairpersons of the following parliamentary committees have been
central in guiding the campaign: the Joint Monitoring Committee on
Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled
Persons; and the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
Life and Status of Women.

In this year when we also mark 50 years of the Women’s March for their
rights, it is important for Parliament to check what the realities of our
women are and do whatever we need to do to deliver a better life for them
and for people living with disabilities.

On the implementation of the vision of Parliament, the two Houses of
Parliament adopted the new vision of Parliament in 2005, as we reported in
the past Budget Vote in 2005. The vision seeks to build an effective
people’s Parliament that is responsive to the needs of the people and that
is driven by the ideal of realising a better quality of life for all the
people of South Africa. It builds a people's Parliament, which provides –
as the Constitution enjoins - a national forum, involving the people of
South Africa in its processes and acting as their voice.

The budget tabled today provides the necessary funding to enable Parliament
to continue on its quest to reach this vision. In a nutshell, the ongoing
business of Parliament is as follows: to pass legislation; to scrutinise
and oversee executive action; to facilitate public debate and involvement
in the legislative and other policy processes; to facilitate co-operative
government; and to take part in and facilitate good international relations
through the Parliamentary domain.

My speech will cover some of the work being done to implement Parliament’s
vision, to make ours more and more a people’s Parliament. Secondly, I wish
to speak about the efforts to improve systems in Parliament. Thirdly, I
will turn to our work in the broader legislative sector; and, lastly, to
our international relations work.

Building a democratic Parliament that is transparent and responsive to the
electorate, and that develops and follows a legislative agenda that is
aimed at accelerating the transformation of the South African society, has
been Parliament’s overriding policy and strategic objective since 1994.

Between 1994 and 2004 there was a sustained focus on repealing
discriminatory legislation and laying the foundations for a democratic and
open society based on the new Constitution and laws of the new order.

Over 700 transformatory laws were passed in the first decade. The focus of
Parliament has since shifted to its oversight function to ensure that the
ideal of realising a better quality of life for all the people of South
Africa will come true.

In establishing an oversight model, Parliament has focused on the following
areas: determining systems and human resource capacity required for the
function of oversight; the necessary technical mechanisms and tools; trying
to increase the research capacity of parliamentary committees; to implement
a system to manage information within the parliamentary committees; to
develop a public-participation model to ensure that inputs received through
public-participation activities are channelled to appropriate committees;
changes in parliamentary policy and/or rules to accommodate the creation of
an integrated parliamentary oversight committee; continual capacity
development of members in terms of information communication technology,
budgeting practices and other skills required; the training of staff in
line with the oversight best practice guide; and adopting a procedure for
executive or government compliance.

The Oversight and Accountability Task Team will, hopefully, table its final
report to the Joint Rules Committee on 21 June 2006. This takes us closer
to some changes for the better on which we will, no doubt, update this
House next year. Apart from the creation of the Integrated Parliamentary
Oversight Committee to improve co-ordination in our work, the task team is
also working on the legislation provided for in chapter 4, section 77(2) of
the Constitution. It says that “An Act of Parliament must provide for a
procedure to amend money Bills before Parliament,” hon Minister of Finance.

Our participatory democracy puts our people at the centre. Parliament is
elected by the people to represent them and to act as their voice. This is
done through the work of our freely elected representatives; through the
access the people have to their Parliament, its structures, processes and
members. Parliament facilitates the involvement of the public in lawmaking
and other parliamentary processes by nurturing an understanding of
Parliament and its work through educational, informational and direct
engagement activities.

In enhancing its public participation programme, Parliament is implementing
the following interventions. The first is additional resources to help
improve co-ordination of constituency offices. In the 2005-06 financial
year parliamentary political parties were allocated R59 million, and for
this financial year the allocation has increased to R105, 9 million. This
translates into a 77% increase. This will improve the ability of political
parties to reach their members and the public at large through their
constituency work.

The second area in this regard is establishing parliamentary democracy
offices in all provinces. The purpose of these offices is to increase the
points of contact where people can access Parliament and inform its work
and direction; to create an immediate parliamentary presence in the
provinces – that is outside of provincial legislatures whose sphere and
competence are provincial; and to ensure a greater level of efficiency in
accessing communities and providing ground support for parliamentary
programmes.

These parliamentary democracy offices will be established in all nine
provinces and they will eventually be supported by a fleet of mobile
offices that will be equipped to take Parliament even further into rural
areas.

The third project is the People’s Assembly. This programme uses technology
to enable Parliament directly to engage with the public across the length
and breadth of the country on issues affecting the people. It is conducted
in co-operation with the provincial legislatures and civil society. This
ground-breaking programme was the first of its kind that enabled the
public, from across all nine provinces, to interact in real time with their
public representatives.

This year’s People’s Assembly will be held on 14 and 15 September in
Oudtshoorn in the Western Cape province. We are hoping to arrange for all
of us to travel by train to the People’s Assembly. [Applause.] The topics
for discussion will be informed by the outcomes of the Equality Review
Campaign I mentioned earlier.

The fourth project is the Youth Parliament. This year our country, as you
know, celebrates the 30th anniversary of Youth Day, 16 June, in recognition
of the contribution made by youth in the realisation of a democratic
society in South Africa.

Parliament, in partnership with youth formations and provincial
legislatures, will be holding a Youth Parliament on 28 June and 29 June
2006. The theme for the Youth Parliament is “All shall have equal rights”
in terms of keeping Parliament’s theme. It will be broken down into
subthemes dealing with two main clusters – the first being youth and
economic participation, and the second one being socioeconomic development.

The fifth project in this context is the Women’s Parliament. The theme for
this year’s Women’s Parliament is: “Combating the trafficking of women and
girl-children”. In this context, we intend to reach out to women in a
focused manner in order to provide them with an opportunity to exchange
information on the theme and to be empowered.

We are in the process of approaching the Departments of Social Development
and Home Affairs to work together with us where necessary. We are aware
that Parliament needs to look at the legislative measures needed in this
regard.

Our country for some years now has been used as a transit facility or
destination for victims of this horrible crime. One of the points made at
the recent International Women’s Conference which dealt, among other
things, with this matter is that human trafficking needs to be viewed from
a supply and demand perspective.

We need to look at the phenomenon as it occurs in and affects our society.
Socioeconomic factors like poverty, unemployment and lack of education make
many women and children vulnerable and lead to their human rights being
severely violated. It is important to note that international solidarity
and networking are essential for effectively dealing with this
international crime. We, in that regard, welcome the attention of the UN
Committee on the Status of Women being paid to this matter. We believe that
for their discussions and their work on the next International Women’s Day,
they will be focusing on this matter. Parliamentarians should lobby the AU,
the PAP and/or Nepad to institutionalise antitrafficking desks, which can
deal with this issue collectively on a continental basis.

These projects, which I’ve just mentioned, the People’s Assembly, the Youth
and Women’s Parliaments, provide opportunities for citizens to engage
directly with Members of Parliament in a meaningful way on issues that
affect them.

Most importantly, the activities start in the provinces where there are
workshops on the ground on the chosen themes. The deliberations culminate
in provincial forums at which delegates are elected to come to the national
events. At the national level the first day is used for the provincial
delegates to hold workshops with members of the portfolio committees
working on the themes of those forums. This year’s Women’s Parliament will
be held on 3 and 4 August here in Parliament.

The second major area I wish to deal with is the systems improvements
within Parliament. It is not an exaggeration to state that Parliament has
undergone unprecedented transformation at both the political and
administrative levels. New rules, procedures, mechanisms and capacities
were needed to effect the work of the Parliament of the present. In
improving its efficiency, Parliament commissioned the development of an
information technology strategy.
A key system for managing the administrative functions of Parliament
efficiently is called Marang, which means sunrays or sunlight. Marang
integrates Parliament’s human resources, payroll, financial and procurement
systems.

The benefits of Marang for Parliament are the following: Operations of
Parliament are now streamlined and in line with best practice; we have
removed duplication; there has been a reduction in manual tasks and we have
been provided with more automation; all transactions are auditable; and the
policies of Parliament are included in the system for checks and balances.

In terms of improvement in systems, I wish to come to the new travel
system. I would first like to say that the Auditor-General’s report of 2003-
04 highlighted areas of weakness in Parliament’s financial and
administrative systems. Under the supervision of the Parliamentary
Oversight Authority – and the very alert eye of the hon Gibson - the
specific issues have been addressed and I will not go into those details.

On 1 April 2006 Parliament successfully implemented a new travel system for
members and their dependants. The new travel system addresses significant
shortcomings in the previous travel procurement process.

Regarding problems with the old system, I would just like to go over them
quickly in case we have forgotten. There was no central storage of data and
data was not accessible to Parliament. Entitlements were controlled
manually through the issuing of paper vouchers. Travel statements and
procurement data were not immediately available to members.

The new system has the following improvements. The travel data is now
stored centrally, using an electronic platform through which members and
service providers request travel, and authorisation occurs. Travel profiles
are maintained electronically, ensuring stricter adherence to travel
policy. All data is available in real time to both Parliament and members.
There are multiple ways to use the system that allows members to procure
and authorise their travel irrespective of their location.

Further completed projects include the upgrading of our information
technology networks, and the implementation of the digital recording system
for Hansard.

All these and other projects will lead the way in realising our vision that
seeks to build an effective people’s Parliament that is responsive to the
needs of the people and that is driven by the ideal of realising a better
quality of life for all the people of South Africa.

I now wish to turn to the work we are doing in the broader legislative
sector. The first issue here is to deal with the EU legislature’s support
programme, the EULSP. The EULSP provides financial assistance to Parliament
and the provincial legislatures that enable them to better fulfil their
functions. To this end, as previously reported, the European Union has made
10 million euros available over three years to the legislative sector in
South Africa. That period will end this coming December.

The Speakers’ Forum has attended to a number of matters aimed at providing
a strategic basis of work for the legislative sector, among which are the
following. We have dealt with the development and acceptance of gender
strategy for the legislative sector. The implementation will take place
pending the development of action plans by each institution. The
development of a draft public-participation framework for the legislative
sector: towards this end a national workshop is planned for discussion of
the framework document.

The Speakers’ Forum, in conjunction with the LSP, will also be working
towards the development of a sector-wide oversight model. This will be done
in close co-operation with the parliamentary task team on oversight and
accountability.

A presiding officers’ workshop was held during April 2006 – which was
actually the third of the workshops we have been holding since the 2004
elections - covering all aspects relating to a presiding officer’s
responsibilities.

There are important projects expediting parliamentary democracy in South
Africa. In this regard, the LSP throughout the legislative sector has made
major contributions to the enhancement of democracy. I’ll just mention a
few of these projects. Approximately R1, 6 million was contributed to our
own People’s Assembly celebrations during June 2005. A large portion of the
EULSP funding assisted with capacity-building initiatives throughout the
legislative sector. Some of the funding is going towards the video–
conferencing system, which will involve Parliament and the nine provincial
legislatures.

Some of the challenges we are facing are with regard to delays we have
experienced in the installation of the video-conferencing system. But we
are hoping that it will be finalised in this financial year. We still also
need to improve on liaison with tertiary institutions to develop courses
for members, as identified in the Members’ Needs Assessment. There is also
the issue of the development of a human resources development strategy
framework for the legislative sector.

The Speakers’ Forum and the European Commission in South Africa recently
met and agreed to discuss possible future programmes pertaining to the
legislative sector. A delegation from Parliament will be visiting the
European Commission and the European Parliament next week to continue with
these engagements.

I now come to my last point, and that is our international work. We have
made significant progress towards the adoption of an international
relations policy. This policy is due to be tabled at the Joint Rules
Committee this month.

During the next three years Parliament will host a number of international
events including the Southern Africa Development Community Parliamentary
Forum at the end of November 2006; the Commonwealth Parliamentary
Association, the CPA, Africa Region Conference in 2007; and, lastly, the
Inter-Parliamentary Union, the IPU, Assembly that is going to be held in
2008. The largest of these conferences is the IPU Assembly with 140
national parliaments, each of which will probably be bringing more than 10
people.
Parliament will be sending a 30-person contingent that will form part of a
South African election observer mission to the DRC for the pre-election,
election and postelection phases next month. The vastness of the country
presents an enormous logistical challenge for any election observation
team, hence South Africans need to be tightly co-ordinated. We trust that
we will be able to play the important role expected of us in ensuring that
the elections are free and fair.

We then come to the Pan-African Parliament. Many critical issues were
processed during the last session of the PAP earlier in May. I wish to
confine myself to some security concerns in the main.

There was unanimity on the fact that Africa will not be able to achieve
growth and development if issues around peace and security continue to
plague the continent. This seemed to be the overall sentiment shared by
many Members of Parliament, following a report by the AU Commissioner for
Peace and Security and the Chairperson of the PAP Permanent Committee on Co-
operation, International Relations and Conflict Resolution on peace and
security in Africa.

On the Second World Conference of Speakers of Parliaments, 150 Speakers of
Parliaments and presiding officers gathered in New York on the eve of the
high-level meeting of heads of states and governments in September 2005. A
declaration was adopted in terms of which they examined how they could
provide more support for international co-operation and the United Nations,
and thus help bridge the democracy gap in international relations.

The presiding officers stated:

  The United Nations must remain the cornerstone of global co-operation. The
  United Nations Secretary-General should therefore be encouraged to pursue
  the current reform process vigorously.

In conclusion, Parliament will tirelessly pursue its constitutionally based
mandate to create a just South Africa in which all shall have equal rights.
It is in that spirit that I hereby table Vote 2 of Parliament for the
implementation of our strategic vision and a better working environment for
all members. I thank you. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, Deputy President,
Ministers, Deputy Ministers and Members of Parliament, it is indeed a
pleasure, Madam Speaker, to follow on after you in this important debate,
particularly given the gigantic advances we have made in transforming this
institution.

Today we are gathered in this august institution of our democracy, the
people’s Parliament, to debate and vote on the budget of Parliament. In
debating this budget, the ANC is cognisant of the enormous sense of
responsibility placed by the overwhelming majority of South Africans on its
shoulders, as we affectionately call the ANC “ugxalaba libanzi ngokuthwal’
iintsizi neentlungu zabantwana bomthonyama” [the one who welcomes and
carries every indigenous person’s troubles and pains on her shoulders].

We have accepted this responsibility with humility for the past 12 years.
It is a responsibility we are committed to implement to the best of our
ability, with the same fortitude as our forbears when they said, “These
freedoms we will fight for, side by side, throughout our lives, until we
have won our liberty.”

We, the public representatives of the ANC, humbled by the growing
confidence of our people in the ANC, as was displayed through the
overwhelming mandate in the recent local government elections, pledge
ourselves not to disappoint the trust which our people have bestowed upon
us. Our democracy is firmly established on the rock foundation of the South
African democratic Constitution.

Inspired by the standard beacon of the vision of our people - the Freedom
Charter, our Constitution, in its preamble, declares that:

   We, the people of South Africa, recognise the injustices of our past;
   honour those who suffered for justice and freedom in our land; respect
   those who have worked to build and develop our country; and believe that
   South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in our diversity. We
   therefore, through our freely elected representatives, adopt this
   Constitution as the supreme law of the Republic so as to –


       heal the divisions of the past and establish a society based on
       democratic values, social justice and fundamental human rights ...

Of necessity, the premise of the ANC regarding the debate on Parliament’s
Budget Vote is firmly anchored on the fundamental tenets of our
Constitution, in the light of the fact that this year we celebrate the 10th
anniversary of the adoption of our Constitution by an elected
Constitutional Assembly, not Parliament. It’s not Parliament that adopted
the Constitution, it is the Constitutional Assembly.

In a real sense, this debate makes an important contribution to the
celebration of our democracy. Our participation in this debate is also
informed by the vision of Parliament. Indeed, the adoption of the vision of
Parliament in the historic year of the 50th anniversary of the adoption of
the Freedom Charter by the congress of the people marked a giant leap in
the transformation of Parliament. It was a clear declaration of intent.

The vision makes crystal clear the mission and purpose of people’s
legislators. In this regard, the vision of Parliament says we must pool our
efforts to build an effective people’s Parliament that is responsive to the
needs of the people and is driven by the ideal of realising a better
quality of life for all the people of South Africa.

Fundamentally, this vision encapsulates the hopes of a people-centred and
people-driven process of transformation. As we reflect on the advances made
since our last budget and the challenges that confront us, we should draw
strength from this vision and rise to the challenges occasioned by the
transformation of society. Furthermore, we should draw inspiration from the
creative tension inherent in our constitutional dispensation.

We have indeed travelled a long way since 1994. So much has been
transformed and yet still much needs to be transformed. The Parliament we
inherited was structured differently and therefore impacted differently,
not only on socio-political processes but also on the lives of the members
who were driving the institutional processes. It is a fact that, today, our
work puts an even greater strain on family life.

We must accelerate the effort to ensure that members with disabilities find
this environment welcoming. We must continue to pay particular attention to
this matter. One of the ways could be the establishment of a unit to focus
solely on the condition and needs of vulnerable sectors, including the
elderly and children. When elderly people and children visit this
institution, we still lack a bit in ensuring that they are looked after and
that there are facilities that cater for them, which we should provide.

The other matter that we would like to raise is about counselling. Among
the issues that need to be considered seriously is that of counselling
services for members. This should be structured in such a way that it does
not come up only when things have come to a head. It also raises the need
to investigate, on an ongoing basis, ways in which members’ lives can be
made more bearable. One of these could be the revitalisation of the gym and
other sporting activities. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

A way must be found to ensure the utilisation of Parliament’s gym. The same
must be done to improve members’ participation in sports and recreational
activities. [Interjections.] [Applause.] This, though, raises the question
of where would members find the time to do these things. We must
acknowledge that sizeable progress has been made in the structuring of our
programme. More needs to be done to ensure that members spend sufficient
time with their constituencies and find enough space for their wellness and
family life.

There has been improvement in the time available for constituency work and
we must commend the institution on this. Much good work is also being done
in constituencies. Our weakness is still in the lack of systematic
reporting of this work and the necessary institutional follow-up processes
to give effect to the work members do. To address this would go a long way
in restoring the dignity of public representatives and add weight to this
important aspect of our work.

Systematic reporting would help to ensure that we learn from each other and
would lead to the identification of best practices and better service to
our people. Here, again, the need will arise to differentiate between
narrow political interests and matters of national priority.

We also need to do more to ensure that constituency issues find expression
in our institutional work. Among other things, better resourcing of
constituency offices, including equipping them with better technologies,
will bring them within closer reach. Our Taking Parliament to the People
programme would find a qualitative impetus if we were to focus on equipping
constituency offices and capacitating them with the requisite facilities
and up-to-date information and communication technologies.

Our programming has also improved, with respect to the time available for
members’ training. We, however, need to continue to engage, with regard to
the type and quality of training. There has been an improvement in time
allocated for party training. This has the potential to contribute greatly
in the strengthening of the quality and vibrancy of debate and multiparty
democracy.

There is a need to address the issue of members’ administrative and
secretarial support. We must move towards individual support for members.
This will have to include making available individual research capacity to
members. This matter, of course, brings to the fore a lot of other issues,
particularly with regard to resources. However, if we are to cope with the
increasing demands for better service for the people, we also shall have to
improve our capacity.

The full implementation of the mandate of Parliament is directly linked to
the extent of the investment we make in skilling Members of Parliament and
the staff of Parliament. Staff must also be conscious of the fact that they
are here in this institution at the invitation of members, and not vice
versa. If there were no members in this institution there would be no staff
here. In this regard, a change of mindset is needed. There is a need to
improve turnaround times.

A better sense of consultation, participation and inclusiveness
characterises the relations amongst parties and between the parties and the
institution. We believe that there is good accommodation of small parties
in the work of the institution. This finds expression in the manner of
their representation in the structures of the institution as well as in
time allocations during the debate. This approach continues to ensure that
our society is afforded the opportunity to listen to even the smallest
voice; alternatively, that even the smallest constituencies and ideas have
the space to contribute to the debate about reconstruction and development
of our country, without strict adherence to representation and percentages.
If we were to adhere to representation percentages, other parties would
just stand up and say, “Hallo; good afternoon,” and sit down.
There is also an evolving sense of common understanding and appreciation of
challenges we face, in regard to our common and respective
responsibilities. We have also succeeded in deepening good party-to-party
relations. The work of the Chief Whips’ Forum is invaluable in this regard,
and this brings to the fore the need for a dedicated budget for the forum.

All the issues we have referred to have resource implications. We must
commend Parliament on the sincere efforts that have been made to provide
the resources to ensure steady realisation of our national objectives.

We need to take stock of the symbols of the institution to see if they are
consistent with the new vision. The culture of democracy, peace, human
rights and social justice that we worked to deepen must also find
expression in the symbols that define who we are. The recognition of the
sensitivities around these matters should not be allowed to paralyse us
into inaction.

The principal platform of action for members is committees. To improve the
quality of the work of committees we need to improve the quality of the
work of study groups. Furthermore, and in general, the quality of work is a
broader reflection of the allocation of resources. More resources go hand
in hand with stronger influence.

Let me conclude because my time is running out. Where do we go from here
and where is the source of our optimism? Necessarily, the answer to this
critical question cannot be based on a figment of one’s imagination. Our
experience in the first 12 years of our democracy informs us that we should
rely on the evidence of our observations. Anything to the contrary will
condemn our assessment to wishful thinking.

It is our considered view, as the ANC, that the quantitative gains of
transformation we have registered in the past 12 years of democracy are
being translated into qualitative improvements. Today is better than
yesterday; tomorrow will be better than today. Parliament is well poised to
enter the age of hope. I thank you. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: The hon Mr Goniwe used the word
“humility” four times in his speech, and I was very impressed until I
remembered how he spells the word: “a-r-r-o-g-a-n-c-e”.

Chairperson, Parliament’s programme of sittings, debates, constituency
weeks and oversight visits is working better than it ever has. But, at
another level, the National Assembly is no longer quite the place where
things happen in the political life of South Africa. Five areas should set
the alarm bells ringing about what can only be called the sidelining of
Parliament.

Ministers address the media at briefings before coming to Parliament for
announcement and approval. This sends out the message that Ministers think
the media is more important than the National Assembly. This should stop.
Media briefings must take place after Parliament, and not before it.
Parliament itself spends time on inconsequential debates and is far less
preoccupied with discussing urgent and important matters.

Some debates attract no more than a handful of hon members. No doubt they
are busy with very important work elsewhere, but the point is that other
things seem to be more important than sittings of the National Assembly.

A third aspect is that because the government has been in power for more
than 12 years, it seems to have run out of steam. There are few new ideas
emanating from the ANC, and it has become a little tired. In a normal
democracy the ANC would have been voted out at the last elections, and it
would now be spending time in opposition, regrouping, re-examining its
priorities and its policies. That is one reason why Parliament is not what
it was. [Interjections.]

Parliament has many dedicated public servants who serve MPs well, and I
want to thank each one of them for what they do for us. There are, however,
two positions that require examination. The first is that of the Head of
Finance of Parliament. I must repeat here what I said outside Parliament,
and that is that Harry Charlton, the former Head of Finance of Parliament,
was fired on trumped-up charges.

South Africa does not believe that there was substance to the charges
against him, or the findings of the kangaroo court appointed to dispose of
him. The suspicion lingers that because he was the whistle-blower in the
Travelgate scandal, who insisted on a proper investigation and no shoving
under the carpet, he had to be got rid of. And you succeeded.

Months later he is not being replaced. Lionel Klassen, a very nice and
decent man, has been acting for six months, probably against his own
wishes. Mr Klassen presided over the finances of Parliament when they
slipped into disarray, and when the systems were such that many MPs were
able to defraud the public by abusing their office. When is the successor
going to be appointed? It is six months later.

The person of the current Secretary to Parliament diminishes Parliament. Mr
Zingile Dingani is an able man. I remember him when he was a Member of
Parliament who aspired to be the leader of the ANC in the Free State. He
served as an MEC, was knifed, as they all are in that province, and then
redeployed as the Secretary to Parliament. The fact is that he is a
politician and not a public servant. It is a very difficult transition to
make, from politician to public servant. [Interjections.]

Regrettably, Mr Dingani has not managed that transition very well, and I
want to give you an example: There was the publication about Parliament a
few months ago. On the cover was a huge picture of the Secretary with his
hand raised and rays of light reaching out from his fingers. He was
described underneath as the people’s visionary. I thought the thing stopped
just short of being blasphemous. It is laughably inappropriate for a public
servant to promote himself in this way at the expense of the taxpayers.

What it does, is that it serves to illustrate my point. In the publication,
the Speaker and the Chairperson had tiny photographs like this. I think it
was either on page 3 or on page 4. But the difference between their
importance and the Secretary to Parliament was only too clear.

My repeated letters to the Speaker and to the Chairperson of the NCOP
requesting details of the amount spent on the publication, who had approved
it, and who selected the pictures in the text, have gone unanswered. Madam,
it is rude to ignore repeated letters like this. But it shows that the
officials are above Parliament and are not accountable to Parliament.
Surely, this is wrong.

Another aspect of ...
Ms M P MENTOR: On a point of order, Chairperson: To say it is rude and
pointing to the Speaker of Parliament, I think is unparliamentary.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: No, it is not.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Gibson, did you say, “rude” when
you referred to the Speaker?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Yes I did, Chairperson. It is rude to
ignore repeated letters about this matter and allow months to go by.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): It is not unparliamentary in terms
of law. No, your time will be taken care of. You can sit down. I am not
ruling on that order. Thank you. You may proceed.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you. Please give me an extra half a
minute. Another aspect that deserves attention is that of the
representation of this Parliament to big international occasions. I want to
remind you about the visit by our Speaker to the inauguration of Ellen
Johnson-Sirleaf, the President of Liberia.

The President of South Africa was going, the Foreign Minister was going,
but a committee consisting of the Speaker, the Chairperson of the NCOP and
the Secretary to Parliament, decided that our Speaker should go, and that
she should hire a plane at a cost of R470 000. In addition to that, there
were all the other costs of hotel, catering and transport. I then wrote
about them to her as well, and asked about all of those. Months have gone
by and I still have not received an answer. The implication is that the
duty to account to Parliament will be undertaken when it suits the
Presiding Officers, not when it suits members. This is quite wrong, Madam.

The Presiding Officers are not the bosses of Parliament, but they are the
servants of Parliament. Their trips, their expenditure, and their decisions
are not above the law, or above Parliament. They need to become
accountable. I say this in the friendliest possible way. Because all of us
are accountable: the Speaker is accountable to Parliament and Members of
Parliament are accountable to the electorate.

All these aspects lead me to say that while we keep on protesting and
talking until we blue in the face, about this being a people’s Parliament,
Parliament as an institution is being sidelined and downgraded in our
democracy. It is a worrying tendency, and something that needs to be
arrested. I generally do not align myself either with the Communists or
with Cosatu. There is, however, a great deal of validity in the claim they
have recently made about Parliament being sidelined.

Of course, in power, those people would be far worse than the ANC, but when
they are in opposition or whatever it is that they are at the moment, they
quite often put their finger on sensitive points. It is all these things
that make me come to the conclusion that Parliament should think very
carefully before we vote for this Budget Vote of Parliament. I think we
should cry, “halt”. I think what we should say is, “thus far and no
further”, and we should reject the Budget Vote of Parliament this year.

Mr O E MONARENG: It is unfortunate that I am after the Chief Whip of a
whingeing party, who displays rudeness and roguishness at all costs. You
are the chief of an opposition party. It is unparliamentary and bad for you
to be bashing officials, even Parliament to which you belong. What we need
to do ...

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, I rise on a point of order. The hon speaker at
the podium said that what Mr Gibson said was unparliamentary. I believe
that that in itself is unparliamentary and should be ruled out.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): I did rule that the word “rude” is
not unparliamentary; that ruling stands. Mr Gibson was not unparliamentary
in that regard. Hon Monareng, that was the ruling that we had earlier.

Mr M J ELLIS: He is going to withdraw, Chairperson? He can’t go around
saying that my hon colleague is unparliamentary, when you have ruled that
he was not.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Monareng, can you withdraw that
assertion?

Mr O E MONARENG: Yes, I thought you were going to make a ruling. You want
to force me to withdraw. [Interjections.] Why should I? I don’t want to.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order, order, Please sit down. Hon
member, I made a request and I think you are now addressing my request.
Please withdraw and then proceed with your speech.

Mr O E MONARENG: If I have to withdraw at the request of an hon
Chairperson, I withdraw the remark.

Let me start by saying that hon members, Ministers, I am sure that there
are a couple of things that we were supposed to learn because over the past
10 years in the new dispensation there were so many lessons that we have
learned about Parliament. It was not only about Parliament in South Africa
but across the world, and it is important and imperative that we should
draw on these lessons. My attention will be on political and ideological
issues that have to do with Parliament and how it has evolved over many
years.

Since the end of the Cold War, a plethora of scholars have advanced a range
of theories concerning the future likely state of the world as we entered
the new millennium. Some argue that we have just witnessed the final
victory of the West’s capitalism and that countries everywhere will now
adapt their political systems to those of the West. Others, exemplified by
Samuel P Huntingdon in his book, The Clash of Civilization and the Remaking
of the World Order, argues that the world, for the first time in history,
is now both multipolar and multicivilisational, along civilisational lines
based on the main. Huntingdon describes a world in which countries
increasingly identify their allies and enemies along civilisational lines,
based on the main cultures and religions and predicts the possible decline
of the ascendency of the West in the new millennium.

Regardless of which future one espouses, in order to discuss the new
millennium and attempt to investigate the role to be played by government
and parliament therein, it is necessary to assume that governments and
parliaments will operate in a largely peaceful world; and history has shown
that parliament plays a very minor role in war situations.

This is a lesson which I use to illustrate that parliament is not a rogue,
is not an arrogant institution. It is a very democratic institution. Allow
me the opportunity to express myself in this seemingly simple and obvious
debate, which, because of the absence of particular portfolio committees
who specialise in parliamentary matters, is made more complex and
difficult. Our understanding of Parliament and all its operations is
nurtured over a period of time by its members, leaders, presiding officers
and committees, members of the executive, officials and simple, ordinary
functionaries. These are the people who make Parliament possible, including
the opposition. As South Africans they have borrowed experience primarily
from the Westminster system and elsewhere in the world.

Its experience is very important and in their past 12 years we have also
learned a couple of experiences. Without much ado, I would not deliberate
on the obvious and the simple. I wish to adopt an approach, which
encroaches onto complex political and ideological methods, which the
opposition has ventured into, tampering with an area that has nothing to do
with it, but has to do with the liberation history. This is an area of
attention and focus best understood and known by nobody else but the
liberation movement in its entirety.

The hon Chief Whip of the DA, Mr Gibson, has interpreted the statements of
Cosatu and the SACP from a far, remote political point of view. He
misconstrues an ongoing internal debate and criticism on the ANC from a
pure position of opportunistic point of view by suggesting that the ANC and
its allies are about to go their separate ways and pursue an agenda of the
national democratic revolution as individual, separate entities. That is
not the way it is interpreted. In the ANC there is debate, there is
openness, there is criticism and selfcriticism. That point about Cosatu
criticising us is not a problem of the opposition, but it is actually a
problem of the alliance and those who participated in the liberation of
this country.

I want to continue by drawing on other experiences insofar as ...
[Interjections.] That is not true. Some scholars have attempted to define
democracy. I just want to get to a point where we have to explain exactly
what democracy means, so that the opposition can understand it. Most say
that it is virtually impossible to define democracy. No definition exists
in law and there is no totally acceptable consensus on the political
meaning of the concept. There are many variants of democracy and different
legitimate interpretations, derived from various historical, cultural and
regional experiences of various people around the world. Certain features
are common to the concept of democracy, as a universal, not exclusively
Western value.

This includes the contest of regular free and fair elections by many
parties conducted by secret ballot on the basis of unilateral adult
suffrage. There is a separation of powers and an independent judiciary and
a free press. There is a respect for the rule of law. Human rights and the
rights of minorities are respected. An independent, efficient and
accountable civil service exercises prudent management of public resources.
Underpinning democracy is a private sector, free from excessive government
intervention. I am sure that in South Africa we have such an experience.

Our view as the ANC is that we have come a long way in exercising and
practising democracy. We have actually added value to the understanding of
democracy and we are in a country that is exemplary. South Africa is one
country that understands what democracy and what parliamentary democracy is
all about. In addition to parliamentary democracy, we have got the notions
that are tantamount to what we call people’s participatory democracy and
this is what is happening. Some of the issues are the ones that are
actually explained in a deep way by the hon Speaker of this House on how
should we go about public participation. The Speaker and the Chief Whip of
the ANC have also explained processes, which, at an operational level and
administrative level, we are able to engage in.

As the ANC, we call upon the DA to stop confusing the nation, because the
ANC is not confused. The ANC can handle complex and sophisticated questions
raised by complex organisations such as the SACP and Cosatu. Their
questions do not really constitute a crisis within our ranks, instead, they
strengthen democratic participation within our ranks. The debate has
further attracted the nonmembers of the ANC to enter the fray in the name
of democracy, in which we will come.

South Africans have the right to entertain ideas around the election of the
President. A number of surveys should determine the popularity of potential
presidential candidates. This is acceptable in a democratic country like
ours. The unfortunate thing is that in the South African context of a
democracy guided by the Constitution, only political parties contesting a
democratic election can have a particular name serving as a presidential
candidate. That candidate will henceforth be elected by Parliament to be
the President of the country, unless the process is changed by the
amendment of the Constitution, which in my view is not likely in the next
20 years.

The Constitution of the country enjoins the notion of the separation of
powers through Parliament, for the executive is held accountable by
Parliament, notwithstanding the judiciary. Parliament is the centrepiece of
all institutions that are in chapter 9 of the Constitution, in that these
institutions ensure that there are checks and balances in our democracy,
like the Office of the Auditor-General, that makes it possible that
departments account in accordance with the PFMA and the country’s fiscal
policies. That Parliament is able to exercise oversight over both the
executive and the judiciary is not child’s play, but real and true
democracy in operation.
Parliament is a true agent for change and the Portfolio Committee of
Defence was able to hold discussions with the Department of Defence at a
point where land was occupied by the SANDF in Vaalmansdal. Our portfolio
committee was in a position to pursue the Department of Defence, and this
was at a time when Prof Kader Asmal was the chairperson of the committee.
As we speak now, the Department of Defence has agreed to the giving of land
to the people of Vaalmansdal and the people of Vaalmansdal are about to
occupy the land. This action, in short, means victory to Parliament and the
people. This lesson and victory could be claimed by all parties belonging
to the portfolio committee, including the DA.

I would therefore like to conclude my input by reiterating that Parliament
is a forum for democratic participation by Members of Parliament and a
range of people and organisations, representing fellow South Africans and,
sometimes, foreigners. This important institution has empirical evidence
that it is a true agent for change. I want the House to support this Budget
Vote. [Time expired.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, the IFP would like to express its
appreciation to Madam Speaker, and other presiding officers and
parliamentary officials as well as the staff, for the good work that is
being done to make our Parliament more efficient, modern and people-
friendly. Thank you very much.

Notwithstanding the good work, it would be remiss of me not to raise at
least three issues today, and my colleague, Mrs Seaton, will raise some
other matters.

The first is the issue, which I notice has been omitted by previous
speakers, of the budget rollovers. It is my understanding that about R200
million has been rolled over from previous years, while about R160 million
was rolled over from last year.

If that is so, then it is an untenable situation. Members are crying out
for more assistance and equipment, yet Parliament is not spending its
available resources. This cannot continue.

We, as Members of Parliament, should beware, because in our oversight role
we often criticise government departments and agencies for underspending,
and yet here we are also doing the same. This undermines our authority as
the watchdog of democracy. I see that Mr Groenewald agrees with me. Thank
you very much.

Let me deal with the most important issue next, that is members’ retirement
benefits. The issue of member’s pensions has regularly been raised in the
Chief Whips’ Forum and also in this House. [Interjections.] Yes, I have
decided that I will retire and when I can announce the date, it is the day
that I die. [Laughter.] The issue of members’ pensions as I have said, has
been regularly raised not only in the Chief Whips’ Forum but also here, and
although small improvements have been made, our pension still falls far
short of what members deserve and need.

How is it possible that a member, after ten years of serving democracy and
the nation, must walk away with a net monthly pension of about R5 000,
which is about a quarter of what he gets now? [Interjections.] I can’t hear
you. Please ask for an opportunity to speak; apparently your Whips don’t
give you an opportunity to speak. They don’t trust you because you would
talk nonsense! [Laughter.]

This appalling situation means that members who retire, leave here as
paupers, and this is not a party-political issue. It affects each member
who is sitting here. One day when you retire, if something drastic is not
done to your pension, you will retire as a pauper.

Members of Parliament always support the calls by the trade unions for a
living wage for their members. It is high time that we call for a living
pension for MPs. [Applause.]

This hopelessly inadequate pension issue means that members have to work
way past the retirement age of 65; it is no wonder that many members have
to rely on outside business interests to provide for their retirement.
[Interjections.] Like myself; I have an outside business. I am sure you are
jealous because you were also an attorney, but nobody wants you to work for
him or her. You can come and work for me! [Laughter.]
Of course, by calling for improved pensions, members will be accused of
boarding the gravy train again. But let it be so, and let those who
criticise us when we ask for improved pensions exchange their pensions for
an equivalent period of service with members. I don’t think any one would
take up that offer.

The pensions issue has now become so serious that one of our colleagues
will soon meet personally with the Minister of Finance to discuss this
matter. We can only hope that the Minister will recognise this urgent need
to improve member’s retirement benefits because he, the Minister of
Finance, is in the same boat.

Finally, I want to raise the fact that this Parliament does not have a
restaurant befitting its status as the Parliament of South Africa. I see
many members agree with me, especially Dr Koornhof.  The existing
facilities for members can at best be described as average and are not
really appropriate for receiving dignitaries, VIPs and guests.

A few years ago, the then Deputy Minister of Public Works undertook an
international fact-finding mission to, amongst other things, view members’
restaurants in parliaments all over the world. He made certain positive
recommendations on his return, but those were dismissed by the then
Speaker.

The fact of the matter is that we do not have anything that can compare
with restaurants in other parliaments of the world and we have nowhere to
receive and entertain important guests properly. I am glad that Madam
Speaker is smiling and bowing her head. Thank you for agreeing that we will
have a restaurant, Madam Speaker. Thank you. [Laughter.]

In addition, although we are close to some of the best winelands of the
world, we can hardly choose between one or two quality wines in our
restaurants. What a pity. We strongly urge that we should rectify this
embarrassing situation for our Parliament by creating a dining room that
befits the status of the democratic Parliament of South Africa. I can see
the Deputy Speaker also agrees with me. She is nodding, yes. Are you saying
yes, Madam Deputy Speaker? The IFP supports the Budget. Thank you.
[Laughter.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Chairperson, hon members, the workload of Parliament and
its individual members in both Houses continues to grow at an exponential
rate. Amongst the vast array of duties that members carry out, none can be
said to be unimportant nor could any of these multitude of duties be
described as being undemanding in terms of time, technicality and effort.

The modern parliamentarian must shoulder wide-ranging institutional,
legislative, political, oversight, ideological, constituency and even
international burdens. We are thus faced as an institution with the duty of
ensuring that members are able to perform all of these important tasks. It
means that we must spend more on the individual parliamentarian in terms of
administrative and institutional support. This should be reflected in the
Budget, unfortunately it is not exactly so.

These concerns are raised every year, and yet the budgets don’t show any
significant changes. The only thing we continue to hear is promises of
improvements in the medium term. We need to look at the expectations placed
upon the average parliamentarian and budget accordingly. Other countries
whose MPs have such heavy workloads are spending vastly more on the
institutional and administrative support of individual MPs. The UDM
supports the Budget Vote. I thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson, Madam Speaker, hon Ministers, colleagues and
visitors, the ACDP questions the decision taken to appoint parliamentary
information officers in all the nine provinces. This, as we see it, is the
work of MPs through constituency offices and the ACDP takes exception to
the fact that the parliamentary budget is being used to propagate a version
of what is the objective with regard to Parliament.

Parliament being responsible for the oversight of the executive and for
passing legislation must, of course, create an enabling environment in
order to carry out these duties, ensuring adequate financial and human
resources are made available.
The ACDP has expressed concern that portfolio committees should be
monitoring every department and internal audit process throughout the year,
and not during the budget process. We need to ensure that members of
portfolio committees are fully conversant with departmental expenditure,
and are not surprised by an adverse Auditor-General’s report, such as the
AG’s disclaimer recently issued to Home Affairs.

At the same time individual members, especially those in opposition
parties, have an additional role and responsibility from the added
perspective of being outside the ranks of the majority party.

It is in this regard that the ACDP is concerned that the effectiveness of
smaller parties, in particular, is capped and frustrated by inadequate
resources.

In many cases even leaders of parties are forced to share secretaries with
other members, and parties have to rely on party structures in order to
afford media or research staff. This is counterproductive and problematic,
especially in view of the underspending. It makes no sense.

I would like to place on record the ACDP’s concern that Parliament’s status
as a “people’s Parliament” was seriously dented this week when a request
from Christian leaders to access Parliament was turned down without any
effort to accommodate them.
These men and women responsible for the Global Day of Prayer, which took
place on Sunday 4 June, had hoped to end this unprecedented event by
praying at Parliament. This day saw millions of Christians across the world
united in prayer for the healing of their nations.

Sadly, Parliament missed an opportunity to open its doors to those who
represent a vary large and important sector of our society and has failed
to recognise and value the efforts of this sector which is committed to
serving the people of South Africa and supporting their representatives in
Parliament by actively identifying with and participating in our democracy.

We also register our objection to the practice of media briefings preceding
debates. The ACDP thanks you for the extra bit of time. It does, however,
acknowledge Parliament’s many concerted efforts to address weaknesses and
increase transparency and access. This excludes, of course, the matter of
speaking time for smaller parties, which often effectively silences us and
seriously constipates the debates.

On a positive note, the new travel system is one example where despite the
challenges, it has been professionally handled and implemented and
constitutes a vast improvement on the previous system. Well done to all
concerned.

The ACDP also applauds efforts to ensure that the needs of women
parliamentarians, those with disabilities and the elderly are high on the
agenda. Very importantly, we also strongly support calls for members to be
encouraged not to neglect family responsibilities, their health and, of
course their constituencies; as Parliament has a way of consuming our every
waking moment, if we let it.

The ACDP is seriously considering supporting this Budget Vote. Thank you.

Ms M P MENTOR: Chairperson, hon members, about two years ago I saluted
Comrade Eric Molobi from this podium, a mentor who instilled in me an
undying passion for education, freedom and justice.

Comrade Eric Molobi taught not only me the values of nonracialism,
nonsexism, unity and prosperity, but also hundreds of young people, whom he
also taught to duplicate themselves. Today Eric Molobi rests in peace,
fully knowing that he built a democratic, just, fair, nonracial and
nonsexist South Africa. He must rest in peace knowing that he left South
Africa in good hands. And we the young people, who went through his hands,
must pledge today that we will defend democracy, our freedom, peace and
stability, our economy, our people, our country and our leadership.

Chairperson, my speech today focuses on the support of Parliament to its
members. If I have time, I will also consider the question of whether
Parliament is weak against the executive or not.

Coming back to the issue of support for members, let me acknowledge first
that Parliament is supporting its members administratively to do its work.
I would like, however, to submit immediately that this support is not
necessarily efficient.

Parliament is obliged to support its members in order for them to be able
to do their work, which is complex and intricate, but can be made easier
with much support. In order to understand the nature of the work of members
of Parliament and their performance, you need to go to the Constitution to
extract the role and authority of Parliament. The role of Parliament then
becomes the responsibility and the core function of its members.

These are the following: to amend the Constitution; to pass legislation and
review it; to represent the people of South Africa, in the case of the
National Assembly, and to represent provinces in the case of the National
Council of Provinces; to scrutinise and oversee executive action; and to be
a national forum for public consideration of issues that affect the nation.

Constitutionally Parliament should also intervene in the following matters:
maintenance of national security; maintaining economic unity; maintaining
essential standards and establishing minimum standards required for the
rendering of services; preventing unreasonable action on the part of a
province that is prejudicial to the interests of another province or the
country as a whole.

Parliament is bound by the Constitution and must act within its limits when
passing or amending legislation. Comrades and colleagues, South Africans,
we can ask together whether members of Parliament are empowered enough to
deal with the above-mentioned daunting tasks.

I think you will agree with me that as far as legislation and national
norms and standards are concerned, Parliament and its members pass with
flying colours. However, with respect to national security, economic
defence of the Republic, and guarding against prejudicial action against
the country, its interests and its people, Parliament must still learn to
empower its members to confront these tasks as the Constitution expects. We
need to do serious work to start empowering members to face this daunting
task.

The Bill of Rights is another key performance area for members of
Parliament. We must, again together, ask this question: Has Parliament
empowered its members to defend and ensure the following rights of its
citizens: the right to equality; human dignity; life; freedom and security
of the person; no slavery, servitude or forced labour; the right to
privacy; freedom of religion, belief and opinion; freedom of expression;
the right to assemble, demonstrate, picket and petition; freedom of
association; political rights and the right to citizenship; freedom of
movement and residence; freedom of trade, occupation and profession; the
right to fair labour; the right to a protected environment that is not
harmful to their health or wellbeing; the right to adequate housing; the
right to health care, food, water and social security; rights for children;
the right to basic education, further education and adult basic education;
the right to language and culture of choice; access to information; access
to courts; and the rights of arrested, detained and accused persons.

I don’t think that members of Parliament have been empowered enough to
secure these rights for the citizenry of South Africa. When we talk about
empowerment of members, I think that, yes, we must talk about their work
environment, their wellbeing, how much they earn to support their families
and their dependants, but most importantly, we must check whether members
of Parliament are empowered to fulfil the requirements that are imposed on
them by the South African Constitution. Earlier on I indicated that we
should be guided by the Constitution when we carry out our work.

Lastly, because the nature of work in Parliament is such that there is
nothing like job security, we may need to learn from other parliaments,
both in Africa and in the world, as to whether in the next 15 to 20 years
we can affirmatively, with pride and assurance, say that this Parliament
will be attracting skilled, professional and capable members who are able
to stand up against their counterparts in fulfilling these obligations that
are constitutional and in relating to the world at large.

We must seriously consider whether we are remunerating our members
efficiently to do work in a very befitting manner. The image of Parliament
rests upon the image of members. Whereas the issue of conduct is important,
and members of Parliament are expected to conduct themselves in a very good
manner at all times, we must also do away with circumstances that force
them to behave in ways that are unbecoming.

I would propose to Parliament that we look into the models used by other
parliaments where, if parliament is not remunerating its members
adequately, serving members of parliament are allowed to venture into other
things, such as their own businesses and professions, as long as they
declare that to parliament.

Is Parliament weak against the executive? I think that there is always room
for improvement. Only a nonthinking person would ever say that we do not
need to improve. I think that with regard to the three arms of the state,
the judiciary, the executive and Parliament itself, there is always room
for improvement for all of them.

Lastly, I would like to respond to hon Gibson. You see, the ANC has touched
on three important issues that probably we had not touched on before
seriously, like we are doing now. These include the media, the
intelligentsia and the economy. I think that we are pressing the right
buttons and we are touching on the right areas. That is the reason it
becomes a matter of concern to hon Gibson and others, who had a leeway of
using the media for their own benefit only.

In conclusion, I will submit to the opposition and to the media, in
particular, that this country is your country too. Help us to build it.
There is no way you can build it if you undermine Parliament the way you
do. I would like to encourage the media to play a positive role by helping
us build this country. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, hon Speaker, Deputy Speaker, the hon
chairperson of the ANC caucus delivered a good speech. I can’t,
unfortunately, agree with the last conclusions she made.

Criticism of things in Parliament doesn’t mean that you undermine
Parliament. It means that you put your finger on certain things that are
not correct.

Mnr die Voorsitter, in die kort tydjie wat ek het, twee minute, 120
sekondes, wil ek stilstaan by ... [Mr Chairperson, in the short time at my
disposal, two minutes, 120 seconds, I want to dwell on ...]

... section 42(3) of the Constitution, which basically deals with
Parliament as an institution. It deals with the two Houses, but
specifically the National Assembly. It’s elected to do what? It’s “...
elected to represent the people”.  And you must understand that it is to
represent all the people, not only the people of a certain party or the
majority. Members are elected to do that. Then to do what? To choose a
President.

That we have done and we will do so again, some time in the future. Then it
has to pass laws. That we are doing. Furthermore, it also represents the
people “... by providing a national forum for public consideration of
issues ...”. With due respect, I think that Parliament fails miserably in
dealing with this specific issue that the Constitution asks us to do.

We do not debate and consider issues of public importance regularly in
Parliament. We don’t do that.

The second point and the last one is that the Constitution says the
National Assembly represents the people “...by scrutinising and overseeing
executive action”. And I think we are failing in that regard, also very
badly.

It’s very easy; we can ask the executive. Is any member of the executive
scared of or worried in terms of coming to Parliament, yes or no? The
Minister says she is. I think she is probably the only one. Parliament
fails in that respect.

I’ve got 23 seconds left, and that brings me to the last point. It’s
impossible, if we want to do justice to debates in Parliament, to give
political parties 120 seconds to debate budgets consisting of billions of
rands in a meaningful way; we cannot do that.

An HON MEMBER: Get more votes!

Dr C P MULDER: No, not get more votes, definitely not! We are here. We
represent people and we should be allowed to put our case in a decent
manner. You cannot do that in two minutes. How should you touch on the
Budget? How should you look at the different projects of Parliament? You
cannot do that; it’s as simple as that.

You come here; you make one or two points, it’s the end of my speaking
time. That’s exactly the point I’m trying to make. We have to change that.
The sooner, the better. [Time expired.]

Mrs L MALONEY: Madam Speaker, Ministers, Deputy Ministers, Chairperson and
distinguished guests present here and Members of Parliament, it is an
honour for me to participate in this parliamentary debate. My input will be
focusing on how Parliament is viewed by an ordinary MP.

Chairperson, before I go into detail, allow me to echo what is written in
the Freedom Charter, “The People shall govern”. All people shall be
entitled to take part in the administration of the country. Though the idea
of the Freedom Charter emanated from the ANC, the people of South Africa
adopted it, hence it is called the People’s Document.

Even after 50 years of its existence the demands enshrined in the Freedom
Charter are more relevant than before. They are the demands of the people
that the ANC stands for. The first democratic Parliament laid a foundation
and the second democratic Parliament built on that foundation. The third
democratic Parliament is the phase for people’s power in action, to
accelerate policy implementation.

This is the reason why the ANC signed a contract with the people in order
to cement these phases - while on the other side the DA is divorcing itself
from the people. As Members of Parliament we need to sharpen our oversight
and accountability tools through our constituency work, public hearings and
making sure that people come to visit Parliament, and then the gallery will
be as full as it is today.

In the strategic document Parliament has been identified as one part of the
powerful state machinery that can be used as an agent for change. This can
be answered with a big yes, as Parliament is made up of women and men who
are democratically elected by the people for the people.

Since 1994 up to today, 799 pieces of legislation have been passed by this
Parliament. All legislation passed by this democratic Parliament is to make
sure that the plight of the poorest of the poor is addressed for a better
life for all. At the ANC’s 51st National Conference in Stellenbosch, a
resolution was adopted that there is a need to capacitate legislatures.

This resolution is been implemented by Parliament to make sure that at the
beginning of each session all Members of Parliament undergo training in
order to equip themselves with skills on how to run Parliament effectively
and efficiently.

We welcome Parliament’s women’s caucus that has been established, led by
our honourable deputy secretary, Comrade Kiki Gweqane. This political
instrument will not only look at the needs of women, it will also monitor
the engendering of all legislation passed by this Parliament. Much has been
done during these 10 years of democracy and much more still needs to be
done. The 50% of women in Parliament came here through the commitment of
the ANC government, and it has fulfilled that commitment.

This poses a challenge to other political parties to follow suit. The DA
must stop this nonsense of merit when it comes to the selection of women.
That is nothing else but women-oppressing tactics. They must treat the
equality principle with the honesty that it deserves.

The cluster system that was introduced by Parliament is a good concept as
it broadens the scope of understanding and more knowledge is gained through
this system.

The MPs do not have enough time to attend a lot of committees. This system
eliminates the clashing of committees. Members are more focused now than
they were before. This Parliament has produced role models and many ex-MPs
are now deployed in different areas. Some are captains of some industries,
some are community leaders, and some are in the Public Service.

I want to touch on the challenges facing MPs, especially previous MPs. I
think Parliament should look at those skills that have been accumulated
during the training of those former MPs, in order for us to feed them into
what Jipsa is calling for. The time we spend in Parliament as MPs needs
immediate attention. For those who do not understand, the work of MPs does
not start at 14h00; it starts as early as 08h00, and it ends at about 19h30
to 20h00 in the evening.

Sitting in Parliament is only one of the jobs that Members of Parliament
are doing. Most of the time during the day the MPs are in committees, in
study groups, in public hearings, but backbenchers remain active all the
time to make this Parliament more vibrant.

The problem faced by this Parliament is that because it is made out of both
young and old women, young parents with young children are denied time and
opportunity to interact with their children, as they arrive home late. Our
veterans as well are kept in Parliament for long hours and that is not
really good for their health - something must be done about this.

The backup support of staff members remains a major challenge. The MPs
still access researchers from a pool of researchers and that applies to the
secretaries as well. This creates a workload for staff members as well as
for the researchers. To the MPs this creates a nightmare, as it is
difficult to access what they need. This defeats the whole question of MPs
being effective and efficient.

The transformation of Parliament is a necessity to all of us in this House
and we should not pay lip service to it. Different parties have a
responsibility to abide by this. Before my time expires I want to share
something with you. You know, when the DA came here it wanted to turn
itself into a better party. Let me tell you a secret about this DA, on
behalf of my black brothers and sisters who are in the DA. More than a
decade into the new dispensation there are some who are intent on
preserving white privilege. It should tell us that these people are
organised into a political formation that actively seeks black votes. I
have never heard of any political party that chooses its delegation to a
federal congress based on votes that were cast and not on membership.

The DA constitution was amended in such a way that 60% of the votes cast
and 40% of members decide on it and it was clear that it was a device to
make sure that the people of colour will never control the DA. What more
could be more racist because the DA knows that the majority of its votes
are from the white communities? Therefore delegates will have to be white.
That is a scandal, so that is why you will always have this cherry on the
top, which is being the deputy president of the DA! [Applause.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, Parliament is the legislative
body and should serve as a watchdog over the executive because Members of
Parliament are the people’s representatives. In keeping with the vision of
Parliament, members should strive to improve the quality of life of people
they represent. MPs should always ensure that what they say and do is what
the electorate looks forward to.

For Parliament to be dynamic as an institution it should undertake study
tours like the portfolio committees do, to observe how other
parliamentarians carry themselves. Whips of parties should be afforded an
opportunity to go out to see how their counterparts manage their offices.

This may also bring to light how speaking time is managed among the
majority party and other parties in democratic governance. The efforts by
the presiding officers to bring parties on board regarding the day-to-day
running of Parliament is welcomed. The parliamentary oversight authority
seeks to ensure that the political parties steer the course of this great
ship called Parliament.

One can only hope that the change of the travel system for members that was
brought in was to keep pace with the times, not necessarily to obviate
fraudulent use of vouchers by members. If that is the case it will be an
unpleasant reflection on the people who are supposed to be called the
honourable.

One disturbing matter is when a matter has to be decided by voting and
members barely make up the requisite quorum. This should not happen in a
Parliament that has a majority party with a two thirds majority, for
outnumbering the total number of opposition members. It surprises me that
the portfolio committees can go on with business as usual, even when the
Budget Votes are decided. What impression does Parliament create when
officials from departments outnumber the members in the House?

It is appreciated that much has been done to enhance the lives of the
members. Travel facilities have been increased and the 20% payment by
members to some cards has been discontinued; telephone allowances have been
raised - though it will never be sufficient.
All that remains now is for Members of Parliament to accept their status
and all responsibilities of being custodians of the interests and the trust
of the electorate with responsibility. The UCDP supports the Budget Vote.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Chair, Parliament represents the heart of South
Africa, as it is here where the voice of our nation is heard, represented
and served. Both the National Assembly and the National Council of
Provinces play a vital role in delivering a system that shall provide for
the needs of the nation. We therefore welcome the 16,5% increase in
Parliament’s budget for this financial year.

The increase in this year’s budget is a result of capacity-building and
members’ remuneration. However, the MF would like a more detailed
elaboration on the capacity-building and how it will be set out.

In view of the parliamentary programme we extend concerns as to what
general member support is set for this term that increases Programme 3, as
this clarification will assist in approving the 64,2% increase in this
programme.

Further, the decrease in Programme 2 is a result of policy changes. We
would like more clarity on what policy changes are being referred to here.

The MF regrets that Parliament’s report lacked any of our commitments
regarding gender or disability, even though we attempt to reach our
balances in this respect daily.

In view of the subprogrammes of Programme 1 – Administration, the MF draws
attention to the legislation and oversight accounts. Oversight is one of
our priorities and it is a spectrum in which we may bring the executive and
the various houses to question regarding delivery, loopholes and
challenges. In view of the decrease for this subprogramme the MF expresses
its discontent, as oversight needs to receive far more prioritisation than
at present.

However, in view of Parliament in general under the auspicious Chairs of
both Houses, the MF applauds the success and delivery achieved through all
challenges.

As advised, we would respect and value greater clarity on a number of
issues and representation of Parliament’s stand on gender and disability
progress. The MF supports the Budget Vote.

Ms E NGALEKA: Chairperson, Madam Speaker, hon members, ladies and
gentlemen, I’m pleased to have the opportunity to participate in this
important debate. We welcome the opportunity created by the Speaker to
allow members the time to reflect on our Parliament and democratic process.
The ANC supports this Budget Vote.

There has been public comment in the past few weeks on the democratic
Parliament. I would like to begin my input by repeating the words of our
President: “Today is better than yesterday, tomorrow will be better than
today.”

This year marks the 10th anniversary of the adoption of our Constitution.
It’s been 12 years of freedom, 12 years of democracy. Not all members were
in this House from 1994 to 1996, but it is worthwhile to remind ourselves
of that history. Our newly elected members in 1994 cemented democratic
decision-making and democratic participation in this Parliament. They did
this in two ways.

Firstly, our Constitution was written, not by experts, but by our elected
representatives through a process of popular public participation. The
participation of the public is entrenched in the Constitution. Today all
the meetings of Parliament are open to the public, except those that are
declared closed for clearly stipulated reasons. This means that the public
is now not only dependent on representation by the members who are elected,
they also have direct access to participate in the processes of government.
Members of the public can make their own contributions to influence the
legislative and supervisory functions of Parliament.

The method of democracy developed and continues to influence our practice
today. Our Parliament is open, democratic and accessible. Nevertheless it
is important to ask ourselves if we have gone far enough in transforming
our Parliament or if there is more that we should be doing.

Allow me to refer in this regard to the Rules of Parliament. Those of you
who came to Parliament in 1994 will remember that you found the Rules in
place. We have amended them over the years, but shouldn’t we be doing more?
Some of our Rules, especially those relating to the debates in the House,
are in need of serious reconsideration. We have rules that govern the
nature of the debate. They state that we should not read our speeches. All
Members of Parliament do not honour this Rule.

Members, what changes should we make to this? Does our current model allow
debate and engagement, or do speeches deny debate? We have achieved a great
deal in a range of rule changes. Open committees mean more time for public
comment on legislation and improved participation of members in the Budget.
Yet more still needs to be done. We have to make our Parliament different,
more responsive and more accessible.

The task of our Parliament is to respond to the needs and interests of the
most marginalised, the poorest in our country. Have we done enough in our
Rules to ensure that this sector of our community is represented and heard?
We are debating our Budget Votes, but what are the views of the most
excluded? How could we use Parliament to hear their voices? Are our Rules
sensitive in this area?
We may need to consider community radio izimbizo linked into community
meetings. We could hold budget hearings via community radio stations based
at multipurpose centres. Community members could be given the right to
question us, to seek clarity and explanation from MPs on budgets and
national priorities. Committee rules would have to be revised to
accommodate such innovation.

We can never truly transform Parliament without adjusting the Rules.
Further than that, we can never have an African Parliament governed by a
Westminster system. By transforming the Rules of Parliament we aim to
achieve the objectives laid down in the Freedom Charter, which protects and
promotes equality, transparency and accountability. This embraces the
notion of public participation through encouraging public hearings and
conducting oversight.

Furthermore, we still face the challenge of linking our roles as members to
visible transformation. To what degree should Parliament require MPs to
report through constituency reports on delivery in communities in our
society? We need concrete rules on expectations regarding constituency
work, as this remains a subject that is underdeveloped.

The first decade of our democratic Parliament marked a time for intensive
legislative reform. Now that we have done that, we need to consider the
programme of Parliament seriously and ensure we monitor delivery and do
oversight in our constituencies. Firstly, Parliament’s schedule should
allow more public input, which will impact on the time committees spend in
Cape Town. Secondly, Parliament should create extended periods of time for
public outreach.

We have had much discussion during the past few years on the programme of
Parliament. The time has come for us to debate and decide on the amount of
time we should spend in the House. We need to plan better, to have a
programme that allows us to exercise oversight of practical progress in our
communities. This should be phased in, going hand in hand with public
education in order for the electorate to understand that MPs do not only
work when they are in Cape Town.

Members’ statements are one of the reliable mechanisms of making the
executive accountable to the masses out there. In general, political
parties in Parliament have been using members’ statements successfully for
the purpose it was created for. However, we have realised that Ministers
are not always available to respond to questions due to their work
schedule.

The mechanism of members’ private motions was created towards the end of
2004 with the purpose of allowing individual members to initiate snap
debates in the House. This mechanism allows members to debate relevant,
topical issues of national importance and be able to reflect their parties’
views. There is room for improvement in this regard, however.

The majority of parliamentarians feel that the structures that deal with
questions and answers are adequate for two main reasons, the first relating
to the time allocated and the second to the coverage and information that
are disseminated.

Our Rules and procedures tend to support democratic processes, but we need
to scrutinise them to ensure that they remain relevant and responsive. It
may be useful to create a subcommittee that would analyse the Rules and
identify areas that need change to make them more dynamic and more
supportive to Parliament. We need to make Parliament visible and accessible
to the people of South Africa.

Allow me an opportunity to thank all the staff members of Parliament, from
the cleaners to those in higher positions, for always being helpful and
going the extra mile. I also want to thank the service officers for not
getting tired of serving us in the House. Once again, the ANC supports this
Budget Vote. Ndiyabulela. Kwaqhwatywa. [Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr N T GODI: Chairperson, Madam Speaker, comrades and hon members, on
behalf of the PAC I join those who have stood up to support the budget for
Parliament, a Parliament guided by its vision to build an effective
people’s Parliament, amongst other things, which we as the PAC believe
entails a responsibility for openness, transparency and accountability. We
want to acknowledge that much has been done to make Parliament more open
and to ensure that it is closer to the people. However, we believe that
much still needs to be done.

In order for Parliament to be effective, there is a need to capacitate both
individual members, which is done through the various programmes we have
from time to time, and committees. We are happy that at least at a
conceptual level there has been recognition of the need to capacitate
committees, but our concern is the implementation and the extent of this
capacitation, how far it will go.

Indeed, Madam Speaker, there are visible changes and improvements in the
administration of Parliament. Regarding the travel facility for members,
the worst I can say about the system is that it is working well.

I also want to join those who decry the roll-overs when facilities for
members need a lot of improvement. But I must acknowledge that even we as
committees have roll-overs. Whether we have roll-overs because we have no
capacity to spend or because we are prevented by almost insurmountable red
tape from accessing that money, I think is another question that needs to
be looked at.

In passing this budget, as with all departments, we expect proper
management and administration of this budget. It is not good that
Parliament received qualified audit opinions from the Auditor-General for
the past two years. I think this highlights the need to quickly pass the
Financial Administration of Parliament and Provincial Legislatures Bill, to
ensure that there is clarity on how financial accountability and oversight
should be achieved by Parliament. Should this be done by the Standing
Committee on Public Accounts, or at what level? At this stage it appears
there is some disagreement over whether Scopa has the right and obligation
to check on the finances of Parliament or not.

The PAC wants to stress that we believe that Parliament should be
continuously transformed to better serve our people, deepen democracy and
help to propel the national democratic revolution towards the ideal of an
egalitarian society. The PAC supports the budget. [Applause.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Madam Chairperson, year after year we come together,
as we are doing today, to consider a budget for Parliament, a budget which
is meant to facilitate the proper functioning of this assembly. This is
important in the sense that the decisions that we take as a legislative
body have a direct as well as indirect bearing on the lives of many South
Africans. By the same token, lack of adequate funding can impede work that
has direct consequences for the lives of citizens, particularly those whose
lives depend on Parliament’s capacity to legislate in a way that is
consistent with the Bill of Rights.

In order for us as representatives of the people to be sure that the laws
that we bring to bear on the lives of our people are relevant, we need to
give ourselves more time to interact with those whose lives we intended to
advance by the laws and regulations we have crafted since 1994. Azapo
suggests that we should plan to have time to spend with the people out
there in the townships and in the villages. In spending more time with the
marginalised communities not only will we be in a position to understand
the conditions they live under, but we will be able to check whether our
legislative good intentions correspond to the benefits intended, and if
not, we will be able to take timeous, corrective measures.

For too long we have left this area of responsibility to government
departments and officials who are most of the time office-bound. In any
event, we are the representatives of our people and this is our
responsibility.

In conclusion, Azapo wishes to commend the National Prosecuting Authority
for bringing to our courts all those who are alleged to have defrauded
Parliament. The oath we have all taken as members of Parliament compels all
of us to uphold high moral standards and values. Azapo supports this Budget
Vote. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Chair, hon Speaker, Deputy Speaker, Ministers, Deputy
Ministers and colleagues, it goes without saying that no compromise can be
made when it comes to the provision of support services required by
Parliament to fulfil its constitutional mandate. In this respect I wish to
express my general satisfaction with the provisions made by this budget as
it goes a long way in allowing Parliament to function optimally.

I especially wish to express my gratitude for the manner in which smaller
parties are being accommodated by the functionaries of Parliament, and also
to the governing party for its positive approach in matters such as time
allocation to the smallest parties in this House, though I am of the
opinion that a minimum time allocation of four minutes would be more
satisfactory.

Chair, despite the relative satisfactory composition of this budget, I wish
to point out that the dynamic nature of a parliament in a multiparty
democracy requires of all parties to make quality contributions in the
execution of their parliamentary mandate. I therefore wish to expostulate
that the current provision for especially the smallest parties has much
room for improvement. The lack of funding for, for instance, competent
researchers for the smallest parties is an area of great concern.

An important project that Parliament has undertaken in the past two years
is taking Parliament to the people. This has given rise to a decision to
establish parliamentary information offices or parliamentary democracy
offices, as also mentioned by the Speaker. It is however worrying that
despite a good response from team leaders to run these offices and the
closing date having expired some time ago, a shortlist has not even been
compiled. If we intend to be a Parliament that is truly responsive to all
South Africans and with deep public participation and involvement, we need
to ensure that we first streamline the internal administrative processes of
Parliament. I thank you.

Mrs S A SEATON: Chairperson, Madam Speaker, I too would like to express the
IFP’s appreciation to you, Madam Speaker, to the Deputy Speaker and to the
three House Chairpersons, as well as those parliamentary officials and
staff who work for the benefit of all, striving to make Parliament
successful; and there are many of them.

I think that you know, Madam Speaker, that I have the greatest respect and
admiration for you. You are a people’s person without doubt and you
genuinely have the interests of members at heart. I would agree with you
that there are many things that have transformed Parliament and made it a
great deal better over the past few years. One of them is the new travel
system, which is without doubt a very successful story. I believe we have
to say thank you to Harry Charlton and Linda Harper for making it
successful.

We have always contended that there are still serious issues that need to
be addressed. We have also contended that Members of Parliament should have
private secretaries. We should do what parliaments around the world do, and
that is to have individual secretaries. Members are desperate for more
assistance and equipment. Most Whips have an extremely heavy workload and
yet not even they have personal secretaries, despite numerous requests over
the years for secretaries and equipment to do our work effectively. And yet
Parliament is not spending available resources.

Mr Van der Merwe spoke earlier on today about pensions, but there are other
issues that also need to be raised that needed a tremendous amount of
attention. One is the additional notch for members serving their third term
of office. Currently members who have completed a five-year term and
members who have completed two terms and are in their third term are
earning the same amount of money. Hardly fair, would you say?

I know the matter is before the Moseneke commission, but what pressure is
being put on the commission by the presiding officers to ensure that the
position is rectified?

Many members have to run two vehicles and yet our car allowance does not
even come close to the car allowance of senior parliamentary officials who
need to run only one vehicle. [Applause.]

There are still numerous outstanding issues relating to the infamous LG 19,
such as overnight accommodation for members travelling in excess of 800 km,
and the unilateral decision of the officials to limit AA rates to the cost
of an air ticket on the shortest route.

Members are living in dilapidated houses in the three villages, houses
furnished with old, unsightly furniture and electrical appliances.
[Applause.] Many houses are not burglar-guarded. Pelican Park doesn’t even
have a tearoom. Members are stuck in these villages, because they don’t
have adequate transport facilities.

Then there is the issue of administration, which presently leaves a great
deal to be desired. Why has the post of the chief financial officer not yet
been filled? We were assured at the last Parliamentary Oversight Authority
meeting that by 30 March this person would be in place. It is now 6 June
and we still don’t see this person. Parliament has to set the example of
good management instead of the somewhat chaotic state we sometimes appear
to be in. To get any response to correspondence sent to the Secretary’s
office on important matters is almost impossible.

Members have had their laptops stolen out of locked offices, yet Parliament
does nothing to replace laptops. I wrote, on behalf of my colleague Mrs
Mars, nine months ago. Mr Van der Merwe and I started addressing the
Secretary to Parliament on this issue. To this day, nine months later and
still no laptop. How are members supposed to work?

The Whips have to take the flak from our members for these issues. We are
looking to you, Madam Speaker, as the presiding officer, to take these
matters up and to sort them out.

Lastly, in the few seconds I have left, there are issues that we really
need to look at and one of them is the ethics committee. I am increasingly
concerned about our ethics committee in this Parliament. We have an ethics
committee with a wonderful so-called code of conduct, which we never adhere
to. The ANC majority continuously ramrods issues through and says that
members are not breaching the code of conduct, when in actual fact they are
breaching the code of conduct. We need to do something about it; we need to
change the composition of the ethics committee and we need to treat it with
more respect. Thank you, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): House Chairperson, Madam Speaker,
members of the executive, hon members, comrades, friends, ladies and
gentlemen, visitors in the gallery, thank you for being interested in what
we do here in Parliament. You are most welcome to this budget debate.

At the beginning of this year, we were keenly aware that 2006 was going to
offer us moments of critical reflection on the strides made in terms of
fostering the people-centred democracy envisaged in our Constitution.
Barely a month ago we celebrated a decade of constitutional democracy. This
month we are going to reflect on the role of the youth in fostering and
strengthening democracy, 30 years after the 1976 student uprisings.

Even later this year, in August, we are recalling the 50 years since the
historical stand made by women in the face of brutal suppression when they
declared: “You strike a woman, you strike a rock.”

As we debate this budget today and in light of these significant moments in
our country’s political life, I wish to focus this contribution on
reflecting on what strides Parliament has made in strengthening and
fostering the hard-won freedoms of our democracy.

Of late an impression has been created in the media, strengthened by
pronouncements from certain quarters, that Parliament has weakened in terms
of its ability to perform its functions as set out in our Constitution. For
those of us who have been a part of the institution since its formative
years, such views stand in stark contrast to the progress made, especially
with regard to improving mechanisms for the co-ordination of functions of
Parliament’s committees and the development of protocols for the effective
working of committees.

The remarkable transformation of Parliament from a closed, insular
institution 12 years ago, to an open and transparent organisation driven by
public participation, is recognised throughout the Commonwealth and by the
members of the Inter-Parliamentary Union.

With regard to the co-ordination of committee activities, we have been
particularly successful in ensuring that the committee of chairpersons
moves from being a crying chapel to becoming a vibrant forum, through which
chairpersons of committees can articulate their views for the smooth and
effective functioning of committees.

With a membership of 40 committee chairpersons and another 26 senior
managers and staff, this is the largest of all Parliament’s committees. Our
regular and well-attended meetings have not only broken down the silos, but
allow for the sharing of knowledge and experience, in the spirit of the
struggle dictum “each one teach one”

We are encouraged by the Secretary’s support in the creation of a post to
support the committee of chairpersons. However, given the scope of this
committee’s mandate, an appeal is being made for additional support to be
considered as a matter of urgency.

With the executive increasingly conducting their activities in a clustered
fashion, we have to find ways of appropriately exercising oversight over
such activities. To this end, we will be proposing to the committee of
chairpersons that it sets up a task team to look at mechanisms that would
allow committees to carry out oversight in a clustered manner in addition
to committees’ current modus operandi. We have already discovered that our
rules currently do not permit for a cluster of committees to submit a joint
report for debate and consideration by this House. We call on the rules
committees of Parliament to amend these rules accordingly.

Cognisant of the developments taking place in the task team on oversight
and accountability, it has become abundantly clear that Parliament’s
research, procedural, administrative and information communication
technology support systems have not kept up with the ever-increasing
workload and demands on our committee system. To rise to Minister Manuel’s
challenge - and I am sorry that he has left the House – and I quote:

   We have to utilise all the information available to Parliament when
   exercising oversight. We need then to beef up these systems by addressing
   this backlog and it becomes of paramount importance.


The committee of chairpersons will soon be afforded an opportunity to make
contributions to the restructuring of Parliament’s programme. We
specifically wish to ensure that committees are given enough time to
effectively carry out their mandates.

In partnership with the National Assembly Table, we have finalised and
implemented two very important protocols, namely the procedure on multiple
referrals to committees as well as the procedure for ensuring executive
compliance with recommendations from Parliament as emanating from
committees.

Just yesterday, the National Assembly Table and the Legislation and
Oversight Division briefed the committee of chairpersons on how committee
reports are dealt with by the House and the executive. Following this, the
committee of chairs has resolved to have a one-day workshop, at the
beginning of the third term, on how to improve this important aspect of
committee work. It is necessary to undertake a process to gauge the extent
to which the executive is responding to recommendations contained in
committee reports. Such measures clearly illustrate that it is never
business as usual, but that we constantly have to review our systems with
the intent to improve and grow our evolving Parliament from strength to
strength.
Over the past year we have placed extensive focus on the training of
members and staff with regard to the analytical work required to exercise
oversight on the President’s state of the nation address, departmental
strategic plans and estimates of national expenditure, better known as the
national Budget.

The Applied Fiscal Research Centre, Afrec, which is affiliated to UCT, has
been commissioned to document these practices into a manual for committees.
This is work in process. We now have in place procedures and mechanisms for
analysing departmental annual reports in the form of a guide. With regard
to these initiatives we recognise, with appreciation, the collaborative
role played by the National Treasury, Afrec and Parliament’s donors,
particularly the European Union and the African Capacity Building
Foundation.

I wish to place special emphasis on the huge strides made through our work
in the task team on oversight and accountability, especially as it relates
to the role of committees. As reflected in this budget, Parliament’s
legislative workload has reached a natural point of saturation, leading to
an increased emphasis on Parliament’s oversight role, coupled with improved
member support, as well as increased demands on the role that Parliament is
expected to play with regard to global relations.

A fundamental outcome of the work of the task team on oversight and
accountability is that it will provide every Member of Parliament and the
parliamentary service with the opportunity to consciously reflect on what
it means when the Constitution enjoins us -

  To make rules and orders concerning Parliament’s business with due regard
  to representative and participatory democracy, accountability,
  transparency and public involvement.
Through the activities of the task team, we now have a deeper understanding
of Parliament’s constitutional mandate and measures required to enhance
oversight. For committees, three critical areas for implementation
currently underway are of particular importance. Firstly, through a process
of extensive consultation and research, Parliament’s procedural staff and
external consultants are finalising a best practice for committees on
oversight. This guide captures our very own best practices as developed
within the various committees; and for the first time provides us with a
document that not only strengthens Parliament’s institutional memory, but
also allows for the strengthening of capacity as it relates to committee
oversight processes.

Secondly, the importance of support, especially as it relates to research
and support to members in general and committees in particular, is being
addressed through a reviewed strategy for committee resource support. It is
a resolution of the Joint Rules Committee that each committee will have at
its core a content analyst, a committee secretary and a subject specialist
researcher; and a specialist librarian and assistant committee secretaries
will provide further support.

An administration unit will be set up to focus on documentation,
publications, logistical arrangements, web page publications and updating
Parliament’s web page in respect of committee activities. This will free up
the time of committee secretaries to focus on procedural work. During this
financial year the Legislation and Oversight Division will implement this
new support system in three clusters, comprising a total of 15 committees.

The committee of chairpersons recommends that steps be taken by the
Secretary to Parliament to engage with National Treasury to secure adequate
funding for all committees to benefit from the envisaged support structure
within the 2006-07 financial year.

The third most important programme emanating from the work of the task
team, as it relates to committees, is the introduction of the Parliamentary
Content Management System. This system is envisaged to greatly facilitate
members’ ability to access and share information required to perform their
duties whether in Cape Town or when deployed in their constituencies or
provinces.

In recognising the above-mentioned achievements, we, however, in no way
underestimate the challenges confronting us in bringing to fruition the
People’s Parliament, responsive to the needs of the people and committed to
a better quality of life for all South Africans, as captured in
Parliament’s vision.

The complex nature of governance today will place increasing demands on
Parliament as it relates to its ability accurately and timeously to deal
with matters emanating from various government portfolios. The reality that
Parliament confronts a capacity paradox in relation to the executive is by
no means an issue that should be underestimated.

Whilst government departments generally have extensive access to public as
well as private sector research resources in developing policy and plans of
implementation, Parliament’s access to the same pales by comparison. We
have to find creative means of addressing this paradox as the knowledge
society we find ourselves in demands of us a closer linkage with knowledge
resources for us to truly remain the custodians of our people’s
aspirations.

We call on the Secretary to Parliament to investigate the plausibility of
setting up a technical assistance unit in line with that of the National
Treasury, comprising specialists available on demand.

We cannot shy away from the fact that Parliament finds itself in an often
unfair competition with the private sector and government as it relates to
access to highly skilled human capital. Given our fundamental role in
ensuring good governance and service delivery, it is imperative that we put
in place policies and strategies that will ensure that Parliament becomes
an employer of choice for skilled individuals.

Whilst the PCMS will assist us in more fruitfully employing information and
communication technology, we should be frank in recognising that much more
thinking and work is required to ensure that we more proactively use ICT to
capacitate members and to enable us to perform our function.

We are aware that many challenges remain in improving Parliament’s capacity
to deliver on our constitutional mandate, but we remain optimistic and are
encouraged by the tremendous progress that has been made. To this end, we
wish to call on civil society and the media to partner us in ensuring that
we identify the challenges and respond to them in an appropriate fashion.

Parliament is and will remain a tool of people’s power, established to
serve, first and foremost, the will of the people as expressed through our
country’s democratic process. The vigour required to ensure that we, in
time, become the democracy envisaged by our founding parents when they
penned our Constitution demands of all of us to resolve to further
strengthen and build this institution.

I wish to thank the presiding officers, the Chief Whips of all parties, the
Secretary to Parliament and the parliamentary service for their unwavering
commitment to ensuring that we build a people’s Parliament. Today’s
Parliament is better than that of yesteryears, and tomorrow’s will even be
better than today’s. Thank you. [Applause.]

Chair, I haven’t left the podium yet. I’ve got a few responses I would like
to make regarding points raised by hon members.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Fortunately, you have some time left.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Thank you, hon Chairperson. Hon
Gibson, I think we must respond very quickly to some of the issues you’ve
raised. I think in respect to the trip to Liberia, Mr Gibson, you should
acknowledge that you have been responded to, and that the trip, as it was
decided by the policy-makers of the institution, was legitimate and
therefore well within the law. I’m sure when you have time to look at that
extensive response you will be able to feel a bit better. You might be
unhappy about it, but Mr Gibson, I’m sure ... [Interjections.] ... We will
look into that, Mr Gibson.

The second point raised by Mr Gibson relates to the publication, Around the
House, an internal publication. It is a publication through which the
Secretary to Parliament communicates with the staff and Members of
Parliament on issues of the new vision of Parliament, and the Secretary to
Parliament was actually explaining what the vision means to the
parliamentary service and to Members of Parliament. So, I am sorry that Mr
Gibson doesn’t like the picture on the front page of the publication.

On constituency resources, there is already a marked improvement in funding
constituency support for political parties, and I think the Speaker touched
on this, if you were listening carefully. There is a 75% growth from 2005-
06 to 2006-07. In actual rand terms, it has increased from R59 million to
R104 million. So, I think that anybody who is complaining should really
have a look at the figures once more.

On the issue of roll-over funds, Oom Koos - he has left the House - and I
think Mrs Seaton also raised this and we should respond to it. I think we
should acknowledge that this is a problem and not shy away from it.
However, there are reasons, and because of poor planning there has been a
tendency to overstate our budgetary requirements so that we are safe, and
therefore it creates an impression that we are underspending.

Let me assure you that this is being addressed. The Secretary to Parliament
has now put in place a management budget council, whose objective is to
align planning with budgeting and make sure that divisions do a proper
exercise in terms of cash flow projections. So, I think we should watch
this space for further improvement.

Mrs Dudley, on the issue of parliamentary democracy offices, I think it is
something that all Members of Parliament have complained about, that when
we have public hearings we seem to attract only the well-organised, the
monied and we never hear the rural voices. The parliamentary democracy
offices are to do that exactly; they are going to address the rural voice.
They are going to assist us in reaching out to the rural communities, the
far-flung communities, so that we do hear their voices when we pass
legislation or legislate and do oversight on their behalf.

They are there as an access point for members of the community in provinces
to access Parliament and to create an immediate presence of Parliament in
the provinces. So, I think there is a lot more that maybe we could discuss
around this when you have some time, and I would like to take that process
further with you.

Chairperson, my time is running out, but lastly, I would like to just to
pay tribute to somebody very important in my life, with your permission,
Chairperson. My older sister turns something six, on the sixth of the sixth
of the sixth. I won’t reveal the first digit! Thank you very much.
[Applause.] [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Congratulations to your sister, Mr
Doidge.

Mr M J ELLIS: Yes, indeed, Madam Chair, I do also want to congratulate Mr
Doidge’s sister on her achievement. I also want to say to Mr Doidge as
well, that you were certainly very quick to criticise my colleague with
regard to certain issues that he raised. We did not hear you saying
anything at all about Mr Charlton and he certainly chose not to reveal any
other issues relating to what he had to say. So, we note that with
interest, but obviously perhaps the hon Andries Nel will be referring to
that when he speaks later.

What the hon Speaker had to say today about the new vision for Parliament,
the work of committees, the process of oversight, etc, is not something the
DA will argue about; and certainly the ANC Chief Whip, who is busy talking
over there at the present time, also has some interesting things to say,
with humility of course, about the parliamentary programme. But I want to
say to both of them that it’s not all as good as they think.

I certainly want to pick up one or two issues raised by my hon Chief Whip,
Douglas Gibson. He mentioned something about the nature of the
parliamentary debates and that Parliament itself spends far too much time
on inconsequential debates and not enough time on matters of state - and
that, of course, is a fact. The truth is that by far the majority of
debates in Parliament are repetitive and boring. Parliament, quite frankly,
has become a very predictable place and has lost any real form of
spontaneity – the same faces at the podium, every time after time to talk
about much the same subjects each time. Very seldom these days are members’
motions debated or snap debates granted to discuss something of actual
importance, something that may have just happened, which should be debated
in this House. I want to say that the hon Corné Mulder, who is not here,
also raised this particular point.
Quite frankly, there is no imagination given to the formulation of the
parliamentary programme, which would help to revitalise parliamentary
sittings and make members want to be in this House. Quite frankly, even
Budget Votes now are very boring with many Ministers themselves doing very
little to make their own inputs interesting and engaging. They simply get
to this podium – and you are an exception, Minister of Education, but you
know what I’m talking about because you actually agree with me. Many
Ministers do very little to make their own inputs interesting and engaging.
They simply come here and they read 30 to 35 minute speeches in a most
tedious manner and they don’t even begin to engage the House. And then we
have five or six ANC members arrive here, each with 10 or 14 minutes, and
they do say much the same thing as the Minister has said; and they are
long, boring and repetitive.

So, we find ourselves saying today is as boring as yesterday and tomorrow
will be as boring as today! [Applause.] [Laughter.] Question time is no
better, in fact, it is often worse. What used to be the most vibrant
exciting time in Parliament every week has become the most boring and
predictable. [Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: On a point of order, Madam.
[Laughter.]

Mr M J ELLIS: This should be interesting.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Is it parliamentary to be bored by
good news and transformation?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Well, it’s not very pleasant but it’s
parliamentary.

Mr M J ELLIS: There you are again being very boring, sir, you see.
[Laughter.] Question time has been engineered by the ANC to prevent the
opposition from participating effectively in it, and question time itself
has a very small oversight role. It used to be a high-quality opportunity
for Members of Parliament to hold the executive to account. We had
questions mostly from the opposition and we had interpellations, but now we
have the extraordinary situation of the ruling party insisting on
questioning itself - the result, quite frankly, is a farce.

Their questions are all sweetheart questions and of no real consequence at
all. Let’s take the question paper of last week – the Social Services and
Governance cluster. There were 30 questions on the question paper
altogether, only four of which were from the ANC and 26 from the
opposition. Yet the ANC had all their questions answered while only three
questions from the opposition were heard that day.

The opposition’s other 23 questions were unanswered. [Interjections.] It is
much the same as last week – I’m sorry, Madam, you have to speak much
louder than that because I’ve got a loud voice, so I can’t hear what the
heck you are saying. So, it’s very obvious then that no ANC members even
bother to write their own questions these days. They are written for them
with the intention of giving specific Ministers the opportunity to brag or
explain about some particular action in their departments. There is no
oversight intended whatsoever.

The same basically applies to follow-up questions. No worthwhile, sparkling
questions ever come from the ANC or ever will. So, week after week, or
whenever the ANC even bothers to hold question time these days, we go
through the same poor and pathetic process.

But the truth of the matter is that the ANC intends to try doing one thing,
and one thing only, and that is to close down the opposition space in
Parliament. Take, for example, the way they have manipulated the so-called
sitting of the 10th Anniversary of the Constitution. They allowed only one
speaker so that opposition parties had no opportunity to participate. There
is no spontaneity and no excitement about Parliament anymore. It is just
the rubber stamp that the ANC wants it to be. There is little enthusiasm on
the part of MPs. We all know that when the bells ring at 13:50 each day,
they signal little more than probably another boring day in Parliament.

So, I would say to the ANC that if you do have such a huge majority and if
you do have so much confidence in your ability to rule forever - as you
claim you do - then open up Parliament, give the opposition parties a real
opportunity to hold the executive to account, create real opportunities for
MPs to question the executive and make Parliament a place that is vibrant,
interesting and exciting. Thank you. [Time Expired.][Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, Madam Speaker,
hon members, in all that we’ve heard from this debate, I don’t think anyone
seriously contested that we are moving forward towards building an
efficient people’s Parliament that is responsive to the needs of the people
and that is driven by the ideal of realising a better quality of life for
all the people of South Africa. I think we are on track in terms of the
realisation of that vision that we have for Parliament, which is based on
the constitutional mandate for Parliament that is contained in our
Constitution.

But as representatives of the people I think we have a sacred duty
constantly to engage in criticism and self-criticism. We can never accept
that we are doing well enough for those who have sent us here to represent
them. Therefore we need to engage honestly and seriously at all times in
whether we as public representatives, and the institution within which we
work, is really doing what it needs to do. But we need to engage in that
debate in a serious way. We need to engage honestly and on the basis of
fact. And I think the vast majority of inputs that we have heard here today
have tried to do exactly that.

But unfortunately we have heard inputs that I think are really doing grave
injustice to the seriousness of the issue that we are dealing with. Mr
Gibson comes here, and he makes the assertion that Parliament is being
sidelined. I mean that is a very serious allegation. Firstly, who is
sidelining Parliament? Because to sideline Parliament goes against the
Constitution, so whoever is doing that is acting in an unconstitutional
manner. And we presume that they, like ourselves, have taken a solemn oath
to uphold the Constitution. So who is sidelining Parliament and how are
they doing that? I think we need some weighter evidence or arguments to be
brought before us than Mr Gibson has done. He comes here today and he says
Parliament is being sidelined, because Ministers are holding media
conferences. What kind of an argument is that?

I can understand that for people who worship the media like my colleagues
on my left, that to address a media conference is almost more serious than
coming to address Parliament, but I don’t think that is evidence that
Parliament is being sidelined. [Applause.]

Secondly, Mr Gibson makes the assertion that government has run out of
steam, and that it has no new ideas. You see, the problem, Mr Gibson, is
that the ANC and government are not intellectual fashionistas. We are not
driven by opportunism or by what sounds nice today. More than 50 years ago
the people of South Africa came together and drew up the Freedom Charter.
That is the base policy document on which we operate. [Applause.] That is
the framework that is being spelt out, and that is the mandate that we were
given five decades ago. Why must we reinvent new ideas for the sake of it
or to excite ourselves?

No, we have been given a mandate to implement. We formulated policies. This
Parliament engaged in lengthy debates on policies. I remember in those
early days of this Parliament, none other than Mr Leon once complained that
the ANC is running Parliament as if is a sociology seminar. No, we were
engaging in policy debates. We have laid that policy foundation. Why is it
that every week we must come and think up new policies? We need to work
seriously towards the implementation of these policies and assess the
impact of those policies as we implement them. [Applause.] Where there is
then a need for new ideas and policies, we will develop them.

Thirdly, Mr Gibson raised the issue of Mr Charlton. Now I do not know why
it is that one individual out of the whole parliamentary service is now
being brought to the floor of the National Assembly for this serious
discussion. But the undertone of what Mr Gibson is saying is that someone
is being fired, and he says it is in order to sweep matters under the
carpet. But what has happened in this case?

I don’t know what the relevance of Mr Charlton in this matter is, because
what happened here is clearly that a junior official in Parliament detected
certain irregularities, and reported this matter to their superior. Their
superior in turn reported it to the Secretary to Parliament, who in
consultation with the Presiding Officers commissioned an investigation.
This investigation comes back. The matter is then handed first to the South
African Police Services and secondly also to the National Prosecuting
Authority. And the law takes its course. Members are charged, and all
parties are charged. Trials are continuing and the law is taking its
course. So is there anything swept under any carpet? Those things are the
matter of legal processes. [Applause.]

And whether those members or others are guilty or not the court will
decide. But I don’t know where anything has been swept under any carpet,
and where Mr Charlton has anything to do with this. He is often described
as a whistle-blower, but whistle blowing only becomes relevant where an
official in an institution attempts to raise a matter, but that is blocked.
There was no blockage of anything here. Everyone was doing their work, and
the law took and is still taking its course.

Next, Mr Gibson raises the issue of the Secretary to Parliament, and says
that he is a politician and not a public servant. Now I don’t know what is
meant by that because as far as I know and recollect we were all in this
House when we passed the resolution to appoint the Secretary to Parliament
in that position, and that is a decision we took unanimously as a House. We
knew very well that Mr Dingani was a former member. I do not see why that
disqualifies him to hold this position.

One would think that exactly someone who has the experience of Parliament
and provincial legislatures would be very well-equipped to acquit himself
of the position of Secretary to Parliament.

Come to think about it, he has built admirably on a very solid foundation
that was laid by his predecessor Mr Mfenyana. The programmes of Parliament
are being implemented in an effective and efficient manner. And if one
takes any performance indicator, I challenge the opposition to show where
these things are not being done properly. Two years ago the Auditor-General
gave Parliament a qualified audit report on eight counts. Last year’s
report shows that it is down to one. We hope that next year that would be
down to zero. [Applause.] Now they want to crucify the man, because his
picture appears somewhere. Surely we can’t conduct debates on that basis
and at that level.

Next, Mr Gibson turns his attention to the speaker of the NA. He then puts
forward as charge number one, that the speaker attended the inauguration of
a head of state in Liberia. He does not say that there was anything
financially untoward, and that no system was followed, or a rule was broken
in this. He demands instant accountability. But we can’t operate on that
basis, surely the Secretary to Parliament as the Accounting Officer of this
institution accounts thoroughly and properly on an annual basis.

We can’t be constantly writing to people and asking for full justifications
of each and every thing that they do. I mean that would be chaos, but in
this case those who have power over that matter have seen it fit to
respond. We haven’t heard that there was anything wrong with the response.
But we would wonder why it is that these two individuals are being singled
out, and not only today but last year and consistently. Why are the Speaker
of the NA and the Secretary to Parliament consistently being singled out
for attack and vilification without any real substance?

Is it not perhaps that instead of being inefficient they are too efficient
for the liking of certain people, in terms of implementing a programme that
will transform this Parliament into the Parliament that we want it to be?
[Applause.]

Mr Van der Merwe raised the issue of roll-overs; I think some members have
responded to that. And I think equally we would associate ourselves with
the concerns expressed. Clearly we can never allow a situation where there
are resources available for those resources not to be utilised, but I think
it is also a matter that we need to look at a bit more carefully. Is it
really a question of funds that are going to waste or are there issues in
the budgeting and budget management systems of Parliament that need to be
improved, and which we think are being improved by the introduction of the
Marang management system?

Mr Ellis goes on at great length about boredom, but I think at the heart of
it is his boredom of form and content. He harped on, for virtually the
whole of his speech, issues of form, going on and on that this form is
boring and that one is boring, and so on and on, and nowhere does he
address himself to matters of content. Mr Doidge spoke at length about the
work being done to put oversight and accountability and committee work on a
proper structure or scientific basis that leads to real qualitative
oversight. That bores Mr Ellis, yet he focuses on form.

But we are here to represent the people of our country. We are not here for
our own amusement. So I must sympathise with Mr Ellis. There are many
speakers who also bore me, but I am not here to be amused. I am here to
represent people. [Applause.]

Lastly I would like to, in conclusion, thank the Presiding Officers, the
Whips and the members of all parties, the Secretary to Parliament, the
parliamentary service, the leader of government business, but most of all
the people of South Africa who have entrusted us with this task of
representing them. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on vote No 16 – Health:

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, I thought members were going to say
“impilo iyasetshenzelwa” [one has to work for health].

But they haven’t said that and I understand in parliamentary procedures you
can’t sing. I would have loved to sing: Impilo iyasetshenzelwa. [One has to
work for health.]

Chairperson, hon members, invited guests, thank you very much for being
here this afternoon.

Members would have noticed the screening programme outside this Chamber and
I hope most of you have taken the opportunity to be screened for body mass,
hypertension, diabetes and cholesterol. These screenings, together with
skipping ropes and pedometers on your desks are part of our interventions
to promote healthy lifestyles and I hope you will use them.

Allow me especially to welcome the health workers who made a special effort
to be in the House this afternoon, including our stakeholders and special
guests. [Applause.]
In January this year, the National Health Council decided on five
priorities for health for 2006-07 in the context of our five-year strategic
plan. These priorities are: service transformation plans which should be
completed by each province; human resources plans for health; quality of
care; physical infrastructure for primary health care and hospitals; and
priority health programmes with specific reference to promotion of healthy
lifestyles, TB control and prevention of HIV/Aids.

Through a resolution sponsored by our country in 2005, the World Health
Assembly resolved that 2006 be dedicated to human resources for health.
This is in recognition of the hard work that health workers in all
categories put into ensuring that we promote healthy lifestyles and when we
are ill, we receive the best possible care that our country can afford.

South Africa led this process because we understand that the planning and
development of health resources for health is a major undertaking that
requires both national and international interventions. In view of this, I
wish to take the opportunity to salute the contribution of each and every
health worker who contributes to the effective running of our health
systems. [Applause.]

In line with the importance that we have attached to the matter of human
resources for health, we made considerable efforts to finalise the human
resource plan for health for South Africa. Part of the process included
extensive consultation with stakeholders. I am happy to announce that we
completed and launched this plan on World Health Day on 7 April 2006.

During our consultations, health workers raised many issues as challenges
affecting them, which included issues of inadequate remuneration, poor
working conditions in some areas, lack of suitable accommodation and other
supportive amenities, particularly in rural areas.

The health system is challenged by the migration of health workers from the
rural to urban areas, from the public to the private health sector and from
South Africa to developed countries. One of the factors is a desire by some
health workers to gain international exposure and experience by working in
different health environments as part of their health career development.

Chairperson, permit me to provide just a few examples of the activities of
the Department of Health that are beginning to address these push and pull
factors.

On the issue of remuneration, we accept that over the past few years the
remuneration of public health workers has lagged behind the public sector
workers. We have been working very hard and closely with the Department of
Public Service and Administration and National Treasury on developing a
revised remuneration structure for health workers and I am informed that
this should be ready for implementation in the next financial year.

On the issue of improved conditions of our health facilities, members will
recall that we have initiated the revitalisation of hospitals programme
over a period of three years. Currently, we have 42 projects enrolled into
the programme and we hope to complete another four hospitals in the 2006-07
financial year. These are the George Hospital in the Western Cape, which
will be officially opened on 30 June, Jane Furse Hospital and Lebowakgomo
Hospital in Limpopo and Mary Theresa Hospital in the Eastern Cape. The
other three hospitals will also be officially opened during this financial
year.

In addition, every hospital has been requested to develop a hospital
improvement plan that includes basic activities such as repairing the
broken windows or leaking taps to clinical audits to improve the quality of
care that we provide for our citizens.

To demonstrate the effect of the changes we are making through the
revitalisation programme, I would like to quote two health workers and a
journalist on their experiences and perceptions of our facilities.

A nursing sister working at the newly opened Manne Dipico Hospital in
Colesberg said:
  Our patients feel safe and comfortable in this beautiful hospital. It is
  fantastic to work here. We have all the equipment we need and the Karoo
  summer heat cannot reach our patients; thanks to the air-conditioning. In
  my 20 years of experience I have never felt more comfortable and confident
  to provide our people with care that they need.

The head of the newly completed Trauma Unit at Pelonomi Hospital in
Bloemfontein said:

  This is going to be the best trauma centre in the country. We will be able
  to handle the accidents and emergencies effectively.

A reporter who went to write a story about the same trauma unit in Pelonomi
said, ``The trauma unit is so well equipped and I would not mind being
treated here, should I be involved in an accident.’’

These comments from health workers and users of our service bear testimony
to the results that are beginning to filter through. We must, however,
accelerate our programme to ensure that within at least 15 years our public
facilities are completely revitalised. Of course, in the meantime we shall
be fast-tracking maintenance work that is needed to ensure that our
facilities are properly maintained.

In this regard, I wish to quote a letter that I received recently from Mr
Prinsloo about treatment of his friend at the George Mukhari Hospital in
Gauteng. Hon members will recall that this is the same hospital that I
visited last year and found its mental health section to be in urgent need
of upgrading which I am pleased to report has taken place.

Mr Prinsloo writes:

  A very dear friend of mine, Kobus Cronje, was shot in the head on 21 April
  2006 in his house at 02:00 in the morning. He was rushed to the Montana
  Private Hospital and the doctors there stabilised him – for which I am
  very thankful. Because he did not have a medical fund and because the
  family could not secure R500 000, the functionaries of the said hospital
  dumped him at the Dr George Mukhari Hospital in Gauteng at 8 am. One must
  understand that the intensive care unit of the Dr George Mukhari Hospital
  was full but the doctors made a plan. I witnessed the doctors, sisters,
  nurses and other staff rendering but only the best possible service to my
  friend. Apart from the absolute professional services the hospital,
  although old, was very clean. Another fact is that the doctors worked for
  more than 18 consecutive hours in order to do good to my friend and other
  patients. The aforesaid is not hearsay, I was there and I saw it with my
  own eyes. I was at the hospital myself for 24 hours. For example, Dr
  Monana, an ear, nose and throat specialist who attended to my friend in
  the morning came back at 21:00 that night and worked on him until 02:00
  the following morning. Dr Monana was not the only doctor, a number of
  others also worked on him. The only thing I can do is to thank you for
  rescuing my friend through a hospital and wonderful staff at the Dr George
  Mukhari Hospital. If possible, kindly convey to the staff our sincere
  appreciation. From now on I will be your and your department’s biggest
  supporter.

[Applause.]

I invited Mr Prinsloo to attend, but unfortunately he is not well and has
been advised by his doctor not to travel. However, I am pleased Dr Monana
was able to be here with us today so that we can show him our appreciation.
He is in the public gallery. Can you please stand up, Dr Monana.
[Applause.] I am however saddened to learn that despite the efforts of our
public sector health workers, Mr Cronje passed away. I wish to take this
opportunity to express our sincere condolences to the Cronje family for
their loss.

There are many Dr Monanas out there. They work very hard every day, saving
lives, providing comfort and improving health. [Applause.] Their skills
have made them a valuable asset in the global market. There are those who,
because of today’s world realities, happen to have much stronger economies
than ours and would like to steal the likes of Dr Monana away from us.

In search of professional excellence, our health professionals may want to
compare their competencies with those of their peers in developed
countries. I am also delighted that our President during his recent visit
to the UK also emphasised the fact that developed counties are poaching
valuable human resources from underdeveloped countries because we cannot
stop our health professionals from gaining experience outside the country.
However, we have sought to work with other countries to manage this
movement so that it does not impact negatively on our health system.

We have an agreement with the United Kingdom through which health workers
can work in UK hospitals and return to the public sector without loss of
employment or status.

There have been major achievements as a result of this agreement. Since we
signed the agreement in 2003, the number of South African nurses registered
with the Nursing and Midwifery Council in the UK has decreased by more than
55% from 2 114 in 2002 to a mere 100 in 2005. We are exploring similar
agreements with other countries such as Canada.

Our health professionals, especially those in rural areas, often feel
unsupported. In order to improve additional support, especially to health
professions on the periphery, we are strengthening our telemedicine
capacity so that the specialists in the tertiary hospitals can support our
doctors and nurses and other professionals working in the rural areas.

Finally, with respect to human resources for health, I am pleased to
announce that the Universities of Pretoria, Walter Sisulu and Witwatersrand
will, amongst them, admit 100 students to commence training as clinical
associates, otherwise called medical assistants, in January 2007.
[Applause.] This new cadre of health workers will complete a three-year-
degree programme with significant on-site training in district learning
centres. Upon graduation, they will work under the supervision of health
officers in district hospitals and primary health care levels. The scope of
practice will include diagnosis and treatment, including minor surgery.

We have made progress in other areas of the health sector as well. The
implementation of the integrated management of childhood illnesses strategy
has been strengthened in the past year and will continue to be improved
through the training of additional health workers who work with children.
In a further endeavour to strengthen the health sector, we are in
discussion with the deans of health sciences and faculties and heads of
clinical departments to review and improve the exit competencies of
undergraduates and postgraduates in the health sector.

Our immunisation programme - and we can be proud of this - is generally
good and has a national coverage rate of more than 80%. However, there are
districts and subdistricts with coverage of less than 70% that we will be
paying special attention to during this year. Through our joint initiative
with Biovac Institute, a public-private partnership for local vaccine
production and distribution, South Africa has been able to become self-
reliant, with regard to the production of a range of vaccines and is
currently building capacity required to export vaccines to other countries
in the region.

We need to redouble our efforts to decrease the burden of noncommunicable
diseases on our population. As you know, there are many risk factors for
noncommunicable diseases, which include high blood pressure, tobacco use,
excessive alcohol use, diabetes, artery diseases, physical inactivity and
obesity. These are things that we can do something about as part of a
healthy lifestyles programme.

Regarding tobacco use, in particular, we appreciate the support that we are
receiving from ordinary South Africans in terms of intensifying our tobacco
control measures. We hope we will get similar support from this House with
regard to the amendments to the Tobacco Products Control Amendment Act.

We have strengthened our healthy lifestyles programme through a range of
activities including the establishment of food gardens, the initiation of
the move for a health campaign to encourage increased physical activity;
screening for diabetes, hypertension and cervical cancer; strengthening the
health-promoting schools programme as well as the school health service. In
this regard, South Africa was able to showcase, together with Brazil and
Spain, our efforts to implement a healthy lifestyles programme at the World
Health Assembly that was concluded two weeks ago. I must say members of the
audience from many countries who, I have no doubt appreciated our input,
will be emulating us in the months ahead.

Those members who joined us before lunch would have seen concrete evidence
of our attempts to increase the levels of physical activity amongst our
people. I urge you to work with your constituencies to broaden this
movement, which is called “Vuka South Africa” - Move for your Health.

Concerning communicable diseases, we have worked with other government
departments and the private sector to develop an avian flu preparedness
plan, which has been approved by Cabinet. The control of avian flu
outbreaks requires monitoring of poultry and birds, especially migratory
birds. This is being done by the Department of Agriculture and South Africa
has been declared free of avian flu.

The Department of Health has taken primary responsibility to prevent humans
from contracting human influenza. Let me assure this House that we are
prepared to deal with this disease. Our National Institute for Communicable
Diseases has developed the capacity to test for this virus and we are ready
to assist on the continent as well.

We shall use the World Health Organisation guidelines on the management of
patients with influenza and we have fast-tracked the registration of
antivirals that may assist, and I underline “may assist” in the management
of patients and may be useful as prophylaxis. The recommendation from WHO
is that these drugs should be stockpiled in quantities that are adequate to
manage, particularly regarding frontline workers who may have extended
exposure to possible infection in the line of their duty.

Last week I was informed about cases of polio in Namibia. Our National
Institute for Communicable Diseases assisted Namibia to conduct tests and
has confirmed three cases. I have offered our assistance to my counterpart
in Namibia, and we have also strengthened our own effort in this regard. We
are all on full alert, particularly in the Northern Cape, which borders
Namibia. In addition the Biovac Institute sent 1 million doses of the polio
vaccine to Namibia to assist with the vaccination campaign against polio.

As you may be aware, we launched a National TB Crisis Management Plan in
March this year to strengthen the TB control programme in those districts
with a significant number of TB cases and unsatisfactory cure rates. These
districts are the Nelson Mandela Metro and Amathole district in Eastern
Cape, EThekwini Metro in KwaZulu-Natal and the Johannesburg Metro in
Gauteng.

Concerning HIV and Aids, our emphasis on prevention of new infections and
tackling the link with poor nutrition has finally been endorsed by the
international community in various forums. The World Health Organisation
Africa region declared 2006 the year of accelerated prevention because of
our understanding of the central role of preventing new infections in
responding to this major challenge.

We will be implementing an accelerated HIV-prevention strategy, which
includes an increase in budget allocation for a communication and social
mobilisation campaign to the tune of R200 million for the next two years.
The campaign will improve the abstinence component of prevention, support
the distribution of female condoms and seek to sustain the very impressive
condom distribution rate, which currently averages 350 million free male
condoms per year.

A report tabled by the World Health Organisation to the World Health
Assembly two weeks ago urged member states to integrate nutrition in their
responses to this challenge. In addition, the Global Fund to Fight Aids,
Tuberculosis and Malaria has urged that proposals for funding on HIV and
Aids should also include a nutrition component. We are honoured, as South
Africans, to have led the way in this regard through our comprehensive
plan.

I wish to inform this House that the Global Fund to Fight Aids,
Tuberculosis and Malaria will be hosting a partnership meeting in South
Africa in July. Again this signifies the confidence that the world has in
us as South Africa. We are conscious of the need to strengthen the
implementation of the comprehensive plan in its totality, including
strengthening the health system; social mobilisation and public awareness;
increasing access to voluntary counselling and testing; prevention of
mother-to-child transmission of HIV; promotion of human rights and access
to care and support services; promotion of good nutrition; research and
development of African traditional medicines; and safe administration and
monitoring of antiretrovirals. [Applause.]

Our determination to implement this programme rigorously and
comprehensively is reflected in the consistently increasing budgetary
allocation for our response to HIV and Aids. As South Africans, we must be
proud of our comprehensive plan. At last week’s United Nations General
Assembly meeting in New York there was consensus that the following are key
ingredients for a successful programme: interventions to reduce poverty and
underdevelopment; interventions to strengthen the health system and ensure
proper nutrition; and the need to set appropriate, realistic and attainable
targets that are specific to each country.

The hosting of the soccer World Cup in South Africa in 2010 provides us
with both challenges and opportunities. The department will be ready with
regard to the preparedness of the health system. We will be training and
deploying significant numbers of emergency medical services practitioners,
purchasing additional ambulances as well as upgrading the casualty sections
of designated hospitals as a matter of urgency. These improvements to the
health system will be one of the concrete legacies of the 2010 World Cup.

Let me now turn to our interaction with the private health sector. The
department has been engaging with various health stakeholders in our effort
to finalise a charter for the Health Sector. The charter is our attempt to
provide a coherent framework for engagement between the public and private
health sectors. It is an effort to deal with the inequities between the two
sectors as well as the desire for transformation of the private health
sector. We have started the process of negotiating targets with respect to
equity ownership within the context of broad-based black economic
empowerment.

Equally important is the need for sharing resources, experiences and
competencies between the two sectors in a manner that strengthens the
entire health system. We are confident that we will be able to negotiate a
charter with the stakeholders, and that stakeholders will feel comfortable
to sign, noting that it is indeed a voluntary exercise. Of course we will
do this, I hope, within the next two months.

As you know, the Department of Health has, over the past few years, taken
legislative and other measures to strengthen the financial situation of
schemes. I reported previously that this has been achieved. Medical schemes
are now financially stable and the Council for Medical Schemes has put in
place strategies for early identification of potential problems, which they
are dealing with.

I also reported on the previous decision to implement a risk equalisation
fund. We are in the process of finalising legislation to give effect to
this policy, and hope to send to the House draft legislation in this regard
during this parliamentary session.

As a result of the Constitutional Court ruling, which upheld the right of
government to regulate medicine prices, we are continuing with our efforts
to reduce the prices of medicines in the country. Interested parties have
provided input to the Draft Dispensing Fee Structure published in March,
and these inputs are being consolidated and considered in the finalisation
of the new dispensing fee structure, which should be finalised soon.

The pricing committee is also developing a methodology for international
benchmarking, which will bring medicine prices in South Africa in line with
those of other countries. The draft methodology should also be available
for public comment within the next few months, with the intention to
implement it before the end of this year. Patients can expect further cost
savings when this methodology is implemented.

On African traditional medicines, the department will focus on the
establishment of the Traditional Health Practitioners’ Council as provided
for in the Traditional Health Practitioners Act, and developing a policy
framework for dealing with African traditional medicines. We will be
hosting an international workshop on traditional medicine on 9 and 10 June.
We hope to learn from international experience in this regard.

These initiatives will assist us to better understand the value and the use
of traditional medicine, and support the research and development of this
important component of health.

I am pleased to report to this House that our investment in health research
far exceeds 2% of the health budget guideline accepted internationally. It
far exceeds 2%.

In addition to the monetary investment that we made to support the
provisions of the National Health Act, we developed structures and systems
to ensure better co-ordination of health research and to safeguard the
population from unethical research practices, especially with regard to
clinical trials. We need further to improve equity in the spread of
research, especially involving previously disadvantaged researchers and
historically disadvantaged research institutions and universities.

In the development of health clinical policies that I have highlighted this
afternoon, you will notice that we have gone the extra mile in ensuring
that most stakeholders had ample opportunity to make inputs to influence
these major policy undertakings.

In addition to consulting on specific issues last month, we inaugurated the
National Consultative Health Forum, the purpose of which is to act as a
platform for consultation with national stakeholders. Similar structures
have been established at provincial level and indeed will be extended to
district level.

Finally, let me turn to the budget that we have been allocated to fulfil
our mandate. The allocation to the Department of Health for 2006-07 is
R11 billion, and that includes that which we must dispense for conditional
grants to the provinces.

The increased allocation received by the Department of Health for its own
use was limited to R15 million for project management of certain projects
in the provinces, and also risk equalisation management to be implemented
by the Council for Medical Schemes.

With respect to conditional grants, the department has received the
following increased allocations for 2006-07: R100 million for the Hospital
Revitalisation Programme; R525 million to fund improvements in the Forensic
Pathology Services, which we took over from the SA Police Service on 1
April this year; and R32 million for the Medical Research Council to
accommodate the new VAT laws without decreasing its operating budget.

In order to strengthen the national Department of Health, I approved a new
organogram for implementation in 2006-07. This will see the number of new
Deputy Directors-General increasing from the current three to six. There
will also be an increase in the number of management posts at other levels
to strengthen the senior management team. This expansion will require an
additional R30 million for personnel.

In the past, the cost of accommodation for the national Department of
Health was budgeted for by the Department of Public Works. These funds have
now been transferred and are included in the budget for the national
Department of Health, amounting to R35 million for 2006-07.

As I noted earlier, I attended, together with the MECs for Health of
KwaZulu-Natal and the North West province, the annual World Health Assembly
meeting of the World Health Organisation. Whilst preparing for the World
Health Assembly, we learnt that Dr Lee, the Director-General of the WHO,
had suffered a stroke. Despite the efforts of the best health professionals
in the developed countries, he didn’t survive.

I wish to acknowledge the role that Dr Lee played in international health
and, in particular, in Africa. He revived the principles of Alma Atta which
include issues of development, provision of drinking water, adequate
sanitation and the importance of education as the key to ensuring the
provision of effective primary health care, including community
participation and involvement.

I am pleased to report that the South African delegation made a significant
contribution to several areas of debate, and to strengthening the
resolutions on a wide range of issues. I shall just mention two to provide
hon members with the flavour of the issues.

The issue is whether all countries should destroy the smallpox virus that
some countries still hold, even though smallpox has been eradicated. The
issue here is the risk posed to all nations should the virus get into the
wrong hands. Progress was made in this regard through the broadening of the
advisory committee that will address this matter. Initially, the advisory
committee was only composed of only two countries that are, themselves,
doing research on this issue.

The second issue revolves around intellectual property rights as it affects
health. Again, tough negotiations and discussions were needed to protect
the interests of developing countries, which we championed. In the context
of a globalised health system, it is very important that South Africa is
able to speak for itself and on behalf of other developing countries,
especially those in Africa, and ally itself with progressive forces in
Africa and other parts of the developing world. Unless we are able to do
this, nation states in the developing countries will be less likely to make
and implement health policies that are in their best interests.

Before I conclude, permit me to remember our former Minister of Public
Works, Stella Sigcau who inspired many of us in Cabinet with her work with
rural communities in particular. May her soul rest in peace.

In conclusion, I thank our health workers once again for the sterling work
that they are doing. I wish to sincerely thank Members of this House, in
particular, the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Health, for the
support during the year, for looking critically at both our draft
legislation as well as monitoring the implementation of our policies.

Finally, I wish to thank the Deputy Minister, the MECs for Health, the
Director-General and the officials of the Department of Health at national
and provincial levels for their contributions to our transformation agenda.
I ask this House to pass the Health Budget Vote. Thank you very much to the
health workers. I really want to acknowledge you. [Applause.] I thank you
very much.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Madam Speaker, two days ago we found out what they do
with Aids charlatans in Kenya. A woman there fleeced hundreds of people
living with HIV/Aids of thousands of dollars by promising to cure them of
HIV through prayer. She was arrested, charged with six counts of fraud, and
faces up to three years in jail and a fine.

Here in South Africa we have 1 000 Aids deaths per day. This is the figure
released by the Actuarial Society of SA. Yet, Minister, your colleague
Trevor Manuel told me in this very House that that figure was poppycock
when he was one of the long list of alternative Ministers answering the
questions that you should, in fact, have been dealing with. It seems you
even have your own colleagues denying that there is a problem.

And does this country deal with charlatans as they do in Kenya? No.  Here
we reward them with a free ministerial stamp of approval. One quack claimed
that his vitamins cured all heart disease, cancer, Aids, bird flu and, as
of last week, tuberculosis. He’s currently peddling his wares in Nigeria,
claiming that his clinical trials in South Africa proved his case. The
bereaved families in Khayelitsha would disagree. There were, of course,
never any clinical trials.

Then there is a woman in KwaZulu-Natal Tina - van der Maas - who tells
thousands that Aids doesn’t exist, so safe sex is not necessary. Her so-
called patients are dying, and she is the one who told you that garlic and
beetroot were the cure you were looking for.

Then there is the man who says he’s never trained as a traditional healer.
He brews up leaves in his back yard every evening, pours the concoction
into plastic milk bottles and makes a killing on the proceeds. He claimed
to two of my KwaZulu-Natal colleagues on separate occasions that in four
months he could cure Aids. He is unable to produce any records, any proof.
Instead he makes claims about a dream he had.

Doctors in that province are warning their patients not to buy into his
blandishments about a cure, as he insists that they stop taking
antiretrovirals once they buy his product. The result is disastrous. You
won’t stop him and other charlatans like him, so I’ve gone to the police
and I’m hoping that where the Ministry of Health has failed us all so
disastrously, the Ministry of Safety and Security and our legal system
might just assist in stamping out the charlatans. Well, we live in hope.

And when I tackled you on a radio programme on World Aids Day, Minister,
and asked you to state once and for all, for all South Africans to hear,
whether, if you were raped, you would take antiretrovirals within 72 hours
to avoid contracting HIV, you said you would want to know what your options
were. You seem utterly fixated on attempting to prove that the rest of the
world - every nation in the world - is wrong and that there is an
alternative out there. Well, there isn’t.

No one has ever claimed that ARVs are a cure for HIV. No one! But thousands
upon thousands of HIV-positive people are pulled back from the brink of
death by those miracle drugs. They recover, they put on weight and they go
back to work. If monitored by a doctor, this regime could keep them well
for over a decade - time enough, perhaps, for the scientists on this planet
to find a cure.

For the sake of South Africa, Minister, put aside your flirtations with the
Aids denialists and accept the truth. Vitamins and vegetables are important
to everyone - no one has ever said they weren’t - but they will not prevent
the downward spiral towards death.

A year ago I stood at this podium and, Minister, you were apparently on the
verge of launching a huge anti-Aids campaign. Well, we’re still waiting.
It’s rather like waiting for Minister Jordan to appoint a new NAC board.
You know it won’t happen, but all you have left is hope.

In any other country in the world, 1 000 deaths a day for just a week would
have triggered calls for the declaration of a national emergency. Here,
sadly, we have a Minister who is known globally, not for the lives she
saves, but for her denialist stance. One thousand deaths a day! Minister,
what are you thinking, and what was it that you graduated in that allows
you to call yourself “doctor”, when every single doctor and nurse I’ve
spoken to in this country - black, brown and white - just shake their head
in utter disgust at the bizarre choices you make?

Well, the time has come for you to stop. Stop meeting with and encouraging
the Aids denialists and quacks; stop denying our people the drugs they so
desperately need - it’s your duty to provide them - not only to the lucky
130 000 who are provided by public hospitals, but to any of the over
500 000 amongst us who need them. We can’t just target one in five. Who’s
supposed to choose which of the five get them, and which four are left to
their deadly diet of garlic, beetroot and vitamin pills?

You have until 2010, until the next UN Aids Congress. Are we going to hear
again, then, that the Aids pandemic in this country shows absolutely no
signs of slowing? Do we have 5,5 million infected now, or is it really 6,3
million as your Department of Health states? Well, at least one in nine is
infected.

One third of pregnant women in this country are HIV-positive, but you have
only managed to get 15% of those women the treatment that prevents their
babies from contracting the virus from them. Fifteen percent! The treatment
exists, it works, but you’ve done nothing. How do you sleep at night?

To your never-ending shame we’ve had exposed to all the world the fact that
the life expectancy of the average South African has now dropped to a mere
47 for men, and 49 for women. We should have a plan. That’s about all the
ANC does produce: plans.

But the UN General Assembly Special Session on Aids said such a plan should
be a national priority. Such a plan would reduce Aids-related deaths, says
the UN – well, you failed there. Such a plan would ensure that those with
HIV would be cared for. You failed there too. You keep one and throw back
the other four to die. Such a plan would reduce the stigma of HIV, as
they’ve done so well in so many other countries. Look at Uganda, the
Seychelles, Mozambique, Botswana, but you won’t look! Well, will you? You
failed there too. The last thing such a plan would do is promote the rights
of women and children. And this country’s response there has been to close
down 66 child protection units. There are 151 reported rapes each day.
That’s only 50% of the rapes that actually take place.

Minister, 1 500 people a day are being infected with HIV in this country,
and where are you; or, are you, like Minister Nqakula, going to tell me to
stop whingeing and leave the country when I tell you the truth? By the time
the Soccer World Cup comes to South Africa, it will be too late for five
million of us, who will have to watch the games from a garlic-and-beetroot-
induced afterlife.

Your good friend Matthias Rath, who has now spread his tentacles to my
province, KwaZulu-Natal, with his Sanco colleagues encouraging residents to
rise up and strike those who insist that ARVs be made available to them,
has accused me personally of genocide and crimes against humanity.

Now, Rath is a joke in most countries in the world, but this business of
being charged with crimes against humanity! I’ve begun to hear calls about
the Minister in this regard, and should the Minister not be able to pull
her head out of the sand and turn things around by the next UN Aids
conference - well, watch this space.

Of course the next President will, no doubt, want to start with a clean
slate, and so, no doubt, your days in that seat, which you don’t use much,
are numbered, I’m sure. But I doubt that you want your only legacy to be
that under your tender care 365 000 people a year died of a plague the rest
of the world took seriously. Make it work, Minister. [Interjections.]

Don’t please talk to us about the big bad world stealing all our doctors
and nurses. If you’d ever just once stopped and listened to them, they
wouldn’t be in such an all-fired-up hurry to leave. But you just can’t stop
yourself from treating them as your own personal army, enduring years of
poorly paid conscription in your rat-infested hospitals; hospitals such as
the one that killed four newborns a few days ago, even though I warned you
about how bad it was, and you know I personally took the photographs of the
rats. [Interjections.]
No one but you blames our health professionals for leaving the rampant
crime and disintegrating education systems in this country -and that,
together with the filth and the efficiency that have come to represent our
public health service. They leave - well, for any country really - where
they are treated with respect and given the right to live and work where
they wish, and where they quite probably don’t have to drive to work with a
gun on their hip.

The Auditor-General tells us your Ministry received a qualified report,
again. He couldn’t even get an audit report out of the Northern Cape.
Overall your internal audit systems are a mess and getting worse. Your
asset management was a disaster, rather like the Ministry of Arts and
Culture. It seems that people just help themselves, and chances are that
without a forensic audit no one will ever know.

Of the eight reports that were audited, personnel, revenue, expenditure and
compliance with the Division of Revenue Act were identified as problem
areas. Unauthorised expenditure was also reported in four of the eight ...

Dr M SEFULARO: I rise on a point of order, Madam Speaker.

The SPEAKER: Yes, hon member. What is your point of order?

Dr M SEFULARO: Is it appropriate for the hon member to keep sniping at the
Minister of Arts and Culture when we are debating the Health Vote?
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: She’s within her rights to say whatever she wants to say. Hon
member, please proceed.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: This is a democracy after all. [Interjections.] The
Division of Revenue Act framework for the Ministry of Health’s hospital
revitalisation plans was ignored. Were the implementation plans ever
approved, ever monitored? No one knows. Where were the business plans with
respect to the HIV/Aids grants?

Minister, your grant expenditure was ineffective. There were no guidelines
to ensure monitoring, and somehow the financial statements between your
department and the provinces just won’t add up. Shoddy work again,
Minister. Why didn’t you ensure that the fixed assets were safeguarded and
the movement of assets controlled? Where are the asset registers? In fact,
where are the assets? Where are the fraud prevention plans? In the past
year you’ve managed to develop inadequate systems of internal controls,
staff capacity problems and, of course, under your care we’ve seen develop
an ineffective financial administrative system ensuring that benefit
payments weren’t recorded when banks rejected them.

Let’s look at the so-called SA National Aids Trust. That’s a fine title for
a nonexistent organisation. This is how the auditor puts it: "The Trust had
limited operational activities resulting in nonachievement of objectives."
It’s just a name; nothing else. It has R33 million in assets, but spent
just R600 000. What on? Rent and benefits for the members who never meet -
that’s what it was. [Interjections.] Good news is that the King George V
Silver Jubilee Fund for tuberculosis has a clean report, but that’s because
it’s been closed down.

We’re told that there was underspending of R554 million rand - that’s
underspending by Mpumalanga and North West for the second consecutive year.
As for Gauteng: again, it’s to do with capital works and the failing
hospital revitalisation programme. In fact, things are so bad in Gauteng
that the latest news is that over half of them have already failed to
achieve minimum standards set by an independent watchdog body, and these
are the basics I look for when I judge hospitals: cleanliness, patient
safety and a fully stocked pharmacy. Well, another three look like they’ll
be losing their rating, and they are Pretoria West, Leratong and South
Rand.

I heard 10 minutes ago that in Gauteng they cut the budgets for the
Johannesburg General Hospital and the Pretoria Academic Hospital by over
R1 million apiece. What are you thinking? All this on top of the fact that
- surprise, surprise - R44 million of the maintenance budget for Gauteng
hospitals and clinics was not spent, and the year before R55 million wasn’t
spent. It’s something of a record, I would think. Tuberculosis is a huge
problem, especially HIV/Aids-related tuberculosis, and, as your DG has
admitted to the portfolio committee, it seems the systems there are failing
too.

Well, the hospital revitalisation programme hasn’t amounted to much, Aids
and TB are soaring, your books are in a mess, state hospitals are too. I
receive constant reports from patients, throughout the length and breadth
of this country, who claim that they have to attend the worst hospitals in
this country. One that didn’t make it onto my list of the five worst
hospitals is one which, let me remind you again, just caused the deaths of
four newborn infants. They suffocated in their incubators during a power
failure.

Then there was the Nursing Bill. The nurses spoke with one voice. No, they
did not want you to take over their council. No, they did not want to do
your conscription. You took over the council, and now they have to sign
over a year of their lives to you, even the ones who pay for their own
training. You didn’t listen to a word they said. This nation has come to
understand that you have only one modus operandi: that what you want, you
take. And if people don’t like it, don’t want it, you force it on them.
Must I remind you that we live in a democracy? [Interjections.]

Well, you’ve ensured that you get your way everywhere by appointing a team
of yes men: the MRC, the Health Professions Council of SA, Professor
Anthony Mbewu, Professor Nicky Padayachee. Need I say more? As for the
Medicines Control Council: since the honourable man, Professor Peter Folb,
was suspended in 1997 for refusing to bend to the ANC’s wishes that drug
trials be held to test that poison, Virodene - well, you’ve put two senior
government officials on that board. [Interjections.]

And it’s through them that Rath has been elevated in this country; he has
actually been given access to Members of Parliament’s private pigeonholes
via the good graces of the ANC Chief Whip to ensure a maximum audience for
his maniacal claims. As for the so-called investigation into Rath’s
activities, it didn’t happen, and I was told that it was because of you,
Minister. One of these so-called investigators told me you instructed him
not to. [Interjections.]

The medical community has lost all respect for these once proud
institutions. They were meant to be scientifically independent bodies, but
you couldn’t allow that, could you? And that final statement sums up the
current state of the Ministry of Health. It’s because you won’t allow it to
work, that it doesn’t. And no, of course, the DA will never vote for this
budget. [Applause.]

Mr L V J NGCULU: Thank you very much, hon Speaker. Thank you very much to
our Deputy President. Hon members, we in the ANC support this budget.
[Applause.] It is indeed a budget that gives hope to the people of South
Africa. In other words, it gives life and meaning to the age of hope, which
our President so eloquently spoke of in the state of the nation address.

As the Minister of Finance stated, this budget gives practical expression
to the programme of a better life for all. Most gratifying to us as the ANC
is the fact that this budget focuses on the needs of the poor and the
vulnerable. I would like to dedicate this budget - especially as it falls
in the time of the 30th anniversary of the June 16 uprisings - to the great
doctors who served the ANC and uMkhonto weSizwe.

My memory goes back to many years ago in my life. I remember in particular
those doctors who sacrificed all to be part and parcel of the sufferings of
the cadres of uMkhonto weSizwe. We think of the great doctors of the ANC
who remained true to the Hippocratic oath of serving the people selflessly.
My mind goes back to the memory of Dr Nomava Ntshangase, Dr Peter Mfelang
and Dr Sipho Mthembu who all are no more today. They served the June 16
detachment with splendid and sterling responsibility.

These doctors, together with our current Minister of Health, looked after
the health of the generation of June 16. This generation, coming mostly
from urban areas, experienced for the first time the sting of a mosquito or
a tsetse fly, thus for the first time they suffered from tropical diseases.
Thanks to these great doctors many of us survived and many of those who
died may not have seen freedom, but those who survived were able to carry
on the fight for a free and democratic South Africa.

So as we debate this budget we take pride in the fact that the ANC they
served, until they could no more, remained true to the ideals of a better
life and a free South Africa. We take pride in the fact that the Health
budget keeps going up, thus confirming that the commitment to a healthy
population and better access to health is guaranteed.

In the 2005-06 financial year for instance, the budget increased by 11,4%
compared to 2004-05, and the allocation is projected to rise. To further
prove this point, the national Department of Health recognised the fact
that one of the principal challenges in ensuring that health delivery was
improved was human resources. In this regard, a new programme, the human
resource plan, was created in order to consolidate various departmental
responsibilities for human resources, a reflection of an increased focus on
human resource planning. We take pride in the fact that the human resource
plan has been launched, and the department is sparing neither strength nor
resources to ensure that human resources, the bedrock of health delivery,
are improved.

It is indeed very saddening for us to listen to the DA speak disparagingly
about the exodus of health professionals from South Africa. Whilst it may
be true that they are leaving, no one can take comfort or pride in their
leaving. You can’t celebrate such a thing. [Applause.] If indeed the DA is
serious about the quality and delivery of health care services, they
shouldn’t celebrate the departure of doctors from South Africa.
[Interjections.]

Some, of course, may want to nit-pick about this, but to the actual
recipients of health, problems notwithstanding, they know that today South
Africa is better than yesterday. Maybe one day when we speak from this
podium, we may say a little bit about the history of Dianne Kohler-Barnard
before she became a Member of Parliament, or even before South Africa was
liberated and there were still troops on the border. I will tell you
something about that one day. [Interjections.] To further illustrate this
progress ... [Interjections.] My history is very illustrious, of course.

To further illustrate this progress towards a better life that gives rise
to the age of hope that sometimes confounds our cynics and pessimists, 2004
was the first year of our implementation of the comprehensive plan. We are
happy today – this is also what our Minister stated – that our
comprehensive plan is in place and that all the targets have been met. It
is important, therefore, when we deal with this particular issue, that the
operative word in this regard should be “comprehensive”. For the DA,
therefore, to stand up here, especially for me as an African, and ridicule
traditional health care actually makes me sad. [Interjections.]

I wonder sometimes how those of a darker skin in the ranks of the DA
survive when their cultures and traditions are trampled on. They may not be
proud, but one of the lessons the DA will actually learn in its life is the
fact that HIV/Aids can never be declared a national emergency because it’s
a long-term struggle all of us are involved in. You deal with an emergency
now and later declare that it is no longer there, but this particular
challenge is with us today, will be with us tomorrow and will be with us
for a very long time to come. It can’t be dealt with as an emergency.
[Interjections.]

Of course, for us one of the things we must say as the ANC - and I think
the trend is actually already discernible from the ranks of the DA – is
that in this regard our hearts and prayers go to Comrade Ruth Bhengu who
lost her beautiful daughter, Nozipho. Even before her bones touched the
cold ground of the earth, some people, including some NGOs, politicians and
editorials, treated her in the most insensitive and cruel way. They never
cared for the family or for her dignity. They never thought of the pain
Comrade Ruth was going through.

I’m certain that when Comrade Ruth stood on this podium to announce the
condition of Nozipho, little did she know that those who cherished her
bravery for such an act would, when Nozipho passed on, trample on her
dignity. Indeed we found some celebrating her death, and some quite
chillingly for, in their own view, she did not heed their advice. Yet we
here know full well that Ruth tried her level best to ensure that her
daughter, Nozipho, lived longer and better, but death, cruel as it always
is, robbed her and us of her best gift in life, Nozipho. We, in the ANC,
feel very strongly that the people who humiliated and haunted Nozipho in
her death should be condemned vehemently, for they would like to cheapen
death and display unheard-of intolerance.

We are proud that every time we discuss the budget, both of the national
Department of Health and provinces, we talk of progress. We may highlight
some challenges, but no one can deny progress. Even when some of our
comrades in the Sport and Recreation committee were restless on the
preparedness of Safa regarding 2010, we in the Portfolio Committee on
Health would take pride in the fact that Health was ready for the
challenges of 2010. [Applause.] This is one of the things that makes us
proud, as do all elements in this regard.

Health will actually be part of those people at the front line, whether you
are looking at the emergency services, looking at hospitals, or looking at
everything. Health is ready for the challenges of 2010. Perhaps those in
Safa may take heed when they sit with the Department of Health and look at
how best to be ready in their own ranks. Here, in South Africa, we even
talk of paperless hospitals, thanks to the visionary leadership we find in
Health, when sometimes our own predictors of an apocalypse don’t actually
see progress.

The struggle for affordable medicine has been a long and arduous one.
Vested interests tried every trick in the book to block legislation that
actually tried to address these particular issues, especially when it came
to the question of affordable medicine. Scare stories were peddled, and
some pharmacies even had notices about closing down because the Minister of
Health didn’t want to operate medicine. Yet we know, however, that the saga
is off the radar screen, precisely because we were right and the matter has
now come to finality.

Another arena, of course, was around the question of the dispensing of
medicine. Again, here we were treated with scare stories that the poor
would suffer and that the government was not reasonable. Perhaps the most
unfortunate thing about this was the way some pharmacists decided to
increase prices and include what was called an “administration fee”. All of
this was done to put pressure on the people. Again, we are happy that that
saga is behind us.

It is therefore clear to all of us that the sphere of health is presented
with a lot of challenges. Whilst, on the one hand, it must strive to
deliver better health care and support to the people, it must, on the other
hand, manage the vested interests of some of the people in the supply chain
of health.

Key and fundamental to everything we do in health is that we must not
forget that the central pillar of any of our achievements must be the need
to strengthen our health system. In this regard, we need to ensure that we
are integrated in terms of our activities both nationally and in the
provinces. Only when we focus on this can we ensure that everyone will have
access to good and quality health care.

Conversely, we must laud the decision of the department to focus on healthy
lifestyles. This is a campaign that must be promoted and developed at all
levels of society, in schools and in the larger society for it is here that
the people will be aware of the values of health and how we should live
healthily. Some may try to distort this as the displacement of other
programmes by government. This could not be further from the truth, but at
this stage and time it cannot be denied that health is not just medicine
and drugs; it is broader than that and we must actually be able to
appreciate that.
All of us will be finalising our speeches here today. We must not be
content with what we have said at this podium, even though we have
recognised the strides we have made. We must, equally, acknowledge that the
road ahead is still long. To my mind, dealing with health is like trying to
solve a recurring decimal. The challenge attenuates as we try to find its
solution, but we must not relent in trying to deal with this challenge.

Therefore, the key question we must bear in mind is that there must also be
the social mobilisation we talk about. People must own up to all these
challenges. These are not the challenges of the Minister, or the director-
general or his staff, or the MECs. These are the challenges of the
populace. Therefore, mobilisation for a better life becomes a crucial
strategy that must be harnessed.

Whingers and moaners will tell us that things are collapsing. They will
cite some unfortunate incidents such as the death of the infants at Cecilia
Makiwane Hospital and tell this House and the people, “We told you so”. We,
in the ANC, will try to learn from the mistake. We extend our hands of
sympathy to the parents of the infants, and vow that the core of our
existence is to avoid such incidents happening in the future. We do not
celebrate death or failure; we try to learn from them. [Applause.]

Let us not be discouraged by those whose sole reason for existence is to
criticise and pontificate. We know the challenges we face are huge. Some
might decry the fact that there are long queues in our clinics and
community health care centres. We are aware of the efforts to address these
challenges. Equally, we know that those queues are partly caused by the
fact that health services are now accessible. What gratifies us is that
people will get the treatment and the medicine they want.

Efforts have been made in this regard by introducing mid-level workers, who
are the professionals at the mid-level and subprofessionals. These are the
efforts we are making. We are aware that strides have been made towards
finalising the scope of practice of these cadres of people in order to
address what the DA has actually been celebrating: the departure of our
health care professionals to overseas countries.

That’s why it was sad when the Minister was announcing Dr Monana and the
valuable work he was doing in his hospital - some of us in this House
clapped our hands and ululated because we were proud not only of what Dr
Monana was doing but also of many of the cadres like him – that some,
again, in this House, especially those on my left, sat still and were
confused about this department delivering a better life for all. They were
confounded that a true example, not distant, not far, but here in this
House breathing the same oxygen with us, was displayed to say that a better
life was indeed coming.

These are the strides we are proud of. These are the initiatives we are all
proud of for we know, as we said earlier, today will be better than
yesterday and tomorrow will be better than our yesterday. We face the
future with hope because we know that the resolve of government to provide
a better life is unshakeable. We know that only the ANC can solve the
problems of South Africa. The ANC supports this budget. Thank you very
much. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M W SIBUYANA: Hon Speaker, Deputy President and the Minister of Health;
I am an alternate in this department. As I was coming here I happened to
meet Life and Health running away from Death and Disease which were chasing
them with a terrible machine gun called HIV and Aids. About 12 years ago
the Department of Health laid down the fundamental aim of its policies: It
was to provide good quality health care equally to all South Africans. To
that end the department undertook a huge process of transformation and
social engineering. One of the features of this was to establish health
districts to provide primary health care. What do these latest statistics
concerning 53 health districts reveal? They reveal vast variations with
respect to population and geographical size, health status and indicators,
resource infrastructure and capacity available to improve the quality of
health services.

The expenditure on primary health varies from as much as R389 per person in
Gauteng to a mere R70 per person in Mpumalanga. Although most provinces are
spending between R800 and R1 200 per capita on health care, infant
mortality is increasing. Aids infections and deaths are increasing, as well
as TB and resistant TB, and life expectancy is decreasing. We have to
recognise that most of what comes from central government is obstructive.
In its obsession with equal services, government is providing fewer
services, particularly to the poor.

The IFP would have no problem with the health vote of R11,3 billion if the
money was used efficiently. Rightly, the largest increase was for Strategic
Health Programmes reflecting increased commitment to tackling TB, HIV and
Aids, but the 192 accredited sites still have only 112 000 patients on
treatment in the public sector - a number far from being reasonable to cope
with the spreading epidemic.

The information systems for monitoring the sites are poor. The current
statistics on all aspects of the pandemic are poor. There is inadequate
provision of medicines and tests at clinics and hospitals, and there is
still a huge problem of denial. This could be overcome by leadership being
more outspoken and united around HIV through better partnerships between
conventional and traditional doctors, and through greater deployment of
community health workers.

The IFP strongly believes that decentralising health decision- making
powers and funding to provincial level, would offer a solution to health
care problems that afflict the state and the private sector. We should
simplify and clarify political and financial accountability as well as
responsibility. Let provincial and local government make health decisions,
control funds and choose priorities.

We also firmly believe that it is high time we implemented an unambiguous
Aids policy that treats HIV like an ordinary disease without a need for
special secrecy provisions and provides more testing, treatment, training
and support. We need far stronger health districts and far better IT
systems, for tracking numbers of people tested, infected and on treatment.
We would also improve our response to HIV if traditional healers and
doctors worked more closely together. Better funding and training of health
workers as well as motivation of nurses and doctors to work in rural areas
through incentives, and more extensive use of mobile clinics would also
improve the response to HIV/Aids.

We acknowledge the goodwill in the department and appreciate the intentions
behind the measures adopted to try and distribute equal health care.
However, after 12 years we believe that the ANC should re-evaluate
strategies such as co-operative governance, conditional grants and red
tape, and give the autonomy they always talk of to the provinces. The IFP
supports the budget. Thank you.

Ms M J J MATSOMELA: Hon Speaker, hon Minister and Deputy Ministers present,
hon members, all present in the House and in the public gallery, allow me
to honour the patriots and fighters of 1976, whose stay at the coalface and
resilience contributed immensely to the freedom that we enjoy today.

I am talking of the late Barney Molokwane, Solomon Mahlangu and Mboniswa
Mbatha, who is still missing; and Mickey Tsagae, who is currently employed
in the Air Force, and many more. We celebrate their lives because through
their struggles and sacrifices we can talk of a Comprehensive Health Plan,
whose objective is to enhance the state of health of our nation. To them we
are eternally grateful and indebted for the gift of freedom they have
helped to bring to us. That freedom would not have been achieved if it were
not for the hope and fighting of the youth of 1976 and the women of 1956.

Yes, indeed, South Africa’s freedom and achievements have given hope to the
masses of our people in our country and also to the people on the
continent. Our role in government is to provide the muscle and the means to
fulfil our people’s dream in this age of hope. South Africa has embarked on
a journey that gives flesh to the immortal words of Patrice Lumumba:

  Africa will write its own history and both north and south of the Sahara
  will be a history full of glory and dignity.

Se se buiwang ke Patrice Lumumba se a bontsha gore puso e e eteletsweng
pele ke mokgatlho wa ANC ga ya simolola go itse ka 1994 gore e tshwanetse
go kgathalela le go tlhokomela pholo ya batho ba Aforika Borwa. Ba itsitse
gore batho ba tshwanetswe ke botshelo jo bo botoka. Fa e sale kwa
tshimologong, ka ngwaga wa 1912 le dingwaga pele ga 1994, mokgatlho wa ANC
entse e le modisa wa setšhaba. ke ka gone seane sa Setswana sereng, modisa
wa dikgomo o tswa natso sakeng. Modisa wa dikgomo ga a kopane le dikgomo mo
tseleng, modisa wa dikgomo o itse dikgomo tsa gagwe. (Translation of
Setswana paragraph follows.)

[What Patrice Lumumba said shows that the ANC-led government already knew
before 1994 that it is supposed to care for the health of the people of
South Africa. They knew that people deserve a better life. In the
beginning, in 1912 and the years before 1994, the ANC had been watching
over its people, that is why the Setswana proverb states that the way in
which you behave when you start something, will determine the way in which
you are going to continue. A shepherd does not meet his cattle along the
way, and he knows his cattle.]

In 1994, the ANC-led government made a commitment to the people of our
country that our agenda is one of creating a better life for all. The ANC
committed to the quality of life of our people, and in particular their
health status. Every citizen in this country has the right to achieve
optimal health, and it is the responsibility of the state to provide this
because this is one of the key priorities of the RDP – meeting the basic
needs.
The policy on universal access to primary health care introduced in 1994,
forms the basis of health care delivery programmes and has had a major
impact on the South African population.

Re agile mafelo a pholo mo diseterekeng di le 53 gore batho ba baaborona ba
se ke ba tsamaya sekgala se se leele go fitlhelela pholo. Balwetse mo
nageng ba tlhatlhobiwa ka tlotlo le ka go lekana. (Translation of Setswana
paragraph follows.)

[We built health centres in 53 districts so that our people should not
travel a long distance to receive treatment. Patients in our country are
treated with dignity and are all equal.]

The Freedom Charter proclaimed that there shall be equal status in the
bodies of state, in the courts, in hospitals, in schools, etc, and this
notion from the Freedom Charter is embedded in the Constitution that our
people’s dignity must be protected and respected. The rights to health
care, food, water and social security are also a fundamental rights. These
rights, as contained in the Constitution, are an epitome of the Freedom
Charter and the tone was set by the masses in their thousands on 26 June
1955.

Ditirelo tsotlhe tsa pholo di neelwa kwa ditleliniking le kwa dipetleleng
tsa rona tseo di agilweng go simolola ka ngwaga wa 1994, ka gore re
fitlhetse batho baaborona ba sa kgone go fitlhelela pholo e e tshwanetseng.
Dingwe tsa tsona di ntse di tlhabololwa e bile di sa ntsane di tlile go
tlhabololwa.

Ditirelo tse tsa pholo di neelwa ke baoki bao re ba bonang kwa godimo kwa,
le dingaka tseo di rupeletsweng sentle mo nageng e ya rona ya Aforika
Borwa. [Legofi.]

Se e sa ntse e le kgwetlho mo lefapheng go ya ka puo ya ga Moporesidente
gore mangwe a mafelo a thupelelo ya baoki a bulwe gore se setle se oketse
palo ya baoki mo nageng ya rona. Pulo e ya mafelo a thupelelo ya baoki –
reopening of nursing colleges – e tla totobatsa e be e tsepamisa tsholofelo
mo ngwageng o wa ditsholofelo. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs
follows.)

[All health services are provided in our clinics and hospitals that have
been built since 1994, because we realised that our people could not access
the relevant treatment. Some of them are being developed and we will
continue developing them.

The health services are being provided by nurses who are sitting over
there, and our doctors who have trained in our country, South Africa.
[Applause.]

According to the President, this is still a challenge for the department.
Some of the nursing colleges need to be re-opened to increase the number of
nurses in our country. The re-opening of nursing colleges will confirm and
instil hope in this hopeful year.]

This will be the realisation of Asgisa as a catalyst instrument aimed at
specific interventions across all sectors.

All the services provided by public health care workers for our people at
both the public clinics and hospitals need a budget for sustainability and
accessibility. Hence the health budget for this financial year is R11,184
billion. [Applause.]

One of the stated aims of the Department of Health is to improve public
health through the prevention of both communicable and noncommunicable
diseases. And this is in line with our ANC-led government’s objectives to
provide opportunities for good health to all our people.

I would like to focus on the critical issue of noncommunicable diseases. As
we all should know, South Africans have - and this has been proven by
various studies and investigations over the last few years - become almost
negligent with regard to our physical and mental well-being.

Some of our most common health conditions like obesity, hypertension,
diabetes, cancer, high blood pressure, etc, are inevitably linked to
lifestyle. These conditions are deadly if not managed or treated as
serious. Both prevention and management of these conditions depend heavily
on adopting healthy lifestyles and can be prevented through the following:
a balanced diet, regular exercises, no tobacco smoking, moderate or no
alcohol intake. In fact, many experts would add another – management of
stress.

However, it is not for the Department of Health to legislate against
lifestyles. Attitudes and lifestyles are personal decisions, but often it
also depends on external factors. It goes without saying that people who
are healthy are more likely to learn, work, care for their families and
contribute to their communities – in other words to drive the social and
economic development process of their villages, towns and ultimately the
country. In fact, heads of state recognized this vital link between health
and development when they adopted the Millennium Development Goals.

Furthermore, the national health promotion strategy is consolidating around
the lifestyle factors that are critical to preventing and managing these
chronic diseases. In 2005, the Department of Health led a major campaign to
promote physical activity under the slogan: Vuka South Africa! Move for
Health! It sought to include communities where exercise facilities are
particularly underdeveloped. The campaign featured informative workshops,
mass walks and screening for diabetes, hypertension and obesity problems.
Since then, new partnerships to promote healthy lifestyles were concluded
with private sectors and nongovernmental organisations.
As the ANC, we would like to encourage the youth, our economically active
population and our citizenry in general to take responsibility for their
health. And we say this, mindful of the reality of the poverty and the
conditions of under-development in which millions of our people are still
trapped. The fact is that we will, together with all stakeholders, continue
in our endeavours to ensure the best and appropriate quality care of our
people, particularly the poor.

In conclusion, despite all the challenges that the department is facing, we
hope that the budget allocated for the department will definitely assist in
dealing with those challenges because our role in government is to provide
the basic needs contained in the RDP. By so doing we will indeed continue
to build a winning nation through our national effort and do all these
things that will ensure that the mountains and hills of our country break
forth into song before all our people. Let me remind all of us of our
vision – an accessible, caring and high-quality health system. In order to
achieve this, we must work together, because across the world there is not
only HIV/Aids as a disease. There are a number of diseases across the
world. That is why in my conclusion I am saying this budget, amongst other
things, will address also noncommunicable diseases that have been
mentioned.

The ANC supports the Budget Vote. I thank you, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]
The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Madam Speaker, hon members and honoured
guests, in supporting the Budget Vote of the Minister of Health, I do so
believing that as South Africans we can find common ground on health
issues. This is the basis from which we can all move forward. As a nation,
we have proved that we are capable of putting aside our differences in the
interest of peace and progress.

In the Preamble to our Constitution we say:


   ... united in our diversity. We adopt this Constitution ... so as to heal
   the divisions of the past ... Lay the foundations for a democratic and
   open society in which government is based on the will of the people and
   every citizen is equally protected by law; improve the quality of life of
   all citizens ...

As we debate this Budget Vote, may we be reminded of what inspired us in
agreeing to healing our divided past and move forward. We need to build a
strong and united front led by all leaders rallying our people to act
together in the interest of health. Health is everyone’s concern and is
more important than individual and party political differences. We must
acknowledge our differences and bring forward the creative power in all of
us to create light and not heat. We must draw on the spirit of the
negotiated settlement and joint problem solving as well as evidence of
research so that we can reach consensus on how to provide optimal health
care with the limited resources available.
We have laid a foundation for the delivery of health services to all. Our
policies aimed at addressing health disparities and implementing an
integrated and transformed health system are in place. We have built a
district health system to deliver basic health needs. We have also
established structures for public consultation, participation, consensus-
building and multisectoral collaboration at ward, district, provincial and
national level. We must use these effectively and not demonise our
opponents or allow the health debates to be politicised or personalised.

We have prepared the ground for the provision of a minimum, defined, basic
package that will provide a health care safety net for all. In the context
of limited resources, the challenge inevitably involves reaching consensus
around the content and delivery of this package as well as weighing up the
costs of poor health as a result of not making additional investments on
health care. We call on everyone to adopt health-seeking behaviour and to
use our facilities to check our health status – even if we feel well. Many
illnesses are silent killers and show no symptoms in the early stages when
they can be most easily and effectively treated.

The stigma attached to mental illness discourages people from seeking help.
We must all step up awareness-raising efforts on mental health and give
support to the NGOs and CBOs helping us in this important work. Our
strategic plan for 2006-07 has prioritised the integration of mental health
into primary health care. We are ensuring that Mental Health Review Boards
are appointed and finalising the referral pathways and the list of
facilities that will conduct 72-hour assessments. The shortage of mental
health specialists, problems of infrastructure and systems has a negative
effect on our efforts to implement the Mental Health Care Act. We are
addressing these problems through hospital revitalisation and the Human
Resource Plan.

We are strengthening the policy on free health care for people with
disabilities, assessing accessibility of our public health facilities and
developing a strategy on orientation and mobility services for the blind.
The guidelines on the implementation of the National Rehabilitation Policy
and the revision of the price list for the orthotic prosthetic devices,
have been completed.

Our policy is to keep the elderly in the community for as long as possible
in order to keep the family unit together and tap into the wisdom of our
senior citizens in moulding the characters of the young, libunjwa liseva
[Discipline the child when it is young]. We will, this financial year,
implement a long-term, home-administered oxygen programme and establish
stroke units in all provinces.

We have a great shortage of qualified personnel in the area of health
technology. I appeal to our youth to take up training as health engineers,
health technologists and technicians. These skills in these rewarding
careers are in huge demand and provide an avenue to contribute to the
health and development of the nation. As a medical laboratory technologist
myself, I found the career rewarding as well as valuable in my present post
as the Deputy Minister of Health. Health personnel are a priority component
of the Joint Initiative on Priority Skills Acquisition, the skills
programme under the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South
Africa led by our hon Deputy President.

We are transforming the delivery of oral health care and are integrating it
into primary health care, health lifestyles and neonatal care. When that
first tooth emerges, we want to make sure it is healthy and strong. We are
finalising a national oral health promotion framework and a manual for
community and home-based care. Our programmes for schools are assisting us
in identifying other health ailments. I have visited Gauteng and visits are
planned to other provinces to assess compliance with national oral health
norms and standards and make recommendations for improvements.

In August last year, I visited the innovative Phelophepha Health Train
during Oral Health Care month. The Phelophepha team is helping us take
health care to all, especially to the most remote and isolated parts of our
country. I wish to thank Transnet for donating a second train to
Phelophepha. [Applause.]

Hon members, I am concerned by reports of health practitioners who are
defrauding taxpayers by falsifying medical claims. More than 40 dentists,
dental technicians and doctors in Durban could face criminal charges. I
would like to make a call to all South Africans to expose fraud and
corruption everywhere. People who defraud the State are not only taking the
public’s money, but are also undermining the values for which we struggled
and on which we created the democratic South Africa as well as the health
profession that has a proud record of integrity.

Our community service programme for new graduates in the health sciences is
playing a valuable part in nation building, especially in underserved
communities. A doctor doing community service at Ngwelezane Hospital wrote
to me and said:

  I would like to thank you for the opportunity to work in a rural
  environment. I have found it extremely worthwhile and can only hope that I
  have been of good service to this community. I have gained a lot of
  experience. For this I am so grateful as obstetrics and gynaecology is my
  passion. “Enkosi kakhulu” [Thank you very much]. Yours sincerely, Dr Kerry
  Anne Sherwood.

I wish to add my own thanks to all the young medical personnel doing
community service. How wonderful it would be to have a young accountant,
engineer, artist, journalist, social worker, beauty technologist or
philosopher doing community service in my constituency in Vulamehlo in the
Ugu District Municipality or in Buhlebezwe in the Sisonke District. These
volunteers would be very warmly welcomed and collectively would be a
valuable asset working in the municipalities.

In April this year, medicolegal services that include forensic laboratories
and mortuaries, were transferred from the police to the Department of
Health. The transfer is aimed at ensuring separation and autonomy as well
as offering comprehensive services. This illustrates our commitment to
providing quality health care from the cradle to the grave.

In this financial year, we aim to address the backlog of specimens for
blood alcohol and toxicological analyses through Forensic Pathology Officer
learnerships, career-path and SANAS accreditation for the blood alcohol
sections of the laboratories. An emergency maintenance and upgrading
project is in progress including the purchasing of urgently required
equipment and vehicles for which more than R1,5 billion has been allocated.
A total of 1 346 nonmedical vacancies have been advertised and an agreement
aimed at the retention of staff was reached with SAPS to give serving
police officers in mortuaries first preference in the filling of posts.

I wish to pay tribute to medical science in the fight against disease.
Through progress in medicine, we are living longer. We are finding ways to
prevent and treat cancer, once dubbed the dreaded “C”. A vaccine has been
developed to fight cervical cancer and this should make a huge impact in
the campaign against cervical cancer and HIV/Aids. [Applause.]

We are supporting pilot research at our universities such as the screen and
treat to prevent cervical cancer in low resource settings being done by
UCT; the HPV prevalence and type in women 18 to 34 years, also done by UCT;
and the management of abnormal cytology in HIV/Aids-positive women at the
University of Free State. The University of KwaZulu Natal and the MRC are
researching HIV and traditional medicine. The reproductive health and
research unit at Wits and the MRC are doing research on microbicides and
organised the international conference on microbicides held in Cape Town
last month. Microbicides can offer women a tool they can control directly
in preventing being infected with HIV.

The Department of Science and Technology sponsored two awards at this
conference in recognition of research excellence and it supports the
Academy of Science of South Africa – a statutory independent, merit-based,
activist body committed to assisting the nation to find science-based
solutions and create science-based opportunities for growth and prosperity.
The academy is constituted to ensure that leading scientists, acting in
concert and across all disciplines, can promote the advancement of science
and technology; can provide effective advice and can facilitate appropriate
action in relation to the collective needs, threats, opportunities and
challenges of all South Africans. Its mission statement states:
   The function of science is to create, in a disciplined and systematic
   way, a continuum of coherent, rational and universally valid insight into
   observable reality in all its various facets. Scientific thinking and
   knowledge are fundamental to the best work done in the applied natural
   sciences and in technology.

The academy networks with academics in other countries. I wish to stress
the importance of evidence-based research as opposed to anecdotal evidence,
especially in medical science where people’s lives are at stake. And our
policy decisions must always be guided by the best available scientific
knowledge derived from credible, peer-reviewed research.

I believe that through working together in the spirit of co-operation and
communicating effectively, affirming each other’s achievements, correcting
and supporting one another with compassion when we fail, we can achieve the
goal of comprehensive and quality health for all.

In closing, I wish to thank the Minister of Health, the Health MECs, our
Director-General, Deputy Director-Generals and all heads of department in
the nine provinces as well as my own staff. I thank our health personnel,
who serve us when we need them most - when we are sick and not able to take
care of ourselves.

Siyabonga kakhulu. [Thank you very much.] [Applause.]
Ms N C NKABINDE: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members, the department has a
budget in excess of R11 billion, almost all of which is transferred to
provinces and other institutions. Thus the department has a very specific
responsibility to ensure that the spending translates into service
delivery.

When we are told that the vast majority of the provincial capital budget
for hospital building was not spent, we must then also conclude that the
department at national level failed to properly monitor provincial service
delivery. This is of deep concern to us, since more than R10 billion in
this budget is earmarked for spending at provincial and institutional
level.

When we look at a budget such as this, and we celebrate growing allocations
for vital programmes such as hospital revitalisation, we hope that this
funding will actually translate into service delivery. Another matter which
seems to be positive is the growth of the HIV/Aids programme, which this
year totals nearly R2 billion.

We are relieved that it represents a fourfold increase in what was
allocated a mere four years ago. Indeed, we are happy that the target of at
least one site for each of the 33 districts has been met, and efforts are
afoot to expand into the subdistrict level.

The UDM would like to appeal to the department, in conjunction with the
Department of Social Development and the SA Police Service, to investigate
the child mortality rate in South Africa. It has recently been claimed by
the University of Cape Town’s Children’s Institute that child mortality is
significantly higher than previously thought. We need to determine what the
real causes of these deaths are. Quite a number of these child deaths stems
from disease-related causes. Quite a number are poverty-related, but how
many are the result of abuse and other crimes?

We need to know these numbers and what factors contribute to them. Our
concern should be how we can identify those at risk in advance and
intervene before they lose their lives. There must be identifiable signs
beforehand for the majority of cases of child death. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr A F MADELLA: Comrade Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Minister of Health, hon
Deputy Minister of Health, hon members, esteemed guests in the public
gallery, like Comrade Manto Tshabalala-Msimang, I wish to dedicate my
contribution to this debate to all the health care workers who are doing a
sterling job in caring, nursing and healing the sick, the frail, the poor
and unhealthy under very difficult conditions many, many a time. As the ANC
we wish to salute them.

My input will, in the main, deal with the issue of health service delivery
that constitutes Programme 3 in Vote 16 of the Health estimates of national
expenditure for 2006. This programme essentially deals with support to the
delivery of health services primarily in the provinces and local spheres of
government.

Comrades, Madam Deputy Speaker, health care constitutes a fundamental basic
need as identified and documented by thousands of cadres of our movement,
the ANC, its alliances, formations and progressive, nongovernmental
organisations when they gathered from all corners of South Africa to put
together a strategic policy framework that will serve as a basic guide to
the ANC, upon seizing power through the ballot box in 1994.

This strategic framework policy is none other than our Reconstruction and
Development Programme. We consciously argued that the transformation of the
apartheid national health system, which was racially fragmented,
inequitable, and nonexistent in most rural areas, etc, must be driven by a
primary health care approach. This approach should provide community
participation, empowerment, intersectoral collaboration, cost effective
care as well as the integration of preventative, promotive and curative
services.

Such a primary health care approach should be located closest to the people
and in fact at the level of the democratically elected local government
structures. The notion of health districts amongst other things formed an
integral part of the institutional arrangements for such an approach.

This approach found expression in the White Paper for the transformation of
the health system in South Africa, launched by the then Minister of Health,
the hon Comrade Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma in 1997. The primary health care
approach forms the basis of health care delivery programmes and it is
having, without a doubt, a major, positive impact on the South African
population. Many speakers have referred to that.

This primary health care approach is also encapsulated in a national health
act which in its preamble recognised the socioeconomic injustices,
imbalances and inequalities of the health service of the apartheid past;
highlighted the need to heal the divisions of the past and to establish a
society based on democratic values, social justice and fundamental human
rights; and expressed the need to improve the quality of life of all
citizens, and to free the potential of each person.

The National Health Act further compels us to unite the various elements of
the national health system in a common goal to actively promote and improve
the national health system in South Africa; and to provide for a system of
co-operative governance and management of health services with national
health guidelines, norms and standards in which each province municipality
and health district must address questions of health policy and delivery of
quality health care services.

In assessing the general statement of health care and progress made in the
provision of health for all at the 51st national conference of the most
dynamic liberation movement of all time, namely the ANC, our conference
resolved, amongst other things, to strengthen primary health care
especially in the rural areas. This would be done by amongst other things
eradicating the backlog of health services; improving the availability of
doctors and nurses in especially clinics; improving the management and
governance of hospitals and clinics with community participation;
decisively attacking communicable and preventable illnesses through,
amongst other things, an immunisation programme; strengthening measures to
combat cholera and TB and ensuring the early treatment of chronic and
noncommunicable diseases; accelerated appropriate decentralisation of
certain health services to local government with appropriate resources;
accelerated strategies for the training and retention of health
professionals; accelerated strategies to reduce maternal and infant
mortality rate and morbidity; and strengthening programmes with child
nutrition, food security and the improvement of nourishment.

In deepening health care delivery to all, especially those communities who
were denied such services as a result of apartheid, we can now report with
pride that a total of 53 health districts across the South African
landscape exist today in line with our municipal boundaries.

Access to primary health care facilities has increased dramatically over
the years. The basket of services provided by the primary health care level
includes immunisation; communicable and endemic disease prevention;
maternity care; screening of children; integrated management of childhood
illnesses and health care; health promotion; youth health services;
counselling services; taking care of chronic diseases and diseases of older
persons; rehabilitation; accident and emergency services; family planning
and oral health services.

The district health system, which is the main carrier for the provision of
primary health care, was strengthened during the last financial year
through a special role clarification of provinces and the municipalities.
These clarifications and the provision of district health planning
guidelines will facilitate, going forward, a more systematic planning
process in contributing to improved implementation and monitoring.

Sections 29, 30 and 31 of the National Health Act provide for the division
of health districts as well as for the establishment of district health
councils. I just want to indicate the factors that need to be taken into
consideration in the determination of health districts which must and
should include equity, access to services, quality, overcoming
fragmentation, local accountability, community participation,
sustainability and, of course, comprehensive services.
The provision of primary health care services at the community level makes
it more accessible for the people, but also draws patients away from
hospital services, thereby reducing the burden on them. Primary health care
centres such as clinics, etc, refer patients to hospitals services. A key
element of the primary health care approach is the participation, as I said
earlier, of communities in its application.

The National Health Act provides for, amongst other things, community
representation at clinic and community health centre committees. The hon J
Ngculu referred to this process of social mobilisation, and this is one way
of ensuring that, in our communities where we are living, our
representatives, our people, indeed are taking part in those structures and
indeed are driving the process of creating better health in the
communities.

I wish to mention and highlight Programme 3 of the Department of Health’s
strategic plan and Budget Vote, which deals with health service delivery
and I wish to raise the following six subprogrammes that deal with
noncommunicable diseases, hospital services and emergency medical services.
The issue of hospital revitalisation has already been mentioned by the
previous speaker. There are also the issues of health economics and health
information, primary health care and tenets of compliance.

The expenditure trend of the Department of Health, and the allocation that
has been given to Health is in line with the ANC’s commitment to expanding
service delivery and health infrastructure, which have risen steadily from
2002 to the current year. For 2002-03, it was R6,3 billion and now speakers
have referred to it as being just over R10 billion.

When we look at the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework cycle, we will see
that there will be an average increase of 8,2%. The key challenge for the
Department of Health is to use this consistent, positive increase in
expenditure as a tool to expand health infrastructure; continue with the
refurbishment of existing clinics and hospitals where such needs have been
identified, and deal with human resources challenges in relation to
training of health care personnel; in line with the presidential clarion
call for the reopening of nursing colleges, to increase the number of
nursing professionals.

As indicated by Comrade Minister Tshabalala-Msimang the health
infrastructure programme is in full swing, and a number of new hospitals
will be completed soon, and 16 new projects will commence in this financial
year. In addition, a total of 78 new clinics will be built across the
country, and 41 clinics will be upgraded in the Eastern Cape. The key
policy challenge for the current financial year relates to strengthening
primary health care delivery in the 13 rural and eight urban nodes.
Deputy Speaker, I just wish, as a new member of this committee and a new
member of this illustrious House, to extend my gratitude for the guidance
and leadership provided by the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee,
Comrade James Ngculu who is always at pains and has the necessary patience
to guide us as new members. I must say that literally half of the health
portfolio committee consists of new members, who all came to Parliament in
the last six to seven months. He has been the one guiding us to find our
feet in this House. The ANC supports this Bill. [Time expired.][Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately, the chairperson missed those wonderful
words about himself, because an hon member had drawn his attention to
something else at the time. I promise I will convey the message to him.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers, conditional grants to
provinces constitute the bulk of the Budget and improved management and
monitoring of these grants is imperative, especially in view of the
qualified audit report received in 2004-05. Conscious of our limited time,
the ACDP notes that the comprehensive HIV and Aids grant and the hospital
revitalisation grant have increased significantly, which indicates at least
some degree of recognition of the ever increasing challenges. Researchers
are warning of an expected sharp rise in the cost of public health services
within the next few years as HIV positive South Africans develop Aids-
related diseases. HIV patients might soon account for as much as 70% of
hospital expenditure in medical wards where presently about half of all
patients admitted have HIV-related illnesses, and the numbers of HIV-
patients in paediatric wards are even higher. Aids patients stay in
hospital on average four times longer than other patients, placing enormous
pressure on health facilities and health care workers.

Over the years the ACDP joined others in calling for antiretroviral
treatment to be available through the public health system to relieve the
increasingly desperate situation in hospitals, but delays in providing
treatment continue to take their toll on health services and the economy in
general, not to mention lives. Now as budgets are increased in seemingly
futile efforts to meet the challenge, regrets over government’s
unwillingness to escalate efforts years ago, hang ominously in the air.
Reports showed that the use of antiretrovirals led to a dramatic decline in
deaths and the numbers of Aids patients admitted to hospitals; that while
pharmacy bills initially increased, patients’ bills drastically decreased;
that countries like Brazil also experienced this cost benefit of
antiretroviral therapy significantly decreasing the incidence rate of TB;
and many more reports of a similar nature were all sadly ignored.

Now a recent survey conducted by the HSRC, the Medical Research Council and
the Centre for Aids Development Research and Evaluation found that there
were still gaps in knowledge about the behaviours that put people most at
risk. The impact of expensive awareness campaigns has been questioned and
the need to go beyond merely encouraging condom use and to focus on risk
factors was advocated, confirming what the ACDP has said over and over
again.

The ACDP once again appeals to government to ensure that prevention
campaigns target all age groups with clear messages, which are not smoke
screens distorting the truth and fuelling the pandemic. The truth with
regard to abstaining from sex outside of marriage and being faithful in
marriage has been severely compromised and the devastating consequences
just continue unabated. When will we come to our senses? Will the ACDP
support the Health Budget Vote, which still supports the indiscriminate and
irrational murder of unborn children, a health budget which is
fundamentally flawed, a health budget which has no respect for human life –
no, the ACDP cannot support this budget.

It won’t be long before South Africa will face a new challenge, a challenge
that American citizens face presently. As we emulate American society in
killing unborn children, we effectively wipe out our future workforce. We
and our children, and you and your children, in your retirement years are
going to be in a situation where fewer and fewer numbers of economically
active people will make up a depleted tax base, which will be unable to
carry the burden of the greater numbers of the aged. The only difference in
South Africa is, of course, that the situation will be even worse, because
of the shocking number of people dying of Aids-related deaths. This policy
is not only diabolic but also crazy. No, the ACDP cannot support this
lunacy. Thank you. [Interjections.]

Mr B E PULE: Madam Deputy Speaker, while supporting this Budget Vote, the
UCDP notes with concern that in both 2003-04 and 2004-05 the Department of
Health had received a qualified audit report in respect of conditional
grants, and there was noncompliance with the Division of Revenue Act. This
is of course unacceptable.

Hospital revitalisation has been identified as a priority in the state of
the nation address and it is hoped that with the allocation of R100 million
for this purpose, the Department of Health will support provinces in this
regard. And it would be more than just a mere talk show. Oversight in this
department always remains a hollow euphemism. In the 2005-06 Adjustment
Appropriation Bill the department requested a roll-over of R10 million from
the 2004-05 financial year, because it ordered a large quantity of condoms,
which could not be delivered on time. On the contrary, in the 2006
estimates of national expenditure the department indicated that the number
of condoms is set to increase to 450 million in 2006-07. Whilst the UCDP
does not advocate the indiscriminate production and use of condoms, where
expenditure is involved, it must be seen to be fruitful. This was not the
case.

The department indicates that the management of communicable diseases is a
priority as identified in their 5-year strategic plan, but the amount
allocated for the programme for 2006-07 is the same as the previous year,
which amounts to a decline of 4,9%. The same applies to the health
professionals training and development grant allocations for the current
financial year, where there is also a decline of 4,9%. Will the department
explain these declines?

In the 2005-06 adjustments the department requested a roll-over of R11
million from the 2004-05 financial year for a tender for a reliable
inventory management tracking system for a comprehensive HIV and Aids plan,
due to a delay in advertising the tender. What was the reason for the
delay? [Time expired.]

Ms P TSHWETE: Madam Deputy Speaker, special greetings to Ministers and
Deputy Ministers that are here today and to our distinguished guests in the
gallery.

Last year the Minister of Health tabled the Nursing Bill, and today we are
proud to announce that the President of South Africa signed has signed it
into law, and that it is Act 33 of 2005. This Act amends all pieces of
legislation related to nursing in this country.

The primary purpose of this Act is to transform the nursing council so as
to strengthen the protection of the interests of the health care users, to
improve corporate governance and promote greater accountability by council
members.

The Act will also promote the constitutional requirement of increasing
access to health care services. The Department of Health has heeded a call
from the President of the Republic for the training of nurses by reopening
nursing colleges. This has been discussed with the following structures:
the nursing colleges in the provinces, heads of provincial departments of
health and the SA Nursing Council.

Hon members will note that the training of health professionals is complex,
since it incorporates theoretical and clinical learning. Both theory and
practice should be given enough time so that students can internalise the
content of nursing studies.

In preparation for increasing the number of provinces that have engaged
with the SA Nursing Council to make sure that additional clinical areas are
accredited in order to allocate students for clinical practice and to
maximise teaching and learning, more nursing educators are being recruited
in order to fill vacant posts so that when additional students are admitted
effective learning can take place.

Collaboration with the private and public health sectors is beginning to
take place. With the introduction of community service in nursing in 2007,
it is envisaged that staffing in the underserved and rural health
facilities will improve.

On 7 April 2006, World Health Day, the national Department of Health
launched the National Human Resources for Health Plan. In addition, a task
team was established to draft a national nursing strategy. The Human
Resources for Health Plan lays guidelines for the production of health
human resources, including nurses, based on sound scientific information
and health care needs. This will include staffing norms for health
facilities.

The Democratic Nursing Organisation of SA, Denosa, has won the bid to host
the Quadrennial International Nursing Conference in South Africa in 2009.
As the ruling party, we have high regard for nurses and other health
workers. Together we have a mandate to deliver quality health care to all
South Africans.

Efforts by health workers, who hold the most critical resources in health
service delivery, assist in meeting our constitutional mandate of ensuring
access to quality health care.

The Department of Health will encourage school-leavers to consider nursing
as a career, thereby contributing to the wellbeing of every citizen of this
beautiful country. We, as the ANC, pay tribute to all nurses who commit
themselves to heartily provide health care to our people. Although hard to
admit, health services would collapse without nurses. [Applause.]

Sekela-Somlomo, ndithi mandibhekise kakhulu kumaqobokazana ahleli phaya
kwigalari. Sinazo iingxaki esinazo, kuba sinabantu abangaqondiyo ukuba xa
sithetha ngemfuduko yabasebenzi abaqeqeshiweyo abanobuchule, okanye i-brain
drain, sithetha ngantoni na. Abayicingi into yokuba kuthe ukuze ibe kho le
mfunduko i-ANC yavumela abantu ukuba baye kwamanye amazwe, into engazanga
yenzeka ngaphambili. Yayingasoze ibe kho le mfuduko ngaphambili phambi kowe-
1994. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Deputy Speaker, let me address the ladies seated in the gallery. We have
problems because there are people who do not understand us when we talk
about workers who are leaving this country with experience and skills - the
brain drain. They cannot imagine that this migration was created by the ANC
by allowing people to go to other countries, because this had never
happened before.

This migration would never have happened before 1994.]

Before 1994 people were not allowed to go to other countries. So, through
the efforts of the ANC, today they are able to go to other countries and
come back. [Applause.]

We also say to people that the doctors that come to South Africa not only
come to assist, but also to learn.

Kwaye kufuneka sazi ukuba kuzo zonke ezi zivumelwano sisebenzisana nabantu.
[And we should know that in all these agreements we are dealing with
people.]

I have used a stethoscope before, and most of the time you, as scientists,
do not come with a diagnosis without checking signs and symptoms. I think
without even using a stethoscope on the people on my left here, you might
have a diagnosis of them. [Laughter.]

Kaloku imizamo esiyenzayo siyi-ANC, okanye eyenziwa nguMphathiswa,
ayibonwa, ngenxa yokuba abantu abakafundi ukuhlala phantsi, beze nendlela
eyakhayo yokwakha uMzantsi Afrika. [By the way, the efforts made by the ANC
and the endeavours of the Minister are not recognised, because people have
not yet come forward with a way to develop South Africa.]

They have time, which we don’t have. We go to our constituencies – and we
will be going to our constituencies right now. On 23 June we will visit
hospitals in order to find out where we can help; not to take photographs
of hospitals that are dilapidated and those that are not.

I want to remind hon members that before 1994 – the people on my left know
about this ...

... kwakukho amagumbi ezigulane ezimhlophe kunye nawezigulane ezintsundu.
Eyona nto ibuhlungu kubo yinto yokuba uMphathiswa usa izixhobo zokusebenza
emaphandleni ukwenzela ukuba kulinganwe. Abayifuni ke loo nto.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] Anizi kumthanda uMphathiswa, siyayazi loo nto, kuba kaloku
wenza le nto ningayifuniyo.

Ndingeva into embi, sihlalo wam, ukuba andimphenduli obekekileyo uDudley.
Uthi yena balubonile uphando ngeNtsholongwane kaGawulayo. Thina asiludingi
uphando ngale ntsholongwane, ngoba sinabo emakhayeni ethu abantu abagula
yiyo, siphila nabo. [Kwaqhwatywa.] Basoloko besima apha eqongeni besithi
uphando lusixelela oku, noku. Hayi! Thina sinabantu abagulayo: oodade
wethu, abantakwethu, abantwana bethu, abahlala nathi. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[... there were wards for white patients and for blacks. What is
frustrating them is that the Minister is providing health resources to the
rural areas for equity purposes, and this is not what they want.
[Applause.] We know for a fact that you are not impressed by the Minister’s
actions.

Chairperson, I would be disappointed if I did not reply to hon Dudley. She
says they have seen a research report on HIV/Aids. We do not need such a
report because we have first-hand experience of people suffering from
HIV/Aids in our homes. [Applause.] The members of the opposition always
come and stand at the podium and tell us that the research says this and
that. No! We have people who are suffering from the illness: our sisters,
brothers and children living with us. [Applause.]]

As a health care worker, I know that you cannot give antiretrovirals to a
patient who has not had anything to eat.

Ukuba eso sigulana asityi, asizi kuphila, ndiyakuxelela. Kwaye bayalibala
ukuxelela abantu ukuba amachiza adodobalisa ulwamvila lweNtsholongwane
kaGawulayo, ii-Antiretroviral, awanyangi mntu. Soloko bedala ingcingane
yokuba la machiza aza kunyanga umntu. Ayikho loo nto. (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[If the patient is not eating well, chances of getting well are limited, I
am telling you. They also fail to tell people that the antiretrovirals
cannot cure HIV/Aids. They always create the impression that these
medicines cure HIV/Aids. There is no such thing.]

So, please, don’t mislead our people; tell the truth. [Applause.]

Xa ndiqgibezela, ndiyazi ukuba uMphathiswa wephondo waseNtshona Koloni uza
kutsala nzima. Ndandingumongikazi apha eNtshona Koloni, amachiza ayengayi
kwiindawo zabantsundu. Ngoko ke ndiyacela kuye ukuba aqinisekise ukuba
abantu abadala mabangayi ezibhedlele nasezikliniki ePhilippi, eKhayelitsha,
eGugulethu, bafike phaya bafole, kuthi emva kokuba sekukudala befolile
kuthiwe awakho amachiza.

Ngamanye amaxesha asingomongikazi obangela ukuba amachiza angabikho,
ingenguye noMphathiswa wephondo. Mhlawumbi kufuneka sazi ukuba zikhona
iingxaki ezikhoyo ngamanye amaxesha ezibangela loo nto.

Mphathiswa, ndicela uxolo ngokukubalisela le nto: Ndakhe ndaya komnye
umngcwabo ... (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[In conclusion, I know that the MEC in the Western Cape province is going
to face a difficult situation. I was a nurse here in the Western Cape and
medicines were not delivered to the black communities. I plead with you not
to let older people travel to the hospitals and clinics in Philippi,
Khayelitsha, and Gugulethu and queue up there, only to be told later that
there are no medicines.

In other instances the absence of medicine is not the nurse’s fault, nor is
it the fault of the provincial Minister. We must understand that there are
other causes for these problems.

Minister, pardon me for telling you this story: I once attended a funeral
...]
... where nurses were blaming the health workers for the deaths in
hospitals. It is also our collective responsibility - and it is not
reserved for nurses only - to take care of our sick people.

Ndakhe ndaya komnye umngcwabo, Mphathiswa, apho kwakungcwatywa ixhego
elinama-96 eminyaka. Andikhumbuli ukuba yayingumngcwabo wesingaphi apho
kwakusithiwa xa kubulelwa - siyathanda kaloku thina ukwazi unobangela
wokufa, kwaye lo nobangela wokufa soloko uchaphazela abongikazi - kuthiwe:
“Yho! Utata ngengabhubhanga ukuba aba bongikazi bebengamphethanga kakubi.”
Uneminyaka engama-96 ngelo xesha.

Kaloku thina asinayo imimangaliso yokuthi xa lifikile ixesha lokuba umntu
alishiye eli, sikunqande oko. KwaseBhayibhileni kuthiwa siya kuhamba
ngokuhamba, kodwa abantu abafuni kuvuma ukuba umntu xa enama-96 eminyaka,
ngamanye amaxesha kudla ngokuba ngaphaya kwamandla abongikazi ukumsindisa.
Abongikazi bayazama, bayafuna ukuba akaphile, kodwa abakwazi.
[Kwaqhwatywa.]

Xa ndigqibezela, ndicela ukuphakamisa, Sekela-Mphathiswa nawe Mphathiswa,
ukuba sinawo amandla; siza kunincedisa, siza kulilwa utshaba. Alukho olunye
utshaba lwethu ke, bantu, ngaphandle kwe-DA. Siyawuxhasa lo Mthetho
uyilwayo. Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[I once attended a funeral of a 96-year-old man, Minister. I do not
remember how many funerals I may have attended where the speaker would tell
the people about the cause of death. We like to hear the cause of death.
Unfortunately the cause of death will always implicate the nurses when
people say, “Oh! The old man would have still been alive if those nurses
had treated him well.” Meanwhile he was 96 years old.

The nurses are not privileged to be able to perform miracles and stop
people from dying. Even in the Bible it is stated clearly that everyone has
his day. People do not want to believe that the nurses cannot prevent the
death of a 96-year-old person, and that sometimes it is beyond their
capability. Nurses do try their best, but they can fail. [Applause.]

Finally, I want to appeal to the Deputy Minister and the Minister that we
do have the power and that we will support you in fighting the enemy. We do
not have any other enemy except for the DA. We support this Bill. Thank
you. [Applause.]]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. The department’s budget is
viewed in line with the 2006 state of the nation address, as well as the
department’s strategic plan for 2004-09, which clearly portrays
government’s commitment to improve accessibility, facilities, and health
services to the South African people.

Looking at the budget, the Minority Front sees that the department has had
a steady growth and that commitments continue to be prioritised on
community concerns such as HIV/Aids-related programmes, health, human
resources and hospital services.

As always, the bulk of the department’s funds are disposed through grants
to provinces. The MF, however, expresses its concern about the department’s
success in monitoring and managing grants. We also enquire as to why there
is a decline of 4,9% in real terms, in the health professional training and
development grant for 2006 and 2007.

Concern is expressed as to precaution being taken in light of the bird flu
spreading to South Africa since the first man-to-man infection was reported
abroad.

I now turn my attention to a more pressing issue, which is the Aids
situation in South Africa. It has been reported that South Africa has an
estimated 5,5 million people living with HIV, making it the most infected
country on the continent of Africa. It is hoped that the R180 million grant
set aside for Aids vaccine research shall serve to reduce these statistics
in time. However, something needs to be done in order to address this issue
in all urgency. HIV/Aids places a heavy toll on our economy and
irresponsible behaviour needs to be treated as a criminal offence.

As for the recent power cuts, the MF finds it crucial that the hospitals be
equipped with generators that are operational, and maintenance of these
need to be made regularly to ensure that tragic incidents like the loss of
the babies at a hospital in East London, as a result of a power cut, will
not occur again.

This calls for all of us to stand together, not to criticise but to
compromise and work together and find solutions to the problem. We have to
work together to build a better South Africa to live in. Remember, united
we stand, divided we fall. An injury to one is an injury to all.

The MF is pleased that the department is continually making efforts to
deliver health facilities to the poorest of the poor, and making health
facilities more accessible. The MF takes this opportunity in thanking all
the health service people, the doctors, the nurses, and all those who serve
the ill of health and the health department. God bless you. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Deputy Speaker, before the next speaker starts, I wonder if
you could take a point of order, please. The hon Bloem is wandering around
Parliament pointing at me. I am absolutely positive that it is not
parliamentary for him to behave in the way he does. I wonder if you could
ask him to take back these cutting the throat and punching movements, and
maybe do them to himself instead. It might be more appropriate.
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Bloem, I don’t expect you to address me. I am just
going to call you and Mr Ellis to order. May you please concentrate on the
debate?

Mr M J ELLIS:  Madam Deputy Speaker, I promise you I have done nothing, I
have been sitting here very quietly, minding my own business. I don’t
understand why he wants to do that to me. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have a problem with your eyes following Mr Bloem
wherever he is going. [Laughter.]

Mr D V BLOEM: I really beg to respond, Deputy Speaker. In Sesotho, it
means, “I like you.” I love you, ke a o rata [I love you]. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Deputy Speaker, it is possible that the
hon Bloem is behaving in that way because the hon Ellis, is boring.
[Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, the Minister is definitely out of order.
[Laughter.] Mr Ellis you are exciting, if that is going to make you feel
better.

Ms N F MATHIBELA: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers, hon Deputy
Ministers, hon members, our distinguished guests in the gallery, the
doctors, nurses, community health workers, and all other health
professionals, this month is the month in which the youth of 1976 is
commemorating their 30th anniversary. I therefore have two people to whom I
have to dedicate this speech.

Firstly, this speech is dedicated to the women’s march that took place in
Pretoria 50 years ago. Being the 30th and 50th anniversary of the 1976
uprisings and the women’s march to the Union Buildings respectively, I
would like to make mention of two heroes whose contributions to the fight
for a better South Africa, like many of our fallen heroes and heroines,
will forever be etched in our hearts and minds.

The first is Japie Vilankulu, who was among the first fatalities in the
Alexander Township on 17 June 1976. Your death has not been in vain. May
your soul rest in peace. The second one is a woman who participated in the
woman’s march to the Union Buildings in 1956 and she was Malie Fakier.  She
later dedicated her life to empowering women at grassroots level, and co-
founded the woman’s institute for leadership development and democracy.

I had the privilege of working with her and learning from her. May her soul
also rest in peace. We will eternally be grateful to these heroes and
heroines and many others who fell in the struggle for a free South Africa.

Due to its history, Africa in general, and South Africa in particular,
cannot afford to drag its feet when it comes to fighting diseases,
particularly communicable diseases. The socioeconomic impact of these
diseases on our people is huge. If we are to attain the goal of halving
unemployment and poverty by 2014, then no time or resource ought to be
spared in fighting these diseases.

The most common communicable diseases in the country are measles, malaria,
sexually transmitted infections, TB and HIV/Aids. Great strides have been
made in the country in the fight against measles. Immunisation rates are
increasing, but there are pockets of low coverage in some districts. The
last confirmed polio case was recorded in 1989 and we are well on the way
to being declared polio-free by the World Health Organisation.

Great strides have also been made in the fight against malaria. In 2005, 7
254 cases of malaria and 55 deaths from the disease were reported. It is a
substantial decrease from 64 622 cases and 406 deaths in 2000. This was
delivered through our policy of indoor residual spraying and our
collaboration with our neighbours.

The collaboration between the Medical Research Council and the national and
provincial Departments of Health has also played a major role in the
effective monitoring of the disease. The MRC has further also identified
two plants that are effective against malaria parasites. Through the
Lumbombo Special Development Initiative involving South Africa, Mozambique
and Swaziland, malaria prevalence in Mozambique has been reduced by 82% and
in KwaZulu-Natal by 96%, compared with 2002. A similar initiative between
Zimbabwe and Limpopo is being explored.

There is currently active co-operation with Zimbabwe on cross-border
malaria control. For a number of reasons, the fight against TB has been a
rather challenging one. TB infections continue to escalate despite
improvements in TB care and despite treatment for TB being free of charge
at all public hospitals and clinics in our country.

The Department of Health has declared TB to be a national crisis and is
working with provinces to improve diagnosis and treat TB early, reduce
treatment interruption and further improve the quality of the directly
observed treatment short course programme. During 2006 to 2007 and 2008 to
2009, all provinces will be supported to develop high-level plans to reduce
TB infections in line with the recommendations of the national TB review.
This has already started.

Among other things, a TB crisis management plan, in line with the World
Health Organisation Afro decision, has been developed to focus on four
health districts. The government’s comprehensive plan for the management,
care and treatment of HIV/Aids has two main objectives, namely the
prevention of further HIV infections and the management of those already
infected with HIV.
The plan’s core focus is the prevention of HIV infections through many
interventions, including encouraging people to get tested to determine
their HIV status. In the unfortunate event of people testing positive for
HIV, they are encouraged to maintain a healthy lifestyle with an emphasis
on good nutrition, avoidance of substance abuse and taking exercise.

It is common knowledge that women, in particular, are at a great risk of
acquiring the disease for biological and socioeconomic reasons. We must
continue to empower our women and ask men to be responsible in their
behaviour. Women are, and will remain, vulnerable, unless urgent steps are
taken to empower them and educate their partners.

Community leaders and NGOs ought to be encouraged to continue to empower
women and men as partners. During the period 2004-05, 347 million condoms
for men and 1,1 million condoms for women were distributed. The plan is to
increase the distribution of condoms for women over the next three years to
3 million per year. This will assist in empowering more women.

If the objectives of Asgisa are to be achieved, there is no question about
the need for the youth to stay healthy and free of disease, as the future
growth of our economy depends on them being healthy and living longer. This
empowerment will further reduce infections. It would thus be encouraging to
see a more active participation by the youth in programmes that advocate
for healthy lifestyles.

Youth organisations such as the National Youth Commission must take the
lead in prevention programmes and health promotion, particularly as we
commemorate the 30th anniversary of the 1976 uprisings. The youth
commission and other organisations must actively participate in eradicating
complacency among the youth and show their appreciation of, and
indebtedness to, the 1976 youth for fighting for better opportunities for
today’s youth. Youth, vukani emaqandeni [wake up] and take charge of izwe
lenu [your land] and the future of the economy!

The ANC supports this budget. Before I leave the podium, I would like to
talk a bit to the DA. The DA pretends or tries to give people wrong
messages, as if HIV started in 1994. HIV/Aids started in 1981, and they
tell us nothing about what they were doing to eradicate this HIV/Aids.
Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, before we call on the next speaker, I
would like to recognise, in the public gallery, a former member of this
House and a former Chairperson of the ANC caucus in this Parliament, Mr
Mendi Msimang. Siyabonga Baba. [Thank you, sir.] [Applause.]

Ms R J MASHIGO: Thank you, Deputy Speaker, hon minister, hon Deputy
Minister, hon Members and guests, we know that a healthy nation is a rich
nation. That is what the ANC-led government strives for - a better life for
all where everybody will not be poor in health services and facilities.

Our Constitution clearly states that everybody has a right to access health
facilities including reproductive facilities and also has the right not to
be refused emergency medical services. My focus today in the budget speech
will be on hospital revitalisation, but before I get there I would like to
refer a little bit to what our hon Minister said.

The Minister spoke about five priorities which are in the plan of the
Department of Health, but hon Kohler-Barnard just thought of one thing that
is not a priority but has been addressed year in and year out; an obsession
about HIV and Aids. We should remember very well that the Cabinet adopted
the comprehensive treatment plan for HIV and Aids in 2003 and here is hon
Kohler-Barnard addressing it as if it is a new issue in this Parliament.

Once again, instead of going to the police to report a constitutional issue
of traditional healers she and her party should come and stand here and
tell us about their programmes. What are the DA’s programmes to address HIV
and Aids? They do not have one single programme except the programme of
going to the police; the programme of going to the press, the programme of
going to anywhere. Really, come up with a programme and we will honour you.
We will see that you are part of South Africa and that together we are
fighting this pandemic, but you are not.

Let’s all fight this pandemic. Now the hon member from the IFP, I am so
sorry for you because you just took Dr Rabinowitz’s paper and stood here
without editing it and just read it and read it. You are from the black
community and you know the truth about everything. You should just have
looked at Dr Rabinowitz’s paper and put it aside, then told the truth about
the communities because your people there in Mpumalanga were listening to
you. They were listening to what you were saying but you did not listen to
them.

Hon Dudley, we pray that you attend at least our portfolio committee
meeting. We pray that you could be in line with the concepts used in the
department. We talked about the choice of termination of pregnancy and you
stand here and then talk about abortion. We don’t know what abortion is. In
the portfolio committee we talk about choice. The community talks about
choice. Everybody talks about choice. If you know the relevant terminology
you will know about the comprehensive treatment plan for HIV and Aids - but
you talk about your research. You know about the ARV roll-outs but you
don’t refer to that ...

Mr M W SIBUYANA: I wonder if the hon member expected me to throw away the
speech and say nothing. I am very pleased to hear that she comes from a
place where people are not sick.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Take your seat; that is not a point of order. Hon
member, please continue. But I also hope that you have prepared your speech
because you are using a lot of your time.

Ms R J MASHIGO: When the Reconstruction and Development Programme document
was drawn up it was based on what the people of South Africa wanted the ANC
government to do, and that was to build resources next to our places. We
know that we have few facilities and hospitals in our black communities,
which were inhumane and a shame. People travelled distances from their
places because the hospitals next to them could not attend to them because
of the colour of their skins.

People travelled to the Chris Hani Baragwanath hospital because it was the
only state-of-the-art hospital for blacks in the country. Our democratic
government, as a result, addressed the issue and saw the special need for
revitalisation of hospitals and our National Treasury has set aside
conditional grants for that. The purpose of these grants is specifically to
provide strategic funding for provinces so as to enable them to plan,
manage and rationalise hospitals to improve and transform infrastructure
and to monitor and evaluate hospitals in line with the national policy
objectives. The province should include business plans.

Tse batho bantsho ba tshwanetseng go di itse, kwa gae koo diporofense tsa
lona di tswanetse go romela polane ya kgwebo le di PIP’s, Project
Implementation Plans kwa Lefapheng la Pholo gore dipetlele di tle di
tsosolosiwe. Dipolane tse tsa kgwebo le di PIP’s di tla sekasekiwa.
(Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[There are things that the black people should know, such as that your
provinces are supposed to send in their business plans and the PIPs Project
Implementation Plans, to the Department of Health so that your hospitals
can be developed. The business plans and the PIPs will be scrutinised.]

This hospital revitalisation plan is a comprehensive one which also deals
with hospital CODs and before I go today, let me tell you that in this
short space of revitalisation we have completed four well-equipped
hospitals. We also have 16 new projects in line which need to be initiated.
Our best hospital, Baragwanath, is one of them. The demolition is partly
completed.

We also talked about our hospital managers. They do a good job even if they
don’t have any training. In my constituency our CEO from the FH Odendal
hospital addressed the community about what they do at those hospitals to
give people an opportunity to interact with all of their management team,
which accompanied him to address the community.

In the state of the nation address our President referred to the fact that
there were audits done at institutions to see how well equipped our
managers are so that they will be able to delegate to the authorities. The
audits were done and some of our managers have already gone through this
training programme. For your information, Wits and KwaZulu-Natal
universities have Masters degree programmes, which address the capacitating
of hospital managers. I am proud to say that we have six CEOs in Limpopo
who have registered for this programme.

For hospital care, we have a patient care charter, a patient rights
charter, we have Batho Pele, which is a challenge to everybody here to make
sure that we use the patient charter that will assist in the improvement in
the care of our people. That will also uplift and enable our health
professionals to check themselves and see that Batho Pele says we are doing
this. Let’s improve our care because here we talk about the treatment of
people, we talk about referral systems and so forth.

The challenges we know of are that we need to improve our relationships
with the Department of Public Works so that we stop the backlogs. We need
to understand as that department understands. That will help us to
understand that not every province is underspending. The reasons for
underspending are various. They are not the same in each province.

We also have emergency medical services. People want shorter response
times, for ambulances. Short-time responses call for trained ambulance
officials and proper information systems so that when they report an
emergency it must be picked up quickly and the response must come about
quickly.

The Minister and our chairperson have already referred to what the health
services will be doing in 2010. We are not going to start then. That is
part of what we know the people want and what we know we should be
delivering to the people.

When it comes to governance, we urge the communities to participate in this
democratic election of our hospital boards. Hospital board members are
supposed to be nominated from the communities because in that management
board they bring forward the needs of the people and how they want the
hospitals to be managed. This also enables the hospital to know what is
happening because there are assurance tools, like feedbacks to the meetings
and call centres which people should call when they are not happy;
community meetings, addressed by councillors and hospital board members and
our PCOs; because we have constituencies that can also be used. We have
contact with the people.

Re tshwanetse gore re itse kwa di kgaolotlhophong. Lona kwa gae koo le
lebeng kwa di kgaolotlhophong le tsamaeng di... [We have to know from the
constituencies. People should go to their constituencies and attend ...]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: On a point of order: Your time has expired.

Ms R J MASHIGO: Thanks very much. The ANC supports the Budget Vote.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Deputy Speaker, at my disposal I have only three
minutes and I don’t know whether I can do justice ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: You actually have five minutes, Minister.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: First of all, let me thank all those who have
participated in this debate and thanks all those who spoke in support of
the Budget Vote. At first I thought it probably would be a waste of time to
respond to hon Barnard-Kohler. I thought ... [Interjections.] ... whatever.
I think it is correct to do so.

Mr M J ELLIS:  Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: I apologise if I haven’t pronounced her name
properly.

Mr M J ELLIS: Well, it is not only that, Madam Deputy Speaker, but you
don’t just say, “whatever”. That is a bit rude.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister has already apologised.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: In any case, it doesn’t warrant any serious
response as far as I am concerned. The only thing that I’d like to say to
her is: I will never stop telling the truth about HIV and Aids. You can
stand here and babble and babble and quote figures and figures, I will
never stop telling the truth about HIV and Aids. That is just who I am.
[Applause.] Listen to me and you will learn about the truth. Just listen to
me.

The best strategy to prevent and fight the spread of HIV in this country is
through prevention, and that is the truth. [Applause.] Healthy living and
positive living and especially proper nutrition is vital - shall I repeat,
garlic; shall I talk about beetroot; shall I talk about lemons; shall I
talk about amadumbe – because it delays the development of HIV to Aids-
defining conditions. That is the truth; proper nutrition. [Applause.]

I say that traditional medicine has been used by our people long before the
advent of other forms of medicine, and our people still use traditional
medicine, even today.

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Why are they getting Aids? Why do we get Aids
then?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, order! Hon member, you must never do that again.
You must ask. You don’t just switch on your microphone in the middle of
someone’s speech. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: I want to repeat the third truth, which is that
traditional medicine has been used by our people – I don’t know about yours
– long before the advent of other forms of medicine. I know your people
used it too and our people still use traditional medicine, even today. And
you can’t stop them from using traditional medicine. That is the truth.
[Applause.]

It is not true that only South Africans focus on traditional medicine. Next
week the WHO is convening a meeting on traditional medicine. Maybe you are
unhappy that they didn’t invite you. If you had asked me to give them your
name, you would have been invited. They will continue discussions on the
role of traditional medicine. The WHO continues to support research into
traditional medicine, while hon Kohler-Barnard sleeps through it all and is
not part of it. You just sleep and are not part of what the whole world is
doing. That is the truth.

These and many other things are the truths that I will continue to tell the
people of South Africa; the citizens of this country. I will continue to do
it. Therefore, no churning out of figures will deter me and my department
from telling the truth to the people of our country. You can remain there
and talk about everything you want to talk about, but we will continue to
tell the truth. In fact, maybe I should invite you to our workshop on
traditional medicine that takes place this weekend. I know you will be lost
in that workshop. I will not even bother to invite you to that workshop.
You will not understand.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Minister, may I just appeal to our
distinguished guests in the gallery. You may not participate in this
debate, please.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: I think they understand the things that I am
talking about: the truth and the truth and the truth. Perhaps what I should
also do is to advise the hon member to visit the UK to find out how that
country is debating the role of traditional medicine. You sit here and you
don’t want to debate it. In the UK they are debating it. This debate was
initiated by the Prince of Wales, who spoke strongly in favour of
traditional medicine – just two weeks ago in Geneva at the World Health
Assembly. Please go to the UK and you might come back better educated than
you are today.

I just wanted to address those two issues and thank the speakers,
particularly members from the ANC, who have elaborated on the programmes
that are undertaken by the Department of Health. Indeed, we have
decentralised health care systems and I thank all those who spoke in favour
and supported the Budget Vote. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 19:32.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



ANNOUNCEMENTS:


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

 1. Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)


    (1)     The JTM on 6 June 2006 in terms of Joint Rule 160(3) classified
        the following Bills as section 75 Bills:

        (a)      South African Institute for Drug-Free Sport Amendment Bill
             [B 7 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75)

        (b)      Sectional Titles Amendment Bill [B 8 – 2006] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

2.    Introduction of Bills

    (1)     The Minister of Safety and Security

        (a)      Firearms Control Amendment Bill [B 12 – 2006] (National
             Assembly – sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
             notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
             28843 of 19 May 2006.]

        Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Safety and
        Security of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the JTM
        for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


        In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
        the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
        working days.


    (2)     The Minister of Sport and Recreation

        (a)      2010 FIFA World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill [B
             13 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75) [Explanatory summary
             of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
             Government Gazette No 28593 of 10 March 2006.]

        Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Sport and
        Recreation of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the JTM
        for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


        In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
        the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
        working days.



National Assembly


1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Provincial and Local Government for consideration and report. The
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is
        referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        (a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Local
           Government Association (SALGA) for 2004-2005, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
           2004-2005 [RP 21-2006].

    2.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Provincial and Local Government and the Standing Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

        (a) Letter from the Minister for Provincial and Local Government
           dated 11 May 2006 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in
           terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act,
           1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of
           the Annual Report of the South African Local Government
           Association (SALGA) for 2004-2005.

    3.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development:

        (a) Letter from the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
           Development to the Speaker of the National Assembly, dated 9 May
           2006, informing her of the resignation of Magistrate, R Ameer an
           Additional Magistrate at Pinetown.

        (b) Letter from the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
           Development to the Speaker of the National Assembly, dated 25
           April 2006, informing her of the upliftment of the provisional
           suspension of Magistrate M S E Khumalo from Amsterdam.

    4.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Arts and Culture for consideration:

        (a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Arts and Culture for 1 April
           2006 to 31 March 2009.
    5.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Safety and Security for consideration:

        (a) Strategic Plan of the South African Police Service (SAPS) for
           2006 to 2007 [RP 42-2006].

    6.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Transport for consideration:

        (a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Transport for 2006 to 2009.

    7.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Service and Administration for consideration:

        (a) Medium Term Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Service
           and Administration for 2006 to 2011.


        (b) Medium Term Strategic Plan of the Public Service Commission for
           2006/07 to 2008/08.


    8.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Home Affairs for consideration:

        (a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Home Affairs for 2006/07 to
2008/09.

TABLINGS:


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Education

    (a)     Government Notice No 540 published in Government Gazette No
        28719 dated 10 April 2006: Call for written submissions from
        stakeholder bodies and members of the public on the draft policy
        document: An addendum to the policy document, the National
        Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the National
        Qualifications Framework (NQF), regarding learners with special
        needs, in terms of the National Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No
        27 of 1996).

    (b)     Government Notice No 603 published in Government Gazette No
        28806 dated 8 May 2006: Call for comment on the Further Education
        and Training Colleges Bill, 2006.


    (c)     Government Notice No 265 published in Government Gazette No
        28657 dated 24 March 2006: Calling for the nomination of persons to
        serve as members on the Second Umalusi Council for General and
        Further Education and Training Quality Assurance for the period 8
        June 2006 until 7 June 2010, in terms of the Act, 2001 (Act No 58 of
        2001).


    (d)     Government Notice No 593 published in Government Gazette No
        28790 dated 3 May 2006: National policy regarding further education
        and training programmes: Approval of Modern Greek as an additional
        subject to be listed in the National Curriculum Statement: Grades 10-
        12 (General), in terms of the National Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27
        of 1996) and the South African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No 84 of
        1996).

2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
        (a) Government Notice No 385 published in Government Gazette No
        28753 dated 21 April 2006: Regulations in terms of Chapter 5, made
        in terms of the National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No
        107 of 1998).


    (b)     Government Notice No 597 published in Government Gazette No
        28803 dated 5 May 2006: Draft Regulations relating to listed
        threatened or protected species, made in terms of the National
        Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of
        2004).


    c) Government Notice No 598 published in Government Gazette No 28803
       dated 5 May 2006: Draft national norms and standards for the
       regulation of the hunting industry in South Africa, made in terms of
       the National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No
       10 of 2004).


COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    Report of Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
   Life and Status of Women on Appropriation Bill [B 2-2006], dated 2 June
   2006:

Introduction
The Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of the Quality of Life
and Status of Women, having considered the Appropriation Bill and the
associated budget votes, reports that it has concluded its deliberations.

The Joint Monitoring Committee has over the years consistently focused its
attention on the three issues of poverty, gender-based violence, and
HIV/AIDS. The Committee has done so because these are all issues that
affect large numbers of South African women, and – in particular – tend to
affect those who are most disadvantaged.
We can all be proud of what South Africa has achieved in respect of gender
equality at the top end of the political and economic arenas in our
country. In both the public and private spheres, South Africa does much
better than average in having women in powerful positions. Indeed, we have
reached the point where it is no longer something to remark on that a chief
executive officer or a Minister or a director-general is a woman. At the
bottom end of these arenas, however, there is still much room for
improvement. The Committee’s comments therefore focus on what the 2006/07
Budget of national Government says in the areas of poverty, gender-based
violence and HIV/AIDS. Each of these issues is a major topic in itself, and
our comments can therefore not cover all aspects. However, we highlight
some of the aspects about which we have concerns.

Before going on to the three topics, we must commend the Treasury and the
individual departments on the amount of information that is provided in our
Budget books. We are fortunate compared to many other countries in having a
programme-by-programme narrative alongside the Budget figures. We are
fortunate in having Budget estimates for seven years, allowing us to see
patterns over time. We are also fortunate in having information on
objectives and targets and indicators. Perhaps unfortunately for
Government, this information makes us hungry for more! It is the
Committee’s opinion that the potential of this Budget format is currently
not being fully utilised. In particular, we would like to see better use
made of the targets and indicators as these are a concrete tool that
Parliament and civil society can use to monitor Government’s achievements.

Poverty
The Expanded Public Works Programme (EPWP) is a flagship programme for
South Africa in terms of directly addressing poverty. The EPWP was
introduced in 2003, as an expansion of activities previously funded through
poverty alleviation funding. One of the changes announced in 2003 was that
the scope of the activities covered by Public Works would be expanded. In
particular, EPWP would now also include the social sector activities of
home- and community-based care (HCBC) and early childhood development
(ECD), alongside physical infrastructure activities on which Public Works
traditionally focus.

Having public works in home- and community-based care (HCBC) and early
childhood development (ECD) is an extremely innovative idea. Perhaps South
Africa is the first country to attempt to do this. It is an idea that is
welcome from a gender perspective.

Firstly, it is innovative to recognise that caring services can also
produce a type of infrastructure – an infrastructure that is called
healthier people. Secondly, HCBC and ECD are areas of work in which women
traditionally predominate, unlike the building of physical infrastructure
which is the traditional focus of Public Works. In the latter area, South
Africa instituted a quota to ensure that women – who predominate among the
poor – could benefit in proportion to their relative need. This quota has
not, however, always been observed. Thirdly, HCBC and ECD are types of work
that are often done for no pay, and their inclusion in the Expanded Public
Works Programme (EPWP) affords some recognition that these activities
constitute real, productive work.

We nevertheless have several concerns about the social sector EPWP
programme. Firstly, we understand that the programme will focus on
learnerships rather than on payment to people who are doing this work in an
ongoing way. If this is the case, the programme will not be especially
useful to the many poor women who already have the necessary skills for
this work, but are providing the services for free both in their own homes
and to others in the community. A focus on learnerships also does not
acknowledge that there is a huge ongoing need for both types of services –
and a need that is growing in respect of home- and community-based care
(HCBC). We cannot expect women to continue to provide these services for
free simply because they are given a few months training during which time
they receive a limited stipend.

Secondly – and even more importantly – it seems that implementation of the
social sector EPWP has not yet happened. As noted, the EPWP was introduced
in early 2003. It is now early 2006, three years later. Yet it seems that
the home- and community-based care (HCBC) and early childhood development
(ECD) are still only at the planning stage.

In his budget vote speech on 17 May the honourable Minister of Social
Development stated that R4,2 billion had been set aside for the social
sector EPWP programme. He added that, with the support of the Business
Trust, the sector had ‘identified the critical path for implementation’ and
‘begun to address the capacity and project management deficits’ which had
been identified. The Committee is very concerned that three years after the
social sector EPWP was announced, this important activity is still only at
the planning stage. The Estimates of National Expenditure state that the
Department of Social Development plans to train 5 800 caregivers during
this budget year. This is too little too late.

Another poverty-related issue revolves around divorce and maintenance. When
marriages split up, women are often left in a precarious position
economically. This is so because men tend to earn more than women, because
men are more likely to be employed than women, and because women’s
household responsibilities limit the time and energy they can devote to
income earning. In addition, the dwelling in which families live is
generally registered in the man’s name despite the fact that after divorce
the children generally stay with the woman. This places even greater
burdens on the woman’s time and greatly limits on her ability to earn
income. The many women in South Africa who bear children outside marriage
face the same impossible burden as those who are divorced and separated.

Yet research commissioned two years ago by the Commission on Gender
Equality (CGE) found that the average amount of maintenance per child
awarded to women who were persistent and lucky enough to get such an award
was only R200 per month. Meanwhile the men concerned were earning an
average of nearly R3 000 per month. The Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development’s Annual Report for 2004/05 acknowledges that
even the specialist Family Courts are not able to deliver a satisfactory
service in respect of maintenance. The situation in ordinary courts will be
even worse.

Given these difficulties, the Committee is pleased to see in the
Department’s Annual Report for 2004/05 that Child Maintenance is regarded
as one of the Department’s flagship projects. The Committee is pleased to
see in the pages of this year’s Estimates of National Expenditure relating
to the Department of Justice that the Legal Aid Board has named women
involved in divorces, maintenance and domestic violence as a priority
group. We hope in future reports to see the actual numbers of women in this
situation who have been assisted by the Board. This would be a useful way
to utilise the potential of the targets and indicators of our performance
budgeting format. Also promising is the restructuring of the Office of the
Master of the High Court so that the rulings in the Moseneke and Bhe
judgements on Black deceased estates can be properly implemented. The
Moseneke issue is also one of the Department’s flagship projects, and we
therefore hope to see good progress on this, and that this progress will be
reflected in the budget documents and annual reports.

The Committee is, however, concerned that this year’s Budget does not seem
to say anything about maintenance investigators and prosecutors. Last
year’s Budget reported that the appointment of 82 investigators and 100
clerks for maintenance and domestic violence courts had helped improve the
system. Despite these improvements, the Committee is well aware that women
who approach the courts are still facing major obstacles. The Department of
Justice’s Annual Report for 2004/05 says that 140 investigators would be in
place by the end of 2004/05, and that they would be employed as permanent
civil servants rather than – as in the past – as contract staff. The Annual
Report also says that the Department has ‘prioritised funds’ for the
appointment of maintenance investigators at the ordinary and Family Courts.
The Committee is concerned that the 2006/07 Budget book does not say
anything about maintenance investigators. Without this information it is
difficult to monitor if commitments are being carried through.

Violence against women
The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development has a major role
to play in respect of gender-based violence. Unfortunately, the
Department’s Vote in the Estimates of National Expenditure says almost
nothing on this topic.

The one area related to gender-based violence in which there is an exact
number relates to the sexual offences courts. This year’s Estimates of
National Expenditure state that 70 such courts had been established by
August 2005, and another 30 would have been established by March 2006. This
is welcomed. However, we need more information. Last year’s Budget book
said that 52 sexual offences courts had been established, but only 52 of
these met minimum requirements. Do all 70 courts established by August 2005
meet the minimum requirements? And will the 30 established by March 2006
also meet them?

We would also like more information about the sexual offences courts. In
particular, we need to know how many cases they are dealing with in respect
of children, and how many cases in respect of adult women. The Committee
notes that the Department has set itself a target of a 70% conviction rate
in sexual offences courts. This is lower than the target set for all other
courts. The Annual Report for 2004/05 states that the conviction rate for
the sexual offences courts was 63%. The conviction rate for sexual offences
in other courts was only 47%. This means that more than half of cases of
the women and children who are not fortunate enough to land up in a
specialised court do not result in conviction. These rates are very
worrying as we know that there are many more women and children who do not
report the violence that they experience in the first place. Low conviction
rates increase the chances that they will not consider it worth the trouble
to report in the first place.

The significant difference in conviction rates for the sexual offences
courts is particularly worrying given recent announcements that the
specialist courts are to be abandoned. The Committee is concerned that when
available indicators provide strong evidence of the effectiveness of a
particular strategy, Government is planning to abandon that strategy. We
urge that this decision be reconsidered.

HIV/AIDS
Our third special area of interest is HIV/AIDS. This issue is particularly
burdensome for women for a number of reasons. Firstly, because of both
biological and sociological reasons, women are more vulnerable than men to
infection, and are likely to be infected at a young age. Secondly, women
and girls tend to predominate among those who care for others in the
household and community who are ill. Women are thus both more infected and
more affected by HIV/AIDS than men.

In terms of HIV/AIDS, the Committee must again refer to the issue of HCBC.
Until now, there has been a national conditional grant that has provided
money to provinces in respect of home- and community-based care (HCBC).
That grant has now come to an end, and provinces are expected to provide
for these services in their own budgets. The Committee is not confident
that this will happen across all provinces. We have twice in the past had a
bad experience in terms of conditional grants in respect of early childhood
development (ECD) which, when they came to an end, were not adequately
replaced by funding from the provinces. The Committee fears that this will
again happen in respect of HCBC. The Committee would therefore like
information on what the national Government is planning to do to ensure
that the carers and those for whom they provide care will not suffer. Our
concern is especially acute given the lack of progress in implementing the
EPWP in the social sector mentioned above.

There are many other issues that the Committee could raise in respect of
the three issues of poverty, gender-based violence and HIV/AIDS. The
Committee offers these examples in the hope that they will assist
Government departments in understanding what is required by Parliament. If
these and similar improvements can be effected, it will also assist
Parliament in better fulfilling its mandate of oversight.

CREDA INSERT REPORT - Insert T060606E-insert2 – PAGES – 1187-1210



