---
title: 'National Assembly - 05 September 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-09-05
---

TUESDAY, 5 SEPTEMBER 2006
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                                 ARBOR WEEK

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

  That the House -

  (1) notes that -


       (a)  1 to 7 September is Arbor Week; and


       (b)  this week is meant to deepen awareness about the importance of
            trees in our lives and the environment;


  (2) recalls that -

       (a)  trees contribute to our health in a number of ways: they
            effectively muffle urban noise, a mature leafy tree produces as
            much oxygen in a season as ten people inhale in a year and that
            to produce its food, a tree absorbs and lock away carbon
            dioxide, a major suspect in global warming; and


       (b)  the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry is undertaking a
            campaign from 2000 to 2015 to highlight two indigenous trees
            every year, one tree common and the other rare and that the
            common tree this year is the Wild Pomegranate and the rare one
            is the Kosi Palm; and


  (3) commends the Department of  Water  Affairs  and  Forestry  in  raising
       awareness about the critical role of trees in our lives.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought the Chief Whip was going to tell us how many
trees he himself planted this morning!

Agreed to.
                CONSTRUCTION OF PRESIDENT’S PRIVATE RESIDENCE

                   (Statement by Minister of Public Works)

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, and fellow
South Africans, I wish to thank Madam Speaker for allowing me to address
this august House on a matter of public importance, which relates to the
policy on the privileges of public representatives, including the
President, Deputy President, the former Presidents and the former Deputy
Presidents.

I do so, but not because of the so-called question the DA, as they have
stated in the paper, has raised. I do so, because as we speak and as I
speak here, I have not received such a question, and neither has the office
that deals with questions in Parliament.

I thought it was necessary to explain to our people and members of this
National Assembly the policy guidelines and conventions that have been used
with regard to the privileges of public representatives.

It is important for me to go back to the matter of the question that I have
just started with. Hon Douglas Gibson, a Member of this Parliament, has
been quoted – whether correctly or not – as saying that he has sent a
question to myself with regard to the matter of the construction of the
private residence of the President. During this previous weekend, an
impression has indeed been created that government did not respond to the
question that the hon Douglas Gibson has raised on this matter.

Clearly, I had to follow-up. I asked my office whether this was true or
not; whether they had received a question or not, and when they said they
had not, I asked them to go to the questions office in Parliament so that
we could clarify what and where the question was that was being referred
to.

Following this inquiry, I want to say to the hon member that I have here an
e-mail which I received from Mr Michael Plaatjies today at 10:24, which
confirms that there has not been any question on the President’s private
residence that has been received by his office. [Interjections.] Clearly,
hon members, it would be good if hon Douglas checks with his office what
might have happened to his question, and after that, apologise to me and to
the public for misleading them about the claim that he has made.
[Applause.]

At the end of last week, we all witnessed unfortunate and strange behaviour
indeed, where one of our hon members of this House led a contingent of
journalists to the private residence of our head of state. [Interjections.]
This visit follows – I hope hon members listen to this – an enquiry which
was made by a person who claimed he was a researcher for the DA to the
contractor, wanting to know the location of the house that they were
building for Mr Mbeki.
Clearly, the contractor, as an honest citizen, gave the address. Shortly,
thereafter, the hon Gibson and the contingent of journalists were at the
house.

It raises an interesting question that all of us must ask: What was of
interest about this private residence? Clearly, as it emerged on Friday,
and as it went on during the weekend, and this morning on SAfm on the eight
o’clock debate, hon Gibson believed the state was building a private
residence for Mr Mbeki, and had kept the house under wraps, as was stated
in one of the Sunday papers over the past weekend.

Surely this indicates an underlying mistrust. Can the state be trusted? Can
the state act in the interest of the public? Maybe, as again the Sunday
papers – The Independent – stated, ``Can the state escape any controversy,
particularly the African head of state?’’ [Interjections.]

I found it very convenient and interesting that when the Sunday Independent
wrote their article on this matter, they went on to say ``This former head
of state bought his private residence’’; ``This former head of state bought
his private residence’’. Instead of saying ``Mr Mbeki has also bought his
private residence’’, they left the public in the dark. They then said,
``Well, this is the third African head of state matter which has caused
controversy after President Mugabe and President Chisano’’. I said: ``How
unfortunate that our own media can stoop so low, and not tell the facts.’’

Let’s come to the question that has brought me here, hon members, to
clarify the policy with regard to public representatives. Chapter 4.1 in
the Constitutional Handbook for Members of the Executive and presiding
officers, particularly on the residences, clearly indicates how the state
allocates official residences to these members. What is the state’s
obligation and how should the state act through the Minister of Public
Works and the department?

Chapter 4.2 further states how the state must provide security arrangements
for private residences used for official purposes as it is covered in
Chapter 2, paragraph 3, which states:


  On assumption of office, members should approach the Minister of
  Intelligence Services and the Minister for Safety and Security for a
  security analysis and arrangements for provision of appropriate security.
  Members and their support staff should at all times adhere to the
  security arrangements and policies, and take precautions not to do
  anything that will compromise security.


  The analysis referred to will include security of private residences
  occupied on a regular basis, state-owned residences, private residences,
  personal security and the offices utilised by members.
  The Minister of Public Works should be requested to implement, in
  conjunction with the SAPS, the recommended security arrangements at the
  privately owned residences in terms of this scheme approved by Cabinet for
  this purpose.


In addition to the Constitutional Handbook for Members of the Executive and
presiding officers, there is a policy that relates to privileges of former
Presidents, their spouses, widows and widowers, which spells out what these
privileges are, what the responsibility of the state is in this regard.

In this policy, the state has the following obligations. I won’t mention
all of them. I will mention the ones that relate to the residences: A
former President and his or her family may, from the date of resignation
from office, remain in the official residence of his or her choice for up
to 60 days with retention of all existing privileges they previously
enjoyed in the residence. On security, with regard particularly to the head
of state and deputy head of state, security services rendered to a former
President will continue after his or her departure from the official
residence for as long as and at the level that the Minister of Safety and
Security deems necessary. Security measures at the private residences of
former Presidents will be dealt with in terms of the policy which I have
already outlined, which was adopted by Cabinet on 20 August 2003.

In point 3.4 of this booklet that refers to policies of former Presidents
and Deputy Presidents, it states that security measures that have been
agreed to in terms of the processes, the SA Police Service personnel and
related corps shall be provided and funded by the SAPS. Structural
additions and amendments shall be provided and maintained and funded by the
Department of Public Works. It also states that the security situation at
the private properties owned and regularly used by the former Presidents
and their immediate families shall, from time to time, be revisited by the
SAPS.

Based on the findings of a threat analysis, the SAPS shall report its
findings to the Minister of Safety and Security. This may, at any time,
lead to upgrading, downgrading or termination of security services. If
security measures are downgraded or terminated, any permanent structures
shall become the property of the owner of the land on which the said
structure shall become the property of the owner of the land on which the
said structures were erected, who shall have to maintain them.

It also further states that the former presidents may request secure office
accommodation with secure parking facilities. Such accommodation will be
provided, and is limited to 120 square metres.

I also want to say, with regard to ourselves seated here, that in terms of
the Parliamentary Villages Management Board Act No 96 of 1998, the state
has to provide all of us with accommodation, furniture, maintain and also
secure those premises and further transport us to work. If we choose to use
our cars, that’s our own choice; it’s not because the state can’t provide.
That is why hon members, through the board, have been very angry with us
for not adjusting to the timeframe so that the busses can commute
consistent with the schedule of Parliament. This we provide. Even the
nominal rent that we pay in those houses is actually subsidized by the
state.

I thought it was necessary for us to raise these issues because somehow in
this matter we have lost the essence of what we seek to address. A question
may be asked: Is the hon Mbeki the first person to whom this policy
applies? I want to say that even before the democratic state there was a
convention. There are some minutes, which indicate how the then government
dealt with the serving of the former heads of state with regard to security
in their official and private residences.

As I stand here, we still provide former Vice State President Schlebusch,
who served a very short period of time, with security in his retirement
home. The security personnel that looks after him is paid by all the
taxpayers of this country. We still provide former President Marais
Viljoen, who actually served less than five years - I think two to three
years - in his retirement village with fulltime security personnel, paid by
SAPS and this government. We provide security arrangements, including all
features that are required in terms of personnel security to former
President P W Botha, who chose, and correctly so, a house in one of our
prime areas of this country, namely in George as residence of his choice.
We never asked questions. The SAPS time and again, year on year, assesses
all those security and say to us what we need to do. We offer the former
President and Second Deputy President F W de Klerk the very same support
consistent with this policy. Similarly, we provide the former President
Nelson Mandela with those security and office space as is covered by
policy. We provide the former Deputy President Jacob Zuma the very same
security arrangement and privileges as is defined by the policy I have just
stated. President Mbeki, as he will retire, we will as the state provide
him in accordance with this policy. [Applause.]

Hon members, I think we must be ashamed that we can act on rumour because
indeed the first medium that led with the story was the Noseweek. Neither
did it ask the Minister of the facts in this matter ... [Interjections.]

Mr M JELLIS: On a point of order, Madam Deputy Speaker: it is the second
time during the debate that somebody from that side of the House said, I
presume, that the hon Gibson is a liar. [Interjections.] I believe, Madam
Deputy Speaker, that that is out of order and the person should be asked to
withdraw that remark. [Interjections.]

In fact, Madam Deputy Speaker, I am reliably informed that it was the
Deputy Minister of Housing who said that.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, is there anyone who wants to own
up, because they say someone from that end? [Interjections.]

Mr H P CHAUKE:  Yes, on a point of order, Madam Deputy Speaker.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I am still dealing with this point of order, Mr
Chauke. Please take your seat for now.

Mr M J ELLIS: I am reliably informed, Madam Deputy Speaker, that it was
actually the Deputy Minister of Housing who shouted that out.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! The Deputy Minister of Housing? When was a
Deputy Minister of Housing appointed? Hon members, I just need to be
informed: When did we have an appointment of the Deputy Minister of
Housing? [Laughter.] If we don’t, then your source is actually not
reliable. [Interjections.] [Laughter.] [Applause.] Please take your seat,
Sir.

Mr M J ELLIS: I can name the person, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Interjections.]


The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no! We cannot keep on guessing the whole afternoon.
Please take your seat, hon Ellis.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you rising on a point of order, hon Chauke?

Mr H P CHAUKE: Madam Deputy Speaker, in fact the person seated next to me
was saying, Hamb’ uyolala [Go and sleep]. He did not say you are a liar.
[Laughter.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Please take your seat, because you are not
helping us. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Prof A K ASMAL: On a further point of order, Madam Deputy Speaker. With
your permission, Madam Deputy Speaker: How can the hon member of the DA
raise a point of order when he is really denying a general sentiment held
by the House at large? You can’t withdraw a general sentiment.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Asmal, that is not a point of order, please
take your seat.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, are you saying that nobody is prepared
to own up to the fact that they used the word ``liar’’?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, you said you are reliably informed.
Which means that you have a reliable informant that there is a Deputy
Minister of Housing. And we all know that we don’t have such a person in
this House. [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I believe I have the right to correct
my mistake because it’s not a point of order. [Laughter.] [Interjections.]
There is nothing wrong. Even you make mistakes sometime, Madam Deputy
Speaker. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Of course, I do, lots of them too. Hon Ellis, will you
please take your seat.

Mr M J ELLIS: Are you not going to rule on the fact that somebody said he
is a liar?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have ruled on the matter. I said that we are not
going to keep on guessing the whole afternoon and that there is no Deputy
Minister of Housing. That is where we closed the matter. You can’t name the
person. You said you had a reliable informant, which proved not to be
reliable. Please take your seat.

I am not going to address this matter anymore. Please proceed, hon
Minister.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Thank you very much, Madam Deputy Speaker. I
hope that the minutes that have been taken will not be taken away from my
speaking time.
Hon members, I think what has happened this weekend should not have
happened and shouldn’t happen again. Unfortunately, for some of us who
listened to the debates as they have been raging in the media, clearly such
acts take us back in the history that we have travelled because the under-
currents that emerge and views and feelings make people wonder, to what
extent have we walked this road of reconciliation as a country? Has this
question been asked because it happens to be an African President? It may
be painful indeed ... [Interjections.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: You should be ashamed of yourself.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: I will not be ashamed, hon Douglas Gibson.
You heard it yourself on the debate this morning, which I was listening to
and you were part of. Such sentiments were indeed raised. [Interjections.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Were they raised by me?

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Not by you, surely. Neither did I say it was
you. I am saying they were raised in that debate. They have been raised
during the weekend. Because surely ... [Interjections.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: You should be ashamed of yourself.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: I won’t. You should be. [Interjections.] If
you had an interest, as you stated, in transparency, you should have asked
the question. You did not. You yourself once said in this Parliament that
we must not ask issues of parliamentary nature in public before we ask them
here. You have actually undermined your own statement in this regard. As I
stated, I have evidence of the response ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you rising on a point of order, Chief Whip?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Yes, Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point
of order: we are addressing a matter ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are saying yes. I just want to know why are you
interrupting the Minister?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I think we can
... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is your point of order, Chief Whip?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: My point of order is the way the hon
Mr Gibson is behaving. We are addressing a matter here ... [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order.
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Mr Ellis, when you stood several times to
give points of order, everybody gave you an opportunity. May I please
address ... [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: What sort of a point of order is it?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I will make the ruling. Since when are you doing
my work? [Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I am saying:
protect the speaker. Mr Gibson will have an opportunity to respond. He is
interrupting and harassing the speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Chief Whip of the Majority Party, please
take your seat. Let me humbly request all of us to give the Minister an
opportunity to address us, because some of us, who don’t have the privilege
of the handbooks that the Minister is referring to, do not know most of the
information that is being raised here. So, I think if it goes well with all
of you, and I think it should, we should give the Minister the respect she
deserves. Whether we are going to be participating later in the debate or
not, let us all give the Minister the respect she deserves. Hon Minister,
your time is still secured.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I raise this
issue because all of us here, as Members of Parliament, have the utmost
responsibility to ensure that we do not reverse the gains of this democracy
by our actions or what we say.

I also want to say to hon members here that this democratic government
acted very holily even where it could have acted meanly; it respected
international protocols. Today we do not discriminate which president was
serving who; we offer what is due to that former president. And I hope that
we will do so continuously.

I’m raising this issue because we may not agree, but I think that we have a
responsibility regarding the messages we are sending the electorate, as
well as a responsibility to act holily and responsibly as public
representatives.

I want to say, hon members, without any equivocation, that we, as members
of this House, owe Mrs and Mr Mbeki an apology for the way in which one of
us has acted. [Applause.] Indeed, it would be sad if one of us could one
day ask who is staying where, take journalists to where we stay and start
casting aspersions on us by asking: “I wonder where the money to build the
house came from?”

None of us here have been asked which banks we went to, to apply for
housing loans. None of us were ever asked about the history of the
contractor who built or is building our houses. If we are going to stoop
that low as Members of Parliament, I wonder what our people would think of
us? I hope that in future we will not behave in the manner in which one of
us has behaved in this instance.

Ukuba asazi, bantakwethu, masibuze. Ndiyayibona ke nale nto yenza ukuba
bangakwazi nokuhlala ezitulweni ngoku, kaloku inyaniso iyahlaba. Kananjalo
umenzi uyalibala; umenziwa akalibali. [If we do not know, we should ask. I
can now see why they are so restless and uneasy. Remember the truth is
painful. Furthermore, the one who inflicts pain forgets, and the victim
does not.]

One thing that I’m happy about is that the movement that I serve helps me
to reflect on and remember to treasure the times and mountains I’ve climbed
for us to be here. That is why, with humility, we can still stand on this
podium and try to explain what is fact, not what is fiction. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, there are three
things wrong with the Minister’s statement: The first one is that it should
have been made more than a year ago, because in democracies governments
account to the taxpayers for the spending of their money before they spend
it, not afterwards when they are forced to admit it. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Mr Gibson deserves some respect.
[Interjections.] He must be heard in this House. And if there are any
points of order, hon members will rise to raise them, but we must all be
protected by the Chair. Continue, hon member.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you, Madam. The second thing wrong
with the statement is that the Minister still fails to tell us how much
public money is being spent on this property; just to offer it.
[Interjections.]

The third thing is that questions officers confirmed to us that the
question is there: it will be on the Order Paper at the end of this week,
for a reply in two weeks’ time. So your information is outdated - as it so
often is, Minister. You should apply to me and apologise to me now, instead
of me apologising to you. Thank you very much.

The ANC would have saved itself a lot of hysteria if the Minister had
opened her mouth earlier and made a statement, because what has happened is
that Noseweek published an article, saying that a retirement house was
being built and that it was gonna cost R22 million, and that the Department
of Public Works was involved in it. The Minister said nothing.

On Friday morning the Beeld and Die Burger had huge stories about this
retirement home and had interviews with the construction people. The Star
newspaper published a photograph of the House on Friday morning.
[Interjections.]
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Mr Gibson. There’s a point of order from Ms
Vytjie Mentor.

Ms M P MENTOR: Madam Deputy Speaker, I think the body language of Mr Gibson
is unbecoming.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon member! There’s nothing wrong with his body
language. Continue, hon member.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: I’ll look after my body, if you look
after yours. [Interjections.] Helen Suzman taught us to “go and look for
yourself”, because that Minister and the government kept quiet, and they
don’t tell the people of South Africa anything. So I went there to “go and
look”, and I advised the media that I was going, and they all turned up.
Isn’t that strange? [Interjections.]

When I arrived at the house, outside the driveway, the security people
asked me not to enter, and I didn’t enter. I invaded no one’s privacy. I
didn’t put my foot on the driveway; I didn’t go in the garden; I didn’t go
inside the house; I invaded no one’s privacy. [Interjections.]

Afterwards Motheo Construction came to talk to me on the pavement ...
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Douglas Gibson, please address the House. When you
provoke the House, I can’t protect you. But I don’t know what’s going on.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam, that’s a very weak excuse; you
should be protecting me and you’re not.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, we can’t hear. Please continue, hon
member.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: I’m explaining what happened, and if they
shout and scream, it’s because they don’t want to hear the truth. They want
to give vent to their hysteria, and the specifics about reprehensibility
are absolute nonsense.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Gibson, there’s a problem; there’s something that I
don’t understand: what’s going on there, hon members?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Please add to my time, Madam.

An HON MEMBER: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of correction, Mr Gibson
did not invade privacy, he transgressed ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no! No point of correction! Sit down. Chief Whip,
I’m really appealing to you to give us the co-operation we need.
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m trying to
calm down the ANC caucus. Please, let’s allow the speaker to finish.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Yes, and add some time to the time
allotted me. Thank you, Chief Whip.

The points that I made outside the House – and it’s not me who went and
climbed over the fence, it’s the media; it’s not me who charted aircraft
and took aerial photographs of the property, that’s the media. I want to
tell you that in a free democracy that’s how the media carries on. They
might be irritating; they might be invasive; they might be hypocritical,
but far rather that than have what happened in the sort of state that hon
member wants in South Africa in future.

I said outside the House that all that the taxpayers wanted to know is how
much of their money was being spent on this. I said that what the Mbekis
paid for was their private business; what we paid for was our business ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon member! Your speaking time has expired.
[Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam, with respect, the timer shows that
it hasn’t expired.
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your time has expired. The timer shows minus 12
minutes. That means it has expired.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Just take note of the fact that the
Minister had 20 minutes; the ANC has got eight, and I’ve got about two
minutes ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please sit down, Mr Douglas Gibson.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you. You don’t want to hear the
truth; I’ll say it outside the House. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Gibson, we are not going to allow this kind of
behaviour. When your time has expired and I say please take your seat, go
and take your seat; and don’t address me on this matter.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: I want to address you on another matter
of order, Madam Deputy Speaker. The point of order I wish to make is that
...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: ... I’m not taking any point of order; I’m addressing
you on your behaviour here, and please take your seat.
I’d like to continue with the debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Yes, and then may I address you on a
point of order thereafter?
Mr D V BLOEM: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order, I just want to
tell Mr Gibson ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, no, the point of order! [Laughter.] There is no
point of telling.

Mr W P DOMAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order, I just want to ask
thus, as per custom, was time added to Mr Gibson’s speaking time in view of
the many points of order that were raised whilst he was speaking, for
future reference purposes?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, we know what we are doing here. If there is
any problem, raise it with us later. We have monitored everybody’s time,
and whenever we have any interruption or intervention we stop the timer for
the duration of the interruption or intervention, and then restart it to
make sure that everybody gets his or her full allotted time. So Mr Gibson
got more time because he gave himself extra time, even after I had asked
him to take his seat, which is unacceptable and should not happen,
especially from a person of senior stature in this House.

Please lead by example. Don’t address me; I haven’t called you to address
me. [Laughter.] You like the microphone. You are not going to address me,
because I’m continuing with the debate now.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: May I raise another point of order?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No!

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: All right. How do I raise the fact that
on the podium that clock showed that one still had time? How do I raise
that, if I can’t do it by way of a point of order?

Ms M P MENTOR: You must stop pointing a finger at the Deputy Speaker!

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, thank you for your assistance, but I’m
sure I’ll be able to handle this matter on my own. Hon Gibson, the Chair
gives a ruling. If you’re unhappy with the ruling of the Chair, you know
what to do. And don’t waste time because there are four other people
helping me to make sure that we keep time. [Interjections.]

Well, I’m the fourth one. At times we can’t count, you know. I also counted
the person on the podium. Would you like to sit down?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam, I’d prefer just to say that on
that clock, it showed that there were still nine seconds to go when all
four of you wrongly said that my time was up.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The problem is that you did not see how much time there
was before that, which means that you had more than your allotted time. I
don’t know, I can’t be teaching mathematics now. I did that 15 years ago. I
did that so many years ago. My former students are now doctors and so on.
Will you please take this ruling? [Interjections.] Thank you.

Mr F BHENGU: Deputy Speaker, Minister, hon members, the Minister made
reference to the Sunday Independent when she spoke earlier on. In fact, she
wanted to refer to the Saturday Star. For the purposes of the record, we
would request that that correction be made.

Kuwusizi nje bandla. Akukho esingakukhuluma. Ngqongqoshe, usukusho konke
... [It is just a pity. There is nothing more we can say. The Minister has
in fact, said it all ...]

... save to say that, as the ANC, we want to then say it is immoral,
perverse, unethical and un-African to invade and disrespect the dignity and
privacy of another person, irrespective of whether he or she is a public
figure or not.

The callous action by the DA and hordes of journalists who descended on the
President’s residence last week reminds me of scavengers which, after
gnawing every piece of rot on their way, turn to the living, mercilessly
kill and feast on them to satiate the genetic abnormality of being
destructive. [Interjections.] [Applause.]
Listening to ordinary South Africans, Minister, and I think you have
referred to this ...

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: The hon member at
the podium referred to Mr Gibson as a scavenger. [Interjections.] I believe
that that is unparliamentary.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the hon member should continue because there is
nothing wrong with making a reference to a party. Continue, hon Bhengu.

Mr M J ELLIS: But Madam Deputy Speaker ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I did not hear him call out Mr Gibson by name and I
think I still have my listening skills very much in order.

Mr M J ELLIS: But the reference was very clear, Madam Deputy Speaker.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why do you want us to swap roles?

Mr M J ELLIS: I think I’d do quite a good job.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sit down then, Sir. If you respect the Chair, you are
going to sit down. Hon Bhengu, please continue.

Mr F BHENGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Listening to ordinary South
Africans, you would find that they question the very freedom and rights
that we fought for. They further ask: “In the history of this country,
where have you ever heard of a situation, past and present, where you
conclude without habitual truthfulness, and concoct unadulterated lies and
mislead the nation with your delusions and hallucinations?”

Are there no sinister motives behind these activities? Is this not
camouflaged racism that suggests that blacks in general are congenitally
deficient and corrupt?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon Bhengu.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: It was quite clear this
time and you will have to agree that the hon member at the podium indicated
that Mr Gibson, in his opinion, was telling lies. He actually used that
word. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Bhengu, please continue. Mr Ellis, please allow us
to continue with the business of the House.

Mr M J ELLIS: I have been deadly serious, Madam Deputy Speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am also serious.

Mr M J ELLIS: So, is there nothing wrong with what he said?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am very serious about it because there was no
reference to Mr Douglas Gibson. Please take your seat.

Mr F BHENGU: Are there no sinister motives behind these activities? Is this
not camouflaged racism that suggests that blacks in general are
congenitally deficient and corrupt and that all African leaders are
inherently not credit-worthy? Is this the kind of freedom that we fought
for, where the venom of the perpetrators of the injustices of the past was
never milked but hibernated to wreak vengeance on our democracy ...

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, this is over the top. [Interjections.]
This is hate speech and this is racism and everything all at once, Madam
Deputy Speaker. [Interjections.] It can’t be allowed to carry on like this.


The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mnu Bhengu, ngicela uthi ukuhlala phansi kancane. [Hon
Bhengu, can you please take your seat for the time being?]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Ellis, you have raised this point several times ...

Mr M J ELLIS: But it gets worse and worse.
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have been listening to the hon member. There was no
reference to Mr Gibson.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, can I ask you to please check the
record afterwards.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: For your benefit, I will check the record thereafter.
But from the beginning of his speech up until now, there has not been any
reference to him. Please continue, hon Bhengu.

Mr F BHENGU: Aren’t they abusing our Constitution to advance their wicked
and criminal resistance to reconciliation and transformation? Are standards
of morality determined by the colour of one’s skin?

Was it a mistake to adopt our Constitution in 1996, which enshrines the
rights of all people in our country and affirms the democratic values of
human dignity, quality and freedom? Is it a fallacy when our Constitution
prescribes that everyone has inherent dignity and the right to have their
dignity respected and protected? Is it absurdity when our Constitution
stipulates that everyone has the right to privacy? Is it not written in our
Constitution that freedom of expression does not extend to advocacy for
hatred that is based on race, ethnicity, gender or religion and that
constitutes incitement to cause harm ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Bhengu, please take your seat, once more.
Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise on a point of order: He has gone
right over the top. If he is not talking about Mr Gibson, who the heck is
he talking about? [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t you ask him? You have the right to ask him.

Mr M J ELLIS: May I ask the hon member a question?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. What you could do is to rise and ask a question to
the hon member.

Mr M J ELLIS: But this is an affront to Parliament, Madam Deputy Speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. I just want to get the view of the Table but I
think there is nothing wrong that the hon member is doing. [Interjections.]
If you need to know whether he is referring to Mr Douglas Gibson, you have
the right to ask a question.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Deputy Speaker, is the ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you asking it on his behalf?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: No. Is the hon Ellis prepared to take a
breathalyser test this afternoon? [Laughter.]
Mr M J ELLIS: With the greatest of pleasure. Shall we go now? Come, let’s
go. I will take one with pleasure. I’d like that Minister to coach you ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Minister! [Interjections.] [Laughter.] No, no, no.
We can’t allow this. I would like the hon Minister of Finance to please ...
I need to take a ruling on this matter. [Interjections.] [Laughter.]
Minister of Correctional Services ... Order, hon members! [Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, is the hon Minister scared
to take a breathalyser test?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Mr Gibson. Mr Trevor Manuel, I would like you to
withdraw your last remarks unconditionally. Don’t speak to me. Don’t give
me any speech, just withdraw that remark and take your seat.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: I will withdraw ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are not going to withdraw in future, you must
withdraw now.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: I withdraw in the hope that that will generate
better conduct on the part of hon Ellis. I thank you.
Mr M J ELLIS: I am not sure that I understand what that means, Madam
Speaker. [Interjections.] [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: I am suggesting that your conduct is not
suggestive of sobriety this afternoon. [Laughter.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I am more than prepared to go and take the
breathalyser test. Let’s go. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Minister of Finance, the Chair would like to give
you ... I see the hon Chief Whip over there – sit down please.

Hon members, we are going to get the House in order. We can’t continue like
this. Parliament is not a circus and I am not going to allow any points of
order on any matter after the withdrawal by the Minister of Finance.

I will study the record to find out where the name of Mr Gibson was
mentioned and we did not hear it. We will then come back to the House and
make sure that we give a ruling accordingly. Mr Manuel, will you please
withdraw?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: I withdraw, Deputy Speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Mr Bhengu, please continue.

Mr F BHENGU: Listening to SAfm’s Morning Live this morning, Mr Douglas
Gibson was in pain defending the indefensible, as much as he has done in
this podium this afternoon. You were challenged by ordinary South Africans
who doubted your psychogenetic make-up when you exposed and made vulnerable
the security of the house of the President. [Interjections.] In the past,
you never invaded nor questioned the past Presidents of apartheid under
whom you served. The question is: Why?

One white lady said during the SAfm programme, “The President and his wife
are of high moral standing and what you did is despicable.” You purport to
have submitted a question for a reply, as the Minister indicated, and you
continued to say so in this House. At 12:15 I communicated with the
Secretary, and they indicated, chief, that there was no such.
[Interjections.] I say 12:15 ... [Interjections.] They said so.

How could you wilfully tell the untruths when you knew that you did not
submit anything to Parliament and the department?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mnu Bhengu, ake uphinde futhi uthi ukuma kancane baba.
[Hon Bhengu, would you please again take your seat for the time being,
sir.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Deputy Speaker, the hon Mr Bhengu was now
referring to me. He can’t deny that and he asked why I wilfully misled the
House. Is that what you said?

Mr F BHENGU: I withdraw.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you. That’s right. Withdraw all the
other ...

Mr F BHENGU: You were conscious of the procedures and platform to use as
the Chief Whip of the Opposition when you wanted to interrogate what you
called “public interest”, but you were very opportunistic and resorted to
the media like a liberated ghost, casting malicious aspersions about the
Deputy President and saying, “She was slow to apologise for squandering the
taxpayer’s money on a jaunt ...

Mr T M MASUTHA: Madam Deputy Speaker, can you spare us from the running
commentary of the opposition.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! What is your point?

Mr T M MASUTHA: On a point of order: I think that running commentary is not
allowed in the House. I think there is continued running commentary.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sit down. It’s not allowed - from all sides of the
House it’s not allowed.

Mr F BHENGU: He went on to say, “the Deputy President was so slow to
apologise for squandering the taxpayer’s money on a jaunt to the United
Arab Emirates and London, and is now jumping in before the debate in
Parliament and expects me to apologise for doing my job.” That’s what you
said. You know that this was addressed by competent structures that
exonerated that office.

“Are you suggesting by your actions that you have a disregard for these
democratic institutions and that, in the name of democracy, you have the
nerve, the audacity and sheer dastardly naked arrogance ...” one reader
moaned.

Hon Douglas Gibson continued and said, “I will never apologise for doing my
duty as the member of the opposition, that is what the voters sent us to do
in Parliament.” [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

Mr F BHENGU: Today the listeners of SAfm, in your presence, negated your
assertion ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Mr Bhengu, your time has now expired.

Mr F BHENGU: The clock still reflects some time.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: It reflects negative values.

Mr F BHENGU: I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I see a speaker at the podium, and I have not
recognised anyone! [Laughter.] I’m just taking my time so that you respect
the Chair. [Laughter.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I can’t believe it, it’s quiet.
[Laughter.]

As today’s debate has already proved, this subject has become nothing less
than a street fight between the ANC and the DA, and we in the IFP will stay
out of that. It is our position that the President’s future residence is a
private matter and as such his and his wife’s privacy should be respected.
We can only hope that they will enjoy living in this house.

The IFP’s interest in the matter goes only as far as the use of public
money is concerned. We have no problem that public money will be used to
provide for the President’s future security, just as we have no problem
with the fact that public money is used to protect former presidents
Viljoen, P W Botha, F W de Klerk and Mr Mandela. [Interjections.]
Schlebusch was a deputy ... and Mr Jacob Zuma, the next president of South
Africa, I hear. [Interjections.]

What would perhaps be of interest is if the hon Minister could give us an
indication of how much public money is being used to protect the former
presidents, and we wish President Mbeki and his wife a good retirement in
that beautiful house of theirs. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members, the truth is that
the hon Douglas Gibson has compromised the security of that house and it
might now cost more to secure it. [Laughter.] By all means, investigate and
expose the abuse of taxpayers’ money fearlessly. But we all know that there
are numerous ways of doing that without resorting to this crass, self-
promotion at the expense of national security. To what lows would they
stoop for prime time and international media coverage? [Interjections.]
They would ridicule their country without a shred of evidence, it seems.

It shows a lack of ownership and pride in this country and its institutions
as much as it shows a complete disregard for the right to privacy of every
citizen. It is quite apparent that this had little to do with concern for
the taxpayer and everything to do with how much publicity the DA could get
for itself. [Applause.] The DA was in pursuit of a photo opportunity, not a
principle. Enkosi. [Thank you.] [Applause.]
Mr A HARDING: Madam Deputy Speaker, this visit is clearly totally out of
order, and nothing else but a clear act of naked racism. [Interjections.]
The hon Gibson has publicly claimed never to have benefited from apartheid,
but what he conveniently forgot to mention was the pension benefit that he
draws from having been involved in a previously racist parliament. This
visit with the press in tow is nothing but an act of political narrow-
mindedness. [Interjections.] Claiming innocence is further confirmation of
this narrow-mindedness.

If the DA is so dissatisfied with parliamentary processes, why do they, for
example, occupy the position of a House Chairperson? Why do they, for
instance, occupy positions on the parliamentary executive authority?
[Interjections.] Why? If anything, the only thing that the DA has achieved
this weekend is to have pushed up the security cost, because now every Tom,
Dick and Harry knows where the President will be staying. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairperson, the ACDP believes all state presidents have
the right to a retirement home that they can afford. The question of how
much such a home should cost is none of our business. It is a private
matter that should be respected by all. The ACDP will obviously, not
support the use of taxpayers’ money to fund private homes, including that
of the President.

It is unfortunate that the DA chose to act in a manner, which, at the very
least, is questionable especially considering that they didn’t even ask the
Minister to answer the questions they have. This, we believe, is a
disrespectful approach and it is unfortunate. It is the ACDP’s opinion that
the DA should, at the very least, apologise to the President and his wife.
[Applause.]

In view of the hon Minister’s response, it would seem that this project is
being funded by the Mbeki family and therefore, a private matter. Mrs Mbeki
deserves a comfortable home that befits the First Lady of our country as
she will continue to host and entertain, not only first ladies from many
parts of the world, but also...[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Voorsitter, ek kan verstaan dat hierdie onderwerp ŉ hewige
debat afgee. Ek verstaan dit en ek dink dit maak sin. Maar ek dink as ons
met onsself eerlik is, sal ons ook erken dat van die optredes vandag in die
Huis nie die Parlement tot eer gestrek het, en ek dink ons almal besef dit
en dit is nie reg so nie.

Die agb Minister het baie tyd in haar toespraak gespandeer aan die beleid
van die regering ten opsigte van hoe voormalige staatshoofde gehanteer
word. Ek dink nie daar is iemand in die Parlement wat ’n probleem het met
spesifiek hoe daardie beleid toegepas word nie. Die beleid is regverdig en
billik, en niemand het daarmee ’n probleem nie.
Die probleem in hierdie situasie het gekom as gevolg van ’n berig wat die
wêreld ingestuur is om te sê dat hier ’n huis gebou word teen ’n hoë bedrag
geld en dat die suggestie was dat die staat daarby betrokke is. Miskien kan
ons daaruit leer.

Ek wil met alle respek teenoor die Parlement en van die lede van die
uitvoerende gesag sê dit sal help as ons partykeer nie tot drie maande wag
om antwoorde te kry op parlementêre vrae nie. As dit in die praktyk nie
gebeur nie, sal die Parlement sy rol volledig kan speel om hierdie goed na
die Parlement toe te bring en op die regte manier te kan hanteer.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Die VF Plus gun mnr en mev Mbeki ’n rustige aftrede. Hulle is geregtig
daarop. Ek dink ons kan almal leer om hierdie situasie vorentoe beter te
hanteer. Dankie. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, I can understand that this subject leads to
heated debate. I understand it and it makes sense. But I think that if we
are honest with ourselves, we must admit that some of the behaviour in the
House today has not been to the credit of Parliament, and I think all of us
realise that that is not correct.

The hon Minister devoted a large part of her speech to the government’s
policy with regard to how previous heads of state are treated. I do not
think that there is anyone in Parliament who has a problem with the
specific implementation of that policy. The policy is fair and equitable,
and no-one has a problem with it.

The problem in this situation arose as a result of a report which was sent
into the world saying that a house is being built here for a large amount
of money, and that the suggestion was that the state was involved with it.
Perhaps we can learn from that.

With all due respect, I want to say to Parliament and the members of the
executive that it would help if we did not, on occasion, have to wait for
three months to receive answers to parliamentary questions. If this does
not happen in practice, Parliament will be able to play its role fully to
bring these things to Parliament and to handle them in the appropriate
manner. [Interjections.]

The FF wishes Mr and Mrs Mbeki a peaceful retirement. They have a right to
it. I think we can all learn to deal with this situation better in future.
Thank you. [Time expired.]]

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chairperson, on a point of order: As I said,
there was no question. I have written to the Deputy Speaker and I’m sure
she’s given you the answers from the Questions Office, so no question about
this was ever asked.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Sorry, hon Minister, I won’t take
that as a point of order.
Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, we in the UCDP have never
condoned the invasion of privacy of residencies, whether official or
private, regardless of who is the perpetrator or the victim. It is
humiliating to the victim. We condemned it when the ANC did it to the
residence of our leader Kgosi Mangope 12 years ago. [Interjections.] Even
today, we condemn it as it is done to the residence of the First Lady. We
know the pain the family is going through.

The UCDP wishes to state this categorically that being a black head of this
government does not make one the thief of state funds. No amount of
chattering, by way of justifying the puerile action, will to us, the UCDP,
make it good. We appeal to the DA to accept the responsibility of being the
majority minority party in this Parliament with responsibility, modesty and
circumspection while toning down their zeal with temperance. We as UCDP,
feel strongly about this lack of respect for the privacy of the family of
the President. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N T GODI: On behalf of the PAC, I wish to join those who are
sufficiently sane in condemning the conduct of the DA on this matter before
the House. This whole tragic episode is the intention of besmirching the
standing of the country’s President. We condemn this callous lack of
respect for leaders of the liberation movement by remnants and defenders of
the old order. [Applause.]

Did we see this kind of activism under apartheid? Not by any stretch of
imagination. They were quite happy to go along with the lack of
transparency and accountability. Transparency and accountability are the
hallmarks of the democratic order. We fought for it and we brought it
about. However, it must not be misused by any body, least of all, those to
whom it had been alien before 1994. We condemn! We rebuke! We censure!
[Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, speculation and assumption are the greatest of
all disasters. The issue of the hon President’s private property made by
the hon Gibson, of the DA, is purely speculatory. Any case is proved with
the production of proper and circumstantial evidence, and the DA needs to
educate themselves with the Administrative Justice Act of 2000 and ask for
information.

The time for throwing stones at each other is over. It is now time to pick
those stones and build our democracy, and a house for our hon President and
respect his rights, dignity and integrity. The MF wishes the hon President
and his wife a pleasant stay in their retirement home.

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Chairperson, the matter before us stretches democracy
to its limits and it is very disturbing. It is not clear what the DA seeks
to achieve by sensationalising and for that matter bothering on character
assassination by implying that the President and his family are corrupt
simply because they are building a beautiful house.

Azapo’s understanding of hon Gibson’s action and, by implication, that of
the DA, is that apartheid Presidents can build beautiful houses and then
there is nothing wrong about it, and then when black Presidents build
beautiful houses, they are corrupt.

Azapo believes that this is a racist attitude and there is no question of
it not being a racist attitude. This attitude must be wiped off from our
democracy and we must work tirelessly to reform some of the members of this
Parliament. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, although I accept that as public representatives
we have a very important oversight role in ensuring that government
accounts for the manner in which public funds are spent, I am of the view
that the Chief Whip of the DA, the hon Douglas Gibson, has overstepped the
boundaries of his oversight role, when he, with a group of journalists in
tow, without any invitation, visited President Mbeki’s future retirement
house.

I believe that the security of the President and the First Lady has been
compromised. The President and the First Lady have their right to privacy
and one’s house is one’s private domain. It is unbecoming of us as MPs, and
especially senior members of Parliament, to snoop around the private homes
of political leaders in order to establish whether the state’s funding has
been spent correctly.

It is no secret that the Department of Public Works is supplying the
security systems for all retiring Presidents, in line with clear Cabinet
approved policy. I believe the hon Gibson owes the President and the First
Lady an apology. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, I do believe - and I do rise on a point of order
- that since the hon Mr Gibson has been severely attacked this afternoon he
should be given the right to reply. I request that he be given an extra two
minutes to do so. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Ellis, as far as my limited
knowledge goes that is not a procedure when a statement is made by a
Minister, but I will enquire on your behalf and I will inform you. Thank
you.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, in the light of the
debates, I shall be giving notice of the following motion:

   That the House –


     1) noting the reprehensible actions of the hon D H M Gibson, Chief
        Whip of the DA, and other members of the DA, accompanied by members
        of news media, who attempted to enter a private property belonging
        to President Thabo Mbeki and the First Lady Mrs Zanele Mbeki on
        Friday 1 September 2006 in Johannesburg ...
[Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, the time for notices of motion this afternoon
has come and gone. I wonder why the hon Goniwe did not do it then. I
believe that he is out of order in doing it now.

The CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Ellis, he is not out of order and I
have that on the good advice of the Table. Will you please proceed?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: You need a workshop on the Rules:

   (2)      Recognising that the Constitution of the Republic provides that
        the Republic of South Africa is one democratic state founded on the
        following values: human dignity, the achievement of equality and
        the advancement of human rights and freedoms;


   (3)      everyone has inherent dignity and the right to have their
        dignity respected and protected. Everyone has the right to privacy,
        which includes the right not to have their personal homes searched;
   (4)      further recognises that the Constitution, national legislation
        and the rules of Parliament provide for a variety of mechanisms to
        ensure openness, transparency and accountability with regard to use
        of public funds;


   (5)      believing that the conduct of the hon member exceeded all bounds
        of political maturity and human decency, was undignified and
        unbecoming that of a member of this House;


   (6)      had the hon Gibson, an MP, intended to conduct bona fide
        parliamentary oversight, he would have made use of the many
        mechanisms that exist for this purpose. His failure to do so is
        indicative of the calculated attempt to make cheap political
        capital;


   (7)      Parliament and its members have the duty at all times to be at
        the forefront of upholding the values of human dignity, the
        achievement of equality and the advancement of human rights and
        freedoms, and of good governance, transparency and accountability.
        [Time Expired.]

Mr H P CHAUKE: Chairperson, on a point of order: In 1994 I was serving on
the ethics committee ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Mr Chauke, why this stretch of
imagination? That cannot possibly be a point of order that you were here in
1994.

Mr H P CHAUKE: It is not about hon Gibson this time. Could you allow me to
speak, please?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Then make your point of order,
please.

Mr H P CHAUKE: We agreed that all the parliamentary bottle stores should
close. The one in Marks building could remain open.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Chauke, please take your seat.
[Laughter.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Chairperson, during her input,
the Minister of Public Works ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Explain to me on what point you are
rising?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: It is a point about whether a
question on this matter was given to the Minister that was raised by the
Minister.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Chief Whip, the Minister raised
the question with me. It will be answered in writing and there is no
procedure that allows for a correction now.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: No, I am not correcting, but
submitting here proof for you, Madam, to follow up.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I have absolutely accepted what the
Minister said to me already. You don’t have to prove it. Thank you very
much. That will be referred to the Speaker. Thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Chairperson, Mr Ellis moved a point
of order earlier to ask whether I would have the simple right to reply to a
number of attacks on me and you said you will rule on that. I am afraid I
haven’t heard your ruling.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Regrettably, hon Chief Whip, no such
allowance is made here.


          SCIENTIFIC INTERVENTIONS IN STEMMING THE TIDE OF HIV/AIDS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S L DITHEBE (ANC): Deputy Chair, the Portfolio Committee on Science and
Technology held a meeting on 29 August 2006 with the Medical Research
Council regarding scientific interventions in stemming the tide of HIV and
Aids.

In this meeting we reflected on the management of HIV and Aids and the
requisite scientific interventions needed in improving the quality of life
of South Africans, especially the future use of vaginal microbicides, which
will give women greater power in protecting themselves against the HI
virus, thereby helping significantly in reducing its transmission.

We urge all South Africans to choose a lifestyle that protects them from
this virus, and thus they must abstain, be faithful and condomise. We
similarly urge practitioners of modern and traditional medicine to
collaborate in finding treatments to all diseases - curable and incurable.
We remain confident that these linkages and synergies are possible and that
they can lead to sustainable livelihoods among all South Africans, thereby
creating a healthier and more prosperous society. I thank you. [Applause.]


                          ANC ELITE BECOMING RICHER


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G R MORGAN (DA): Chair, the ANC must surely have noticed the growing
public outrage at the fact that the ANC elite is becoming even richer,
while shack settlements expand on the fringes of our cities.

The President himself has acknowledged that the ANC is in danger of
becoming an ignoble, bloodsucking and corrupt parasite. And has there been
a more disgusting sight this year than the pictures of that Fabiani-clad
failed revolutionary, Tony Yengeni, being carried into prison as a hero by
senior members of the ANC?

Listen to Thobeka Mesalane, who wrote in the Cape Times this morning: “From
what I see, all the new democracy has achieved is to swop one uncaring self-
enriching elite for another.” Any sign of ostentatious wealth among the ANC
elite has become a matter of enormous public interest, fairly or unfairly.
Perhaps that is why 40 journalists fell over themselves and each other to
catch a glimpse of the President’s retirement home, which reportedly cost
between R8 million and R22 million. Presumably, they thought their
consumers would be interested.


                          PUBLIC SPENDING ON CRIME


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Madam Deputy Chair, it is shocking to learn that a
total of R90 billion is spent every year on protecting our citizens from
crime. Of this amount, the government spends about half on the Police
Service, the courts, the prisons and other security services.

However, private citizens spend an equal amount - about R45 billion - on
private security to protect themselves against crime. If one adds the
additional cost to citizens, such as insurance against loss resulting from
crime, it is clear that the public is spending much more on crime than the
government. This forces us to ask the question: Is this situation normal;
is it normal for any society in the world for the public to outspend the
government in dealing with crime?

We also have to question whether the government is serious about crime if
it is outspent by the public, which appear to be very serious about crime
if one takes into account the amount of money they put into security. The
sad fact is that although we spend such a massive amount on security, crime
levels are not really coming down fast enough, but appear to just fluctuate
between different types of crime.

When vehicle theft figures come down, vehicle hijacking increases. When
housebreaking crimes decrease, armed robbery in residential areas
increases. We therefore have to ask whether the government is doing enough
about crime and whether its efforts are having an effect on reducing the
crime level. Thank you.


                   UN GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY ASSEMBLY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs J CHALMERS (ANC): Chair, last week South Africa successfully hosted the
third Global Environment Facility - the GEF - Assembly, in Cape Town. Not
only did we demonstrate our ability to host major international events, but
this event also contributed an estimated R16,3 million to the national
economy. The international donor community have shown their continued
support: 32 countries have pledged to contribute US$3,13 billion, which
will be dedicated to environmental projects over the next four years.

The GEF was established 15 years ago and its projects address six complex
environmental issues: biodiversity, climate change, international waters,
land degradation, the ozone layer, and persistent organic pollutants.

South Africa is putting GEF funds to use in projects such as the Maluti-
Drakensberg Transfrontier Conservation Area, which is receiving US$15
million, and the Greater Addo Elephant National Park Project, which is
receiving US$5,8 million.
The ANC endorses the call made by delegates from developing countries for
more resources to be dedicated to the implementation of multilateral
environmental agreements, and that these are managed and allocated in a
more equitable manner. [Applause.]

                     TRAGEDIES IN EASTERN CAPE HOSPITALS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J BICI (UDM): Madam Chair, the UDM brings to the attention of this House
the horrific incident that unfolded at the beginning of August at the
Madwaleni Hospital in the Eastern Cape. Olwethu Mabelane, a nine-month-
pregnant teenager, was admitted on 2 August. Apparently a nurse placed a
heater close to her bed and her blanket must have fallen down. The
resultant flames engulfed the bed and the young woman and her unborn baby
were burnt to death. Apparently the nursing staff didn’t even hear the
screams of this lady.

We cannot help but compare this to the recent tragedy that unfolded at
another Eastern Cape hospital, the Cecilia Makiwane Hospital, where four
babies died. What is happening in our hospitals, especially in the Eastern
Cape? When is the national government going to intervene? Exactly how many
people must die before serious interventions are undertaken? It is
unacceptable that in this day and age our expectant mothers and newborn
babies should be exposed to danger and death in government facilities.
Thank you.

                YOUTH BRANCH OF FF PLUS AT TSHWANE UNIVERSITY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr W D SPIES (VF PLUS): Mev die Voorsitter, verlede maand het die VF Plus
daarin geslaag om 87% van die studenteraadsetels by die Universiteit van
die Vrystaat te wen. Sedertdien het die party ook gepoog om ’n tak te stig
op die kampus van die Tshwane-universiteit van Tegnologie. Die ANC-Sasco-
beheerde studenteraad by die betrokke kampus weier egter om die VF Plus se
tak te erken, en dit ten spyte van eindelose pogings vanaf ons jeuglede om
die ewig verskuiwende doelpale te haal.

Waarom word hierdie pogings gedwarsboom? Wat het van die grondwetlike reg
geword van alle Suid-Afrikaners om te organiseer en te assosieer? Dit sal
jammer wees as gebeure soos hierdie ’n voorbeeld begin raak van ANC-optrede
wanneer sy magsposisie bedreig word. Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans
member’s statement follows.)

[Mr W D SPIES (FF PLUS): Madam Speaker, last month the FF Plus succeeded in
winning 87% of the Students’ Representative Council (SRC) seats at the
University of the Free State. Since then the party has also attempted to
open a branch at the campus of the Tshwane University of Technology.
However, the ANC/Sasco-controlled SRC at the campus concerned refuses to
recognize the FF Plus branch despite endless attempts by our youth members
to comply with the constantly shifting goal posts.

Why are these attempts being stymied? What has become of the constitutional
right of all South Africans to organise and to associate? It would be
deplorable if events like these were to become an example of how the ANC
reacts when its power is under threat. Thank you.]




                        CONSUMER EDUCATION IN TSHWANE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D C MABENA (ANC): Chairperson, from 1 April 2006 to 30 June 2006
consumer education workshops were conducted at Mabopane Unit R,
Olievenhoutbosch, Eesterus and Soshanguve Extension 2.

The consumer education programme was facilitated by the City of Tshwane
Sales Administration and Housing Transfer Section. Beneficiaries were
informed about the value of title deeds as part of the effort to protect
the public from unscrupulous operators in the market. The workshop also
dealt with the importance of the safekeeping of title deeds, and the
implications of illegal occupations.

We commend the ANC-led government on its broad-ranging efforts to improve
the quality of life of all our people. I thank you. [Applause.]


                     SERVICE DELIVERY BY MUNICIPALITIES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N T GODI (PAC): Chair, the PAC recognises the critical role of local
government in service delivery to the people. The PAC, however, wishes to
raise its concern about the slow pace of capacitation or response to rescue
measures. Too many of our municipalities are not running their affairs
properly, to say the least. The Auditor-General is reported in today’s
media as having slammed the lack of key attributes of good governance, that
is accountability and transparency, in an unacceptably high number of
municipalities.

The PAC would like to make a call on the Department of Provincial and Local
Government as well as on Salga to intensify their programmes to capacitate
municipalities, so that they can be equal to their enormous
responsibilities. We also make a call on both elected councillors and
council employees to be conscientious and patriotic in their work. Service
delivery to the people is a political imperative that should not be
compromised. Thank you.


                           PARLIAMENTARY OVERSIGHT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S E OPPERMAN (DA): Madam Chair, oversight by parliamentarians is not
optional.
Die bewerings wat in Noseweek gemaak is omtrent die President se aftreehuis
was nie die enigste bewering wat in die uitgawe gemaak is nie. Oor ’n ander
bewering in dieselfde uitgawe wat handel oor ongemagtigde grondverkope deur
dieselfde departement sal ook vrae gestel word. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[The allegations made in Noseweek concerning the President’s retirement
home were not the only allegations made in that issue. Questions will also
be asked about an allegation in the same issue that deals with the
unauthorised sale of land by the same department.]

During the Budget Vote debate on Public Works on 29 March 2006, I said:

  The wake-up call by the Minister of Finance during the Appropriation Bill
  debate that Members of Parliament must take up their oversight role was,
  although long overdue, a challenge that cannot be ignored.

“We must not be afraid,” he said, “to ask the necessary questions”.

Reguit vrae waarop reguit antwoorde verwag word. [Straight questions to
which straight answers are expected.]

There is another debate this afternoon in this House on Satyagraha:
insistence on truth.

Dit is presies wat ons sal doen, nou en in die toekoms. [That is exactly
what we’ll do, now and in the future.]

We will perform our oversight role now as we did in the past, and we will
do in the future without fear or favour. Thank you. [Applause.]


                   SMUGGLING OF CIGARETTES IN SOUTH AFRICA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms A VAN WYK  (ANC): Madam Chairperson, recently the SA Revenue Service,
the SA Police Service and the National Intelligence Service mounted a joint
operation aimed at crushing a cigarette smuggling syndicate in Tshwane. The
suspects used two trucks to smuggle in R15 million worth of cigarettes from
Botswana to South Africa. The consignment was off-loaded into a warehouse
near Tshwane and, in the process, the authorities pounced and busted 10
alleged members of an international syndicate and charged them with
smuggling. Most of the suspects were caught red-handed late on the Sunday
evening.

This success came after months of monitoring and investigations, and
finally, on 24 August information was received indicating when the
consignment would be delivered in the country. The success of this
operation demonstrates the ANC government’s commitment to eradicating
organised crime. [Applause.]

                 WATER SUPPLY CUT OFF IN INFORMAL SETTLEMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M W SIBUYANA (IFP): Madam Chair, hon members, water is a basic need and
without it we cannot function effectively. I was shocked therefore to read
that residents of the Chris Hani section of Soshanguve had the water supply
to their communal taps cut off for three weeks. Apparently, this was done
without warning or support from the local council. About 1 000 households
were affected and people had to walk long distances to use the communal
taps in other sections of the informal settlement.

We in the IFP think that it is totally unacceptable that these people were
forced to suffer without water for such a long period of time. The council
should have given the residents prior notice of their water supply being
cut off and also should have made alternative arrangements for water to be
supplied to the affected community. [Time expired.]

            ENERGY POLICY FOCUSED ON PROVISION OF ENERGY SERVICES

                            (Member’s Statement)
Ms N F MATHIBELA (ANC): Madam Chairperson, the ANC-led government’s energy
policy concentrates on the provision of energy services to meet the basic
needs associated with community services, such as schools and clinics.

Eskom plans to build a new power station in Lephalale in Limpopo’s
Waterberg District, which contains 50% of South Africa’s coal deposits.
This investment is set to change the economic face of the district. The
electricity utility is set to invest an amount of R26 million. Eskom, in
its projection, expects that electricity demand will surge as a result of
the government’s Asgisa – the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for
South Africa - target of above 6% economic growth between 2010 and 2014.

This and other initiatives demonstrate the commitment of the ANC to putting
the final nail in the coffin of the practice of using the countryside as a
dumping ground, where rural people are subjected to poverty and abuse and
denied their citizenship and dignity. I thank you.

                      PROGRAMMING OF DEBATE ON ZIMBABWE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M J ELLIS (DA): Madam Chair, this Parliament sent an observation team to
monitor the last general election in our neighbouring Zimbabwe. The team,
upon their return, drew up a report on their findings, which was supposed
to have been debated in the National Assembly.

But two years later there is still no sign of this debate, a debate which,
quite frankly, is a matter of regional and national importance. One can
only guess why that debate did not take place, but then, again, it is not
too difficult, I am sure, to find the answer.

However, it took this Parliament less than four days to clear space in the
programme for a debate on the DA’s visit to the President’s retirement home
in Johannesburg. Let me make it clear: the DA visited the house because the
taxpayer has a right to know how and how much of its money is being spent
for state purposes. So the question has to be asked: How is it that we can
find time to slam the DA, but no time to debate issues which really affect
South Africa? Thank you.

                      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY CONFERENCE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms B T NGCOBO (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC is committed to addressing the
historical distortions in our human resources in science and technology to
support innovations in the context of economic growth.
Over the past weekend the Presidential International Advisory Council on
Information Society and Development met in Mpumalanga. Amongst other
things, the council noted that the country was still short of ICT skills
and that we needed a development programme that took into account local and
global imperatives. It further recognised that there were still many
untapped opportunities in rural and densely populated urban areas.

The council recommended to government, service providers and operators that
there was a need to look at innovative and cost-effective approaches to
expand connectivity in rural areas. The ANC urges all role-players in this
field of ICT to join forces with the government in implementing ICT
development programmes. I thank you. [Applause.]

                   AID FOR FLOOD VICTIMS IN PORT ELIZABETH

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M JOHNSON (ANC): Chair, the ANC welcomes the joint announcement by the
Housing Minister, Lindiwe Sisulu; the Eastern Cape MEC for Housing, Local
Government and Traditional Affairs, Sam Kwelita; and the Mayor of Nelson
Mandela Bay, Nondumiso Maphazi; that funds had been stretched far to
provide relief to communities affected by the recent floods. An amount of
R74 million has been set aside to fast-track the accommodation of families
affected by the flooding, who are living under stressful conditions. The
funds will be used for the relocation of flood victims and the provision of
new infrastructure.

An audit of the storm-damaged and defective houses has been completed, and
business plans have been submitted to the provincial housing department for
consideration and subsequent approval. This announcement comes as a big
relief to the affected communities in the Veeplaas and Soweto-on-Sea areas
who suffered major setbacks as a result of extensive damage to their
properties. Thank you, Chair.

                          OVERSIGHT ROLE OF MEMBERS
    STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS ON THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE
                            PRESIDENT’S RESIDENCE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Deputy Chair, I would like to respond to
three of the statements by members of the DA, starting with the one by the
hon Opperman. Let me re-state the responsibility of Parliament to its
oversight responsibilities. But that oversight responsibility, I believe,
fundamentally carries with it the responsibility for members or their
committees to be informed of circumstances. And as with everything, more
than one source of information is vital to be informed in the process.

The unfortunate rag you quote as your source has no intention of informing
the populist or people who are silly enough to buy it. It wants to stir
trouble. If that is your only source of information, you are misleading
yourself and consequently run the risk of misleading Parliament. That is
not an oversight responsibility. That is being the puppet in the hands of
somebody pulling the strings.

So, I want to encourage you and every member of this House to take
seriously your oversight responsibility, not merely to mouth off what
others have written without any intention to tell the truth. But you have
paid for the untruths. You’ve paid for the untruths. Now, use your
intelligence to filter between that and what needs to happen in the course
of oversight. Don’t do yourself or your party or those who elected you a
disservice. That is the fundamental problem with what has transpired here.

This goes also to the hon Morgan. Of course, he doesn’t want this House to
discuss the issues because part of the problem here is that the DA have
just taken “’n groot klap” from every party in this House who are saying to
them you’ve acted wrongly, you’ve been singly out of order and the hon
Gibson should be censured for his poor conduct.

That is the issue before us. The DA thought that they would generate
support, but there is no support for that because there is respect for the
President and government and a general view in this country that you’ve
acted out of order. So, no matter how many times you conjure up that source
of information, every time you do it, you will do truth and honesty a
disservice.

On the other point, if he were interested – I’m not sure if he were
interested - I can provide hon Morgan with a series of references that deal
with societies and transition where inequality happens. In a country like
South Africa, where black aspirations were suppressed in the way that they
were, where black people were prevented from owning businesses in an early
democracy, those effects of suppression would be marked by inequality. But
unequal societies are all over the world and probably one of the most
unequal societies presently is a country like China. But you need to be
informed about this, and not use it merely to try cheap politic because you
saw what happened to the hon Gibson this afternoon.

Turning to the hon Ellis: unfortunately, he got into the ring, jaw first
and with hands behind the back – no defence, no cover. He thought that
somebody would suddenly feel sorry for him because everybody was pummelling
him, because he’s behaved like a complete oath and a buffoon. That’s the
issue at hand. There is no R22 million. What that despicable rag did was a
lie. It did disservice to you and by merely following it unquestioningly
you’ve done all of your supporters a disservice. Thank you very much.




              SPENDING ON SECURITY BY GOVERNMENT TO FIGHT CRIME


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Madam Chair, let me just say that you can
flog a dead horse and flog it again and again, that dead horse will remain
dead. I just hope that the DA understands that.

I want to respond to the hon member from the IFP on the issue of crime. We
are all agreed that all of us have to do something about dealing with the
issue of crime. So, my only appeal to the hon member is that it won’t help
to party politic over this issue. What is clear is that the executive, the
legislatures, local municipalities, civil society structures, business,
religious organisations and all of us have an equal responsibility to work
and act in partnership so that we can deal with the issues of crime, and
deal with them in a way in which all of our people, wherever they are
living, feel safe. So, I invite the hon member to come and join all of us
so that we act together to deal with the issue of crime. Thank very much.




                       FIREARMS CONTROL AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Second Reading Debate)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you, Madam Chair and hon
members. One of the debates that has been polarised in South Africa is the
matter of gun ownership and the prerequisites to control such possessions,
hence today we are dealing with the second amendment of the Firearms
Control Bill.

Whatever the arguments are, there are certain truths that should be obvious
to anyone, irrespective of the side they occupy in the debate. The first is
that many of our people die from gunshots and figures of such deaths stand
in the thousands every year. In fact, firearms account for more than 50% of
murders in South Africa. It is also a fact that some of the firearms that
are used in the murders and other violent crimes were once upon a time
legally owned, but that they slipped from the hands of the legal owners
into those of criminals, either because the owners were robbed or they lost
their firearms.

Every year, an average of 20 000 legal guns fall into wrong hands and
become illegal in South Africa, when the owners lose them. Of course, one
is not suggesting that it is only those guns that constitute the pool of
illegal weapons in circulation in South Africa. There are other sources
that feed into the illegal pool, including guns that are smuggled into the
country from other territories.

The link between the easy accessibility of firearms and the gun violence
and death has been proved by many studies that have been conducted on the
matter.

Our country is among a number of other international countries that are
defining regulations to impose strict gun control laws as a means to curb
gun violence. In fact, firearms regulations are becoming the order of the
day rather than exceptions in many corners of the world, including on the
African continent.

There are stricter gun laws across the globe than is the case in South
Africa. I suppose that this has to do with the fact that ours is a new
democracy and for many decades in the past we were at war with ourselves
and firearms had a place in that war. But, the matter of firearms is very
complicated and even older democracies keep on reviewing the laws for
better gun control.

Self-contained air cartridge guns were banned as recently as the beginning
of 2004 in the United Kingdom because such weapons can be easily converted
to shoot live ammunition. Anyone needing to possess such guns needs a
licence to do so. Handguns and revolvers are classified as restricted
weapons in countries like Canada.

The Southern African Regional Police Chiefs Co-operation drafted a firearms
protocol for SADC that was adopted in 2001 by the SADC heads of state in
August last year. That protocol on firearms raised the following, among
others: strengthening the nations’ gun control measures, registering
firearms in proper books of accounts, collection and destruction of surplus
or confiscated firearms and stricter law enforcement. The South African
Police Service’s police chiefs are members of Southern African Regional
Police Chiefs Co-operation Organisation and were part of the deliberations
that produced the draft protocol on firearms.

It is instructive, of course, to understand the feeling of the Sapcco
conference on the matter of gun ownership as enunciated in the Nadi Legal
Framework for Common Approach to Weapons Control; which was signed in Nadi,
Fiji, on 10 March 2000. The following was recorded: “The possession and use
of firearms, ammunition and related material is a privilege that is
conditional on the overriding need to ensure public safety and improving
public safety by imposing strict controls on the possession and use of
firearms, ammunition and other related materials and prohibited materials.”

We are also influenced in our approach to gun ownership by the overriding
need to ensure public safety. Irresponsible gun ownership does not
guarantee safety at home or in public, hence the desire for responsible gun
ownership. It goes without saying that illegal guns are a primary target
and any programme to ensure public safety, hence the many raids the police
have conducted in the past looking for, and confiscating such illegal
weapons.

The Firearms Control Amendment Bill of 2006, which we are tabling today, is
the response to the experience many police officials, gun owners and other
stakeholders in the firearms industry have amassed in the context of the
implementation of the Firearms Control Act of 2000.

We initiated consultation with the stakeholders and exercised leniency in
many respects when it was necessary to enforce certain aspects of the law.

That consultation will continue to be a feature of our gun control exercise
and suggestions that are cogent and relevant, will always be accommodated
in the work that we are doing, including any necessary amendments to the
laws in future.

On behalf of the Minister, the Ministry and the South African Police
Service, we would like to register appreciation to all those who
participated in the public hearings that were held in respect of these
Bills. We appreciate the role played by Parliament in this, particularly
the role played by other relevant parliamentary committees.

Our teams from the South African Police Service and the Ministry that were
involved in the drafting of the Bill, together with personnel from Justice
and Constitutional Development, played a pivotal role in bringing the Bill
to Parliament. We want to say to everybody: well done! We hope this will be
accepted by everybody. Thank you.

Ms M M SOTYU: Chairperson, the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa
states that the NA must provide for mechanisms to maintain oversight of the
exercise of national executive authority, including the implementation of
legislation and any organ of state. The firearm control legislation intends
to vigorously address the proliferation of illegal firearms, as well as to
control legally owned firearms in South Africa.

Chairperson, let me take this opportunity and pay tribute to those police
officers who were brutally murdered through the barrel of a gun while
protecting you, myself, your property, as well as the state. Legal firearms
can be very dangerous in the hands of an incompetent individual. It is of
utmost importance to note that although the South African Police Services
already achieved various successes in the implementation of the Firearms
Control Act in the short term, the aim of the successful implementation of
the legislation, including the control of legally owned firearms, is
focused on the long term.

Sihlalo, sithe siyikomiti xa besisenza ukhenketho kumaphondo onke saphawula
ukuba ubunzima busekhona kwamanye amaphondo malunga nendlela ekuhanjiswa
ngayo lo Mthetho. [Chairperson, when the committee visited all the
provinces, we noticed that there were still problems that other provinces
were encountering with regard to the implementation of legislation.]

This was identified, among other things, by the slow processing of
applications for licenses, competency certificates, etc. We commend the
Ministry and the Minister for initiating these amendments to the Act. These
amendments came as a result of consultation between the Minister and the
stakeholders, as the Deputy Minister has highlighted. This is an
indication, contrary to sensational views, that the ANC wants workable and
implementable legislation resulting in responsible firearm owners.

Sithanda ukubulela yonke imibutho nabantu abathe xa besiva ikhwelo basabela
ngendlela engumangaliso. Nto leyo ebonisa ukuba uluntu ngokubanzi
lulukhathalele ukhuselo lommi ngamnye welizwe lethu loMzantsi Afrika. Sikwa
mema wonke ubani ukuba eze kule komiti size kuva olwakhe uluvo.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[We would like to thank all the parties and people who demonstrated
tremendous interest in this legislation. This illustrates that everyone in
this country cares about the security of every citizen of South Africa. We
invite everybody to come and attend the committee meetings in order to air
their views on this matter.]

Chairperson, the committee received more than 160 submissions from
individuals, churches, organisations and institutions. As a result we
invited oral representation by groups that in general represent the
different views. I notice that some of them are here, and Gun Free South
Africa is among those that did very well in the public hearings. Enough
time was given to committee members to deliberate on the submissions, both
written and oral.

Kuzo zonke ezo ntsuku zine siye saphulaphula ngomdla okhulu xa le mibutho
izama ukusibonisa indlela emasiwuphicothe ngayo lo mba. Kunjalo nje
siyabathembisa ukuba zonke ezo zinto siya kuzithabathela ingqalelo.
Sisabacenga abo bantu basahleli nemipu engekho mthethweni Tat’uNdlovu,
kunye nabo abanesemthethweni kodwa bengayisebenzisi ukuba bayibuyisele
emapoliseni ukuze itshatyalaliswe. Abantu abaninzi ababulawa ngokudutyulwa
babulawa ngemipu esemthethweni, akakho urhulumente ophilileyo onokuthi
ebona ukuba abemi belizwe abakwazi ukuphatha imipu ngendlela eyiyo asonge
izandla, ibe ngathi akukho nto yenzekayo. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraph follows.)

[In all those four days we listened with interest when the parties were
giving advice on how to deal with this issue. We promise that whatever was
raised will be considerred accordingly. We still plead with those people
who possess illegal guns, hon Ndlovu, including those who own them legally
but are not using them, to return the guns to the police in order for them
to be destroyed. Legal guns are used to murder many people who die of
gunshots. There is no government in any good state that can fold its arms
while its citizens do not handle guns responsibly –as if everything is
well, when in fact it is not.]

The ANC is of the opinion that the final amendment Bill is balanced in its
approach. It is in no way weakening the original objective of the Act. If
implemented properly it will streamline the implementation of the Act
considerably. And it also goes a long way to disperse of the notion that
the ANC government wants to disarm legal firearm owners. Through
interaction with the department, the role of the safety and security Seta
was revisited with regards to the issuing of competency certificates. This
Seta will no longer issue the actual certificate, but will merely accredit
training institutions, which will issue the certificates themselves. This
will shorten the process by as much as six months.

Kule mibutho ingafuni kuxhasa eli nyathelo sithi, khake nicinge kwakhona
bantu bakuthi, sithetha ngemipu apha, asithethi ngezikhwebu zombona.
Kunjalo nje njengokuba senditshilo asizami kuxutha imipu ebantwini abanayo
ngokusemthethweni nabayisebenzisa ngengqiqo. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraph follows.)

[We say to those parties that do not support this measure, please think
again. We are talking about guns here and not mieliecobs. Furthermore, we
are not trying to confiscate legally owned guns that are used with
conscience.]

Chairperson, in conclusion I would like to thank the department’s legal
team led by Dr Philip Jacobs, the Ministry led by Divisional Commissioner
Makhubela, and the members of the Portfolio Committee on Safety and
Security. Thank you for the amazing commitment and the support that you
gave me. I want to thank you Mr Ndlovu and Mr Mfundisi. I appreciate it.
[Applause.]

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Chairperson, among all countries not currently in a
state of war, South Africa records the second highest number of gun deaths
per year. The ANC’s response to this situation was to replace the Arms and
Ammunition Act with the Firearms Control Act of 2000. Such was the uproar
caused that it was only implemented in 2004 with the stated objectives of
regulating the possession, use and trade in firearms. The truth is that it
was finessed through Parliament in a manner not seen since National Party
days with little or no regard to the Constitution in relation to
discrimination or property rights or indeed the right or ability of the
police to administer the gun laws, to conduct warrantless searches or to
arbitrarily declare an existing license to be invalid.

The Act, which introduced strict screening and licensing procedures for all
current and potential gun owners, drew widespread criticism from many
sectors of society who, quite rightly, saw it as a draconian piece of
legislation aimed at disarming legal gun owners. It achieved little but ran
up multimillion rand bills, as with similar experiments conducted
unsuccessfully in Canada. It failed to reduce gun deaths, proved to be
unworkable, overly complex, and has to date put legal gun owners on the
verge of being declared criminals.

On the other hand, as far as the criminals are concerned, not one of them
stood in the endless queues to obtain one of the endless certificates
needed before applying for the license. They continue to shoot their way to
wealth. Police were pulled off the beat to tackle the enormous paperwork
backlog. The criminals with their guns were no longer the focus, but indeed
legal gun owners, dealers, collectors and hunters became their prime
target. So shoddy and unworkable was the legislation that the Safety and
Security Portfolio Committee had a go at amending it, but with the best
will in the world, it still cannot be implemented.

There are several reasons why the Firearm Control Act, in its original
form, met then with such heavy criticism, and why the proposed amendments
still do. Firstly, the Act targeted legal firearm owners but did not
address the millions of illegal firearms that remain in the hands of the
criminals. The weapons most commonly used in robberies and cash heists are
AK 47s, R4 and R5 assault rifles - none of which ordinary members of the
public own. It smacks of the absurd. If one can’t catch the criminals, then
turn the law-abiding citizens into criminals, catch them and boost your
conviction rate just in time for the annual crime statistics release fest.

The Act did what many believe it is set out to do, and that is to disarm
law-abiding citizens. Many were terrified by a threatening radio
advertisement campaign and rushed to give police family heirlooms for which
they received zero compensation. Coupled with a disbandment of the commando
system, our rural citizenry have consequently never been as vulnerable to
attack by criminals. Dozens of brutal farm killings and assaults all over
the past two months, many on elderly rural dwellers, illustrate this dire
problem.

The cost of training and licensing make keeping a gun unaffordable for many
people, especially pensioners who are the ones most vulnerable to attack.
Secondly, the Act, in its previous incarnation and certainly in this one,
had and will continue to have a negative impact on important business
activities, which contribute significantly to South Africa’s economy.

It is unbelievable that the Minister did not bother to carry out an
assessment of the possible economic impact of the Act before implementing
it. Hundreds of firearm dealers and gunsmiths went bankrupt, and the film
industry, professional hunting and the private security industries suffered
with business closures and job losses experienced across the board.  In the
tourism and trophy hunting industry this country is now losing out to
Botswana and Zambia, as hunters are finding the endless bureaucracy just
too irritating to have to deal with.

Finally, the Act gave the SAPS a huge administrative burden, which diverted
them from the real work of crime prevention. An average of 625 000
individuals were expected to renew 900 000 firearm licenses every year
between 2005 and 2008. By the end of last year it was clear that not even a
fraction of the targeted renewals had been met, largely because the
Minister launched the Act before anyone was ready to deal with its
convoluted provisions.

Today such is the administrative burden that thousands of applications are
rejected with the flimsiest of excuses. Our Olympic shotists were refused
licenses; women are refused licences and told that their husbands must
protect them; nonhunters refused because they do not hunt, nonbusiness
owners refused because they do not give details of their businesses.
Indeed, the excuses given for refusing to renew or grant licences belong in
a Monty Python skit.

The portfolio committee has attempted to speed up the process -although
there are no explanations given as to why so many thousands of people are
being rejected for licences. Yes, we had one member ignoring all evidence
to the contrary, and informing us that all silencers were used in
assassinations and must be banned, but on the whole, a huge effort was made
to stay away from James Bond plots and attempt to unravel, and then re-knit
basically unworkable legislation. One Police Commissioner actually came
before the portfolio committee and stated that it took six to eight weeks
for a gun licence to be processed. That is utter rot, because there is a
gaping credibility between that claim and the presentations that stated
that it takes over a year - if it is approved at all.

The Black Gun Owners Association says it is preparing to take the Minister
to court, because its members are being refused licences en masse. They
suggest, quite correctly I think, that this country is merely bowing to UN
pressure to totally disarm civilians with zero acknowledgement of this
country’s rampant crime, coupled with an ineffective police force. Now
valid gun licences will cease to be so on 30 June 2009.

Meanwhile the criminals continue to terrorise us at every turn, our police
force is hamstrung by ineffective management and once again law-abiding
citizens are having draconian legislation foist upon them in order to
control yet another facet of their law-abiding lives. No, the DA will
certainly not support this legislation. [Applause.]

Mr V B NDLOVU: Madam Chairperson, the amending Bill before the House today
will, in all probability, be the first of numerous amending Bills to the
principal Firearms Control Act of 2000, in order to correct oversight
mistakes and general problems picked up during the first period of
operation of the Act.
The track record of implementing this Act must be one of the most
controversial on record. Herein lie two important lessons for this
honourable House. The first one is that you don’t create legislation that
cannot be implemented practically, considering the resources and the
capacity of the state. The second one is that you have to be aware of
passing legislation before a thorough investigation into its consequences
and implementability has been conducted.

The IFP welcomes the fact that silencers will henceforth be considered as a
“firearm part” and as such may be declared unlawful. A silencer is an
assassin’s tool, and free access to and use of such devices will be
outlawed to the fullest extent allowed by the law.

The IFP welcomes the fact that the Bill provides for shorter time periods
applicable to the processing of licenses and renewals. The fact that a
window of a maximum of 30 days is now built into the process for
representation to the Registrar will, in our opinion, lead to a quicker
process and will help to clear the logjam and backlog.

Most of all, the IFP welcomes the new provision that the applications for
competency certificates and licences to possess firearms will be suspended
when the applicant is the subject of a temporary protection order in terms
of the Domestic Violence Act of 1998. It is a fact that women and children
bear the brunt of domestic violence in South Africa, and the inclusion of
this provision will add to measures to protect them from domestic violence.
It is also an example of how legislation must be co-ordinated and
integrated in closely related facets of society, as has been done with
firearms and domestic violence. We applaud the forward-looking and the
anticipatory nature of this new Bill.

Sicabanga ukuthi kufuneka kuqashelwe ukuthi izithulisamsimdo akufuneki
zinikezwe noma ubani. Siyakuncoma futhi ukuthi uMthethosivivinywa lo
ophambi kwethu uthi izithulisamsindo yizona okufanele zihambisane
nezibhamu. Ngamanye amazwi umuntu ongenaso isibhamu esincane esifaka
isithulisamsindo akazukunikezwa isithulisamsindo leso uma esithenga.

Umuntu kufuneka aveze isithulisamsindo abuye aveze iphepha elimgunyaza
ukuba nesibhamu ukuze akwazi ukucosha isithulisamsindo esifanele. Phela
siyakugcizelela thina beNkatha Yenkululeko ukuthi isithulisamsindo
siyingozi kakhulu ngoba uma sike sawela ezandleni zomuntu odakwa ngehora le-
10 ekuseni, kungaba yingozi uma sekushaya ihora lesithupha ntambama ngoba
angabulala abantu abaningi ngesithulisamsindo.

Isithulisamsindo siyingozi ikakhulukazi emindenini ngoba abantu abaningi
bavikelwa ukuthi uma omakhelwane beke bezwa isibhamu sikhala baye baphume
bayolekelela lapho bezwe kukhala khona isibhamu. Kodwa uma ngabe kukhona
isithulisamsindo kuzoba yingozi ngoba ngeke kuzwakale lutho, kobonakala
umndeni nje usuphele wonke kulowo muzi kanti kwenziwa ukuthi kukhona
isithulisamsindo. Ngakho kuyoba ngcono uma isithulisamsindo sihambelana
nokuthi kunesibhamu esifanele esisemthethweni, ukuze kuvinjwe ukuthi
kungabi khona abantu abanezithulisamsindo ngokungafanele.

Ngiphakamisa ukuncoma usihlalo ngoba ngicabanga ukuthi uwanikile amalungu
ekomiti lonke ukuthi akhulume aze aphelelwe amathe, ekhuluma ngalo
Mthethosivivinywa. Umuntu ukhuluma aze aphelelwe amathe, aze aswele nokuthi
yini okunye angakusho ngoba isikhathi sisuke sikhona.

Ngicabanga ukuthi konke bakwenze njengoba kufanele. Futhi ngicabanga ukuthi
uma lo Mthethosivivinywa ususemthethweni uyosebenza ngokuthi ukwazi ukusiza
abantu, kuthi nalabo abahluphekayo abaye babone sengathi bathathelwa
izibhamu masinyane bakwazi ukuthi basheshe bathole amaphepha abagunyazayo
ukuze bakwazi ukuphila.

Sibonga kakhulu-ke kusihlalo. Naye ungibongile, nami sengithi-ke  angimbonge
ukuze ngikwazi ukuphindela esihlalweni sami  sokuba  ilungu  laleli  komiti,
ngokubonga  usihlalo.  Ngiyathokoza.  (Translation  of  isiZulu   paragraphs
follows.)

[We believe that it is necessary that great care is taken in the issuing  of
silencers because they are not supposed to  be  given  to  anyone.  We  also
welcome that the Bill tabled before us, states that  a  silencer  should  be
licensed together with a firearm. In other  words  a  person  who  does  not
possess a firearm cannot be sold a silencer.

A person should present a silencer as well as his gun licence to be able  to
choose an appropriate silencer. We,  the  Inkatha  Freedom  Party  emphasize
that a silencer is a dangerous thing and it should not fall into  the  wrong
hands. And you can imagine what would happen if  such  a  thing  is  at  the
reach of someone who gets drunk as  early  as  10h00  in  the  morning.  And
surely that person would have already passed out by  18h00  and  might  even
massacre the people with a silencer.

A silencer is dangerous, especially within families because most people  are
saved by neighbours who, on hearing gun shots, would normally come  out  and
head towards where shots had been fired in order to assist. Whereas  with  a
silencer, it is difficult as shots cannot be  heard.  With  a  silencer  the
only wake-up call is when the whole family has  been  massacred.  Therefore,
it would be better if a silencer is issued on the availability of  a  lawful
firearm so as to stop the unlawful possession of silencers.

I commend the chairperson of the committee because I think  enough  platform
was given to all the members of the committee to deliberate  fully  on  this
Bill. Each member was given a fair chance and some members  would  even  run
out of words because there was abundant time.

I think they have done everything as expected.  I  also  think  that  should
this Bill be passed and be made a law, it  will  help  the  people  a  great
deal, and those who feel intimidated when guns get confiscated  can  quickly
get licences then they can be able to live.

We are very grateful to the  chairperson  of  the  portfolio  committee.  He
thanked me first and that is why I now return  the  favour  and  I  hope  my
thanking of the  chairperson  secures  my  position  as  a  member  of  this
committee. Thank you.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairperson, the fact that the ACDP voted against the
Firearms Control Act of 2000 does not necessitate the rejection of the
amendments we are debating today. Our support for these amendments should
not in any way be seen as a contradiction of our firm belief that citizens
have a God-given right to defend themselves against criminals in whatever
way they choose, including by using a licensed firearm.

Having said that, we don’t believe that citizens need silencers to defend
themselves. A serious problem we had, and which was raised in the
committee, was what amounted to giving firearm-licensed owners an automatic
right to be in possession of a silencer. Now that our concern has been
addressed by limiting the acquisition and use of silencers to mainly that
of hunting, and that silencers may only be sold by a dealer who would
report the sale and purchase of a silencer to the Registrar on a monthly
basis, the ACDP will support this amending Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M S MOATSHE: Deputy Chairperson, Deputy Minister and Members of
Parliament, the Bill amends the Firearms Control Act, Act 60 of 2000. The
Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security received approximately 160
written submissions from the public on the amendment of the Bill.

The committee approved the amendment of the definition of muzzle-loaders to
correctly reflect the characteristics of these firearms, and the continued
exclusion of cap and ball revolvers from this definition. This will entail
that owners of cap and ball revolvers must now obtain a competency
certificate and a licence for these firearms. Owners of muzzle-loaders will
only need to apply for a competency certificate and not a licence for these
firearms.

A separate competency certificate is required for muzzle-loaders. In other
words, because a muzzle-loading firearm works differently from a normal
firearm, a firearm owner cannot use a general firearm competency
certificate for this purpose, and he or she will need to be tested for
competency in using a muzzle-loader.

It was decided not to partially deregulate cap and ball revolvers, mainly
because in contrast to muzzle-loaders which can only fire one shot at a
time, cap and ball revolvers can fire six shots in succession, which makes
them extremely dangerous weapons in the wrong hands.

A number of amendments were made to the Act that disposed of the notion
that the aim was to discuss legal firearm owners. Some of the specific
amendments were adopted exactly to accommodate the needs of collectors,
professional hunters and businesses that deal with firearms. Amongst these
is a new category of competency certificates for private collectors of
firearms. This makes provision in the Act for a special category of
competency certificate for private collectors.

In addition, the committee, in the light of various public submissions,
decided to amend the provision, which required the SA Heritage Resources
Agency to certify all firearms in private collections. Instead, this agency
will now only be required to approve heritage firearms, and all other
firearms in collections can be approved by accredited collectors
associations who will make this approval based on a number of criteria,
such as historical technology, and cultural or artistic value.

The committee also inserted a definition of calibre applicable only to
collectors, which will enable them to collect cartridges of a variety of
types and makes. An amendment was effected that will extend the validity of
the following licences: Business as a game rancher in hunting, and business
other than game ranching and hunting, e.g. private security companies,
dealers, manufacturers and gunsmiths.

In the case of restricted and prohibited firearms in the possession of
collectors, provision is made for these weapons to be made inoperative with
the least damage possible to the value of the firearm. The restriction on
the number of shots that a semiautomatic shotgun may fire in succession in
respect of a dedicated hunter and sportsperson was removed. The need for
professional hunters to be accommodated was also taken on board and a
special category of licences was introduced.

In the principal Act, silencers were not regulated at all. But now, making
it part of the definition of silencer defined it as a firearm part. There
is a variety of functional uses for silencers such as hunting, culling and
training, and by defining it as a firearm part, it means that people can
continue to use silencers for these legitimate purposes, but no one can
possess a silencer on its own without a licensed firearm. Furthermore,
dealers will have to report on a monthly basis on the silencers that they
have sold to the Firearms Control Register.

Moreover, there is the insertion of a definition for “dispossession”, as
requested by a number of organisations during public hearings to clarify
the term “dispossession”. The term means to lose the firearm by means other
than theft, such as selling it or giving it away to another person. Other
issues debated by the committee included audit versus relicensing. It was
proposed by some submissions that, instead of a relicensing process for
existing firearms, an audit should be conducted, which included the
provision of competency testing. All firearms licensed under the repealed
Act should be retained. Notwithstanding problems in implementation, the
committee will not approve an audit rather than a relicensing process for
existing firearm owners. It would in a way reduce the administrative
burden, while weakening the principal Act.

Regarding domestic violence, many submissions argued that applications for
a competency certificate must be suspended when the applicant is the
subject of a temporary protection order under the Domestic Violence Act,
Act 116 of 1998.

The department has agreed that this is important, and even though provision
is made for this in the Domestic Violence Act, the firearms regulations
will be amended to ensure that the station commissioner must refer any
protection order or warrant of arrest related to domestic violence to the
designated firearms officer to check whether it relates to any pending
licence competency certificate permit.

People who failed in the past, and are still failing now because of being
immune to failure, said no to democracy and failed to stop democracy. They
said no to nonsexism and failed to stop affirmative action. They also said
no to a nonracial society and failed to stop a united nonracial society.

They will now say no to the Firearms Control Amendment Act, and will again
fail to stop what the President has said in the state of the nation
address, when he said strategies should be developed to reduce the number
of illegal firearms and improve the process of applications for firearm
licences. The ANC supports the Firearms Control Amendment Bill. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Mev die Voorsitter, ek wil begin om te sê dat as die
agb Minister van Veiligheid en Sekuriteit dieselfde passie en fokus aan die
dag lê soos met wettige vuurwapeneienaars en dit toepas op die misdadigers,
dan gaan misdaad verseker afneem in hierdie land. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Deel van die konsepwysigingsvoorstelle was dat wettige vuurwapeneienaars
hulle vuurwapenlisensies kon behou. Dit is jammer dat dit nie deurgevoer is
in die komitee nie, en ek sal by die agb Adjunkminister wil weet hoekom die
Kabinet besluit het om nie dié wysigings te aanvaar nie, want ek is van
mening dat as ons hierdie wysiging sou behou het dat wettige
vuurwapeneienaars hulle lisensie behou, ons verder in die toekoms baie pyne
sou kan uithaal ten opsigte van belastingbetalersgeld wat betaal sal moet
word as mense hulle vuurwapens gaan verloor as gevolg van die nuwe
wetgewing oor vuurwapens. Die huidige lisensies is geldig tot 30 Junie 2009
en daar is nog tyd om aan hierdie saak aandag te gee, en ons hoop ons sal.
Dankie, Voorsitter. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Madam Chairperson, I want to start by saying that if
the Minister of Safety and Security demonstrates the same passion and focus
as now with legal firearm owners and applies it to the criminals, then
crime will most certainly decrease in this country. [Interjections.]

A part of these draft amendment resolutions was that legal firearm owners
would retain their firearm licences. It is a pity that the committee did
not go through with it, and I would like to know from the hon Deputy
Minister why the Cabinet has decided not to accept these amendments,
because I am of the opinion that if we were to keep this amendment then
legal firearm owners would retain their licences, and we would have
eliminated many future problems pertaining to taxpayers’ money that would
have to be paid if people are going to lose their firearms as a result of
the new firearm legislation. The existing licences are valid until 30 June
2009 and there is still time to pay attention to this matter, and we hope
that we will. Thank you, Chairperson.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, in view of the horrific crime rate in South
Africa and the hundreds of lives lost through gun violence, the MF strongly
voices its support of a gun-free South Africa. However, reality is set in
that gun usage extends far beyond committing crime.

The Bill serves to address a number of concerns that hopefully will serve
to address and control gun usage, registration and responsibility. The MF
also supports the qualification of gun usage at the age of 25, in light of
maturity and control.

The clear definition that the Bill serves to address is important to ensure
that there are no loopholes for the abuse of gun usage. The MF calls on the
public at large to educate themselves on the usage of guns and to realise
the danger and the death in its use. We hope that this will end, that this
Bill shall not fall victim to corruption and that instead, its serious
application will assist in the plight against crime. The MF supports the
Bill. [Applause.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Madam Chairperson, judging from the crimes statistics it is
clear that the firearms control legislation has not achieved its goal of
eradicating firearms related crimes. This is because of the fact that the
rational behind the firearms control legislation is based on distorted
premises.

This government has the habit of formulating polices on populist notions,
and little regard for sound empirical investigation. Government has
developed the ability, as this legislation illustrates, to set up
investigations into such matters and then produce it as empirical after the
process of factual manipulation has been completed.

The recent Constitutional court judgement underlines this counter
productive modus operandi of government. Because of its refusal to give
genuine and serious consideration to the merits of submissions from the
other stakeholder, we will constantly produce legislation from this House
that is the product of a one party enforcement.
I thank you, Madam Chair. [Time expired.]

Ms A VAN WYK: Chairperson, firstly, I need to deal with statements that
were made by the hon Kohler-Barnard when she came to the podium. I think in
a way we need to be sympathetic as well, she is a new member on the
committee and she might not be up to date with what exactly happened. The
fact of the matter is that for years the implementation of the principal
Act was delayed. The reason why it was delayed was to give time for the
police to get the systems in place in order to deal with this.
[Interjections.] That is a fact and you know it!

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: They are still not in place.

Ms A VAN WYK: I also suggest that she look at the budget of the past few
years to see how much money was allocated in the budget for the
implementation of the Firearms Control Act. She stands here and tells us
that the economy has suffered because of this Act. Professional hunters
during the deliberation told us how much money they are generating for the
economy and not once complained that they are losing money.

It is also interesting to note that members of the SA Gunowners’
Association indicated to us that they believe that, prior to the Act, South
Africa had far too many firearm dealers in comparison to the number of
owners of firearms in this country and the population.

I would also like to know whether the hon member ever tried to calculate
what the cost to the country is when treating firearm wounds.

Hon Deputy Minister and members of the House, there are few pieces of
legislation that have gone through this House, that raised such varied
emotions when they were passed, as the Firearms Control Act. So, as it can
be expected, this situation will repeat itself yet again with the
deliberation of the amendment Bill. For many it is part of their culture
and heritage and they would like to see it protected. To others it is a
livelihood, either as dealers or professional hunters. On the other side of
the spectrum we find doctors who deal on a daily basis with children who
became the innocent victims of gun wounds, women who live in violent
communities and who have lost loved ones through the use of firearms, and
those who would simply like to see all firearms removed from society.
In all of these, we needed to balance the right of every citizen to self-
protection. The protection of culture and heritage and the livelihood of a
few with the bigger strategy of reducing the number of firearms available
in our society and ensuring that those within our community, who are in
possession of firearms are responsible citizens, fit and proper to own and
use a firearm.

Fighting crime, and specifically violent crime, is a priority to the ANC.
It is for that reason that no single piece of legislation that deals with
crime can be seen in isolation ... [Interjections.]

They removed you from the committee. Just keep quiet. It is for that reason
that no single piece of legislation that deals with crime can be seen in
isolation, but needs to be measured against the overall strategy
implemented to address crime. We can therefore not think that it is not
possible to address violent crime effectively without also addressing the
responsibility of firearm owners and the credibility of the firearm
register. This is what the original Act set out to do. The amendments that
we are introducing today are a further step in ensuring that the problems
that were there in the principal Act are properly addressed. The amendments
are strengthening the Act and will assist in the smoother implementation
thereof.

The amendment Bill is further balanced by various amendments that were made
to accommodate private collectors, professional hunters and the period of
validity for specifically businesses. The hon Moatshe has already
highlighted these. These specific amendments clearly are not the kind of
amendments that a government, as the opposition claims, that would want to
disarm its citizens with support. It is important to note that the authors
of this urban legend that the ANC government would like to disarm its
citizens could bring themselves to support these amendments. Amendments are
made to address the concerns of legal firearm owners.

The fight against crime will however require from all of us some form of
commitment and sacrifices.  It cannot be argued away that many legal
firearms end up as murder weapons either through the process of being
stolen or negligence on the side of the owner. This remains the main
motivation for the re-licensing process so that we can ensure that the
firearms are still in the possession of their owner and that the
circumstances of that individual did not change to such an extent that they
are no longer fit to own a firearm. [Interjections.] It seems to me like
the hon member who has been removed from this committee has got the blues
today. He wants to participate in this committee. [Laughter.]

The circumstances of the individual that determines whether he or she is
fit to be a firearm owner need to be evaluated with the re-licensing of a
firearm. A person who previously might have been fit to own a firearm and
to receive a competency certificate, such a person’s circumstances might
have changed to such an extent that they can no longer be seen as fit to
own a firearm. Such a person might have lost his or her job, got divorced
or threatened someone with violence. It is the duty of the designated
firearms officer to ensure that they are comfortable with the circumstances
of the individual before they re-issue his or her competency certificate.
We cannot ignore the fact that legal firearm owners also in some instances
become the perpetrators of violent crimes and use their licence firearms to
commit murders. More often than not, it is innocent women and children that
fall victim to these kinds of crimes.

In June last year, a grandmother in Milnerton shot and killed her daughter,
injured her granddaughter and then killed herself with her licensed
firearm. In the same month, a man who six years previously shot and killed
his ex-wife, described himself in court as being in ``the grip of a mental
storm when he committed the murder.’’ It is these kinds of incidents that
can be prevented if the SAPS implement the Act to its fullest.

In February this year, the Cape Argus reported on a three-year-old who shot
dead two seven-year-old girls with a gun that he found lying around.
Negligence of this nature cannot be accepted and the owner of that firearm
needs to be held responsible for the death of the two young girls. This is
what the Act, and now its amendments set out to do. The DA does not support
this.

There are numerous other examples that can be made of where a licensed
firearm became the weapon of choice for a legitimate firearm owner and
resulted in the murder of innocent victims. The legislation as a whole will
assist that we limit these kinds of occurrences.

Statistics indicate that between 1995 and July 2003, on average 66 firearms
were reported lost or stolen in South Africa each day. This is the reported
figure, not the actual figure, and as such is likely to be an under-
estimate. Only a proportion of these – 63% - are recovered. The remainder
flow into the illegal pool. It is estimated by the SAPS that up to 70% of
all illegal guns in South Africa began as licensed firearms.

Furthermore, research conducted in the US and Canada indicates that the
move from a firearm in the legal market into the illegal market is a rapid
movement. About 70% of illegal guns that are found there are new and as
much as 40% of guns found at crime scenes were sold legally less than three
years ago. Taking into consideration the under reporting of theft and loss
of firearms in South Africa, it then simply makes sense that firearm owners
and theft firearms need to be re-licensed every five years. Balancing the
effort of re-licensing with the affect reduction in firearm related deaths
and crimes is where we as legislators need to find the balance, while not
forgetting the overall role that this Act plays in the crime prevention
strategy.
One of the strongest arguments in support of the amendments to the Act lies
within an article published on 19 August 2006 in the Cape Argus, while we
were busy deliberating on the Bill. In the front page of the Cape Argus it
was reported that research had indicated that gun-related deaths in South
Africa have virtually halved over the past five years. The Institute for
Security Studies, an independent research institution, not related to the
government or the ANC government, believes that the drop is the result of
the implementation of the Firearms Control Act. Yet the hon Kohler-Barnard
claims that the Act has little effect. Tell this to the people who have
lost loved ones due to firearm crimes. [Interjections.]

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Voorsitter, is die agbare lid bereid om ‘n vraag te
beantwoord? [Chairperson, is the hon member prepared to take a question?]

Ms A VAN WYK: No. I don’t have time.

The research looks at mortuaries rather than police records and it is done
independent of the SAPS and government. The research collated the number of
unnatural deaths in Johannesburg, Cape Town and Durban. This research has
been conducted since 1999 and in 2004 it was found that 6 000 died by gun.
This includes suicides, murders and accidents. Despite the fact that we
believe that the figure was still too high, it is slightly just more than
half of the deaths in 2001. It founded that in the Western Cape deaths by
gun was down by almost 50%. Researchers attribute this decline directly to
the implementation of the Firearms Act. Not only is the pool of guns
becoming smaller, but individuals who now own firearms also realise that
they have to act more responsibly with these firearms. They know that there
will be consequences if they lose their firearms, that they will not get
licenses if they cannot keep the firearms safe and that they must proof a
need for those firearms.

Voting against these amendments is effectively voting against the decline
in gun related deaths. It is simply making a big noise about violence and
crime, but lacking the commitment to decisively act when the opportunity
arises. I cannot see how any person or any political party who is serious
about fighting violent crime in our society can vote against this amendment
Bill.

With this in mind, the ANC supports the amendments before the House. Thank
you, Madam Chairperson. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, I’d like to take
this opportunity to thank the chair of the portfolio committee, Maggie
Sotyu for the efforts and the processes driven through these amendments but
also welcome the amendments made by the portfolio committee. We hope that
this is the process in the right direction in South Africa. We also hope
this particular amendment to this principal Act will assist our country in
minimising and reducing the violence we are facing as a country.

May I also take this opportunity to thank all hon members who contributed
towards the success, namely the IFP, MF, the ACDP – thanks, Mfundisi;
although he is not here ...

Mr M C LOWE: DA?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: How can you thank the DA when
they are so negative and they are so full of doom and gloom, as if they
don’t belong to this country. May I also advise the largest minority party
in this country that we have run Operation Sethunya and it has been
successful? So far we have succeeded in retrieving 25 623 illegal firearms.
These were guns that were once legal in our country. [Interjections.] This
amendment improves and makes sure that you are more efficient in
strengthening our administration and making sure that illegal guns are
removed from society.

One also needs to bring to your attention that this amendment also helps us
to go beyond South Africa. We are able to assist our neighbouring countries
through Operation Rachel in retrieving the various illegal firearms found
all over and used for killing our women and children. We welcome the
support but also the amnesty granted. We have seen the results and it is
only the DA that cannot see the results. They have got eyes but they are
not prepared to see.

As we are sitting here today, those who benefit and become happy by
generating economic wellbeing through guns should be ashamed, because this
country has a lot of blood that was spilled by guns. You should be ashamed
as a woman, who supports such a move. It is embarrassing. [Interjections.]
Our children, our women are the victims of guns. You sound like a woman.
Your womanhood is questionable. [Interjections.]

We must also bring to the attention of this House the silencers used on
these guns ...

Ms S V KALYAN: On a point of order, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, the hon
member at the podium questioned the gender of the member, hon Diane Kohler-
Barnard.

The SPEAKER: Gender is not a point of order.

Ms S V KALYAN: It is unparliamentary to question whether she is a woman or
not. It is sexist.

The SPEAKER: No, hon member that is not a point of order.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you, Madam Speaker, but
may I also bring to this House that the reason for us having licensed the
silencers is precisely to make sure ...

... njengoba kade kusho ubaba uNdlovu ukuthi uma isibhamu sidubula kufuneka
sizwiwe yiwo wonke umuntu. Uma sizoqhubeka nokuba nama-silencer, angazi
ukuthi ubani ozosizakala ngalokho. Kusho ukuthi imindeni izophela. Yilabo
abangenalo uzwelo abazothi makuqhubeke lokho, bevuma ukuthi makufe abantu
futhi isizwe sonke singezwa lutho uma kwenzeka lokho. Sithi thina
sikhathele yikho konke lokho. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[... as hon Ndlovu correctly observed – that if a gun goes off, everybody
must hear it. If we can carry on having silencers, I do not know who is
going to benefit from that. This means that families will be obliterated.
It is only the heartless people who can agree that this should happen. It
is callous people who can allow the illegal use of silencers to continue
destroying our people. We say we are tired of that.]

As we stand here today, we support and we welcome the work done by the
police and we must indicate, as this Ministry, that we are going to
continue in all our efforts in making sure that we remove any illegal gun.
Those who are irresponsible, we will indeed take away their guns. Every
individual who applies for a gun must make sure that he becomes
responsible. We can no longer afford a country where we have irresponsible
individuals who, when they see young children, they turn them into dogs and
say: “I saw a dog.” And then they shoot at young children. It is a shame to
support such individuals. Regarding the sickness certificate we will
continue to make sure that you are ready.

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Mevrou die Speaker, op ’n punt van orde: Is dit
toelaatbaar dat die agb Adjunkminister verwys na ’n saak wat tans nog sub
judice is en dat sy daaroor ’n uitspraak maak? [Madam Speaker, on a point
of order: Is it permissible for the hon Deputy Minister to refer to a case
that is still sub judice and to pass a judgement on it?]

The SPEAKER: I didn’t hear that part. Is it allowed to do what?

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Is it in order for the Deputy Minister to refer a case
that is still sub judice and before the courts?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: It is public knowledge.

The SPEAKER: I would need to look at that in terms of what it is that was
referred to and that is still sub judice. There are circumstances under
which we have to be very careful on matters that are sub judice. But I will
have to look into that. Proceed.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: May I also indicate that we can
no longer afford to have children killed in this fashion. We as the police
will continue to remove any illegal guns and continue, through our
administration, to make sure that those who are not competent are not going
to get any licences. We need people who are fit and who are sober and able
to apply their minds but not people who can shoot and be driven by emotions
when they utilise their guns. We welcome the support by this House,
especially the portfolio committee. We thank the chairperson and we thank
all those who are outside there and who have supported us. [Interjections.]
You, hon Jankielsohn, I don’t know what you are trying to do and trying to
say. The ship is moving ahead. We will continue to govern. We will continue
to make sure that this country is governed responsibly by everybody and
that is what the police is going to do. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be read a second time.

Division demanded.

The House divided:

  AYES - 210: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S
  E; Asmal, A K; Baloyi, M R; Bekker, H J; Beukman, F; Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu,
  F; Bhengu, P; Bloem, D V; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Booi, M S; Burgess, C V;
  Buthelezi, M G; Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I; Cele, M A; Chalmers, J;
  Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota, F I; Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J
  P; Cupido, H B ; Dambuza, B N; Davies, R H; De Lange, J H; Dhlamini, B W;
  Diale, L N; Direko, I W; Dithebe, S L; Ditshetelo, P H K; Doidge, G Q M;
  Du Toit, D C ; Fihla, N B; Frolick, C T; Fubbs, J L; Gabanakgosi, P S;
  Gaum, A H; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M N; Green, L M; Greyling, L W; Gumede,
  D M; Gumede, M M; Hanekom, D A ; Hendrickse, P A C; Hogan, B A; Holomisa,
  S P; Huang, S; Jacobus, L; Johnson, C B; Johnson, M; Kekana, C D; Khoarai,
  L P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K K; Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B
  M; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G; Lekgoro, M M S; Lishivha, T E;
  Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Lucas, E J; Ludwabe, C I; Luthuli, A N; Maake, J J;
  Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C; Madella, A F; Maduma, L D; Madumise, M M;
  Magubane, N E ; Magwanishe, G B; Mahlaba, T L; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L;
  Mahlawe, N M; Mahomed, F; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Makasi, X C; Makgate, M
  W; Malahlela, M J; Maloney, L; Maloyi, P D N; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, D
  K; Manana, M N S; Mars, I; Maserumule, F T; Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane, L
  M; Mashigo, R J; Mashile, B L; Masutha, T M; Mathibela, N F; Matsemela, M
  L; Matsomela, M J J ; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Mbili, M E; Mbombo, N D;
  Meruti, M V; Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z S; Mkongi, B M; Mnguni, B A;
  Mnyandu, B J; Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogase, I D;
  Mohamed, I J; Mohlaloga, M R; Mokoena, A D; Molefe, C T; Moleketi, P J ;
  Monareng, O E; Moonsamy, K; Morobi, D M; Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W;
  Mosala, B G; Moss, L N; Moss, M I; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mshudulu, S
  A; Mthembu, B; Mtshali, E; Mzondeki, M J G; Nawa, Z N; Ndlovu, V B;
  Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C; Nene, M J ; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S;
  Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, N W; Ngele, N J;
  Ngwenya, M L; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S J ; Njobe, M A A; Nkem-
  Abonta, E; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Ntombela, S H; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, R S;
  Ntuli, S B; Nwamitwa-Shilubana, T L P; Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N ;
  Nyambi, A J; Nzimande, L P M; Oliphant, G G; Pandor, G N M; Phadagi, M G;
  Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R D; Rabinowitz, R; Rajbally, S ; Ramakaba-
  Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Rasmeni, S M; Reid, L R R;
  Roopnarain, U; Rwexana, S P; Saloojee, E; Schippers, J; Schneemann, G D;
  Seadimo, M D; Sekgobela, P S; Shabangu, S; Sibande, M P; Sibanyoni, J B;
  Siboza, S ; Sibuyana, M W; Sikakane, M R; Skhosana, W M; Smith, P F;
  Smith, V G; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Thabethe, E; Thomson, B;
  Tinto, B; Tobias, T V; Tsenoli, S L; Tshivhase, T J; Vadi, I; Van der
  Merwe, J H; Van Wyk, A; Vundisa, S S; Wang, Y; Woods, G G; Zikalala, C N
  Z; Zulu, B Z.

  NOES - 30: Botha, C-S; Davidson, I O; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Ellis, M J;
  Farrow, S B; Gibson, D H M; Groenewald, P J; Jankielsohn, R; Julies, I F;
  Kalyan, S V; King, R J; Lowe, C M; Minnie, K J; Morgan, G R; Mulder, P W
  A; Nel, A H; Opperman, S E; Rabie, P J; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Spies, W D;
  Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swart, P S; Trent, E W; Van der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S
  M; Van Niekerk, A I; Waters, M; Weber, H.
Question agreed to.

Bill accordingly read a second time.

 THE CONTRIBUTION AND RELEVANCE OF SATYAGRAHA TO OUR POLITICAL, ECONOMIC AND
                                SOCIAL VALUES

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Madam Speaker, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, I am
privileged to participate in this historic debate on Satyagraha, which has
been our country’s gift to all humanity. When President Thabo Mbeki, from
this very podium, declared earlier this year that South Africa would
officially celebrate the 100th anniversary of the birth of Satyagraha, it
was indeed a joyous moment.

The announcement reinforced a decision taken by the Phoenix Settlement
Trust in 2005, that the centennial celebrations of Satyagraha would not
merely be an event, but had to be directed towards our aspirations of the
African Renaissance and global peaceful co-existence. Whilst this was the
process of making the festival one of the 2006 celebrations coinciding with
our national days, there is also a call and commitment to have an ongoing
celebration of Satyagraha in our day-to-day activities. This is especially
so in full recognition of our constitutional obligations and also the
declaration of the United Nations that every human being on this planet is
entitled to have and must enjoy human rights as equals with other human
beings.

In most ways we have succeeded in defeating slavery, colonialism and
racism, but a debate on Satyagraha in the Parliament of our country has to
be seized with the question whether we have succeeded in defeating the
consequences of slavery, colonialism and racism.

I believe that it is common cause amongst us that we have not, and
therefore, we are united in our resolve to guarantee to ensure, in whatever
we do, that every human being leads a life of self-respect, a life of
dignity.

We are inflexible in our commitment that nobody should be a victim of
insults or of being despised by any other because of one’s race, colour,
origin or religion. The questions that we have to constantly ask ourselves
are: What are we doing to end the plight of the hungry on our continent?
What are we doing to prevent untimely deaths from preventable diseases?
What are we doing to prevent systemic violence against human beings and our
environment?

Do all of us accept the fundamental challenge and demonstrate through a
call to action our collective will to end poverty and underdevelopment, to
end conflict, to deepen democratic practice, to end communal, ethnic,
tribal and religious violence?

These are major components required for the regeneration, the renaissance
of the African continent. But along with this, we need to anchor the vision
of the renaissance of our continent in the renewal and the calling forth of
the moral values of Ubuntu, yet another gift to humanity.

It is against this background that the Satyagraha celebrations become so
pertinent. Satyagraha cannot and must not be viewed in isolation with the
Gandhian Trinity: The welfare of all - called Sarvodaya, by Gandhi- and in
the ANC’s language, a better life for all.

In the context of current-day realities, we cannot sit on the sidelines and
expect a better life for all to fall from, what I would like to call paw-
paw trees or fall from heaven as a sequel to our prayers for such a life.
We need to struggle, at times with ourselves, to ensure the welfare and
wellbeing of all. We have to call ourselves into actions, into deeds, into
projects and programmes on the basis of truth and love.

This call to action on the basis of truth and love is Gandhi’s Satyagraha
for us in our politically liberated continent, and more emphatically, on
the basis of action without violence, which is rooted in the principal of
reference and respect for life, which in turn, is Gandhi’s Ahimsa.

In celebrating the 100th anniversary of Satyagraha, conceived and applied
on our soil, we are indeed claiming our right to declare that whilst it
comes from the African continent, it belongs to all humanity.

We need to go further in claiming our rights to declare that the African
value system at the heart of Ubuntu also comes from our continent and also
belongs to all humanity. In essence, these are spiritual values on which
the African Renaissance will stand, alongside the material and political
reconstruction of our continent.

In evoking these values, and in celebrating Satyagraha, we will also be
paying tribute, I believe, to the memory of Pixley Seme who pioneered the
call for the African Renaissance and also to our visionaries, politicians,
businesspersons, trade unionists, professional persons, workers, believers
and atheists who gathered at Kliptown to give to South Africa the Freedom
Charter.

This Charter became for us, who are engaged in the politics of liberation
under the leadership of the ANC, a guiding instrument. It embraces the
values of the Gandhian Trinity and Ubuntu.

In seeking our liberation from the yoke of apartheid, the constant assaults
on our dignity and oppression, we are guided by the thought that in pursuit
of liberation, we also had a duty to liberate our oppressors and to restore
to them their own lost humanity.

This might not sit comfortably with some of us, but in essence it was and
continues to be the tenets of Satyagraha at work. Satyagraha cannot just be
a part of our historical memory; we need to use it creatively, aggressively
and without apology to strengthen our present day choices to make the
African Renaissance a reality. This must be our poise and the dignity we
need to set the pattern and pace for our global co-existence. Our closeness
to each other in our global village, our common achievements in science and
technology have built for us a great civilisation and our common
achievements are remarkable, but we need to ask ourselves: What is it that
we as common villagers in this common global village are slipping and
sliding away from? It is the very essentials of this civilisation, leading
to a civilisational crisis and away from global co-existence.

With all the progress we have made, why is it that in many ways we are on
the brink of a barbarous phase? This phase characterised in our global
village by, among other things, the demand for globalisation with scant
regard for the elimination of poverty, disease, hunger and homelessness for
the vast majority in our global village.

All of these combined with hatred, vengeance, bitterness and wanton
disregard for life are for me more dreadful and dangerous than actual war.
Terrorism respects no boundaries. In our village and at our very humanity,
all of us are potential targets of cold-blooded murder. And, if we share
this danger, ward off our inability to share the responsibility to promote
our common safety and security, without which there can be no global co-
existence.

In the assault on our environment with total and rude disregard for the
opinion of fellow villagers, the disregard and abuse of multilateral
institutions in the quest for world dominance and global dominance whether
this be on the basis of ideology, power or religion, there emerges what is
called ``the clash of civilisations’’.

What is worse is that those who sought to impose on us their imperial
domination, using race as an excuse, believe that we as Africans
contributed nothing to the civilising processes of humanity. It is our duty
to prove them wrong.

Equally, with acknowledging our subjective weaknesses, we are willing and
able to rebel against all those forces, dictators, criminals, rapists,
murderers and robbers, poverty and disease, these forces and more that
militate against our continent renewal. For me, this is rebellion.

But Satyagraha, in concert with the Ahimsa and Sarvodaya, is again non-
violent rebellion and, until we succeed, global co-existence will be a
formidable distance away.

This crusade, which I choose to call a crusade, is a historic challenge not
only for Africa, but all humanity on the basis of the Gandhian Trinity. It
is only when reinforced with this moral force that we will be able to
succeed in challenging and changing global institutions like the United
Nations Security Council to the real and authentic custodians of the values
of Ubuntu and the Gandhian Trinity; that you will be able to succeed and
ensure that globalisation and the restructuring programmes of the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank do not ignore our common
responsibility to extend the frontiers of human dignity of all humanity;
that the disparate and unfair practices of the World Trade Organisation,
with regard to subsidies, are challenged and won because Africa constitutes
the pre-eminent development challenge, and for global non-violent
transformation.

We, in our renewal programme, assume the moral duty to reach out by example
to the international institutions of the different faith systems to relook,
I repeat, to the international institutions of the different faith systems,
to relook the evangelical and conversion programmes in preference to
contributing and creating the conditions for the peaceful, respectful
global co-existence of all and all faith systems.
As a proud and confident African, who has believed and believes that we
only receive in giving, it is our duty to give. I repeat: It is our duty to
give all that we can and perhaps more to ensure that our continent’s
renaissance is effected on the basis of the Gandhian Trinity and Ubuntu.

In conclusion, Madam Chair, for us in South Africa, our triumphal march to
democracy and to co-existence, which indeed had never been painless, was
described by the rest of the world as a miracle. Based on the Gandhian
Trinity and Ubuntu, I believe that it is within our reach to make the
African Renaissance a live reality, another miracle so that, some day,
soon, not only a Roman, but others too will proudly say, ``Ex Africa semper
aliquid novi.’’ ``Something new always comes from Africa.’’ I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: Madam Speaker, in 1906, the Black Act was introduced by Mr
Lionel Curtis. He wanted restrictions to be placed upon Indians:


  Every Indian man, woman or child of eight years upwards entitled to
  reside in the Transvaal must register his or her name with the Registrar
  of Asiatics and take out a certificate of registration.

Gandhi translated this ordinance into Gujarati, and called a meeting of all
the Indians in Transvaal to explain the implications. It was appalling, and
while the business of the meeting was conducted in Hindi and Gujarati, in
the case of the Tamils and Telegus who did not know the language,
everything was explained fully to them. It was decided that a meeting would
be held on 11 September 1906. And it was at this meeting that the famous
Fourth Resolution was adopted which saw the advent of Satyagraha.

Now the foundations of Satyagraha are beyond religious and political
ideology. It works on the principle of truth. Gandhi was able to mobilise
and galvanise more people in his lifetime than any other person in the
history of this world using love, understanding, goodwill and the refusal
to co-operate with evil law. He was able to break the backbone of the
British Empire.

One of the most significant things that ever happened in the history of the
world is that more than 390 million people achieved their freedom
nonviolently. Gandhi objected when people called him a saint trying to be a
politician. Instead, he said, he was a politician trying to be a saint.
Gandhi and Martin Luther King fought oppression and injustice non-
violently, using the weapons of truth, harmlessness and self-sacrifice.

They sought social change against the seemingly unconquerable adversaries
of state power and prejudice. Their campaign successfully exposed the
ultimate weaknesses of falsehood and injustice upon which the dominant
oppressive forces were based.

Given the vitriol that dominated an earlier debate in the House today,
perhaps we should consider embracing the principle of Satyagraha. It can
become the foundation of a new political culture and the result will be
goodwill, integrity and pragmatic problem solving. Gandhi said, and I
quote:


  I believe that no government can exist for a single moment without the co-
  operation of the people, willing or forced, and if people suddenly
  withdraw their co-operation in every detail, the government will come to
  a standstill.

Satyagraha was not a way for one group to seize what it wanted from
another; it was not a weapon of class struggle or of any kind of division.
Instead, it was an instrument of unity. It was a way to remove injustice
and restore social harmony to the benefit of both sides.

Governments worldwide should embrace the principle of Satyagraha - starting
with our own. Our own government should acknowledge that opposition parties
do indeed have a role to play in our new democracy. Perhaps then, there
will be less bloodshed, crime and vitriol, and peace and harmony will
prevail. [Applause.]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Hon Chairperson, hon Members of Parliament, we owe a
great debt of gratitude to the great Mahatma Gandhi. The whole of humanity
owe so much to the inspirational life of one of the undisputed towering
figures of the 20th century. He belonged to the dazzling 20th century class
of the likes of Martin Luther King junior and Mother Theresa, who upheld
the inalienable principle of human dignity.

I think that the entire House will agree with me that it is fitting and
right that the husband of Mahatma Gandhi’s grandchild, Ella Gandhi, Mr Mewa
Ramgobin, has led this debate about the relevance of Satyagraha.

It is appropriate that we commemorate the centenary of the birth of the
great Mahatma in a liberated South Africa. We, South Africans, were
inspired by his example when he led the non-violent struggle, and in the
process founded the Natal Indian Congress.

With humility he taught us about this soul force, Satyagraha. I believe it
is probably the influence of this philosophy, which guided the founding
fathers of the ANC to structure Africa’s oldest liberation movement upon
the ideals on nonviolence and passive resistance. These principles are of
course embedded in the Judeo-Christian ethic and in most of the major
faiths.

Although the intransigence of the apartheid regime compelled some of the
liberation movements to pursue the armed struggle, which was a point of
departure from the strategy of nonviolence, there were some in the ranks of
our liberation movements that staunchly maintained that South Africa’s
problems would be resolved through non-violent means.

I have never wavered from the belief that jaw-jaw is far better than war-
war, to quote the twentieth century British lion, Sir Wilson Churchill.
Gandhi elaborated on the idea splendidly when he remarked that, “an eye for
an eye makes us all blind”.

In the end he was right, it did come to pass in South Africa that the
negotiation process won the day. Humanity prevailed. This vindicated
Mahatma’s commitment to nonviolence and passive resistance.

I remember so vividly the post-war years of the 1946 campaign of passive
resistance in Durban, which was the product of Satyagraha. The defiance
campaign, which was espoused by the ANC, was an effort to bring the
oppressive regime to the conference table. It was my privilege to know the
son of Mahatma Gandhi, who was the father-in-law of Mr Mewa Ramgobin, who
has led us in this discussion during the defiance campaign, Manilal Gandhi.

I cherish my closeness to Prof Fatima Meer, Mewa Ramgobin and other
stalwarts of the struggle during those days. This was why I had the
privilege of delivering the Gandhi Memorial Lecture at Gandhi’s home in
Phoenix during the lifetime of his daughter-in-law, Mrs Manilal Gandhi.
It is for this very reason that one feels privileged to take advantage of
these few minutes to pay tribute to this great man of our time. His message
is of such relevance that he will always be a man of our time. It is also
appropriate to pay tribute to the Mahatma, as we celebrate the Bambatha
Uprising of 1906, because it was during this uprising that Gandhi took the
stand to work with the Red Cross during the uprising in KwaZulu-Natal,
which is known as the Bambatha Uprising.

Until the end of my days, Gandhiji will remain one of the greatest
influences upon my own political career. It is a great privilege to pay
this tribute as we celebrate Satyagraha and celebrate Gandhi’s life, an
imperishable example. His life gave content to the famous teaching of the
Son of Man, Jesus Christ, who said in the Beatitudes, as recorded in the
Gospel according to Matthew 5:9, “blessed are the peacemakers, for they
shall see God.” I am sure that Mahatma today beholds the glory of God. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs J CHALMERS: Chairperson, comrades and colleagues, when I was asked to
speak on this topic, I felt somewhat daunted by the challenge it presented.
I also feel quite strongly that moral values should also be added to the
political, economic and social values in this Resolution, because, surely,
that should underpin all our decisions as, so clearly, it underpinned the
life of Gandhi.

It would be a hundred years on September 11, since Mohandas Karamchand
Gandhi, later to be known as Mahatma, which means, “Great Soul”, met in the
Old Empire Theatre in Johannesburg in 1906, with hundreds of Indian
delegates from all over the Transvaal. The theatre was packed from floor to
ceiling with people. They met to discuss and decide on the action to be
taken in response to a new ordinance to be introduced into the Transvaal
Legislative Council.

The Ordinance was aimed at controlling and limiting the number of Indians -
man, woman and child over the age of eight years, currently living and
working in the Transvaal. As Gandhi said on reading the ordinance: “I have
never known the legislation of this nature being directed against free men
in any part of the world”. Of course, the reason behind it was pure and
simple: greed. Local officials stated: “If the Indians could enter the
Transvaal at will, and trade wherever they choose, British traders should
suffer a great loss”. It was as simple as that, even though Gen Smuts and
others argued that the problem was simply to preserve their own
civilisation of enjoying the supreme right of self-preservation and
discharging the corresponding duty.

Gandhi wrote off that statement as hypocrisy, pure and simple. Every Indian
would, by law, have to register and carry a certificate that would bear his
or her fingerprints. Every Indian who failed to apply for a certificate
would forfeit his right to remain in the Transvaal. Failure could mean a
fine, prison sentence or deportation. That meeting passed a number of
resolutions. The most important being the famous fourth resolution whereby
the Indians solemnly determined not to submit to the Ordinance, should it
become law in the teeth of their opposition, and to suffer all the
penalties attached to such nonsubmission. This was crucial.

They committed themselves by way of making a pledge, both as a body and
also each independently, with the understanding that he must be true to his
pledge even unto death, no matter what others may do. So it began. But what
was he to call the new movement? It was Gandhi himself who finally settled
on the word the “Satyagraha”. “Saty”, meaning truth, which implies love and
“agraha” which serves as a synonym of force. Ghandi writes: “The force
which is born of truth and love or nonviolence”, preferring that to the
phrase “passive resistance”.

I had not realised before reading Gandhi’s book, how he quite clearly
differentiates between “Satyagraha” and “passive resistance”.  He stated
that the former is not “passive resistance”, but it is based on the idea of
strength that grows day by day and becomes even more effective fostering as
it does patience, self-understanding, self-discipline, love of the truth, a
desire for justice and the certainty that a thing acquired by violence can
be retained by violence alone, while one acquired by the truth, can only be
retained by the truth.

Power acquired in this way, and this is so clearly spelt out, has no need
of force to retain its strength. Our own Truth and Reconciliation
Commission too, has its basis in the seeking not after revenge, but the
truth and the belief that the truth will set you free. So, what have we
learnt from Mahatma, the Great Soul, his life and his beliefs as well as
the example that he set for our country that have impacted on our own
struggle for a just society, and what lessons can we still learn?

I was deeply shocked, last weekend to read the headline in our Saturday
paper in Port Elizabeth, “War-torn Somalia is better than this hell”. Media
drama? I asked myself. I don’t think so. I am told ten small shop owners in
Port Elizabeth have been killed there in the past month; many more
throughout the rest of the country. The police spokesman stated that the
Somalis are regularly under threat. Is this xenophobia? Maybe. It is also
because they are targeted as easy prey. They don’t want to report these
attacks to the police. What, I wonder, would Gandhi have made of this?

He was a man who defended to the hilt the rights of the persecuted and
those discriminated against. His long campaign for and the defence of the
untouchables, in India, is well-documented. He renamed those poor outcasts,
“Harijan”, which means the sons of God. Daughters too, I imagine. Surely,
these fellow Africans, many of them refugees from their homeland, because
of the political situation there, have the right to be secure and raise
their children and earn an honest living here. I may say that they make a
worthwhile contribution to our society. Would Gandhi have taken their part
against this lawlessness? I think so. I would hope that both the police and
our civil society play a greater role in protecting them.

The past month has featured some historical events. On 9 August, I was so
thrilled to be part of the 50th Anniversary of the women’s march in
Pretoria. At the National Gallery here, at the moment, the film of the
original march of 1956, is shown daily. I watched it with great emotion as
those women in huge numbers marched, singing in unified solidarity,
protesting against the carrying of passes. So too, did the Indian women,
part of the Satyagraha Association, protest in 1913, against the appalling
judgement given in the Cape Supreme Court that: “Only marriages celebrated
according to Christian rights and registered by the Registrar of Marriages,
would be recognised”. That rendered the majority of Indian marriages
illegal in South Africa, while their children were deprived of their rights
to inherit their parents’ property. A decision was taken that a group of
sixteen women would allow themselves to be arrested, for moving between
Natal and Transvaal without permits. This happened.

They were then sentenced to three months in prison in Maritzburg, in
appalling conditions. Indeed, one of them died as a result of her
incarceration. From then on, women played an active part in the Satyagraha
Movement. Their imprisonment inspired local mineworkers in Newcastle, to
strike against the appalling conditions, ending in the long march from
Newcastle down to the Transvaal border. Two thousand one hundred men, women
and children marched with Gandhi as their head. They marched for eight
days, eating only bread and sugar along the way.  Gandhi was arrested and
released on bail a number of times, but the march went on. Gen Smuts was at
a loss as to what to do, for he said: “How can you harass a peaceful man?”
As Gandhi writes of the march, “our victory was implicit in our combination
of nonviolence and determination.” It didn’t end there, of course.

Eventually, the Indian Relief Bill was passed which validated marriages
held legally in India, abolishing the three-pound licence for indentured
labourers and improving other restrictive legislation.

In July 1914, Gandhi set sail for India, leaving behind him a permanent
legacy that continues to be part of the human rights foundation to our
Constitution and way of life in this country. I believe, however, that as
far as we have come along the road to a just society in the past twelve
years, we still have lessons to learn from Mahatma Gandhi and the
universality of the Satyagraha way. He constantly tested himself and was
never afraid to stand up and be counted when he believed a cause was true
and just and needed his support. He believed in self-purification and self-
reliance. He refused to stigmatise members of society, spending days and
weeks ministering to the sick, even during an outbreak of plague. Can we
learn from this? Do we do enough for the disabled, for HIV-sufferers and
those living on the fringes of society? He tried constantly, to promote
unity amongst people, saying that for him to find a way to settle
differences even within his organisation was when he made the largest gains
in things of the spirit. Surely, now, we can learn from this example. He
had an absolute abhorrence of violence and the use of force, saying mankind
had been reaping a bitter harvest from its use throughout history.

Let me say that for me, reading his book has been a huge learning
experience. He spent 21 years in this country. It was a period when his
strength of character, his passionate love for truth and justice, his
courage and extraordinary intellect had an indelible and lasting effect on
the history of our country. It has been an honour for me to take part in
this motion. I would hope that the principles of Satyagraha could remain
integral to the value system that we use in striving to establish a just
society in South Africa.
[Applause.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Chairperson, South Africa is a country that is in the
process of transition from the most unjust system of the past. It is
grappling with the challenges of building a society that embraces and
respects the human rights principles. We have in reality, a polarised
society. The polarisation cuts across race. In addition to the race
challenges, the emerging trend is the class differentiation factor. This is
because of others being privileged to prevailing economic opportunities
that the poor majority are unable to access. What can we do to unite our
people across the African Botho? The answer to this challenge lies in
ourselves as South Africans.

We can learn a lot from the Mahatma Gandhi Movement. The movement’s aims
and objectives, and especially its programme of action as to how to deal
with the injustices in society, that is, being intolerant of other
political views or ideology, has made this movement a model for others to
learn from in terms of how to fight peacefully when pursuing one’s human
rights goals. The significance and relevance of this movement to our
situation, reminds all of us to be sensitive to the needs of other poor
people. As people’s representatives, we are further challenged to lead
selflessly and to pursue a common goal as opposed to individual glory.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Chairperson, in the same way as the word “ubuntu”,
the word “satyagraha” has a meaning that is difficult to describe in a few
words. These are powerful philosophies of life which we need to invoke in
the present times more than ever before. The spirit of compassion and love
are God-given gifts which are often forgotten by man in his quest for power
and resources.

On 11 September 2006 South Africa in particular and the world in general
will be observing the centenary of the birth of Satyagraha. Satyagraha is
about truth and firmness. It all started at the Empire Theatre in
Johannesburg, as the hon Chalmers said just now, in a meeting convened by
Mahatma Gandhi, who lived in South Africa for 21 years, and during this
period transformed from a young lawyer to a great soul, the mahatma. That’s
how Satyagraha or nonviolent action was born.

Therefore South Africa has a claim to this important legacy, whose
importance must be understood in the context of our quest for peace in the
world. Since then, the use of Satyagraha as a mode of opposition to
oppression has been utilised by many leaders throughout the length and
breadth of the world. Satyagraha has been recognised as the most formidable
but also the best way of dealing with conflict whether in the home, in
society or in international affairs.

This is important, as we would like to see a situation where more and more
people opt for non-violent solutions rather than the wanton destruction of
violent action. We need to take some systematic action to curb increasing
violence. As Gandhi maintained, you cannot fight terrorism with terrorism.
The cycle of violence would just continue if we use violent methods.

The Mahatma once said, and I quote:


  I discovered in the earliest stages that pursuit of truth did not admit
  of violence being inflicted on one’s opponent but that he must be weaned
  from error by patience and sympathy.

Satyagraha, like ubuntu, is about compassion and love through which hatred
and anger can be transformed into friendship and love. Satyagraha is a
powerful tool which can be used in the home, in schools, in the community,
in the country and internationally. It provides the most significant and
viable alternative to violence.  Violence is destructive and satyagraha is
constructive.

While we have set a trend at national level to embrace these philosophies
by enacting the abolition of corporal punishment, capital punishment and
harsh conditions of sentence in prison, at the societal level, this has not
taken root. We need the message of non-violence now more than ever before.

The critical challenges facing us today around the world are the rising
incidences of aggression, violence, war and destruction. Our schools are no
longer safe; schoolchildren carry guns to school; our homes have to be
fenced and barricaded; our streets are dangerous; our countries are at war.

Mankind today is moving on a collision course - in this context I use the
term as meaning “man” and not as a neutral or gender-sensitive term.
Because even though most women are against war and violence, wars or
violence of various kinds at macro and micro levels are thrust on women.
Women are at the suffering end of violence in most cases. Statisticians
have shown that in most wars and violent situations, fewer women actually
participate in direct combat or even in roles as accessories, yet women and
children are amongst the most affected by wars and violence.

A large majority of women continue to play a servile role both in their
homes and in society, with few if any rights. Within society women are
treated as subordinates and, in many subtle ways, women continue to live
under an oppressive patriarchal society. Women are the major sufferers of
abuse in the home, in society, and in wartime the abuse of women takes on
an even more bizarre spectre.

The kind of violence we are seeing today is an indication that we have
failed to leave a legacy of compassion and love for our youth. The present
generation has become more violent and more destructive. Anger,
competition, vengeance, envy and power are at the base of the violent
reactions we are daily witnessing. Car rage, taxi wars, revenge killings
and elimination of a formidable opponent through violent means are being
seen more and more. Safety and security is becoming a major issue.

In this situation, therefore, it becomes even more imperative for us to
discuss the need for invoking our humanistic philosophies, not only for
discussion but also to imbibe the teachings into our lives and encourage
the youth of today to embrace these important philosophies into their
lives.

We must take it as our challenge to build a society that believes in peace,
a society that espouses the notion of satyagraha as we embrace the century
that we call ours. Whether we view violence at a macro level or at a micro
level, whether we view it in the home, or in the community, or
internationally, the dynamics are the same. Violence occurs as a direct
result of power relations.

When violence is confronted by violence it has the effect of raging on
until a stage is reached when there has to be a forced surrender or
annihilation. On the other hand, when violence is confronted with peace the
scenario is totally different and we find that former enemies can embrace
each other and live side by side, in friendship and harmony.

We have seen the effects of the atom bomb and, while we hope that such
weapons are never again used, can we guarantee that that will never happen?
We have also seen the peaceful transition in our country and the efforts
that are being made to reconcile and live together, united in our
diversity.

We have the historic legacy and the responsibility to lead the world into
accepting the power of our heritage. Our peaceful transition is referred to
by many as a miracle. But it is indeed a reality, as the hon Ramgobin said
earlier on, that where people are committed to peace, nothing is
impossible.

Man’s inhumanity has reached such heights since the beginning of this
millennium that one wonders where it will stop, unless we can intervene and
lead them to a more constructive path. War tactics are so destructive that
the idea is no longer to scare people but to destroy them. At the end of
the last millennium many religious heads warned that we are walking a tight
rope. But the warning remains unheeded by many. Let’s take our rightful
place, hon members, and intervene.

Most wars bring out the worst in human beings. And rape, torture and murder
of women and children is a common feature of all violent conflicts. Yet we
do not and are often reluctant to accept that there is another way, a non-
violent way of dealing with conflict.  We salute our President and all our
leaders who are committed to bringing peace in the world through
negotiations.

The involvement of our peace-loving citizens in giving hope and dignity to
the downtrodden goes to show how this philosophy of satyagraha, almost a
century later, is alive. The philosophy of satyagraha and ubuntu has paved
the way for us to learn to be more compassionate, understanding and loving
when faced with issues. As a country, we have also shown maturity in
dealing with conflict.

In our age of hope, surely, we must pursue philosophies that must assist us
in healing our nation - a nation that was torn apart by state oppression
but survived. Let us wish all the people of the world peaceful celebrations
of the Satyagraha.

In conclusion, we revisit Mahatma Ghandi’s words again, and I quote:


   I discovered in the earliest stages that pursuit of truth did not admit
   of violence being inflicted on one’s opponent but that he must be weaned
   from error by patience and sympathy.

I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the MF takes this opportunity to extend its
immense respect, love and admiration for the inspiring Ghandiji, who
brought to the people the policy of Satyagraha. Ghandiji’s work in passive
resistance and ideologies extends to and is beneficially practiced in this
day and age.

Today’s democracy, freedom, equality and upliftment of our people were born
from the vision shared with great people such as Ghandiji. He saw the
benefits of an equal opportunity for all and warned of the dangers of its
neglect. Similarly, South Africa today attempts to redress the horrors of
its past, by creating an equal opportunity for all.

The MF shares in the belief that the nation needs to address its
disparities holistically, and that the masses need to acknowledge that the
government alone cannot institute change and that we all need to play an
active role in embracing this democracy and instilling its values. We can
all see the benefits in adopting Ghandiji’s principle but the greatest
challenge in inculcating these principles into action concerns teaching and
nourishing our increasingly multicultural society to work together and
continue to build South Africa as a united nation, because it indeed
belongs to all who live in it – black and white.

Once again, I extend our admiration and find it valuable in adopting the
ideology of Satyagraha. Om shaanti shaanti shaanti! Peace, peace, peace may
prevail to all! I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S E OPPERMAN: Hon Chair, introducing the subject of Satyagraha in any
given situation speaks of boldness, especially in the world of shadows and
mirrors where the art of deception - which I believe is the greatest threat
to “satya” – has been mastered, and where the most valued people are those
with a doctorate in spinning.

The hon Ramgobin has brought honour to the legacy of a man for whom
Satyagraha was not a slogan but a lifestyle. Mahatma Gandhi, the Indian
spiritual and political leader, was deeply inspired by Rama’s strict
adherence to satya truth and dharma.

On 25 June this year I had the privilege of meeting the High Commissioner
of India, Mr Satyabhrata Pal, and his wife, Sri Pal. In the early hours of
the morning we watched a very rare phenomenon – a synodic solstice, from
the observatory in the Moordenaars Karoo. It is a phenomenon that happens
once in about 100 years and speaks to us of a new cycle, a new beginning.

Satyabhrata means return to truth. I therefore believe the subject of
Satyagraha is timely and absolutely important to all of us and for the
realisation of the African Renaissance. The willingness to detest hardship
and personal travails, and to shoulder any sacrifice for truth can only
come from those who have a strong and stable relationship with the truth.
It is the privilege of those who have received the revelation from a higher
source than themselves, who can see and perceive, and who have knowledge
and understanding.

Hindus often chant: “Ram Nam Satya Hai.” - Rama’s name is truth. For the
Christians, the words of Jesus Christ: “I am the truth,” are supposed to be
an inspiration to search after truth with a passion.

I agree with the hon Mewa Ramgobin and the message of Satyagraha. Let us
all insist on the truth, even to the point of denying oneself because it is
only the truth that can really set us free. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Thank you, Chair. Thank you for all the inputs made by the
different speakers. Yes, hon Sandy Kalyan, you are right. Satyagraha admits
into its equation, co-operation and working with everybody. But it also
requires, and demands, an offering from the opposition: what is it that can
I do? I want to call myself into action to do those things that can make
today better than yesterday. The admission of the role of the opposition in
the equation of the Satyagraha doesn’t mean to become a professional critic
but means ‘a call to action’. But, you are right. You have a role.

Do I call you Shenge or do I call you Dr Buthelezi? Can I call you Shenge?

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: [Inaudible.]

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Okay, I take the privilege of that. Yes, you excite
beautiful memories, but you forgot one major thing - and I am bold enough
to say it from this podium - that it was you, Shenge, who in 1970 launched
the Gandhi Work Camp at Phoenix Settlement. It was you with whom I had a
fight because of your children. We had different approaches to them. But,
it was you who said to me that the Gandhi Work Camp is a vital and
important institution that you are setting up at Phoenix Settlement. I can
assure you that when I look around here today, there are many of us who are
products of that work camp. Thank you very much for that. [Applause.]

Mention has been made about a protest to the Gandhi’s satyagrahic
approaches to making options. I think one of the most forceful methods,
which I would like to interpret as a dialogic one that Gandhi introduced in
making options to make choices for the future, is best seen in his daily
prayer service as a major component of Satyagraha. He never had a prayer
meeting, he never prayed in a temple, he never prayed in a church and he
never prayed in a mosque. He prayed under the open skies with people
belonging to all faiths. The highest form of co-existence and tolerance was
seen then.

Yes, Mr Opperman. Where is he? You are absolutely correct. Intrigue and
deception are not admissible in the processes or what I would like to call
the dialogue of Satyagraha – there should be a dialogue and they are
deliberately excluded. Intrigue and deception are as sinful as many other
things are, but in human relationships it is absolutely disastrous. I think
one of the major aspects of Satyagraha is that in its vocabulary, there is
no place for it.

Comrade Gwen and Comrade Judy, thank you, for constantly reminding me that
in 1994, we saw the highest manifestation of a revolutionary ethic in our
land South Africa. The most profound option for human relationships. I call
a revolutionary choice or option, was here. It is against this background,
comrades, that I would like you to know that almost 80 years ago, it was
Mahatma Gandhi who was ordained as the Mahathma by Rabindranath Tagore in
those days. Perhaps it is important for us as Africans to know this that if
Satyagraha is going to work, it will work in Africa. I have no faith that
it is going to work in India ... [Interjections.] ... and therefore I plead
to us here that we must resist the temptation of ``Indianising’’
Satyagraha. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

It is against this background, Chair, that I apologise for having skipped
my time, but I’m sure you would forgive me for this. I have had the
historical privilege to motivate this debate and today I have the
historical privilege to do something else.

Sir, I move this motion without notice:


  That the House –


  (1) notes that on 11 September 2006 marks the centenary of the
       introduction, by the Mahatma Gandhi, of Satyagraha in South Africa;


  (2) believes that Satyagraha belongs to the historical heritage of South
       Africa and that the principles of Satyagraha can play a meaningful
       role in the renewal and regeneration of our country and our
       continent; and


  (3) therefore resolves to request the Minister of Education to give
       consideration to incorporating the underlying values of Satyagraha in
       the philosophy of our school syllabus.
Thank you very much.

Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to.

The House adjourned at 17:43.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                          FRIDAY, 1 SEPTEMBER 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

     1) Further Education and Training Colleges Bill, 2006, submitted by
        the Minister of Education. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Education and the Select Committee on Education and Recreation.
2.    Translations of Bills submitted


      1) Die Minister van Onderwys


          a) Wysigingswetsontwerp op Voedingsmiddels, Skoonheidsmiddels en
             Ontsmettingsmiddels [W 35 – 2005] (Nasionale Vergadering – art
             76)


             This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the
             Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Amendment Bill [B 35 –
             2005] (National Assembly – sec 76).

National Assembly

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration and
        report. The Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements are referred to the Standing Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Insurance Sector
             Education and Training Authority (Inseta) for 2005-2006,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 77-2006].

          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Banking Sector Education
             and Training Authority (Bank-Seta) for 2005-2006, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2005-2006 [RP 67-2006].


    2.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Labour, the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
        Tourism and the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation for
        consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Tourism, Hospitality and
             Sport Education and Training Authority (Theta) for 2005-2006,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 87-2006].

    3.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Trade and Industry:


          a) Government Notice No R853 published in Government Gazette No
             27946 dated 2 September 2005: Standards Matters in terms of the
             Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


          b) Government Notice No R854 published in Government Gazette No
             27947 dated 2 September 2005: Withdrawal and replacement of the
             compulsory specification for motor vehicles of category N2/3,
             in terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


          c) Government Notice No R855 published in Government Gazette No
             27947 dated 2 September 2005: Withdrawal and replacement of the
             compulsory specification for motor vehicles of category M2/3,
             in terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


          d) Government Notice No R856 published in Government Gazette No
             27947 dated 2 September 2005: Withdrawal and replacement of the
             compulsory specification for motor vehicles of category M1, in
             terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


          e) Government Notice No R857 published in Government Gazette No
             27947 dated 2 September 2005: Withdrawal and replacement of the
             compulsory specification for motor vehicles of category N1, in
             terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


          f) Government Notice No R915 published in Government Gazette No
             28039 dated 23 September 2005: Incorporation of an external
             company as a company in the Republic of South Africa:
             Paddington Limited, in terms of the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No
             61 of 1973).


          g) Government Notice No R916 published in Government Gazette No
             28039 dated 23 September 2005: Incorporation of an external
             company as a company in the Republic of South Africa: Kasvel
             Limited, in terms of the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of
             1973).


          h) Government Notice No R.397 published in Government Gazette No
             28767 dated 28 April 2006: International Trade and
             Administration Commission of South Africa: Tariff
             investigations: Regulations, in terms of the International
             Trade Administration Act, 2002 (Act No 71 of 2002).


          i) Proclamation No 22 published in Government Gazette No 28824
             dated 11 May 2006: Commencement of the National Credit Act,
             2005 (Act No 34 of 2005).


          j) Government Notice No R.489 published in Government Gazette No
             28864 dated 31 May 2006: Regulations made in terms of the
             National Credit Act, 2005 (Act No 34 of 2005).


          k) Government Notice No R.517 published in Government Gazette No
             28894 dated 1 June 2006: Establishments of Collecting Societies
             in the Music Industry, in terms of the Copyright Act, 1978 (Act
             No 98 of 1978).


          l) Government Notice No R.477 published in Government Gazette No
             28848 dated 2 June 2006: Regulations: Payment of levy and the
             issue of sales permits with regard to compulsory
             specifications: Amendment, in terms of the Standards Act, 1993
             (Act No 29 of 1993).


          m) Government Notice No R.478 published in Government Gazette No
             28848 dated 2 June 2006: Regulations: Payment of levy and the
             issue of sales permits with regard to compulsory
             specifications: Amendment, in terms of the Standards Act, 1993
             (Act No 29 of 1993).
          n) Government Notice No R.479 published in Government Gazette No
             28848 dated 2 June 2006: Regulations: Payment of levy and the
             issue of sales permits with regard to compulsory
             specifications: Amendment, in terms of the Standards Act, 1993
             (Act No 29 of 1993).


          o) Government Notice No R.599 published in Government Gazette No
             28924 dated 15 June 2006: Exemption from the provisions of
             sections 143(2): WPP Group PLC, in terms of the Companies Act,
             1973 (Act No 61 of 1973).


          p) Government Notice No R.654 published in Government Gazette No
             28976 dated 7 July 2006: International Trade Administration
             Commission of South Africa, in terms of the International Trade
             Administration Act, 2002 (Act No 71 of 2002).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial and Fiscal
        Commission (FFC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 105-2006].

2.    The Minister of Finance

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Intelligence
        Centre for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 132-2006].


3.    The Minister of Labour

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 17 – Department of Labour
        for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements of Vote 17 for 2005-2006 [RP 59-2006].

4.    The Minister of Safety and Security

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 22 – Independent Complaints
        Directorate (ICD) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 22 for 2005-
        2006 [RP 113-2006].

5.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

     a) Report and Financial Statements of The Freedom Park Trust for 2005-
        2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements for 2005-2006.


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the William Humphreys Art
        Gallery for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 121-2006].


     c) Report and Financial Statements of the National Film and Video
        Foundation (NFVF) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 111-
        2006].


     d) Report and Financial Statements of the South African State Theatre
        for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 152-2006].


     e) Report and Financial Statements of the National English Literary
        Museum for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


     f) Report and Financial Statements of the Windybrow Centre for the
        Arts for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


     g) Report and Financial Statements of the War Museum of the Boer
        Republics for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


     h) Report and Financial Statements of Blind S A for 2005-2006,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements for 2005-2006.


     i) Report and Financial Statements of the National Library of South
        Africa for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 158-2006].


     j) Report and Financial Statements of Business and Arts South Africa
        (BASA) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 135-2006].


     k) Report and Financial Statements of the Voortrekker Museum –
        Isigcinamagugu for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [PR 107-2006].


     l) Report and Financial Statements of the Iziko Museums of Cape Town
        for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 89-2006].


     m) Report and Financial Statements of the National Museum –
        Bloemfontein for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 152-2006].


     n) Report and Financial Statements of the South African State Theatre
        for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


     o) Report and Financial Statements of the National Arts Council of
        South Africa (NAC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


     p) Report and Financial Statements of the Performing Arts Centre of
        Free State (PACOFS) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


     q) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Library for
        the Blind for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


     r) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Heritage
        Resources Agency (SAHRA) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 131-
        2006].

6.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Greater St Lucia Wetland
        Park Authority for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Special Investigating Unit
        (SIU) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 130-2006].

                          MONDAY, 4 SEPTEMBER 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry for
        consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements are referred to the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Clothing, Textiles,
             Footwear and Leather Sector Education and Training Authority
             (CTFL-Seta) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 70-2006].

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Services Sector
             Education and Training Authority (Services Seta) for 2005-2006,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 85-2006].


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Wholesale and
             Retail Sector Education and Training Authority (W&R-Seta) for
             2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 88-2006].


    2.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Transport for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
        Committee on Public Enterprises. The Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Transnet Limited for 2005-
             2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

    3.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Education for consideration
        and report. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
        for consideration:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Education, Training
             and Development Practices Sector Education and Training
             Authority (ETDP-Seta) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006
             [RP 72-2006].


    4.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Labour and the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality
        of Life and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons for
        consideration and report. The Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Umsobomvu Youth Fund
             (UYF) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

    5.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Labour for consideration and report. The Reports of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Economic
             Development and Labour Council (NEDLAC) for 2005-2006,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the National
             Productivity Institute (NPI) for 2005-2006, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             for 2005-2006.

    6.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration and report. The
        Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements are
        referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 27 – Department of
            Environmental Affairs and Tourism for 2005-2006, including the
            Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
            Vote 27 for 2005-2006 [RP 175-2006].

          b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
             Parks (SANparks) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of South African Tourism for
             2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

          d) Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
             Biodiversity Institute (SANBI) for 2005-2006, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2005-2006.


    7.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Home Affairs for consideration and report. The Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is referred to the
        Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Electoral
             Commission (IEC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
             97-2006].

    8.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Home Affairs and the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
        Constitutional Development for consideration and report. The Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is referred to
        the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Electoral Commission
             (IEC) on the Public Funding of Represented Political Parties
             Fund for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General
             on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 137-2006].


    9.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The Reports of the
        Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
        Statements are referred to the Standing Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 9 – Department of
             Public Enterprises for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 9 for 2005-
             2006 [RP 154-2006].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Airways
             (Proprietary) Limited (SAA) for 2005-2006, including the Report
             of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
             2005-2006.

    10.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Enterprises for consideration and report and to the
        Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry. The Report of
        the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements is referred to
        the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Forestry
             Company Limited (SAFCOL) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-
             2006.

    11. The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Education for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
        General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
        are referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Council on Higher
             Education (CHE) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Quality
             Assurance in General and Further Education and Training –
             Umalusi for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the National Student
             Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) for 2005-2006, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2005-2006 [RP 150-2006].

    12.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Arts and Culture for consideration and report:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Artscape for 2005-2006,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2005-2006.

    13.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Labour, the Portfolio Committee on Health and the Portfolio
        Committee on Social Development for consideration and report. The
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is
        referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Health and Welfare
             Sector Education and Training Authority (HW-Seta) for 2005-
             2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 76-2006].

    14. The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy for
        consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Chemical Industries
             Education and Training Authority (CHIETA) for 2005-2006,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 69-2006].

    15. The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
        Administration for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Public Service
            Sector Education and Training Authority (PSeta) for 2005-2006
            [RP 83-2006].


    16. The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Communications for
        consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Media, Advertising,
             Publishing, Printing and Packaging Sector Education and
             Training Authority (MAPPP-Seta) for 2005-2006, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2005-2006 [RP 80-2006].

    17. The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Labour, the Portfolio Committee on Communications and the Portfolio
        Committee on Science and Technology for consideration and report.
        The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is
        referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Information Systems,
             Electronics and Telecommunications Technologies Sector
             Education and Training Authority (ISETT-Seta) for 2005-2006,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 78-2006].

    18. The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy for
        consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements are referred to the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Energy Sector Education
             and Training Authority (Eseta) for 2005-2006, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2005-2006 [RP 71-2006].

          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Mining Qualifications
             Authority (MQA) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
             82-2006].


    19. The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Communications for consideration and report. The Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is referred to the
        Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Media Development and
             Diversity Agency (MDDA) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

    20. The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report. The Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements are referred to the Standing Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:
        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Legal Aid Board for
            2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
            Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 44-2006].

        (b)      Report of the Auditor-General on the unsigned summary of
            statements of monies kept in trust in the Guardian’s Fund for
            2004-2005.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     a) Quarterly Report of the Auditor-General on the submission of
        financial statements by municipalities and the status of audit
        reports as at 30 June 2006 for the financial year ended 30 June
        2005 [RP 153-2006].

2.    The Minister of Education

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
        Qualifications Authority (SAQA) for 2005-2006, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006
        [RP 189-2006].


                          TUESDAY, 5 SEPTEMBER 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


         (a)     Electricity Regulation Amendment Bill [B 20 – 2006]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of
             Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
             Government Gazette No 29192 of 4 September 2006.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Minerals
         and Energy of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
         Rule 160.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Defence

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Armaments Corporation of
        South Africa Limited (ARMSCOR) for 2005-2006, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006
        [RP 139-2006].


2.    The Minister of Public Works


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Industry
        Development Board (CIDB) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 198-
        2006].

3.    The Minister of Labour

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Unemployment Insurance Fund
        (UIF) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 89-2006].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of ad hoc Committee on operational problems in the office of
   the Public Protector, dated 5 September 2006:

The Committee, having concluded its inquiry, reports as follows:


1.    Introduction


The Speaker of the National Assembly established the  ad  hoc  Committee  on
operational problems in the office of the Public Protector on 31  July  2006
in  terms  of  Rule  214  of  the  National  Assembly  Rules.  The   Speaker
established the Committee at the request of the Public Protector.  The  main
function of the Committee was  to  inquire  into  the  operational  problems
being experienced by the office of the Public Protector, as reported to  the
Speaker  by  the  Public  Protector.  The  National  Assembly  ratified  the
Speaker’s decision on 15 August 2006.

The Members of the Committee are:

 • Prof AK Asmal, Chairperson (ANC)
 • Ms CB Johnson (ANC)
 • Ms MAA Njobe (ANC)
 • Ms SM Camerer (DA)
 • Mr LK Joubert (DA)
 • Mr JH van der Merwe (IFP)
 • Mr A Harding (ID).

2.    Mandate

(i)   The Committee’s  mandate  is  outlined  in  the  announcement  by  the
      Speaker, informing  Parliament  of  her  decision,  after  direct  and
      indirect consultation with the Chief Whips and party  representatives,
      to establish an ad hoc committee to inquire into operational  problems
      being experienced by the office of the Public Protector.

(ii)  In terms of this notice, the Committee was required to:

         • investigate the operational problems experienced in the office of
           the Public Protector;


         • consist of members of the Assembly as follows:  African  National
           Congress 3, Democratic Alliance 2, Inkatha Freedom Party  1,  and
           other parties 1;


         • exercise those powers in Rule 138 of the National Assembly  Rules
           that may assist it in carrying out its functions; and


         • submit a report with its  findings  and  recommendations  to  the
           House by 25 August 2006.

(iii) The notice outlining the scope of the Committee’s terms  of  reference
     was supplemented by the Speaker in writing to Prof Asmal on  4  August
     2006, stating that the Committee’s mandate was  limited  to  inquiring
     into the operational problems being experienced by the office  of  the
     Public Protector, as reported to the Speaker by the Public  Protector,
     Adv M L Mushwana, and that the  intention  was  that  the  inquiry  be
     confined to the contents of  the  documents  which  should  guide  the
     Committee’s work.

(iv)  In carrying out its task, the Committee consequently focused on its
     terms of reference, which did not require it to investigate or express
     itself on the allegations and counter-allegations that have been aired
     by the Public Protector and the Deputy Public Protector, Adv M T Shai.
     The Committee was tasked to inquire into the impact of operational
     difficulties on the functioning of the office. However, the terms of
     reference did not inhibit the Committee from identifying wider issues
     that affected the operation of the office.

(v)   We draw the attention of the National Assembly to a  rather  important
     dimension to the Committee’s work. This  is  the  first  time  that  a
     committee of Parliament had been requested to deal with  a  matter  of
     this nature relating to a Chapter 9 institution.

(vi)  Furthermore, the Committee was mindful of the provisions  of  Rule  66
     of  the  National  Assembly  Rules,  which  prohibits   Members   from
     reflecting on the competence or honour of the  holder  of  an  office,
     whose removal from office is dependent on a decision of  the  National
     Assembly.  However,  the  Committee  was  satisfied  that  the  Public
     Protector’s  request  for   the   National   Assembly   to   intervene
     accommodated this concern.


3.    Methodology


3.1   Closed meetings

(i)   The Committee was mindful of the  provisions  of  section  59  of  the
      Constitution, which states that, except where exclusion of the  public
      is reasonable and justifiable in an open and democratic  society,  the
      National Assembly must conduct its business in an open manner and hold
      its sittings and those of its committees in public.

(ii)  However, as the inquiry related to private information that could be
      prejudicial to particular persons and, further, that it affected the
      status of the office of the Public Protector, the Committee was
      persuaded to invoke Rule 157 of the National Assembly Rules and
      conduct its inquiry in closed session. Under section 181(3) of the
      Constitution, Parliament also has a duty to protect the dignity of the
      office. The Committee, therefore, agreed that its sessions would
      assume the form of closed meetings. Press statements were, however,
      released on progress with its work and the need for closed meetings
      was continually reviewed as it proceeded.


3.2   Confidential documentation


(i)   The Committee held its first meeting  on  Thursday,  10  August  2006,
      during which the supporting documents that the  Public  Protector  had
      submitted to the Speaker,  together  with  material  from  the  Deputy
      Public Protector submitted to the Portfolio Committee on  Justice  and
      Constitutional  Development,  were  distributed  to  the  Members   as
      confidential documents, on the grounds  that  they  contained  private
      information that could be prejudicial to particular individuals and in
      order to protect the dignity of the office.

(ii)  At a subsequent  meeting,  held  on  14  August  2006,  the  Committee
      perused the set of documents that constituted the basis of its inquiry
      and declared them to be confidential documents in accordance with Rule
      157. At this meeting, the Committee also agreed to invite  the  Public
      Protector  and  the  Deputy  Public  Protector  to  make  any  further
      submissions, additional to the written  submissions  already  received
      from them.

3.3   Interviews

(i)   At the meeting on 14 August 2006, the Committee agreed that  it  would
      invite the Public Protector and the Deputy Public Protector to  appear
      before it on Monday, 21 August 2006,  and  Tuesday,  22  August  2006,
      respectively. The main objective of  these  meetings  was  to  clarify
      matters contained in the documents submitted to the  Speaker  and  the
      Committee, as well as to provide the Public Protector and  the  Deputy
      Public Protector with the opportunity  to  elucidate  on  the  matters
      before the Committee.

(ii)  The Committee agreed that the interviews would be structured in a
     manner that would enable it to gather information around specific
     themes, which relate to the key issues that the Committee would have
     to explore in the execution of its mandate. The main themes identified
     by the Committee included:

         • the legal  framework  regulating  the  relationship  between  the
           parties;


         • the powers delegated to the  Deputy  Public  Protector  upon  her
           appointment in terms of the Public Protector Act, as amended;

         • the role of Parliament in the appointment of  the  Deputy  Public
           Protector and the drafting of the terms  of  reference  outlining
           her functions;

         • the functioning of the Public Protector’s office in terms of  its
           staff complement, current  vacancies,  lines  of  accountability,
           etc; and

         • the main factors or issues that may have led to the breakdown  in
           the relationship between the parties  and  the  extent  to  which
           these could be resolved or remedied.

(iii) Subsequent  to  the  separate  interviews,  the  Committee  agreed  to
     conduct a joint interview with the Public Protector and Deputy  Public
     Protector on 23 August 2006. The reason for this was to enable Members
     to clarify certain issues arising from  the  separate  interviews,  as
     well as those issues that were in dispute in terms of the  information
     presented by both parties, and to assess the  extent  to  which  these
     could be resolved or remedied.

4.    Timeframes

      In terms of the Committee’s mandate, the Committee was required to
      complete its work and submit a report to the National Assembly by
      Friday, 25 August 2006. However, the Committee, through no fault of
      its own, could only convene its first session on Thursday, 10 August
      2006. Given the nature of the Committee’s mandate, and the volume of
      documentation that the Committee was required to process in order to
      arrive at its findings and formulate recommendations, the Committee
      was not in a position to meet this deadline. Although the Committee
      had completed its formal work by the envisaged deadline, it was
      obliged to request an extension from the Speaker for the submission of
      its report which it did on 24 August. The Committee’s deadline was
      extended to Friday, 8 September 2006, by resolution of the National
      Assembly on 29 August 2006.

5.    Legal framework

5.1   Background

(i)    Governments  worldwide  are  entrusted  with  the  responsibility  of
      protecting the rights of their citizens. However, governments are only
      as trustworthy and infallible as  the  human  beings  that  constitute
      them. In order to promote and ensure effective  government,  different
      forms of supervision and oversight of state  functionaries  have  been
      identified.

(ii)  Most constitutions provide citizens with  the  right  to  litigate  to
      obtain redress for administrative improprieties.  However,  litigation
      tends to be formal, expensive and dilatory  to  the  point  where  the
      ordinary person is deterred from using it to assert or enforce his  or
      her rights. As such, an institution such as the Public Protector is an
      important addition to the armoury of mechanisms that are  employed  to
      create the substance of fair and stable constitutional government.  In
      furtherance of this ideal, an experienced, high-level  public  officer
      normally heads such an office to monitor  the  implementation  of  the
      exercise of policy and the provision of services, in order  to  ensure
      administrative justice and fair treatment of all the people.  Such  an
      office is described as the Ombudsman or the Ombud in  many  countries.
      South Africa has chosen a more meaningful, descriptive name.

5.2   Establishment of the office of Public Protector in South Africa

(i)   As a result of a unanimous decision  of  the  multi-party  negotiating
      forum that recognised the need for citizens to have a means of redress
      that  is  separate  from  the  courts,  section  110  of  the  Interim
      Constitution of 1993 established the office of the Public Protector in
      South Africa. Section 181 of the Constitution of the Republic of South
      Africa, 1996, provides  for  the  office’s  continued  existence.  The
      operational requirements of the office  are  provided  for  under  the
      Public Protector  Act,  1994.  These  three  instruments  provide  the
      regulatory framework for the office of Public Protector.

(ii)  It is important to note that neither the Interim Constitution nor  the
      Constitution  made  provision  for  the  position  of  Deputy   Public
      Protector. This position was created in terms of the Public  Protector
      Act, 1994, as amended by the Public Protector Amendment Act, 2003.

5.3   Appointment and removal from office of the Public  Protector  and  the
      Deputy Public Protector

(i)   The  President,  on  the  recommendation  of  the  National  Assembly,
      appoints the Public Protector and the Deputy Public Protector  through
      separate processes. In terms of section 193(4)  of  the  Constitution,
      the President appoints the Public Protector, on the recommendation  of
      the National Assembly. The Public Protector is appointed  for  a  non-
      renewable term of seven years. The National  Assembly  must  recommend
      persons nominated by a committee of the Assembly and approved  by  the
      Assembly by a resolution adopted with a supporting vote of at least 60
      per cent of the Members  of  the  Assembly.  This  process  makes  the
      selection process of the Public Protector  (along  with  that  of  the
      Auditor-General) more stringent than that  for  any  other  Chapter  9
      institution.

(ii)  Prior to 2003, section 6 of the Public Protector Amendment Act,  1998,
      empowered the Minister of Justice and  Constitutional  Development  to
      appoint one or more Deputy  Public  Protectors  after  consulting  the
      Public Protector. No appointments were made under this  provision.  In
      2003, the Act was amended to provide for the appointment of the Deputy
      Public Protector by  the  President,  on  the  recommendation  of  the
      National Assembly. No  other  Chapter  9  institution  has  a  similar
      provision for a deputy, apart from the office of the Auditor-General.

(iii) Section 194 of the Constitution sets out  the  grounds  and  procedure
      for the removal from office of the Public Protector. In terms of  this
      section, the President must remove the Public  Protector  from  office
      where the National Assembly, by  resolution,  calls  for  his  or  her
      removal from office  on  the  grounds  of  misconduct,  incapacity  or
      incompetence.

(iv)  Section 2A(9) of the Public Protector Act, 1994,  as  amended  by  the
      Public Protector Amendment  Act,  2003,  contains  similar  provisions
      regarding the removal from office  of  the  Deputy  Public  Protector.
      However, in respect of the Public Protector, the resolution for his or
      her dismissal must be adopted with a supporting vote of at least  two-
      thirds of the Members of the National Assembly, while the  removal  of
      the Deputy Public Protector requires a simple majority.

(v)   In respect of suspension, section 194(3) of the Constitution provides
      that the President may suspend a Public Protector from office at any
      time after the start of proceedings of a committee of the National
      Assembly for the removal of that person.

(vi)  In respect of the Deputy Public Protector, section 2A(11) of the
      Public Protector Act states that the President may suspend the Deputy
      Public Protector at any time after the National Assembly has received
      any complaint relating to the grounds referred to in section 2A(9), if
      the President deems the complaint to be of such a serious nature as to
      make it inappropriate for the Deputy to continue to perform his or her
      functions while the complaint is being investigated.

5.4   Powers and functions of the Public Protector

(i)   Section 182(1) of the Constitution empowers the  Public  Protector  to
      investigate  any  conduct  in  state  affairs   or   in   the   public
      administration  in  any  sphere  of  government  that  is  alleged  or
      suspected to be improper or to result in any impropriety or prejudice,
      to report on that conduct and to take appropriate remedial action.

(ii)  Furthermore, section  6(4)(a)  of  the  Public  Protector  Act,  1994,
     provides the Public Protector with additional  powers  to  investigate
     any alleged -

         • maladministration in connection with the  affairs  of  government
           and any alleged abuse of power or other  improper  conduct  by  a
           person performing a public function;


         • improper or dishonest act or omission or offences referred to  in
           specified provisions of the Prevention and Combating  of  Corrupt
           Activities Act, 2004; and


         • improper or unlawful enrichment or receipt of  any  advantage  or
           promise of such enrichment or advantage by a person as  a  result
           of an  act  or  omission  in  the  public  administration  or  in
           connection with the affairs of government at any level  or  of  a
           person performing a public function.

5.5   Independence and impartiality

(i)   The  Constitution  contains  the  following  provisions  that  aim  to
     protect the independence and impartiality of the office of the  Public
     Protector:

         • Section 181(2) declares the office of  the  Public  Protector  as
           independent, and subject only to the Constitution and the law. It
           also requires the office to be impartial,  and  to  exercise  its
           powers  and  perform  its  functions  without  fear,  favour   or
           prejudice.
         • In terms of section 181(5), the Public Protector  is  accountable
           to the National Assembly, and must  report  to  the  Assembly  at
           least once a year on its activities and the  performance  of  its
           functions. In addition, section 11(a)  of  the  Public  Protector
           Amendment Act, 1998, requires  the  Public  Protector  to  submit
           yearly  reports  to  Parliament,  with  the  added  authority  of
           submitting special reports when required.

         • Section 181(3) directs other organs of state, through legislative
           and other measures, to assist  and  protect  the  office  of  the
           Public  Protector  to  ensure  its  independence,   impartiality,
           dignity and effectiveness.

         • Section 181(4) prohibits  any  person  or  organ  of  state  from
           interfering with the functioning of the Public Protector.

(ii)   In  addition,  section  5(3)  of  the  Public  Protector  Act,  1994,
     indemnifies the Public Protector and any member of his or  her  office
     against liability in respect of  anything  reflected  in  any  report,
     finding, point of view or recommendation made  or  expressed  in  good
     faith and  submitted  to  Parliament  in  terms  of  the  Act  or  the
     Constitution.

(iii) The extent of activity relating to the  work  of  the  office  of  the
     Public Protector is reflected  in  the  statistics  published  by  the
     office. In 2003/2004 the office of the Public  Protector  received  17
     295 new complaints, while  7  520  cases  were  brought  forward  from
     previous years. The office reported that it had disposed of a total of
     15 946 cases for the  2003/2004  financial  year.  In  2004/2005,  the
     office received 22 350 complaints, while 9 292 cases were carried over
     from previous years. The office reported that it had  disposed  of  17
     539 cases in the 2004/2005 financial year. The Public  Protector  has,
     therefore, investigated and disposed of a total of  33  485  cases  in
     these  two  financial  years.  The  Committee  considers  that   these
     statistics provide an important insight into the public’s recourse  to
     the office for remedies of one kind or another.

(iv)  The Public Protector has also established  offices  in  all  the  nine
     provinces to make the office more readily accessible  to  all  persons
     and communities in South Africa, and to  enable  it  to  exercise  its
     complaints-handling and oversight function at the provincial level.

6.    Stature of the office-holders

6.1   Criteria of office

(i)   The holders of the offices  of  Public  Protector  and  Deputy  Public
      Protector are required by sections 1A and 2A of the  Public  Protector
      Act to have practised as an advocate  or  attorney  for  a  cumulative
      period of at least 10 years;  or  to  be  so  qualified  and  to  have
      lectured  in  law  at  a  university  for  such  period;  or  to  have
      specialised knowledge  of  or  experience  in  the  administration  of
      justice, public administration or public finance for such  period;  or
      to have been a member of Parliament for such period; or to  possess  a
      combination of these requirements.


6.2   The Public Protector

(i)   Adv Mushwana was recommended by the National Assembly for  appointment
      as Public Protector from amongst 15  shortlisted  candidates  and  was
      appointed to the office by the President with effect from  15  October
      2002.


6.3   The Deputy Public Protector

(i)   Adv Mamiki Shai, one of 10 candidates shortlisted for  appointment  as
      Deputy Public  Protector,  was  recommended  for  appointment  by  the
      National Assembly  on  27  October  2005  and  was  appointed  by  the
      President with effect from 1 December 2005.

7.    The nature of the operational problems

7.1   Based on a careful assessment of the documents  before  the  Committee
      and the inputs made to it in person by the Public  Protector  and  the
      Deputy  Public  Protector,  the  Committee  found  that  a  range   of
      operational problems existed in the office of  the  Public  Protector,
      which negatively impacted, and continue to impact, on its  ability  to
      carry out its constitutional responsibilities optimally. Some of these
      problems existed  prior  to  the  appointment  of  the  Deputy  Public
      Protector on 1 December 2005 and partly contributed  to  the  tensions
      that subsequently developed  between  the  Public  Protector  and  the
      Deputy Public  Protector,  whereas  others  arose  directly  from  the
      strained relations between them as these progressively deteriorated.

7.2   (i)   The Committee found  that  initially  there  was  a  measure  of
      constructive engagement and co-operation between the Public  Protector
      and the Deputy Public Protector.  However,  as  from  mid-April  2006,
      tensions surfaced between the parties. Remarkably these  tensions,  by
      all  accounts,  arose  from  relatively  insignificant  administrative
      issues, including the drafting of a strategic plan for the  office  by
      the Deputy Public Protector. When the Public Protector  indicated  his
      dissatisfaction with the outcome, this culminated in a serious rift in
      relations between the parties.

  ii) This rapidly led to a discord that entered the public domain when  the
      Deputy Public Protector made serious allegations of various kinds that
      directly reflected on the character of  the  Public  Protector.  These
      allegations arose from  a  radio  interview  with  the  Deputy  Public
      Protector on 14 July 2006. That the  Deputy  Public  Protector  should
      grant a radio interview on such matters was in  itself  surprising  to
      the  Committee.  When  the  Committee  questioned  the  Deputy  Public
      Protector about the allegations, she was unable to substantiate them.


      (iii) On 16 July 2006 a story appeared in the  Sunday  Times  implying
      that the Public Protector had  sexually  harassed  the  Deputy  Public
      Protector. The Public Protector responded to this in a radio interview
      on 17 July 2006, in order to “defend his honour”, as he  informed  the
      Committee. In spite of the provocation,  the  Committee  views  it  as
      inappropriate for the holder of such a high public office  to  respond
      in this way.


      (iv)  Subsequently, the Public Protector issued a  civil  summons  for
      defamation against the Deputy Public Protector  and  others,  and  the
      Deputy Public Protector informed the Committee that  in  response  she
      had instructed her attorneys to prepare a counterclaim. The  Committee
      noted that the matter is still pending.


      (v)   The Deputy Public Protector also informed the Committee that she
      had prepared a letter of complaint,  dated  13  August  2006,  to  the
      Commission for Gender Equality  relating  to  what  she  described  as
      certain “gender-based concerns” of hers, but this letter had  not  yet
      been delivered to the Commission as of 23 August 2006.


      (vi)  The Committee views it as unusual in such an institution for the
      head and  the  deputy  head  to  embark  on  such  actions,  which  by
      definition must result in operational problems in the institution.

      (vii) The Committee also finds it inconceivable  and  lacking  in  any
      sense of proportion  for  a  statutory  office-holder  to  attack  the
      character of a superior in a radio interview.

7.3   The most important operational problems identified  by  the  Committee
      are the following:

7.3.1 Lack of clarity regarding the ambit of  powers  and  functions  to  be
      exercised by the Deputy Public Protector

(i)   The Deputy Public Protector has no inherent  powers,  except  for  the
    powers delegated by the Public Protector. The Public Protector  Act  is
    silent regarding  the  extent  of  delegated  powers,  except  that  it
    provides that the Deputy Public Protector shall have such powers as the
    Public Protector may delegate to him or her and that the Deputy  Public
    Protector will perform the functions of the Public Protector if  he  or
    she is unable to do so (sections 2A(6) and (7), Public  Protector  Act,
    1994).


(ii)  The Committee considered whether the Public Protector Act obliges the
    Public Protector to delegate powers and functions to the Deputy Public
    Protector. Based on legal opinion obtained, the Committee accepts that
    the Public Protector is indeed obliged to delegate powers to the Deputy
    Public Protector. The Committee’s position on this matter is supported
    by the high level of skills and qualifications required of the person
    to be appointed as Deputy Public Protector, the provisions of the
    Public Protector Act read as a whole, as well as legal precedent. The
    Committee agreed, therefore, that in respect of delegation:

        • The Public Protector may withdraw the delegation at any  time  and
          perform the function personally. He  or  she  may  also  prescribe
          certain conditions relating to the exercise of the function by the
          Deputy Public Protector.


        • When the Deputy Public Protector performs a function on behalf  of
          the Public Protector, he or she acts in the place  of  the  Public
          Protector and the function is regarded as having been performed by
          the Public Protector.

        • The Public Protector may exercise various types  of  control  over
          the Deputy Public Protector. He or she may require reports  to  be
          furnished and if the task is not correctly exercised, may  relieve
          the Deputy Public Protector of his or her function. However,  once
          a task is completed, the Public Protector is bound by the decision
          or performance. He or she may only repeal or alter the  delegation
          in respect of future acts and may not undo completed matters.


(iii) Notwithstanding the obligation on the Public Protector to delegate
    powers to the Deputy Public Protector, he or she retains ultimate
    responsibility for the operation of the office and, as such, is
    accountable to the National Assembly. Moreover, the Public Protector
    retains ultimate responsibility for all external communications, and in
    this regard should never delegate powers to the extent where the Deputy
    Public Protector exercises exclusive discretion.

(iv)  The Committee found that certain functions had been assigned to the
    Deputy Public Protector, as reflected in the minutes of a management
    meeting on 13 January 2006. However, this did not constitute a formal
    and distinct delegation of powers as contemplated in the Act. Indeed,
    the Committee found a total lack of precision regarding the powers
    vested in the Deputy Public Protector. It was not clear to the
    Committee what exactly she was expected to do and on what basis of
    authority.


(v)         It appears that functions were assigned to her in an ad hoc way
    and that they were largely of an administrative nature. More
    specifically, in the absence of a chief executive officer, the Deputy
    Public Protector performed duties that can be performed by senior
    staff, although she did not fulfil the function of accounting officer.
    In terms of the organisational structure of the office of the Public
    Protector, all but two managers at the national office, as well as all
    regional managers, are required to report to the Deputy Public
    Protector. However, the Deputy Public Protector complained that she did
    not have sufficient authority to exercise effective managerial control.
    Furthermore, the Deputy Public Protector voiced dissatisfaction at her
    lack of direct involvement in the core business of the office, namely
    investigations.

(vi)  The Committee found that despite the Act’s silence regarding the
    ambit of the powers and functions to be delegated to the Deputy Public
    Protector, any powers delegated to the Deputy Public Protector should
    befit her status as an appointed office-holder.


7.3.2 Lines of authority and accountability  between  the  Public  Protector
      and the Deputy Public Protector as statutory office-holders

(i)   It appears to the Committee that neither the Public Protector nor  his
      Deputy has  understood  or  grappled  with  the  issue  of  the  legal
      relationship between the two of them. This is reflected in the request
      by the Public Protector  to  various  bodies  for  assistance  towards
      ”reconciliation” between them, and  in  the  Deputy  Public  Protector
      seeking “mediation”. In following this  course,  these  office-holders
      have misinterpreted the law.
(ii)  Yet, the Act is very clear as  section  3  unambiguously  states  that
      “The Public Protector shall, subject to  his  or  her  directions  and
      control, … be assisted (our emphasis) by the Deputy Public Protector”.
      This envisaged that  the Public Protector would manage the Deputy.  In
      other words, insubordination could be regarded as misconduct  for  the
      purposes of section 2A(9) of the Act.


(iii) The Committee therefore considered the matter  of  accountability  and
      affirmed that the Public Protector is the head of the  office  and  is
      the person who  is  accountable  to  the  National  Assembly  for  its
      functioning.  Accordingly,  despite  the  statutory  nature   of   the
      appointment, and the similarity  in  the  rules  pertaining  to  their
      appointment to and removal from  office,  they  are  not  equals.  The
      Deputy Public  Protector  reports  to  the  Public  Protector  and  is
      accountable to the Public Protector for the exercise of her powers and
      functions.  The  Deputy  Public  Protector  has  accepted  before  the
      Committee that this is the correct interpretation of the nature of the
      legal relationship between the two office-holders.

7.3.3 Cessation of regular meetings between the  Public  Protector  and  the
      Deputy Public Protector

(i)   The Committee found that before the office  of  the  Public  Protector
      started to experience operational problems, there was a measure of co-
      operation  between  the  Public  Protector  and  the   Deputy   Public
      Protector. This is evident from the fact that the parties held  weekly
      meetings to discuss operational issues in the office, as well  as  the
      fact that management meetings were held on a regular  basis.  However,
      since May 2006, their weekly meetings to discuss operational issues in
      the office had ceased as relations between  them  became  increasingly
      strained. The Committee noted that communication  between  the  Public
      Protector and the Deputy Public Protector became more distant as  time
      progressed, and that  they  resorted  to  a  flood  of  short  message
      services (SMSs) and electronic mail (E-mail) rather than  speaking  to
      each other directly.


7.3.4 Failure to observe protocol  in  communication  between  the  parties,
      communication between the parties and staff, as well as  communication
      with external role-players, such as Parliament and the media

(i)   The Committee noted  with  concern  that  the  progressively  strained
      relations between the Public Protector and the Deputy Public Protector
      had unfortunately culminated in a public dispute between them.  It  is
      not for the Committee to determine exactly who  took  the  initiative,
      but both parties interacted  with  and  provided  information  to  the
      media. Furthermore, both parties separately submitted  representations
      to  the  Chairperson  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice   and
      Constitutional Development for intervention. The  Portfolio  Committee
      does not appear to have addressed the representations made  to  it  in
      this regard.


(ii)  Section 2(5) of the Public Protector  Act  provides  that  the  Public
      Protector may at any time approach the Portfolio Committee on  Justice
      and Constitutional Development with regard to any matter pertaining to
      the office of the Public Protector. It was,  therefore,  not  improper
      for the Public Protector to approach the Portfolio Committee. However,
      it  was  improper  for  the  Deputy  Public  Protector   to   do   so.
      Nevertheless, the Committee was of the view that the Public  Protector
      should have known, regardless of information  received  from  a  third
      party, that the appropriate protocol  when  approaching  the  National
      Assembly on issues pertaining to the office of the Public Protector is
      through the Speaker of the National  Assembly,  who  must  refer  such
      issues to the relevant committee.


(iii) The Committee expressed its dismay at the apparent  inability  of  the
      Public Protector and the Deputy Public Protector, who are appointed to
      these high ranking offices in a  process  determined  by  statute,  to
      solve minor internal problems, and to resort to  seeking  a  political
      resolution to what are largely administrative matters.


(iv)   Furthermore,  both  the  Public  Protector  and  the  Deputy   Public
      Protector displayed a lack of discretion  in  placing  their  personal
      differences in the public domain. This  lack  of  discretion  is  also
      evident in their lack of prudence in directing appeals to a number  of
      government  structures  simultaneously,  including  the  Minister  and
      Deputy Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development.  There  was
      internal evidence that even the Presidency had been approached by  the
      Deputy  Public  Protector.  This  was  totally  out   of   order   and
      inconsistent with their constitutional status.  In  the  process  they
      allowed their dispute to escalate into a public row  that  degenerated
      into a débâcle.


(v)   Given that both the Public Protector and the Deputy  Public  Protector
      have  sufficient   authority   to   resolve   administrative   matters
      internally, as well as responsibility to protect the  dignity  of  the
      office, the Committee found their behaviour to be regrettable  in  the
      extreme. A public argument of this nature undermines  the  dignity  of
      the office, which could adversely affect the level of  confidence  the
      public has in this vital office.

7.3.5  Withdrawal  of  the  powers  and  functions  of  the  Deputy   Public
      Protector, which have not yet been restored

(i)   As noted above, the Committee was informed that before the
      deterioration in relations between the Public Protector and the Deputy
      Public Protector, all but two managers at the national office, as well
      as all regional managers, in principle reported to the Deputy Public
      Protector in terms of the organisational structure of the office.
      However, the Committee was informed that on 17 July 2006 the Public
      Protector had, by means of a memorandum, instructed all managers that
      from that date they should report to him directly, and not to the
      Deputy Public Protector. The Committee was informed that this
      instruction is still in effect. Hence, since mid-July 2006, the work
      undertaken by the Deputy Public Protector has been significantly
      reduced.


7.3.6 Delays in filling senior positions and staff turnover

(i)   The Committee found that the staff turnover in the office of the
      Public Protector is a matter of serious concern. This may not
      necessarily be attributable to the strained relations between the
      Public Protector and the Deputy Public Protector, but rather to the
      absence of an effective staff retention strategy, particularly with
      regard to senior staff. In addition, the Committee noted the long
      delays in filling posts in the office, especially at senior management
      level. Of particular concern to the Committee is the tardiness in
      filling the position of chief executive officer, which has been vacant
      since the Deputy Public Protector assumed office in December 2005. The
      Committee was informed that the delay in filling this position could
      be attributed, in the opinion of the Public Protector, to difficulties
      in determining the appropriate remuneration for this position.
      Consequently, some of the functions of the chief executive officer
      were effectively devolved to the Deputy Public Protector in the
      interim.


7.3.7 Terms and conditions of service


(i)   The National Assembly is tasked with determining the remuneration and
      other terms and conditions of service applicable to the Deputy Public
      Protector upon the advice of the relevant committee (section 2A(5) of
      the Public Protector Act, 1994). The Committee found that, pursuant to
      this mandate, the National Assembly had indeed approved the terms and
      conditions of service applicable to the Deputy Public Protector as
      early as October 2005, and those had been sent to the Public
      Protector. However, it appears that such terms and conditions have not
      been communicated to the Deputy Public Protector and that the Public
      Protector and the Deputy Public Protector were not applying them.


(ii)  Confusion around leave applications by the Deputy Public Protector
      also contributed to the strained relationship. The Committee
      established that the Deputy Public Protector should apply to the
      Public Protector for leave.


(iii) The Committee also clarified that the Public Protector is responsible
      for his own ordinary leave requirements and that the chief
      administrative officer should keep records for auditing purposes.


(iv)  Both the Public Protector and the Deputy Public Protector agreed to
      adopt this new approach to leave applications.


7.3.8 Allegations of sexual harassment

(i)   The Committee noted that no charge of sexual harassment had been laid
      and that no complaints on those grounds or on the grounds of other
      inappropriate behaviour had been submitted to any public authority as
      of 23 August 2006. The allegations, as published in the media, were
      therefore unsubstantiated and required no further response from the
      Committee.


7.4   The Committee found  that  the  deterioration  in  relations  and  the
      resultant aggravated behaviour in public between the Public  Protector
      and the Deputy Public Protector had resulted in  tension  among  staff
      members, leading to poor staff morale. The Public  Protector  informed
      the Committee that there were “camps” in his office, built around  the
      Deputy Public Protector. The  Deputy  Public  Protector  informed  the
      Committee  that  there  were  “tensions”  in  the  office.  This   has
      contributed to the current operational problems being  experienced  by
      the office.

7.5   The Committee also noted that prior to  the  Deputy  Public  Protector
      assuming office on 1  December  2005,  there  had  been  no  complaint
      regarding the operations  in  the  office  of  the  Public  Protector,
      particularly  relating  to  issues  of  authority  and   jurisdiction.
      Although  the  Committee  is  reluctant  to  attribute   the   current
      operational problems being experienced by the  office  of  the  Public
      Protector exclusively to either party, it noted  that  a  contributing
      factor might have been the lack of a proper  mentoring  programme  for
      the Deputy Public Protector on assuming office, and the fact that  the
      Public Protector was unavailable  at  the  time  to  provide  personal
      guidance as he was away on leave.

7.6   The Committee noted that the Public Protector  Act,  1994,  is  silent
      regarding the powers to be accorded to the  Deputy  Public  Protector.
      With regard to the content of the powers and functions to be  assigned
      to the Deputy Public Protector, the Act simply states that the  Public
      Protector may delegate powers to  the  Deputy  Public  Protector.  The
      Committee found that the lack of legislative clarity  had  contributed
      to the operational problems being experienced in  the  office  of  the
      Public Protector. However, the legislation concerning the authority of
      the Public Protector is quite clear: the Deputy  Public  Protector  is
      subordinated to the Public Protector. Be that as it may, the Committee
      noted that the inexperience of the Deputy Public Protector in the work
      and activities of the office of the Public Protector did not create an
      impediment for her to intervene, sometimes in a very sharp and  abrupt
      fashion.

8.    Recommendations

(i)   The Committee’s  recommendations  to  the  National  Assembly  aim  to
      strengthen the office of the  Public  Protector  and  to  resolve  the
      operational  problems  affecting  its   optimal   functioning.   These
      recommendations  take  into  account  the  fact  that  some   of   the
      differences and misunderstanding between the Public Protector and  the
      Deputy Public Protector may have been clarified at a  meeting  of  the
      Committee at which both parties were  present.  These  include  issues
      relating to the overall authority of the Public Protector; the  urgent
      need for the formal written delegation  of  functions  to  the  Deputy
      Public Protector; the need for the  involvement  of  both  the  Public
      Protector and the Deputy Public Protector  in  interviews  for  senior
      appointments;  the  clarification  of  leave  applications   and   the
      applicable terms and conditions of service; as well as  the  need  for
      proper communication of the powers  delegated  to  the  Deputy  Public
      Protector, as under the organisational structure of the office.

(ii)  The Committee submits that its recommendations should  be  implemented
      as a matter of urgency, as they include  confidence-building  measures
      to assist in removing the potential sources  of  tension  between  the
      Public Protector and the Deputy Public Protector.

The Committee’s recommendations are as follows:

8.1   The lines of authority and accountability between the  office  of  the
      Public Protector and other organs of  state,  more  particularly  with
      Parliament,  the  Presidency  and  the  Department  of   Justice   and
      Constitutional Development, need to be observed so as to  protect  the
      independence of the office of the Public Protector. The  Committee  is
      concerned that  the  Minister  and  Deputy  Minister  of  Justice  and
      Constitutional Development were approached, although neither of  these
      authorities has any competence relating  to  the  functioning  of  the
      Chapter 9 institutions.

8.2    The  lines  of  authority  and  accountability  between  the   Public
      Protector and  the  Deputy  Public  Protector,  as  statutory  office-
      holders, have  been  clarified  by  the  Committee.  Both  the  Public
      Protector and the Deputy Public Protector accepted  the  authority  of
      the Public Protector as head of the institution. As such,  the  Deputy
      Public Protector  reports  to  the  Public  Protector.  The  Committee
      recommends that the Public Protector and the Deputy  Public  Protector
      apply this clarification of the lines of authority and  accountability
      in the daily operations of the office.  In  other  words,  the  Public
      Protector should exercise his undoubted authority henceforth.

8.3   The Deputy Public Protector should be delegated powers that are
      appropriate to the statutory nature of the office. Such delegation of
      powers and functions should be related to the core competencies of the
      office, should be communicated clearly to the Deputy Public Protector
      and should be documented.


8.4   The Public Protector should, in person and without delay, ensure  that
      the Deputy Public  Protector  is  adequately  mentored  regarding  the
      powers to be delegated to her and the general running of the office.

8.5   The Public Protector and the Deputy Public Protector should resume
      their regular meetings regarding operational issues in the office.
      Similarly, meetings with managers should continue to be held on a
      regular basis.

8.6   All communication with Parliament must be by the Public Protector in
      person. Other public communication should in principle be directed by
      the Public Protector, or should be performed with his authority by the
      communications manager.




8.7   The posts of chief executive officer and chief financial officer, as
      well as other senior staff vacancies, should be filled without delay.
      Concerning the determination of an appropriate salary level for the
      chief executive officer, the Committee was surprised to learn that
      this was regarded as an impediment to the filling of the post. This
      matter must be settled in the appropriate fashion in accordance with
      Public Service requirements.


8.8   The Public Protector should ensure that clear written  procedures  for
      the appointment of staff members, as well as for  internal  horizontal
      transfers of staff, are developed to the extent  that  these  are  not
      already formally documented, and should further ensure that  they  are
      adhered to at all times.

8.9   The Public Protector needs to develop a staff retention strategy to
      address staff turnover, particularly at a senior level.


8.10  When the Public Protector acts in accordance with the provision of
      the Public Protector Act that empowers him to approach the National
      Assembly with regard to any matter pertaining to his office, he should
      direct such communication to the Speaker of the National Assembly for
      referral to an ad hoc or standing committee. Equally, the committee,
      in responding to the issues raised by the Public Protector, should
      communicate its response through the Speaker’s office.


8.11  The Public Protector and the Deputy Public Protector are expected
      immediately to implement, and function in accordance with, the terms
      and conditions of service as approved by the National Assembly.


8.12  The National Assembly should allow a period of not more than six
      months for the corrective and confidence-building measures referred to
      above to be implemented and to take effect.


8.13  The Speaker should consider reconvening this Committee before the end
      of March 2007 to assess progress made and to determine any further
      action that may be required to ensure that the office is able to
      fulfil its constitutional and legislative mandate.


9.    Conclusion

9.1   In conclusion, the Committee trusts that the Public Protector will
      urgently take steps to ensure that the office achieves optimal
      operational levels in the shortest possible time, and towards that end
      will observe and enforce the decisions of the National Assembly
      resulting from the Committee’s recommendations.


9.2   The Committee is of the view that it is undesirable that current
      legal action and a possible related formal complaint remain in the
      public domain and unresolved. For as long as these continue, they will
      unavoidably impede the optimal functioning of the office.


9.3   The Committee is under the impression that the Public Protector and
      his Deputy have responded in a largely positive fashion to the
      recommendations contained in this Report during the Committee’s
      discussions with them.




9.4   The Committee believes that the adoption by the National Assembly of
      these recommendations with a view to their urgent implementation will
      assist in strengthening the office of the Public Protector and the
      removal of the identified obstacles to its operational efficiency.


10.   Acknowledgement of support to Committee

The Committee was supported by the following parliamentary officials:  Mr  K
Hahndiek, Secretary to the National Assembly; Adv Z Adhikarie, Senior  Legal
Adviser; Mr M Philander, Control  Committee  Secretary;  Adv  T  Molukanele,
Procedural Officer at the National Assembly Table; Ms  E  Saptoe  and  Ms  C
Silkstone, Researchers; and Ms S Lovember, Administrative Assistant.

These officials have worked long hours. The Committee wishes to  record  its
appreciation for the exceptional commitment to the work of the Committee  by
them, and their unstinting service and professionalism.

Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the  Standing  Committee  on  Private  Members`  Legislative
     Proposals and Special Petitions  on  the  proposed  Magistrates’  Court
     Amendment Bill, dated 29 August 2006:

        The Standing Committee on Private Members` Legislative Proposals and
        Special Petitions, having considered the proposed Magistrates’ Court
        Amendment Bill submitted by Mr. L K Joubert,  and  having  consulted
        the  PC:  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,  the  Committee
        recommends that the permission be given to  the  member  to  proceed
        with the proposed legislation.


   Report to be considered.

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works on the Government
     Immovable Asset Management Bill [B 1-2006] (National Assembly), dated
     30 August 2006:

     The Portfolio Committee on Public Works having considered  the  subject
     of the Government Immovable Asset Management Bill  [B1-2006]  (National
     Assembly – sec 75) referred to it, wishes to report as follows:


     1. During the meeting of the Portfolio Committee held on 3  May  2006,
        the Committee was informed by the Department of Public Works of the
        existence of complexities on the extension of the scope of the Bill
        to local government. The Department was directed to revisit and  do
        extensive consultation on those complexities  and  also  include  a
        chapter on local government, which the Department undertook to do.


     2. At the meeting of the Committee held on 24 May  2006,  pursuant  to
        and in response to the  meeting  of  3  May  2006,  the  Department
        reported to the Committee on the outcome of their consultation with
        the Department of  Provincial  and  Local  Government  (DPLG).  The
        Department proposed that the Bill be passed in its current form and
        a future amended Bill incorporating a local government  chapter  be
        considered at a later stage. Further that the Committee  recommends
        to the House that the extension of the scope of the Bill  to  local
        government be referred to  the  Departments  of  Public  Works  and
        Provincial  and  Local  Government  for  further  consultation  and
        consideration.


     3. The Committee noted the proposals by the  Department  but  referred
        the Department back to consider the Bill, as reasons  advanced  for
        not incorporating a local government chapter were unconvincing  and
        unacceptable.


     4. At the meeting of the Committee held on 31 May 2006 the  Department
        informed the Committee that it did not  sufficiently  consult  with
        DPLG and South African Local  Government  Association  (SALGA)  and
        proposed that the Bill could either be withdrawn from  the  current
        parliamentary session  or  be  passed  in  its  current  form,  and
        thereafter an amendment to be incorporated into the  Bill  be  fast
        tracked.


RECOMMENDATIONS

    ❖ The Committee considered the Bill  and  recommends  to  the  House  to
      reject the Bill.

Report to be considered.



