---
title: 'National Assembly - 17 October 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-10-17
---

TUESDAY, 17 OCTOBER 2006
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

Acting Speaker, Mr G Q M Doidge, took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


       TRAVEL VOUCHER COURT DOCUMENTS REQUESTED BY PRESIDING OFFICERS


                               (Announcement)

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! In the light of media reports
regarding members entering into plea bargains relating to the abuse of
travel vouchers I wish to inform members that I have consulted the Speaker
and have urgently requested the relevant court documents, as soon as they
are available, to enable the presiding officers to consider the terms of
the court judgment.

The presiding officers will then, at the earliest opportunity, propose
steps to be taken by the Assembly in response to these developments. I must
appeal to members to afford the presiding officers an opportunity to follow
this process before raising these matters in the House in any other
context. Thank you.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I
intend moving the following motion:


  That the House debates the scandal involving the use of parliamentary
  travel vouchers.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I hereby give notice that I intend moving the
following motion:

   That the House-

     1) notes with dismay allegations that Mr N Goniwe, MP, the ANC Chief
        Whip, has avoided the service of court documents relating to a
        maintenance claim against himself; and


  (2) while expressing no opinion about the court action, since the hon
        Goniwe is entitled to his day in court when his liability or
        otherwise will be determined, nevertheless states that it is
        unacceptable for a member of this House to hide behind his or her
        immunity when he or she could easily either waive that immunity, or
        attend, at the office of the sheriff, to accept service of court
        documents.

The ACTING SPEAKER: (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon Ellis, I would like to inform
you that that motion is out of order. I will look at it once again, and we
will correspond with you. You are aware that that is not the appropriate
avenue to raise a motion, which should have been a substantive motion.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I beg to differ. I think, under the
circumstances of this particular case, you will find that everything is in
order. But I await your further judgment on it, sir.

Dr S M VAN DYK: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I intend moving the
following motion:

   That the House debates what the government can do to improve the export
   performance of South Africa in order to combat the deficit on the current
   account to ensure that-


   (1)      the rand is not put under undue pressure by the balance of
        paymentS situation;


     2) further upwards pressure is not being exerted on inflation; and

     3) South Africa’s economic growth is not slowed down by consequent
        interest rate increases.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, on behalf of the ACDP, I give notice that I shall
move:

   That the House debates -


    1) the growing challenge that dementia, of which Alzheimer’s disease is
       the most common form, presents;


    2) the urgent need for an adequate response by government and society;
       and

    3) the desperate need for research in South Africa to better understand
       the extent of this disease and to remedy the great lack of
       understanding which currently leaves sufferers undiagnosed and
       vulnerable to financial, emotional and physical abuse.




  CONGRATULATIONS TO SOUTH AFRICA ON BECOMING MEMBER OF UN SECURITY COUNCIL
                    AND TO NEW UN SECRETARY-GENERAL ELECT


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the House, noting that South Africa has become a member of the
    Security Council of the United Nations Organisation and that Mr Ban Ki-
    moon has been elected Secretary-General—

    (1)     congratulates the President of South Africa, the Minister of
          Foreign Affairs and all others involved in the successful
          election;


    (2)     congratulates Secretary-General elect Ban Ki-moon; and


    (3)     expresses the hope that during the periods of tenure peace,
          democracy and good governance will be promoted throughout the
          world.


Motion agreed to.


              INTERNATIONAL DAY FOR THE ERADICATION OF POVERTY


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the House—


   (1)      notes that—


          (a)    17 October has been declared by the United Nations
                Organisation as the International Day for the Eradication of
                Poverty; and


          (b)    the United Nations Organisation designated this day to
                promote awareness of the need to eradicate poverty and
                destitution in all countries, particularly in developing
                countries;


   (2)      recalls that—


          (a)    the theme for this year’s International Day for the
               Eradication of Poverty is: ‘‘Working together out of
               poverty’’; and


          (b)    since the Second World War, the world has experienced
               three successful development programmes specifically and
               consciously aimed at the eradication of poverty and
               underdevelopment and that these were the Marshall Plan to
               reconstruct war-ravaged Europe, the East Asian growth and
               development programme, and the European Union integration
               programme;
   (3)      notes that the experience we have gained on development over the
          last six decades indicates the strong involvement of government
          in efforts to eradicate poverty; and


   (4)      commends the work done by the United Nations Organisation and
          other relevant agencies dealing with development.

Motion agreed to.

                          SUSPENSION OF RULE 253(1)

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chair, I move the draft resolution
printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That Rule 253(1), which provides inter alia that the debate on the Second
   Reading of a Bill may not commence before at least three working days
   have elapsed since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended for
   the purposes of conducting the Second Reading debate on the Postal
   Services Amendment Bill [B 22—2006] (National Assembly—sec 75) on
   Thursday, 19 October 2006.

Motion agreed to.


             ELECTION OF MR A MLANGENI TO PRESIDE OVER SITTINGS


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chair, I move the draft resolution
printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That the House elects Mr A Mlangeni to preside during the sittings
   scheduled for 17, 18 and 19 October 2006, when requested by a Presiding
   Officer to do so.

Motion greed to.


                              CRIME AT SCHOOLS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms P R MASHANGOANE (ANC): Chairperson, the aim of our education system,
among other things, is to promote understanding, tolerance and friendship
among all South Africans, to advance and deepen the culture of human
rights, and to nurture potential talent for the enhancement of social
cohesion.

The ANC is concerned about the recent spate of violence in our schools.
Violence against learners has emerged in various forms, from bullying to
daily assaults, and even murders and/or deaths of learners are occurring in
or around school premises.

Crime and violence in schools threaten the wellbeing of young people in
South Africa. This is a severe threat to our social stability in all forms.
It corrupts the social fabric of communities and the nation as a whole, and
endangers the health of both learners and teachers. It disrupts the
provision of basic services and destroys respect for human rights. Crime
and violence can also deepen gender and social inequality and reduce the
overall quality of life.

The ANC-led government is continuously developing implementable policies
through intersectoral programmes to radically deal with this scourge. We
appeal for a concerted effort from both parents and teachers to support the
initiatives for an effective realisation of these goals. [Time expired.]
Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]


                       SITUATION IN DARFUR AND SOMALIA


                            (Member’s Statement)

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (DA): Mr Chairman, the DA draws the attention
of Parliament and South Africa to the continuing silence of the government,
and particularly the Department of Foreign Affairs, on the unfolding tragic
events in Darfur in Sudan, and wonders precisely why it is that the ANC,
which has set itself up as a movement based on morality and respect for
human rights, has been almost entirely, if not utterly, silent about a
situation which is rapidly reaching genocidal proportions.

The DA also draws attention to unfolding events in the east of Africa, on
the horn, where the state of Somalia is rapidly unravelling. There is an
intensification of the struggle there against a legitimate government which
is supported by our government and much of the African Union, by an
insurrectionist, Islamic-based liberation movement which is gaining control
of much of the country.

We therefore believe it behoves Parliament, the government and the
Department of Foreign Affairs to give urgent attention to and act on these
unrelated but equally dangerous and unravelling situations.

 SOUTH AFRICA TO OCCUPY NONPERMANENT SEAT ON SECURITY COUNCIL OF THE UNITED
                                   NATIONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M B SKOSANA (IFP): Mr Chairman, the IFP echoes the sentiments of
President Thabo Mbeki, and I think of late of Mr Gibson, and welcomes South
Africa’s appointment to the nonpermanent seat of the Security Council of
the United Nations. We believe the appointment will create a platform which
will not only project a positive profile and international image of South
Africa, but will also give South Africa leverage to discuss and promote,
within the powerful nations of the United Nations, the aspirations of the
poor nations of Africa, and other developing countries.

The IFP also believes that South Africa’s appointment will create another
platform to put the African agenda firmly before the United Nations and
enable South Africa to be closely involved with the serious question of
international peace and security.

Further, South Africa’s seat on the Security Council will enable it to
continue from a position of average influence to lobby for the continuing
struggle to transform the United Nations. I thank you.


                    NEED FOR LAND AND AGRICULTURAL REFORM


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D M DLALI (ANC): Chairperson, decades of neglect have left South
Africa’s rural areas far behind its highly industrialised cities, with many
small towns and villages still without basic amenities like electricity and
sanitation. Massive urbanisation threatens to hamper a drive to draw more
black people to the land in order to reverse the inequitable pattern of
land distribution engendered by apartheid policies.

Most of the country’s prime agricultural land belongs to whites, a remnant
of the large-scale evictions carried out against the black majority during
white minority rule. Land reform and land redistribution therefore play a
significant role in addressing the social and economic inequalities in our
society.

The transformation of the agricultural sector is thus one of the most
important pillars to revive the rural economy and to stem the flow of
migrants to cities. This asks that small and emerging farmers be given
dedicated and strategic support in developing their agricultural practices.


The ANC calls on government to accelerate land redistribution through
agricultural reform to create jobs and grow economies. We call on all of
government to ensure that the many programmes and incentives that are in
place to assist small and emerging farmers are utilised optimally and
efficiently. I thank you.


                      NUCLEAR ARMS TEST BY NORTH KOREA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J BICI (UDM): Chair, the UDM shares the deep concern of peace-loving
people throughout the world who have recently witnessed a frightening new
geopolitical reality, the possibility of a new nuclear arms race being
triggered by North Korea.
North Korea is a state with almost no allies and refuses to be influenced,
even by China, which is its only benefactor. It refuses to abide by even
the vaguest concepts of multilateral dialogue and continues to maintain one
of the largest land-based armies in the world. Every nation in that region
will undoubtedly start thinking about defence. Billions would be invested
in an unending arms race, instead of the economic and social prosperity of
the people of the region. I thank you.


                      CRIME STATISTICS IN SOUTH AFRICA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr C P MULDER (VF Plus): Mnr die Waarnemende Speaker, volgens die jongste
statistieke van die SA Polisiediens was meer as 2,5 miljoen mense in Suid-
Afrika die afgelope drie jaar slagoffers van geweldsmisdade.

Vanaf 1 April 2003 tot 31 Maart 2006 was 2 546 294 mense in Suid-Afrika
slagoffers van geweldsmisdade. Hierdie geweldsmisdade sluit in moord,
poging tot moord, verkragting, gewone verswarende roof, onsedelike en
gewone aanranding, aanranding met die opset om ernstig te beseer,
motorkaping en roof by private wonings.

Dit beteken dat gemiddeld 848 765 mense per jaar in Suid-Afrika slagoffers
is net van geweldsmisdade. Die Minister van Veiligheid en Sekuriteit, mnr
Charles Nqakula, sê egter dat die toekoms rooskleurig lyk wat betref
misdaad in Suid-Afrika. Maar die afgelope drie jaar is 57 162 mense in Suid-
Afrika vermoor. Vir hulle het die bepaling in die Grondwet, “everyone has
the right to life”, niks beteken nie. ’n Totaal van 380 173 mense was
slagoffers van roof met verswarende omstandighede.

Bogenoemde statistieke bewys dat Suid-Afrika ’n gevaarlike land is om in te
bly. Die publiek voel met reg onveilig, want hulle word beroof in hulle
huise en word gekaap wanneer hulle moet ry. Misdadigers wat deur die
polisie gevang word, kom te gereeld skotvry daarvan af as gevolg van
gebrekkighede in ons strafregstelsel.

Die VF Plus doen ’n beroep op die regering om daadwerklik in te gryp en
spoedig ’n nuwe nasionale strategie, wat die strafregstelsel totaal
insluit, op te stel en prakties te implementeer. Die toekoms wat misdaad in
Suid-Afrika betref, is alles behalwe rooskleurig en vereis uiters dringende
optrede van die regering. Ons kan nie langer daarmee wag nie. (Translation
of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER (FF PLUS): Hon Acting Speaker, according to the latest
statistics of the SA Police Service, more than 2,5 million people in South
Africa were victims of violent crime over the past three years.

Between 01 April 2003 and 31 March 2006 2 546 294 people were victims of
violent crime in South Africa. These violent crimes include murder,
attempted murder, rape, robbery with aggravating circumstances, indecent
and common assault, assault with the intent to do grievous bodily harm, car
hijackings and burglaries at private homes.

That means that on average 848 765 people in South Africa are victims of
violent crime every year. However, the Minister of Safety and Security, Mr
Charles Nqakula, says that the future regarding crime in South Africa looks
bright. But in the last three years, 57 162 people have been murdered in
South Africa. To them the clause in the Constitution, “everyone has the
right to life”, means absolutely nothing. A total of 380 173 people were
victims of robbery with aggravating circumstances.

The above-mentioned statistics prove that South Africa is a dangerous place
to live in. The public is entitled to feel unsafe because they are being
robbed in their homes and hijacked when they have to drive. Too often
criminals that are arrested by the police get off scot-free due to flaws in
our criminal justice system.

The FF Plus appeals to the government to actively intervene and speedily
set up a new national strategy, which includes the criminal justice system
in its totality, and implement it in practice. As far as crime in South
Africa is concerned the future is anything but bright and requires the
government to take extremely urgent action. We cannot wait any longer.]

             AWARENESS OF AND REASONS FOR FETAL ALCOHOL SYNDROME

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms R J MASHIGO (ANC): Chairperson, research findings of the Foundation for
Alcohol-Related Research in South Africa indicate that fetal alcohol
syndrome is the main cause of mental illness in the world and is
preventable.

This is a condition a child suffers after being exposed to alcohol while
developing in the mother’s womb. Fetal alcohol syndrome occurs when the
brain of the fetus does not develop properly due to the mother’s
consumption of alcohol during pregnancy. It is a condition characterised by
abnormal facial features, growth retardation and central nervous system
problems.

According to Pierre Uys, the Western Cape MEC for health, the province has
the highest rate of babies born with fetal alcohol syndrome in the world.
As part of the national Fetal Alcohol Syndrome Day, the Northern Cape
government has asked churches and the public to observe a moment of silence
for affected children.

The ANC calls on the Department of Health to investigate the reasons for
the unusually high prevalence of the syndrome in the Western Cape, and
whether there is any link with the dop system on farms or lack of
recreational facilities for young women. All stakeholders can contribute to
increasing the awareness of our communities and to highlight the dangers of
alcohol abuse in general, and specifically during pregnancy. I thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]


            PROBLEMS FACING THE EDUCATION SYSTEM IN SOUTH AFRICA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr I S MFUNDISI (UCDP): Acting Speaker, there is a growing concern about
access to education, despite the fact that government is doing everything
in its power to ensure that education is accessible.

Efforts for the democratic ideal of schools for everybody tend to
degenerate into schools without education. Pupils find it difficult at
times to settle down because of crime in schools. While business tries to
lend a hand by offering computers to schools, such learning aids are stolen
from schools, thus leaving them without recourse to learning about
information technology.

It becomes even more pathetic when, more than a decade into democracy,
there are still areas that tend to discriminate against pupils on grounds
of language. Some schools go to the length of using all ways and means to
raise funds so that they can erect additional classrooms in which they will
accommodate children of a darker hue who will be taught in English, while
the well-resourced existing learning sites are left for those who use
Afrikaans as their language.

The Lichtenburg High School incident is not an isolated one. Bergsig in
Rustenburg has gone out of its way to do the same. This practice should not
be allowed to continue unchecked and has to come to an end. After all,
education promotes integration and socialisation. The children born post-
1994 are not called “born frees” for nothing. They should be allowed to
grow, learn and play together.

The other unfortunate situation pertains to tertiary institutions. Much as
government tries to make education accessible through the National Student
Financial Aid Scheme, or Nasfas, universities turn education into an
inaccessible mirage by raising student tuition fees. This incessant moving
of the goalposts makes it difficult for anyone ... [Time expired.]


                           BREAST CANCER AWARENESS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S RAJBALLY (MF): Chairperson, new figures show that breast cancer rates
have doubled in 20 years, although this serious disease dates as far back
as ancient Egypt.

The worrying factor is that breast cancer is wrongly labelled as a women’s
disease. Much ignorance exists about the fact that men, too, get breast
cancer. Even though the disease is 100% more common in women, a greater
proportion of men than women die from breast cancer.

I hereby appeal to the Department of Health to embark on a programme to
create greater awareness of breast cancer and to educate the community
about the fact that breast cancer is common among both men and women. Men
should be encouraged to be wary of this cancer and educated on how to test
for it. We call on the public to take regular mammograms, especially men
between the ages of 60 and 70 and women between 50 and 65 years of age.

To those fighting cancer: Our prayers are with you. I thank you.

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Can we have some order in the
House, please? Please be seated, hon members.


                  OVERCROWDING IN AND DISREPAIR OF PRISONS


                            (Member’s Statement)
Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH (DA): Chairperson, the entire justice system is
being fundamentally undermined, because South Africa’s prisons are being
allowed to remain in their current state of rampant overcrowding and
disrepair.

The government needs to increase its efforts to repair and upgrade existing
prisons and to build new prisons to house our more than 150 000 prisoners.
The Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services recently found that the so-
called Sun City facility is almost 300% overcrowded, some prisoners even
sleeping inside the toilet area.

The countrywide overcrowding rate of our prisons is currently 76,3%. This
unacceptable situation is making a mockery of the department’s own aim of
providing a safe and humane environment in which rehabilitation should take
place. An overcrowded prison environment serves only to sap staff morale
and promote illegal activities, attempted escapes, corruption and
gangsterism inside prison. As long as this situation is maintained, our
prisons will continue to be universities of crime. Much more needs to be
done to upgrade and renovate existing prisons and to build new facilities.

We are aware that there are currently efforts to address these problems,
such as the prison building programme, etc. However, they should be speeded
up and rolled out countrywide as soon as possible. Thank you, Chairperson.


                        BUILDING OF HOUSES IN SOWETO


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S A MSHUDULU (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC-led government in Gauteng has
spent R12 million to build transit camps for informal inhabitants living in
squalor at Protea South in Soweto. The camps will be used to temporarily
house dwellers before they are relocated to proper houses with free basic
services.

More than 800 families will be the first to benefit from this initiative.
They have been staying in the area for eight years. The settlement has no
basic facilities, such as toilets and water. For residents of this informal
settlement, all this is set to change.
They will be moved to a transit settlement before being moved to new houses
in two years’ time.

Government has set a timeframe that by 2014 all the informal settlements in
Gauteng should be eradicated. Furthermore, within the next one and a half
to two years Protea South should no longer be an informal settlement but
should be a normal settlement. The process to build new houses will start
in April 2007, once plans have been approved. They will be built in Protea
South, Protea Glen and Doornkop.

The ANC welcomes the initiative taken by the Gauteng Department of Housing
in implementing the ANC plan to make local government better through the
building of sustainable human settlements and viable communities. I thank
you. [Applause.]




                              CRIME STATISTICS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Chairperson, the IFP has long felt that the government
should do more to address serious crime in our country. The recently
released crime statistics and figures reinforce our feeling that the war
against crime is not yet won, and that the government should stop trying to
pretend it is so. The criminal justice system throughout South Africa is
failing its citizens and crime has become a clear and present danger, and a
growing threat to our fledgling democracy.

Government’s collective inability to effectively identify, combat, isolate,
and successfully prosecute and incarcerate huge numbers of criminals is a
national disgrace. It is clear that proper political and professional
leadership is lacking. It has, once again, been made evident in the latest
appalling crime statistics revealed by the government that the highly
centralised system of policing, much favoured by the government, is an
abject failure and should be decentralised as a matter of urgency, with new
and competent leadership being vested where necessary and international
assistance and training being sought to alleviate obvious skills shortages.


The IFP therefore calls on government to release regular and accurate
police crime statistics, which will withstand independent analysis and
which will quickly identify crime trends in various areas, to allow
communities to be more vigilant and increase accountability for the police
service leadership, who must now be deployed in a position of high
authority on the basis of performance only. Thank you.


                     LAUREUS WORLD SPORTS ACADEMY FORUM


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L R R REID (ANC): Chairperson, some of the world’s most influential
sportsmen and sportswomen are to attend next month's Laureus World Sports
Academy Forum in Gauteng. It will be the first time the forum is held in
Africa.

The Laureus World Sports Academy is a unique association of 42 of the
greatest living sporting legends who share a belief in the power of sport
to break down barriers, bring people together and improve the lives of
young people around the world.

The academy members act as global ambassadors for the Laureus Sport for
Good Foundation, volunteering their time to visit projects in order to draw
attention to the problems afflicting society today.

Among the members who are to attend the Laureus World Sports Academy Forum
are Boris Becker, Hugo Porta, Bobby Charlton, Edwin Moses, Monica Seles,
Mark Spitz, Ilie Nastase, Daley Thompson, and Martina Navratilova.

Particular focus will be given to Laureus work in Africa, where the Laureus
Sport for Good Foundation tackles a range of social issues, from child
soldiers to Aids, homelessness and poverty, racial issues and abuse - in
each case using sport as the tool for social change. Laureus also provides
support for projects in Chad, Kenya and Uganda.

The ANC is delighted that the Laureus World Sports Academy Forum will be
coming to South Africa. [Time expired.] [Applause.]


    COVER-UPS REGARDING SAPS MEMBERS ALLEGED TO HAVE RAPED MEMBERS OF THE
                                   PUBLIC


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD (DA):  Chairperson, in the past year, 22 police
officers, the most in six years, have been reported to the Independent
Complaints Directorate for allegedly raping members of the public,
including – I shudder to add - children. It would be shocking if even one
of our police officers, who are supposed to protect us, were accused of
such an act. But reports of this nature only serve to further undermine the
public’s already shaky confidence in the SAPS.

However, what is just as shocking is that apparently these officers’
colleagues in the police are covering up for them, with the result that not
one of the 22 have been charged or convicted for their crimes.

Police officers are reportedly hiding evidence against their colleagues so
that charges are withdrawn. In other cases, police officers have been
arrested, only to be released on petty-cash bail amounts.

According to the ICD, this is only the tip of the iceberg. If this
assessment is true, a major investigation must take place immediately, and
the question must be asked: Why is this only coming to our attention now,
and why isn’t such an investigation well under way?

The situation is utterly outrageous. The matter must be dealt with urgently
by the Minister of Safety and Security, in an attempt, perhaps, to restore
our faith in the integrity of our police officers and the efficacy of the
SAPS as an entity worthy of respect.


                     DISASTER MANAGEMENT IMPLEMENTATION


                            (member’s statement)

Ms K R MAGAU (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC expresses its deep concern over
recent floods and fire disasters in human settlements, some of which have
led to fatalities, injuries and loss of belongings by the poor,
exacerbating their already unacceptably poor living conditions.

We call on all spheres of government to prioritise and take more seriously
the implementation of the Disaster Management Act. Any negligence or delays
in putting into place these plans and implementing them vigorously will
lead to unacceptable results.

The Reconstruction and Development Programme urges government to implement
its mandate in a people-driven and integrated manner. Disaster management
offers an excellent opportunity for doing that.

The ANC is intent on creating a caring society and expresses its
condolences to those who lost their loved ones, and urges all members of
this House and citizens out there to continue giving support and increase
the seriousness with which we treat disaster management. Thank you.


                      CRIME STATISTICS IN SOUTH AFRICA


    COVER-UPS REGARDING SAPS MEMBERS ALLEGED TO HAVE RAPED MEMBERS OF THE
                                   PUBLIC


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, I don’t know how we are
going to handle my responses, I need your guidance. There are several hon
members that have made observations and I need to respond to all of those.
I don’t know how you are going to handle it but you will stop me when you
feel that I am ... [Interjections.]

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr G Q M Doidge): Let’s proceed, hon Minister, and I
will give you guidance.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you very much. There are many
people, apart from the Minister of Safety and Security, who believe that
the law-enforcement agencies in this country are going to be able to deal
with the crime that is happening in South Africa.

Of course, we do accept that many South Africans are worried about the
levels of crime in South Africa. I believe that these law-enforcement
agencies, working in the way that they are at this time, are not alone, but
are working together with the masses of our people. Such people who know
what the situation was in the past, have come forward to say that they want
to be part and parcel of crime-fighting in South Africa. That gives me hope
that things are going to change in the future.

There are many people who have come forward and given information about
criminals who have committed very serious crimes in South Africa. Between
15 July and 15 September, that is two months, the police, as a consequence
of that information, arrested 384 people connected to 687 cases. All of
those cases relate to serious and violent crimes - the crimes that the hon
Mulder has referred to, such as car hijackings, murder, robbing of banks
and cash-in-transit heists. But I hope that we are going to understand what
we are dealing with when I give you the next figures.

Of those 384 people that we arrested, 85 have been linked to 400 cases.
What that means theoretically is that by arresting those people we have
dealt a blow against repeat offending, particularly as it relates to
serious and violent crimes. However, the story does not end there. From 15
July to 3 October, when you add all of those numbers, we arrested 529 of
these criminals connected to more than 800 cases.

I am not talking about the charges that each one of these people is going
to face. I am just talking about the cases and in some of those cases you
find a number of people who are involved in just one case. As I have just
indicated, those 85 people are linked to 400 cases.

We accept that there are concerns about crime, but it is not correct to say
that the crime levels in South Africa are rising because they are going
down. What has not happened is that, whereas we had said all contact crime
needed to come down by 7% to 10%, there are at least three types of crime
that, although decreasing, have not decreased to that level, that is
murder, rape and indecent assault. That is also going down but not like the
others, which have actually gone down by 16% and so on.

The other thing that makes me believe that the future is going to be better
is the fact that, apart from all these people who are coming forward,
including businesspeople who are prepared to walk this road with us, the
police themselves are getting better training and those human resources are
being better deployed.

We have also adopted high technology to deal with some of the problems that
we have. For instance, if you take the matter of DNA and look at some of
these people who have been arrested, they were connected to those cases via
DNA samples and some of the clues we have picked up from the crime scenes.
Even at that level of technology, South Africa is advancing.

I also believe that the future will be better because the entire criminal
justice system is itself undergoing changes, as part of the review of the
system. I believe that at times we say things because we have experienced
crime directly as individuals and because our families have been direct
victims of crime. Therefore, there are many people who would say, despite
the evidence, that crime is not going down. But crime is indeed going down
in South Africa.

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr G Q M Doidge): You have 30 seconds left, hon
Minister.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Well, let me pick up on your comments,
hon Kohler-Barnard. I agree with you entirely. I have said repeatedly in
this House that any police officer who acts like a criminal is indeed one
and we will deal with such people. [Applause.]

I agree with you that those who act in the manner you described have no
part in the SA Police Service. In fact, the Independent Complaints
Directorate is investigating these matters and we will deal with these
officers when their guilt has been proven. Thank you very much. [Applause.]




                  OVERCROWDING IN AND DISREPAIR OF PRISONS


                            (Minister’s Response)
The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, first of all, let me
support my colleague from the justice, crime prevention and security
cluster. We are doing everything we can and we meet nearly every day to
deal with some of these issues. Therefore, I will support you when you
arrest those who commit crime. I will make space for them in my overcrowded
prisons and make sure that they remain there. So, tell the police that they
are doing a good job. They might be putting pressure on me; it doesn’t
matter, because they are doing a good job.

Overcrowded prisons are a reality in our country and they are not only the
responsibility of the Department of Correctional Services. We have said
many times that we can’t build ourselves out of overcrowding. Even if we
were to build 20 prisons, we would never be able to do that.

We are in the process of building new prisons. The more you get used to
that portfolio committee, Mr Sayedali-Shah, the better your language will
be. We don’t have prisons any more, we have correctional centres. So, I
will keep on reminding you so that you get used to that. We correct there.
[Interjections.] No, you are new to the portfolio committee, that is why I
am welcoming you so nicely.

There is a plan and a budget to do maintenance and upgrading of 11 new
centres. We opened one in Wolmaransstad recently. I am also going to open
other centres where we have done maintenance and the offenders themselves
did it. We do not get anybody out there to do it, we make them work.

The criminal justice system is seized with the task of reducing
overcrowding by identifying remand centres for awaiting-trial detainees. We
are trying to keep awaiting-trial detainees separate from the sentenced
ones, and we are using section 62(f) of the Criminal Procedure Act and also
tackling case backlogs in the system.

As a department, we are doing an audit of all sentenced offenders and we
are checking on the possibility of the parole boards doing more work
towards paroling those who deserve to be paroled. We are also making sure
that cases do not last long so that people who could be diverted from the
system can go to community service. That is what we are doing. Mr Shah, the
more you get used to that portfolio committee, the better you will
understand how it works. [Time expired.] [Applause.]


                       SITUATION IN DARFUR AND SOMALIA


 SOUTH AFRICA TO OCCUPY NONPERMANENT SEAT ON SECURITY COUNCIL OF THE UNITED
                                   NATIONS


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Ms S C van der Merwe): Chairperson,
I would like to respond to two statements please, one by the hon Leon and
the other by the hon Skosana - with your permission. In the first instance,
I really do think it is disingenuous of the hon Leader of the Opposition to
talk about South Africa’s role in Darfur in that way.

We, as South Africa, are very active members of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union. Our President is currently in Addis Ababa to
attend meetings of this council, an important organ of the AU. This matter
of Darfur is one of the many things that the council discusses and it is
always attempting, in that forum, to resolve these issues.

South Africa has been an active supporter and advocate of the United
Nations and African Union resolutions in favour of assistance from the
United Nations to the African Union force that is currently in Darfur to
defuse the situation. The same could be said about Somalia, where we
continue to play a role in the resolution of the problems.

Now, unlike the DA, the ANC-led government approaches problems on the
continent in such a way as to resolve them through dialogue and the
multilateral instruments at our disposal, and not to add fuel to the fire.

Regarding the second point, I would like to thank the hon Skosana for his
congratulations to South Africa on being elected as a nonpermanent member
of the Security Council. South Africa is, indeed, very proud to be a member
of the Security Council for the next two years. We will use this
opportunity to promote the issues that confront us on the African
continent, as suggested by the hon Skosana.

I would like to say that 186 countries out of a possible 192 voted to
endorse South Africa’s position in the Security Council. This is a factor
which we believe endorses the work that we do at the United Nations and we
are very proud to be a member of the security council for the next two
years. Thank you. [Applause.]


                    NEED FOR LAND AND AGRICULTURAL REFORM


             AWARENESS OF AND REASONS FOR FETAL ALCOHOL SYNDROME


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairperson, I want
to respond to two statements. Regarding the first one, dealing with the
recovery of the agricultural sector in deep rural areas, hon member Dlali
said that the revival of the agricultural sector is one of the most
important pillars to revive the rural economy. It is actually the most
important pillar - there is no doubt.
Last weekend, I was with the Deputy President in the district of Chris Hani
that stretches from Cradock, through the Karoo to Queenstown over Elliot to
some of the northern parts of the old Transkei. What struck one was that,
again, especially in the communal areas, agriculture is not alive and well.
It needs massive support and I think what is perhaps the most important
aspect in that statement by the ANC is that existing programmes and
initiatives must be utilised optimally and efficiently. If we can be
successful in this, through co-operation with the provinces where we are
doing most of the implementation, I think we will make a difference.

The second issue was a statement on fetal alcohol syndrome, by the ANC as
well. Of course, it addressed the Department of Health but there are also
aspects related to agriculture in that statement. Firstly, there is the dop
system but no one will acknowledge it – you won’t find that
acknowledgement. But there are other techniques that are used which still
lead to overusage of alcohol.

I know that the wine and beer industries are doing their bit to combat the
misuse of alcohol. Perhaps I could just announce that, after a considerable
opportunity for all the different sides to meet to see if they can reach an
agreement with each other, we have decided that we will recommend that the
regulations of the Liquor Products Act are amended to not allow the sale of
so-called “papsakke” anymore. This happens where you buy wine at a garage
or something and you do not know how much water it contains. [Time
expired.]


                       CARRIAGE BY AIR AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

Mr J P CRONIN: Chairperson, over many decades South Africa has been an
active participant in international agreements and conventions covering the
liabilities of air carriers in regard to passengers, baggage and cargo –
whether it is in regard to damage, loss, injury or fatalities. As one can
imagine, with airlines crisscrossing the globe, with passengers or cargo
being boarded or loaded in one place and flying to distant destinations and
with airlines possibly having their headquarters in third countries,
liability issues and the legal framework covering these issues can get to
be quite complicated.

To deal with these challenges, international conventions and the alignment
of domestic legislation with these conventions are the only practical way
to proceed. The principal Act, which we are amending today, the Carriage by
Air Act, dates back to 1946 and was informed by the so-called Warsaw
Convention. Clearly, the challenges and complexities have multiplied with
the immense increase in air travel and air cargo operations.

In 1999, in response to these challenges, the most recent international
convention convened in Montreal. South Africa is a signatory to the
convention that emerged from Montreal and this amending Bill updates our
domestic legislation to align it with the Montreal Convention.

The main new features of the Montreal Convention and therefore the
consequential amendments which we are making today, are: firstly, the
replacing of the old capped liability system with unlimited liability for
carriers with regard to the death and injury of passengers; and secondly, a
two-tier compensation system.

The first tier includes strict liability of up to 100 000 special drawing
rights, which is approximately US$135 000, irrespective of whether the
carrier is at fault. The carrier is held liable for compensation up to that
sum regardless of fault. Then there is the second tier, which is based on
the presumption of fault of a carrier and that has no limit whatsoever.

In terms of the Montreal Convention air carriers are required to maintain
adequate insurance cover for their liabilities under the convention.
Government, therefore, will not be liable for any damages that might occur
as a result of any delay, loss of baggage or cargo or aircraft accidents.

The committee was briefed on the Montreal Convention and our accession to
this convention. We also held public hearings on the amending Bill and we
are sure that all major air carriers within our country have been
consulted. No problems were raised in regard to the proposed amendments and
the committee unanimously agreed to recommend to the House that we pass the
Carriage by Air Amendment Bill. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.


                        CORPORATE LAWS AMENDMENT BILL



                           (Consideration of Bill)


There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, we move:

  That the Bill, as amended, be passed.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairperson we do rather wish that the hon Deputy Chief
Whip of the ANC would get his act together this afternoon. It would help a
great deal.

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr G Q M Doige): I think the problem is with the sound
system.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: My act is very together, Mr
Ellis.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.


         SOUTH AFRICAN INSTITUTE FOR DRUG-FREE SPORT AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, hon Members of
Parliament, the SA Institute for Drug-Free Sport Amendment Bill comes at a
very important time, a time when there is a global fight against doping in
sport, a fight aimed at promoting the values of fair play and honesty in
sport.

About four months ago, this House passed a resolution for our country to
ratify the International Convention Against Doping in Sport. This Unesco-
driven initiative is based on the World Anti-Doping Code which was drafted
by the World Anti-Doping Agency, whose acronym is Wada.

One of the principal functions of the Bill before the House is to align the
existing Act with the provisions of the World Anti-Doping Code and its
international standards. Let me point out that noncompliance would result
in South Africa being refused participation in international sport,
including the Olympics and the Paralympic Games. I, as I stand here, know
of no South African who would like this to happen, yet we read and hear on
a regular basis how some of the top sportspeople in the world, some of the
world record holders test positive for using performance-enhancing
substances.

Only yesterday, we heard of two top cricketers in Pakistan, Mr Akhtar and
Mr Asif, who tested positive. Let me say that this is sad news, because
doping undermines the spirit of fair play and it undermines discipline in
sport. Our own country hasn’t escaped the scourge of doping. We read of our
own heroes like Hezekiel Sepeng who has fallen foul of doping offences.

A few weeks ago the leading article on the front page of the Rapport read
“Skolesportskande”, referring to doping amongst schoolboy rugby players.
The article described how parents bought banned substances for their
children so that they could be selected for the provincial schools teams,
with the hope eventually of getting a contract with one of the senior
provincial unions.

Carte Blanche did an exposé on their programme on 24 September 2006, where
young people, many of them still at school, admitted to using steroids and
revealed that the practice was widespread in some of our schools. One does
not need to be a rocket scientist to determine the reason why top
sportspeople resort to doping, because doping is nothing else but cheating
to achieve success and the driving force here is money.

What is shocking is that this greed for money leads people to totally
disregard the long-term consequences of such behaviour. We all have a
responsibility to ensure that the true values and virtues of sport are
protected and preserved. I am sure that I do not have to stand here today
to expound on the good of sport. Unfortunately there is also the ugly side
of sport. This Bill aims to reinforce our commitment to clean up sport and
ensure fair play.

Clause 5 of the Bill, which seeks to amend section 10 of the principal Act,
compels the SA Institute for Drug-Free Sport to establish a doping control
programme in compliance with the World Anti-Doping Code to ensure that
national federations adopt and implement the antidoping policies and rules,
which conform with the Code’s, the policies and rules; ensure the ongoing
presence and maintenance of a Wada-accredited laboratory in South Africa -
and in our case, it is in the only “free state” in this country, in
Bloemfontein; ensure that while the institute might co-operate with Sport
and Recreation SA and Sascoc as needed, it shall operate independently as
required by the World Anti-Doping Code.

The SA Institute for Drug-Free Sport, Saids, a public entity associated
with Sport and Recreation SA, will have to be sufficiently funded to
redouble its efforts aimed at counteracting this unwelcome tendency of
doping. The testing programme of Saids, their antidoping advocacy and
education campaign will have to be intensified to achieve the required
successes.

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon Deputy Minister, just give
me a minute. Order! Hon members, the noise levels are far too high.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: It is our opinion that doping
in sport is not dissimilar to recreational substance abuse. Our campaigns
in sport to fight the scourge of doping can also serve to address drug
abuse in our society. In these campaigns we should use our sports heroes as
role models. They must not only be vocal on the topic of antidoping and
drug abuse, they should be the heroes and the heroines and the champions
who set the example. I know that, as we speak, we can rely on them to
assist us in this drive against doping.

If and when we identify the real culprits of doping in sport, we must act
decisively against them. It is here that we call on the federations to
comply with the Act because failure to comply by the federations will
result in punitive measures by Sport and Recreation SA.

Clause 17(a) of the Bill makes provision for investigating and dealing with
national sports federations that do not comply with the Act. The section is
in fact very clear: action by the Department of Sport and Recreation may
include withdrawal of government funding, banning such federations from
administrating sport or a recommendation to Sascoc to withhold the awarding
of national colours to the members of such federations.

While the Act provides for this, I am absolutely convinced that it will
never be necessary to use it because our federations have always supported
measures aimed at promoting the values of fair play. We thank the
federations in advance for their unqualified support and co-operation in
this regard.

South Africa continues to play a central role in the fight against doping
in sport internationally and on the African continent. We represent Africa
on both the executive and foundation boards of the World Anti-Doping Agency
and our Minister of Sport and Recreation, uMfundisi [Rev] Makhenkesi
Stofile is a member of that body. We also host the African regional office
of the World Anti-Doping Agency here in Cape Town and that is something
that we as South Africans are extremely proud of.
While it is important to be vigilant about doping practices in sport, it is
equally important that we, on the other hand, increase our support to
athletes to enable them to perform to the best of their ability without
using drugs. Many of our athletes are currently in the national academy
programme. This programme is funded by government and co-ordinated by
Sascoc.

Our athletes are attending camps in preparation for the All Africa Games in
2007 and the Beijing Olympic Games in 2008. At these camps, the athletes
and coaches receive the necessary scientific and medical support that will
help them to achieve their optimal potential.

Our ultimate goal and objective is to place our athletes and teams in the
residential long-term athletes’ development programme in cycles of four
years. To this end, we hope and trust that it will be within our means as
government to shortly announce an athletes’ assistance programme where our
top athletes as well as those with the best potential will be financially
supported on a monthly basis.

The intention of government in introducing this Bill is clear. We want our
athletes to excel in a dope-free environment. We therefore ask the support
of this hon House and all political parties in achieving this objective for
all our athletes. I thank you.

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Chairperson, Deputy Minister, Ministers and other Deputy
Ministers that are around, hon members, the ANC stands up and supports your
request for the amendment of the Bill. The Bill before us today is an
amendment that seeks to address the issue of drugs in sport.

I would also like to inform Members of Parliament that, regarding the
institute that we are talking about today, there are only 30 of these types
of institutes in the world, and in Africa there are only two. South Africa
and Tunisia are the only two countries in Africa that have these
institutes.

This is very special and it is a tribute to South Africans to be among the
nations of the world who are in possession of this very important institute
that deals with the critical matter of doping in sport, so that we
encourage fair play.

This institute has been in existence for more than three decades. What the
Bill is seeking to address concerning this institute, is that this
institute must begin to say, “for more than three decades, the institute
has been a lily-white type of institute”. Today, this Bill says that issues
of redress, as required by the Bill of Rights, should be what this
institute engages in.

All South Africans who have the necessary competency, knowledge and
expertise must be part of this institute and must be able to help us to
form part of this army that is fighting drugs in sport. Deputy Minister, we
therefore request that this amendment and the manner in which we are going
to transform this institute should make it one that belongs to all South
Africans and not to a certain group of people that are privileged.

Deputy Minister, last year the portfolio committee was invited to KwaZulu-
Natal to witness the MTN under-17 soccer tournament – the final tournament.
Regarding the participants in that competition, who were called the under-
17 children, I am sad to tell you, Deputy Minister, today that 80% of them
were adults. There was an outcry that cheating is rife in the under-17
teams at school level. Therefore that defeats what we are talking about
when we say we must encourage fair play and not encourage competition
regarding young children who are still at school level.

This institute must begin to look into issues of age, that is cheating, and
also look at not being able to encourage fair play for those young children
who are under 17 to be able to participate fairly and equitably in that
area.

This Bill seeks to amend the principal Act, that is the South African
Institute for Drug-Free Sport Act. Furthermore, the amending Bill focuses
on considering, deleting and inserting certain definitions and omissions in
the principal Act, and on amplifying crucial sections in order to avoid any
possibility of ambiguity and uncertainty.

The amending Bill is being considered at the time in South Africa when drug-
free sport is absolutely necessary, in line with acceptable international
standards and best practice in respect of fair play.

The Bill makes legislative provision for the appointment of the staff in
the institute, in line with the Public Finance Management Act. Formerly,
there was no recognition of this Public Finance Management Act but there
was what is known as the Exchequer Act. The exchequer is no longer in
existence. We therefore agree wholeheartedly that we must change this to
the Public Finance Management Act, make it relevant and realign it with all
policies of government.

The Bill particularly focuses on putting in place correct methods and
procedures of adopting international best practice, in line with the
requirements of the World Anti-Doping Agency, Wada. The international best
standards considered in the Bill and in the amendment were adopted by the
foundation board of Wada on 5 March 2003 at Copenhagen in Denmark.
Procedures for testing athletes for doping and for enforcing compliance by
sports federations are introduced in this Bill.

The amending Bill directly entrusts the Minister with the authority to
appoint members of the institute, including the chief executive officer.
But, what we have inserted in this original Bill is that the chief
executive officer must not have voting powers like any other member of the
board. Therefore we have removed the voting powers of the CEO. Only those
that are nominated should have voting powers. The chief executive officer
must remain an operational officer and be a non-participant in this
respect.

Clause 3 of the amending Bill specifies that chairpersons and at least nine
members are going to be appointed to the institute by the Minister. They
should possess special knowledge and expertise relevant to doping.
Therefore only those who have that expertise on doping are going to be the
people eligible for being members.

The Minister will invite interested parties through the media, by placing a
notice in the Gazette. The Minister will receive recommendations 30 days
after the publication of the notice. Sascoc will also make an input into
these recommendations, but the final decision will rest with the Minister.

The amendment of section 8 removes the Exchequer Act because it is not in
use any more, and we are realigning that with the Public Finance Management
Act. The second amendment – section 10 - is a consequential amendment. It
brings things into line with the World Anti-Doping Agency code and enhances
the principal Act.
The amending Bill will create measures to ensure that national sports
federations and other sports bodies implement the anti-doping policies and
rules, in line with the stipulated Wada code. The institute will operate
independently from Sascoc and the sport and recreation department will,
from time to time, be required to co-operate, if need be.

We also dealt with section 11 of the Act. This amending Bill also deals
with a number of issues. It introduces the concept of establishing and
maintaining a register for athletes who test positive and top athletes who
shall be subjected to testing during competition and outside competition.
Because, at times, these people go and do testing when the player is in the
field of play or when he is at home, the Bill thus provides for testing
outside and inside the field of play, and they use very sophisticated
methods nowadays.

A few days before a game or competition, they use those substances. After
two days the substance is no longer in the body but has dissolved in a way
that gives more power to that athlete. Therefore, if the anti-doping people
have a shadow of doubt, they would visit that person and test him or her.
The Bill provides for that.

Minister of Safety and Security, I would like you to take into
consideration that the safety and security aspect will have to be looked
into, because there are provisions that we have to take care of when this
kind of thing happens.
Hon Deputy Minister, we have also inserted sections 11A to 11C. These
sections concern the register that has to be kept regarding the athletes
who violate the rules; and these sections also outline the procedures for
informing the sports bodies on how this whole new dispensation is going to
be handled. But that will also be in compliance with the provisions of the
Promotion of Access to Information Act. Therefore, if any other relevant
body, even the police, need this kind of information in terms of that Act,
they will be eligible to get it. The Minister must make provision for that.


Finally, section 17 of the Act has been amended. An independent anti-doping
board has to be established and shall consist of 9 members who possess what
we call “the knowledge and skills which are relevant to doping”. But, also,
the Minister will have to appoint at least three members who will, on the
recommendation of the Minister, constitute the appeal tribunal. The
committee deliberated on this extensively.

The requirement in the original Act that any person who is a lawyer,
practising lawyer or an advocate who is supposed to be nominated in
accordance with this Bill must have seven years of experience, is
tantamount to making access too difficult. This requirement should read
“when a person is accredited as a practising lawyer or advocate and has at
least three years of experience”, because the committee felt very strongly
that seven years perpetuated the status quo.
Seven years makes it difficult for those who must have access in relation
to capacity and knowledge to build up this institution and the knowledge
that this institution requires. It tends to marginalise those people.
Therefore, the committee changed that and said it should be three years.

Finally, Deputy Minister, we have agreed with the institute that an
intensive national education programme on anti-doping should commence at
schools and amateur-level clubs. It should start with immediate effect,
because if we can’t start now doping will escalate. We have seen how it has
critically ravaged highly placed athletes in this country because they have
used these drugs, at times not knowing that they are banned substances.
Therefore the ANC supports the Bill.

Mr S J MASANGO: Ministers and hon members, the core purpose of this Bill is
both simple and important as it seeks to ensure that athletes compete
fairly, without using substances that boost their performance. Having said
that, the Bill has changed fairly dramatically from its original form.
Although there were a number of amendments made to the Bill, I intend to
mention only two of them.

Firstly, the Bill was amended to comply with the international standards as
well as policies and requirements of the World Anti-Doping Code. South
Africa is not an island, that’s why we hosted the Rugby World Cup and
that’s why we will be hosting the Soccer World Cup in 2010. It is thus only
natural that we have a duty to reflect the standards that apply to the rest
of the world.

Ukwenza kuhle umsebenzi wethu njengamaSewula Afrika, kufanele siphalisane
neenarha zoke ephasini mazombe. [To perform our tasks effectively as South
Africans, we must compete against all countries of the world.]

The Bill was amended to allow the SA Institute for Drug-Free Sport to
search for and seize illegal substances - along with the SA Police Service.
As the situation stands, only the SAPS can formally search a person or
property and seize illegal substances. Obviously, the SA Institute for Drug-
Free Sport should have a similar authority if it is to effectively fulfil
its mandate.

The SAPS is overstretched as it is, and fighting drug abuse in sport is
certainly low on their list of priorities. That doesn’t mean that this is
an insignificant problem and that the institute must fill the gap that the
SAPS is currently unable to deal with.

Further, the current pressure on the SAPS does not only relate to manpower
but also to its resources. Our forensic laboratories are hamstrung by
massive backlogs. Allowing the institute to assist will also create a
greater capacity to test any substances seized, and determine their nature.


Besides this Bill, there are a number of other challenges facing the SA
Institute for Drug-Free Sport. The first one is that its role should not
only be limited to enforcing and testing, but should also aim to educate
athletes about prohibited substances and their effects. It should not only
educate professional athletes, but also people who are aspiring to become
professional athletes in the future. As the chairperson said, it must start
at the lower level.

Lokhu kuzokufundisa abagijimi abasakhasako bonyana bazwisise ukuqakatheka
kwe-SA Institute for Drug-Free Sport, nokobana ihlangano le ayisilo inaba
labo, kodwana kuyihlangano evikela bona nemidlalo yenarha mazombe.
(Translation of isiNdebele paragraph follows.)

[This will teach the up-and-coming athletes to understand the importance of
the South African Institute for Drug-Free Sport, and that this organisation
is not their enemy, but is an organisation that protects them and sport in
the whole country.]

Secondly, the penalty for using prohibited substances by an athlete should
be the same in all spheres of sport. The institute has very specific
consequences for a person found to have used any prohibited substances.
Those consequences should be replicated across all South African sports
federations. It should not matter which sport you play: cricket, rugby or
athletics. The consequence for breaking the law should be uniform. If the
substance used is the same, the penalty must be the same.

The earlier a person learns about prohibited substances, the better.
Athletes should have no excuse. They should know what constitutes a
prohibited substance and which substances are listed as prohibited and
forbidden, and they should be able to respond accordingly.

I want to register the DA’s concerns. The first of the DA’s two concerns
with regard to this Bill is the inclusion of the clause through which the
Minister of Sport is allowed to intervene, in the case of a national
federation’s refusal to co-operate. We know for a fact that international
federations do not approve of or indeed legislate for the involvement of
government in sport. This seems to be yet another example of the ANC
administration’s attempts to centralise power in the Minister’s office.

The second matter of concern is that not all federations are members of the
South African Sports Confederation and Olympic Committee or Sascoc. It
seems that there is nothing that compels them to be members of Sascoc. All
disputes are referred to Sascoc, but if some federations do not belong to
them, how is Sascoc going to resolve that dispute?

The committee on sport is presently deliberating on the Sport and
Recreation Amendment Bill. The two concerns are already captured or
registered in this Bill. I hope that with this present amendment to the
Bill, the SA Institute for Drug-Free Sport will now be free to perform its
function. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B W DHLAMINI: Hon Chairperson and hon members, sportsmen and sportswomen
are always trying hard to improve their performances by training harder or
using new technology. There are unfortunately some athletes who have
stooped to the lower levels of using illegal performance-enhancing
substances to get an unfair advantage over their fellow competitors.

Drug use in sport is a worldwide problem that affects all sporting codes.
The number of high profile cases involving drug use in sport serves to
highlight the severity of this problem. Internationally, Justin Ducklin,
the Olympic gold medallist in the men’s 100m sprint, recently tested
positive for the use of an illegal substance and so did Marion Jones, the
much-decorated American athlete.

These problems are by no means restricted to international athletes. Here
in South Africa, apart from our own medallist Hezekiel Sepeng, Isaiah Mkuna
– as the Deputy Minister has said – was also banned for the use of an
illegal substance. What is even more worrying is the use of performance-
enhancing drugs by schoolchildren who are under enormous pressure to
perform in school sports.
These are just a few of the many cases that involve drug use in sport. This
is clearly a problem that is threatening to undermine the spirit under
which sport is supposed to be played.

We, in South Africa, are part of the international sporting community and
are also affected by this growing problem. It is, therefore, imperative
that we do everything in our power to assist the relevant authorities to
stamp out this illegal practice.

The aim of the principal Act, the South African Institute for Drug-Free
Sport Act of 1997, is to promote participation in sport, free from the use
of prohibited substances or methods that intend to artificially enhance
performance, and thereby render impermissible doping practices which are
contrary to the practices of fair play and medical ethics.

This amending Bill before us today introduces provisions that will
strengthen the principal Act. A United Nations’ code designed to diminish
doping cases, has been ratified by this Parliament and this Bill intends to
bring South Africa in line with the international anti-doping code.

Sports and sporting personalities play an important role in our society and
have a great influence on the lives of many people. The euphoria
experienced when we won the Rugby World Cup in 1995 and the Football
African Cup of Nations in 1996 was evident for all to see. These remarkable
achievements made the whole nation proud of the many players from the
respective teams, and they became role models and heroes to many of us.

When sportsmen and sportswomen use illegal substances to enhance their
performance, they are not only cheating their fellow competitors they are
also disappointing their many adoring fans. It is, therefore, necessary
that we provide the relevant framework and legislation that is needed by
the authorities to eradicate the use of illegal substances in sport. The
IFP supports the
Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson, in South Africa there has been a string of
athletes falling foul of the authorities regarding performance-boosting
drugs. The competitive nature of sport, coupled with the large sums of
money often involved, makes professional athletes particularly vulnerable.
This, however, is unacceptable, especially in view of the influence that
they exert as role models.

It is also extremely perturbing to note that many schoolchildren who are
under pressure to perform athletically, are reported to be turning to
drugs. In this regard, the ACDP supports moves by the SA Institute for Drug-
Free Sport to implement an anti-doping education programme aimed at schools
throughout the country before conducting testing at sports events. Measures
that do not include consequences will however be ineffective.
Sport has a tremendous potential and has already played a hugely positive
role in nation-building in South Africa, in raising levels of health and
fitness and even in building self-esteem.

The ACDP welcomes this Bill that strengthens measures to enforce the
national anti-doping strategy. We also support calls for sports federations
to be more active in collaborating with the institute to create awareness
amongst athletes regarding anti-doping rules.

The ACDP, however, notes the legitimate concerns regarding the need to
accommodate drugs such as anti-inflammatory preparations and even asthma
inhalers that are widely used in South Africa for good reason. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms M M NTULI: Hon Chairperson and members of the House, this amending Bill
is going to address issues of cheating in sport to prevent individuals
and/or organisations from gaining more power and will allow fair
competition for any athlete in all sporting codes. This amending Bill
inserts new clauses to ensure drug-free sport and to ensure that everyone
will comply with the international standards.

Again, the amendment ensures the election of the appeal board members and
its functioning, and also determines the voting powers. Furthermore, it
looks at the co-ordination of the staff and provides a gender perspective
as well as instructions regarding remuneration, allowances or any other
employment benefit.

South Africa has only one relevant laboratory for such functions and it is
situated in Bloemfontein. It is very important for us to note that in the
entire Africa, there are just two laboratories: one is in South Africa and
the other is in Tunisia. They constitute part of the 30 laboratories which
exist globally.

South Africa has endorsed the International Convention Against Doping in
Sport, which is spearheaded by the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organisation, Unesco. That emphasises the point that this does
not apply to our sportspeople only, but includes anyone who is entitled to
participate in sport within or outside the country. No one can engage in
any doping without facing disciplinary measures. Again, this gives any
victim room to defend himself or herself in case that particular person has
been framed.

This Bill also complies with the Public Finance Management Act. It is very
important to devise a strategy to inform all stakeholders about all these
changes in order to avoid any disturbance in the process of this amending
Bill, and also for our people to exercise democracy. Anyone is free to seek
clarity or express himself or herself on any aspect.

Once everything has been finalised, the legislation should also be given to
the World Anti-Doping Agency, Wada, so as to align it with the World Anti-
Doping Code. We believe that all people who are proudly South African will
be even prouder about the introduction of such constructive legislation.
The ANC supports the Bill. [Applause.]

Mr W D SPIES: Hon Chair, last week I attended two meetings of the Portfolio
Committee on Sport and Recreation. The issue at hand was not this Bill, but
another more contentious Bill on intervention in sport. The SABC’s report
on the hearings included the part where I criticised the committee for
creating the impression that certain views were disregarded. For some
reason, the report was confusing to many people. One example of this is a
note that I received earlier today from an ANC member of this House. She
wrote:


  Hon Spies, I was so pleased to hear you on TV hitting so hard at Mr
  Kriel’s comments on sport: that he was talking for a bunch of whites who
  were not interested in progress. For the first time, I saw you as a
  person, not a Boer.

The truth is that I was actually supporting Mr Kriel and not hitting out at
him. But, be that as it may, I am glad that I am also seen by hon members
of this House as a person, albeit for the wrong reasons. I am also glad to
announce that this person, the party I represent and the people who support
us are in favour of stricter measures to curb drugs in sport. The FF Plus
supports the Bill. I thank you.

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Acting Speaker, the PAC of Azania welcomes the South
African Institute for Drug-Free Sport Amendment Bill as tabled in this
House. The Minister will be empowered to appoint the members of the SA
Institute for Drug-Free Sport and to align the functions of the institute
with the Public Finance Management Act of 1999.

Regarding the establishment of the anti-doping control programme and the
preparation and approval of strategic plans, as well as the budget of the
institute, by other sports bodies, the PAC of Azania is fully supportive of
the establishment of the institute that consists of the chairperson and
nine other members, including the CEO.

However, we are sceptical of the process leading to the final appointment
of the incumbent, as it is open for misuse. The Minister, as the final
appointer, may, at times, be accused of nepotism, especially when his or
her friends, family or comrades are deemed suitable for the position. The
PAC of Azania, in protection of valid criticism or random allegations of
nepotism, wishes to propose a review of this issue over a period of time,
where a panel of experts and knowledgeable persons may be involved in the
final process.

The PAC feels further unease at the involvement of the Minister of Sport
and Recreation,  and the Minister of Finance in the appointment of the
chief executive officer by the institute.

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order, hon member, your time has
expired.

Mr M T LIKOTSI: The PAC supports the Bill.

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, the use of steroids and other drugs to boost
performance in athletics can be associated with the hunger and pressure to
run faster, jump higher and be stronger.

Challenges regarding testing do exist, where some flu and headache
medication contains substances prohibited by the International Olympic
Committee. Even asthma pumps and certain anti-inflammatory cortisone
preparations are prohibited.

It is a great concern that approximately 80% of South African sportspersons
are ignorant of the substances banned by the IOC at the Commonwealth Games
in 1998. However, the SA Institute for Drug-Free Sport, the SA Sports
Confederation, the Olympics Committee and the World Anti-Doping Agency are
all working hard to inculcate drug-free sport and awareness.

It is extremely worrying that the abuse of steroids has extended into our
schools. Children are often pressured to use these to win. A survey in 1999
showed that 22,7% per 1 000 Grade 12 pupils in Johannesburg and 5,9% per 1
000 Grade 12 pupils in Cape Town, totalling 2 547 collectively in these
areas, were very likely to use anabolic and androgenic steroids. That
definitely suggests that a greater awareness of anti-doping laws needs to
be instituted in all sports federations, and taken to schools.

It’s promising that this Bill serves to earnestly address doping in sport
in South Africa. The MF supports the amending Bill. [Time expired.]

Mme M W MAKGATE: Modulasetulo, Ditona tse di tlotlegang, Maloko a
Palamente, bagaetsho ka kakaretso, Aforika Borwa jaaka nngwe ya dinaga tse
di saenneng Kokoano ya Boditšhabatšhaba e e Kgatlhanong le Tiriso ya
Diritibatsi mo Metshamekong, e itsise Molaotlhomo-tlhabololo wa go se
dirise diritibatsi, go netefatsa taolo le go se gobelele magareng ga
baatlelete le botlhe ba ba amegang. (Translation of Setswana paragraph
follows.)

[Ms M W MAKGATE: Chairperson, hon Ministers, Members of Parliament and
comrades, South Africa, as one of the countries which signed the
International Convention Against Doping in Sport, has introduced an
amendment in the Bill which prevents athletes from using drugs to ensure
that there is control and fair participation among all  athletes.]

Clause 2 provides for the amendment of section 3 of the principal Act,
which will give the Minister powers to appoint the chairperson of the
institute. The Minister, as per recommendation of the SA Sports
Confederation and Olympic Committee and the SA Institute for Drug-Free
Sport, will appoint the other nine members, taking into consideration the
requirements of the Public Service and Administration Act, which promotes
gender equity, and representivity and redresses the imbalances in sport.

In appointing the chief executive officer, it must be noted that the
institute will do so in consultation with the Minister, and subject to the
Minister obtaining the concurrence of the Minister of Finance, in this
regard. Staff members will be regulated by the institute through the
establishment of personnel regulations, in consultation with the Minister
for the Public Service and Administration directing human resource matters
to comply with all relevant legislation applicable to the appointment of
staff.

Clause 11 makes provision for punitive measures that may be implemented
against national sports federations by Sport and Recreation South Africa
after consultation with the institute.

Tona e tla tsereganya mo mokgapheng o, fa e le gore tatlhegelo e tla be e
le ditlamorago tsa kgotlhang, tatofatso ya botsamaisi jo bo sokameng,
kgotsa morero mongwe le mongwe o o tla tlontlololang le go diga serodumo sa
metshameko le boitapoloso.

Kwa bofelong, go tshwanetswe go elwa tlhoko gore ka Molaotlhomo-tlhabolo o,
re ka se salele morago mo go fediseng tiriso ya diritibatsi mo baatleleteng
ba rona ba Aforika Borwa. Ke a leboga. ANC e tshegetsa Molatlhomo-
tlhabololo o. [Legofi.] (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[The Minister will have to intervene in this case if ever the loss will
result in conflict, allegations of a corrupt management or any disgraceful
intentions of tainting the image of sport and recreation.

Finally it should be noted that through this Bill, we will not be left
behind in bringing to an end the use of drugs among South African athletes.
Thank you. The ANC supports this Bill. [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, I would like to
thank all political parties for their support. I didn’t hear the hon
Masango and I don’t know what the DA is going to do, ie whether they
support the Bill or not. Some of the members are nodding their heads in
support and others are not.
However, I think we had very good input from every member, except for two
members whom I think got a bit confused. When the hon Masango and the hon
Spies made their contributions here today they referred to another Bill
which is undergoing the process of public hearings in front of the
Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation.

That’s a Bill that, no doubt, we will debate in this House in time to come.
But let me just point out to the hon Masango that the SA Institute for Drug-
Free Sport operates totally independently as a public entity, as required
by the Wada code. So you don’t have to worry about the powers of the
Minister.

On the other hand, however, we must be clear that the federations that will
not give us their co-operation, and come in line with the provisions of the
Bill and be active in anti-doping activities will be dealt with as reported
in the introductory speech.

I end off by thanking everybody and all the political parties for their
support. Thanks to the portfolio committee for a job well done in preparing
this Bill. I thank you.

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

  THE VALUES OF UBUNTU AS IT DICTATES OUR APPROACHES TO AND CONDUCT TOWARDS
              OTHERS WHO MAY FIND THEMSELVES IN DIFFICULT TIMES

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson and hon members, the
debate, short-timed as it may be, provides us with a very rare opportunity
to re-examine ourselves and our attitudes and stereotypes.

The notion of ubuntu has a very long history. It is a history that resisted
attempts at its annihilation and thereby proved its extraordinary
durability. We have seen many years of colonial rule, which sit at the
centre of attempts to introduce contrary values to the values of ubuntu.
But that notwithstanding, the values of ubuntu continue to be the
cornerstone of the existence of our nation and indeed the humanistic
programmes of our government.

Many writers, reflecting on this notion of ubuntu, do recognise that this
philosophy is a philosophy that makes South African people uniquely
different in their way of responding to issues. If you look at and ponder
practices elsewhere, particularly conflicts in places like the Middle East,
Yugoslavia, for instance, and look at our own experience, it becomes
vividly clear that if we were not driven by this notion and principle of
ubuntu, reconciliation in South Africa would never have been possible. This
calls upon all of us as a nation to genuinely re-examine what the lessons
of ubuntu are.

Particularly, in reference to this issue that gave rise to us debating this
matter, I want to state categorically that when we visited Comrade Yengeni,
without violating and undermining the rule of law, we were affirming that
the walls of prison will not keep us from practising ubuntu. It was about
showing our concern for his wellbeing. This is an unconditional extension
of ubuntu by one person to another human being.

Visiting Comrade Yengeni in jail was therefore a form of vomiting out the
colonial notion of a prison that is a hell of bonfires in which people must
be perpetually tortured in all human dimensions to maximum effect. This
notion of a prison has led to the rejection of prison inmates by the
community. By visiting Comrade Yengeni we generously extended love,
compassion, respect, kindness, concern, forgiveness, warmth and support to
all fellow countrymen and women languishing in our jails.

Ubuntu has also been used throughout our history in gaining credibility for
collective action in the form of stokvels, amalima [co-operative action],
vukuzenzele [rise up and act], etc. It has enabled African nations to
identify themselves with their roots by forming the Organisation of African
Unity. Ubuntu has been used to bind families together through marriages and
the payment of “lobola” as an act of ubuntu to extend thanks to the other
family which consented to give away their daughter.

Ubuntu has been used extensively during times of sorrow and happiness as
well as during times of danger and suffering, and has become a symbol of
peace and gratification among the people of Africa. During the wars of
liberation, the African frontline states amassed their armies under the
command of MK, Zipra, Zanu, Fapla and Frelimo. These African armies fought
for the love of their countries and tried to wrestle control of their land
from western imperialism. Had there been no ubuntu among our armies, we
could never have gained our independence.

Ubuntu is a tool used by indigenous African nations to build solid
relations with other nations and is a foundation for family development.
Ubuntu shown by the mother of a little child lingers forever in his memory
and is regarded as an indelible attribute that cannot be faulted.

Sincere people all over the world demonstrate their ubuntu in various forms
by giving the little they have and are rewarded by the cosmic forces in
return. The laws of nature state that those who give voluntarily will be
rewarded double the amount they contributed towards benefaction.

In the 21st century, the ubuntu ideology, which has been transmitted from
one generation to the other throughout Africa, has now emerged as a binding
force to help develop Third World countries, which are undergoing
development and whose economies have been plundered by the Western
occupying forces.

When most African states got their independence from colonial rule, the
economies of these countries were in ruins since all profits had been
repatriated during their occupation. When they left, they took away all the
valuable and movable assets. In order to survive this ordeal, the nations
of Africa started the rebirth or renewal of the sociopolitical and economic
development aspects of the continent with one constant companion, ubuntu,
as an ally, motivator and redeemer.

Ubuntu is a God-given attribute. He imbued the mothers of this African
continent with power to transmit ubuntu through caring for and nurturing
the young. The father extends ubuntu by looking after the goodwill of the
family fortune, keeping peace and protecting the family from harm. God
gives the government the power to make just laws and in the end the whole
nation becomes blessed and protected from oppression by other nations. This
is how we got our own independence. We did not invade other countries,
occupy them, steal their land and possessions nor did we expatriate their
assets.

Ubuntu is a foundation for moral regeneration and it encompasses and
promotes the achievement of the following moral values: responsibility,
honesty, respect, compassion, trustworthiness, justice, self-reliance,
loyalty, truthfulness; and it arouses spiritual consciousness. Ubuntu is
therefore a powerful tool that can be used effectively through the process
of continuous meditation to achieve peace throughout the world.

Ubuntu forms the backbone of our new democratic society. It is a unifying
value system in a society divided and ravaged by apartheid, having played a
major role in the forging of national consciousness and in the process of
nation-building. It underpins the cultural and spiritual orientation of our
new nation. It has been embraced in different cultures and languages, as
reflected in the phrase “Simunye - we are one” eulogised in word and song
on television and in, other news media. It has turned the country from a
nation cast out of the global village into one contributing to global
peace. It is because of this contribution that we are sitting on the
Security Council of the United Nations today.

In closing, hon members, it is my considered opinion that it is a
collective responsibility for all South Africans to defend the values of
ubuntu. It is the responsibility of all South Africans to nurture the
profound virtue of ubuntu and also invite those who are outside the common
fold of ubuntu to come forward and have their souls cleansed so that they
can enjoy the spirit of liberation which is continuously exuded through
ubuntu in our democratic South Africa.

Umntu ngumntu ngabanye abantu. Inxeba lendoda alihlekwa. [A person is a
person through other people. Don’t laugh at another person’s misfortune.]
Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Ms J A SEMPLE: Chairperson, ubuntu is a uniquely African concept. It
implies a belief in the universal kind of sharing that connects all
humanity. No black African needs to be told exactly what ubuntu means. It
is the same word in isiZulu and isiXhosa but, for the benefit of those who
might have heard the word and need a rough translation, it goes something
like this, in English: humanity towards others, or I am because we are.

Umuntu ngumuntu ngabantu. Ngiyimi ngenxa yenu. [A person is a person
through other people. I am what I am because of you.]

Or a person becomes human through other persons. Another translation could
be the belief in a universal kind of sharing that connects all humanity.
Such a concept will be familiar to those of religious faith. Christians
believe in loving your brother as yourself. The Islamic concept Sadaqatul
or perpetual charity in helping others to the advantage of the collective
over the interests of themselves is demonstrated by South African Muslims
who have collected, many times, donations for victims of disasters around
the world, and most other religions have similar beliefs.

It would appear that the simple meaning of ubuntu is merely humanity, but
ubuntu actually has a much richer meaning than the English word. According
to Wikipedia it means humanity, but that is all of humankind; humanity in
the sense of human nature; humanity in the sense of being human and humane;
humanity in the sense of education; humanity in the sense of civility and
socialisation; and humanity in the sense of humanness, decency and human
dignity.

Ingane yami ingane yakho, ingane yakho ingane yami ... [My child is your
child, your child is my child ...]

... so the saying goes. My child is your child and your child is my child.

A few weeks ago this House debated the issue of maintenance and the problem
raised regarding the nonpayment of maintenance orders. It is hard to
believe that the Chief Whip of the ANC in this House has the cheek to put
forward the subject of ubuntu for discussion and that this is followed by
the words, and I quote: “... as it dictates our approaches and conduct
towards others who may find themselves in difficult times”. Hon Goniwe, how
ironic that we should be debating ubuntu today, given the report in the
Mail and Guardian this past Friday!
Hon Goniwe needs to remember that it is all very well to talk about ubuntu
but you need to live it too. I am sure you will sleep very peacefully
tonight after you have lectured us all on the values of ubuntu. Do you ever
think about children who are sleeping with empty tummies because they are
not getting the maintenance to which they are entitled by law?

When people do not live up to their responsibilities, they make a complete
mockery of their legal system and this institution, and the work it tries
to do. What is the point of the Joint Monitoring Committee on the
Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women going on oversight
visits and berating magistrates, prosecutors and the SAPS for not doing
their job as far as implementing the Maintenance Act, when there are people
setting such an example?

Why should some men pay maintenance for their children when others don’t?
Ubuntu is a wonderful value system. The ANC Chief Whip should think long
and hard about the difficult times his own children find themselves in
because of his arrogant and uncaring attitude. [Applause.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Hon Chair, the first question we have to ask ourselves
today is: What is the current situation in our country? This is very
important in understanding the values of ubuntu and its importance to our
people. Our streets are dominated by thieves and other criminals; our
schools are war zones and there is a complete breakdown in authority at
most levels; our families are dysfunctional with fathers raping their
children, individuals abdicating their responsibilities and children
defying parental authority.

I can go on for a very long time but suffice it to say that there is
currently a very high degree of societal and political decay to be found in
our country. With such high levels of moral degeneration, we must concede
that our country is becoming a weak state. Part of the problem is the
increasing level of moral relativism where nothing is explicitly wrong or
inherently bad. In Afrikaans we say, “laat maar loop”.[“anything goes”.]

The subject of today’s discussion suggests that in a situation such as the
one we find ourselves in, we should turn to ubuntu for the answers and
remedies. There is some truth to be found in that. But ubuntu is not a
switch for lights that can be flicked on and off depending on the demands
of a particular situation or problem, neither is it a coat to be taken on
and off depending on the weather.

In our everyday lives some very important ubuntu principles have either
been ignored or jettisoned altogether. Let me mention some of these ubuntu
principles. Ubuntu says that a person is a person through other people.

Umuntu ngumuntu ngabantu. [A person is a person through other people.]

This ubuntu principle is the opposite of the Western principle of
individuality. But, most importantly, this principle also means that an
individual alone is not responsible for his or her failures or successes.
His or her fellow beings are his or her immediate support system. His or
her society must be so structured that it promotes human success.

So when we judge individuals, ubuntu does not allow for the adoption of a
holier-than-thou attitude. Our society today lacks the necessary support
systems for individual fulfilment. The rich are not willing to share. In
the ubuntu tradition, there were safety measures against individual
frailties, such as “ukusisa” [allocating something to someone so they can
survive] for instance - and there would be no person in society, according
to ubuntu, that would go hungry in the midst of plenty.

We have to ask ourselves here, as Members of Parliament: Do we form the
necessary support systems for our colleagues or do we wait and gloat over
some of our colleagues’ difficulties? To such people, we would say in a
Zulu aphorism: Abanabuntu. [They lack humanity.]

Another very important attribute of the ubuntu philosophy ... [Time
expired.] Abanabuntu. [They lack humanity.].
Muf T E LISHIVHA: Ndo livhuwa, Mudzulatshidulo na miraḓo yoṱhe ya Buthano
ḽa Lushaka. Hei ṱhoho ya namusi i na ndeme khulwane kha muthu muṅwe na
muṅwe wa Afurika Tshipembe. Ro aluwa ri tshi zwi ḓivha zwauri vhuthu ndi
tshone tshithu tshihulwane. Arali wa hau a tshi lila, u lila nae ngauri ndi
muthu, u fana na muthu muṅwe na muṅwe. Na kha bugu ya maṅwalo ho ṅwaliwa u
pfi lilani na vha lalaho. I tshi ya phanḓa iri, u ya muṱani wa zwililo, zwi
fhira u ya muṱani wa dakalo. Hezwo ndi tsumbo ya uri rine vhathu, vhuthu ri
a vhu ḓivha. Ndi ngazwo musi muṅwe wa hashu a tshi lila, ri tshi lila nae,
ngauri heyo ndi yone tsumbo ya vhuthu.

Kha ri ḓivhe u fhandekanya vhuthu na zwiṅwe na zwithu. Ri songo ṱanganyisa
zwithu. A ri koni u dzula ra peta zwanḓa, ngeno muṅwe wa hashu e maṱunguni.
Ri fanela u sendela khae, ra vha nae, ra mu khuthadza, na ene u ḓo pfa o
vhofholowa naho e maṱunguni mahulwane. Muthu ha laṱi ṅwana nga phaḓi. Ane a
vha wau ndi wau, u isa nga hu sa fheli. Vhaṅwe vha ita zwiḽa zwa uri fhondo
ḽi si ḽau, u ṱhuvha ḽi tshi lila. Rine sa ANC, a ri zwi iti hezwo.

U dalela muthu musi hu na maṱungu, ndi zwithu zwa kale na kale. Ro zwi
wana, nahone ri ḓo dovha ra zwi sia, ngauri ndi mvelele yashu. A ri nga
shanduki, naho ri tshi zwi ḓivha zwauri mvelele dzashu dzo fhambana. Musi
ri tshi ḓa kha vhuthihi, ri tou vha tshithu tshithihi, nahone ri bva
phanḓa. Hezwo ndi zwone zwine ṅwana wa MuAfurika a ḓiṱongisa ngazwo. Ndi
zwashu nahone a ri pfi ri tshi zwi shonela.

Kha ri sedze vhuthu kha vhadzulatsini. Miṱa yo dzulelanaho tsini, i vha
tshithu tshithihi. Zwine muṅwe muṱa wa bika, u avhela yoṱhe ya tsini; u
fana na zwidzimba, thophi na zwiṅwe zwinzhi. Vhana vhashu vha tamba vhoṱhe,
nahone vha a ḓivhana, na u ḽa, vha ita vha tshi ḽa vhoṱhe. Hezwi zwoṱhe zwi
vha zwi tshi khou sumbedza uri muthu ndi muthu nga muṅwe. Arali mubebi wa
ṅwana a si ho, u a kona u sala nga tsini, ngauri vha mu dzhia sa ṅwana
wavho.
Kha ndi sumbedze ndeme ya u tshilisana. Kale musi muḓini wa nga tsini hu na
mufumakadzi o ḓihwalaho, vhakegulu vha miḓi ya tsini, vho vha vha sa tsha
fara nyendo ndapfu u itela uri vha kone u thusa nga ḓuvha ḽa musi a tshi
tsa mirini. Izwo zwo vha zwi tshi itiswa ngauri tshifhingani tsha kale ho
vha hu si na dzikiḽiniki na zwibadela, mahayani. Hezwo ndi vhuthu, nahone
ri bva naho kule.

U sumbedza u tshilisana ha MaAfurika, ro vha ri na zwithu zwine zwa nga
madavha, zwine musi muthu e na mushumo, o vha a tshi ramba davha; ḽi nga
vha ḽa vhanna, vhasadzi, kana vhaswa. Hafha hu vha hu tshi tou vha
tshumisano. Hu vha hu si na mbuelo kana muholo. Ndi hezwiḽa zwine ra ri
munwe muthihi a u ṱusi mathuthu. Vhuthu hovhu a vhu ngo thoma ṋaṅwaha. Ndi
zwithu zwashu. Vhathu vha sa zwi ḓivhi vha songo tshuwa; ri bva nazwo kule.


Vhuthu ri vhu sumbedza nga nḓila nnzhi dzo fhambanaho. Kha ri dzhie tsumbo
nga misanda yashu, ngauri ri a i ṱhonifha ra dovha ra i hulisa, musi tsho
limuwa, vhathu vhoṱhe ri a bva ra ya dzundeni u lima. Musi hu tshi kaniwa,
ri dovha ra bva ra ya u kana. Hezwo zwoṱhe, zwo vha zwi tshi sumbedza uri
hu na vhuthu, ngauri a huna muthu ane a tou kombetshedza muṅwe uri kha ri
ye.

Ngauri ri a zwi ḓivha zwauri mavhele a musanda ndi a vhathu vhoṱhe, ro vha
ri tshi shuma mbilu dzashu dzo vhofholowa. Muthu muṅwe na muṅwe musi o
fhelelwa nga zwiḽiwa u ya musanda, a tshi swika a ṱuselwa zwiḽiwa nga
dakalo. A hu na muthu ane a eḓela na nḓala. Arali muthu a eḓela na nḓala, u
tou vha o tou litsha u tevhela zwiḽiwa musanda.

Musi vhathu vho malelana, ho vha hu tshi vha na vhushaka ha vhuḓi nga
maanḓa. Vho-Makhulu na vhakwasha vha a dalelana. Musi wa musidzana a tshi
ḓihwala nga ṅwana wa u thoma, u ya hayani ha vhabebi vhawe, hapfi o ya
tshihulu. Musi a tshi vhofholowa, nahone a tshi vhuisiwa hayani, hu itwa
mahalwa, ha sindiwa makhopfu, mikusule, na nḓuhu dzo sinḓiwaho u itela u
koḓela mukusule houḽa une wa khou bva kha Vho-Makhulu. Nga murahu ha izwo,
musi Vho-Makhulu vha tshi ya u vhona ṅwana, vha isa tsetshelo hangei
vhakwashani. Hafho hu vha na tshimima tshihulu ngauri hu rambiwa mashaka,
dzikhonani na vhahura. Murumba wa ṱwa u tshi ṱambela tshanḓa, ḽi ḽa
maladze.

Vhuthu ri bva naho kule ngamaanda. Vhaswa musi vha tshi aluwa, vho vha vha
tshi ya zwikoloni zwo fhambanaho u ya u guda milayo ine ya ḓo vha thusa u
fhaṱa vhumatshelo. Izwo zwo vha zwi tshi itelwa uri vha kone u vha vhanna
na vhafumakadzi vha vhukuma, vhane vha vha na vhuḓifhinduleli na u ḓivha
uri muthu ndi mini. Ndi ngazwo ṅwana wa MuAfurika a tshi aluwa a zwi ḓivha
zwauri ṅwana u ṱhonifha muhulwane khae, zwi sa ambi uri ndi nnyi nahone ane
a bva ngafhi.

Vho vha vha tshi ya zwikoloni zwine zwa nga sa murunduni, tshiṱamboni na
dombani - hezwi zwo vha zwi tshi itwa nga vhatukana. Vhasidzana vhone vha
ya musevhethoni, khombani – vhushani, na dombani. Domba ḽi tshiniwa nga
vhoṱhe, vhaṱhannga na dzikhomba ngauri havha vha vha vho no ḓiimisela u ya
u fhaṱa miṱa. Vha tshina fhethu huthihi nahone nga madekwana. Vhathu vha
nga pfa vha tshi mangala, fhedzi ho vha hu si na zwo khakheaho zwine zwa
bvelela. Vho vha vho gudiswa milayo ya vhuthu uri muthu u ita mini u itela
uri a vhe muthu kwae.

Ndi ngazwo ṅwana wa MuAfurika a tshi vhona muthu muṅwe na muṅwe a mu
ṱhonifha, nahone a mu lumelisa. Ṅwana ndi wa mubebi muṅwe na muṅwe. Heyo
ndi yone mvelelo ya MaAfurika. MaAfurika vha na zwinzhi zwine vha nga
ḓiṱongisa ngazwo, nahone vha dovha hafhu vha gudisa lushaka. Mabepha ndi
iṅwe nḓila ya u sumbedza vhuthu ha MaAfurika. Muvhundu muṅwe u a kona u ya
u dalela muṅwe, ha ṱwa hu tshi khou tshiniwa zwithu zwi ngaho sa tshipai,
nanga na tshikona. Hu vha hu tshi khou nwiwa, ho ṱhavhiwa na kholomo nahone
ho bikiwa na zwiḽiwa.

Musi vha tshi ṱuwa, vha fhiwa tshizwa tsha kholomo vha ṱuwa natsho, tsha
iswa musanda na halwa vhune vha vha vho vhuya naho. Hezwi zwoṱhe zwi ṋewa
vhathu vhane vha ḓa musanda u ṱoḓa zwiḽiwa. Mabepha haya ndi iṅwe nḓila ya
u dalelana ha mahosi. Havha vhathu vha vhumba vhukonani. Arali ha pfi
musanda ufhio vho dzhenelwa, na miṅwe misanda i a takutshedza na mmbi
dzayo. Ndi iṅwe nḓila ya uri arali wa hau o wa nga khofheni, u fanela u
sendela khae. U nga si ime kule wa sea, vhudzuloni ha uri u mu thuse. Rine
a ri zwi ḓivhi hezwo sa MaAfurika. Zwine ra zwi ḓivha ndi zwauri ri tea u
thusana.
Musi hu na zwi si zwavhuḓi, tshashu ndi u sendela tsinisa na avho vho
welwaho, ngauri vhuthu ndi tshithu tshihulwane; ndi ngazwo hu na
mbekanyamushumo ya Batho Pele kha mihasho ya muvhuso. Kha mafhungo a u
fuwa, muthu o vha a sa koni u zwi vhona zwauri hu na vhathu vha si na
zwifuwo ngauri vhana musi vha tshi ya malisoni, vho vha vha tshi bva
vhoṱhe, vhane vha vha na zwifuwo na vha sina.

Musi kholomo kana mbudzi dzi tshi hamiwa, vho vha vha tshi shelelana mafhi,
muṅwe na muṅwe a ṱuwa o fara. Hezwi muthu u tshi dalela hei miṱa u ya nga u
fhambana hayo, u ḓo wana hu tshi khou sukiwa mafhi miṱani yoṱhe. Havhaḽa
vha si na zwifuwo, vha dovha hafhu vha swaelwa ṋamana kana mbudzana, zwa
dzula henefho dangani u swikela hoyo muthu hu tshi pfi zwino o aluwa, u
khou ya u shambila. Ndi hone zwi tshi bvisa hafho dangani, zwa itelwa danga
ḽazwo hayani ha hawe.

Zwiṅwe zwine ra fanela u zwi ḓivha ndi zwauri heyo kholomo kana mbudzi, na
musi ya nga zwala ṋamana nngana, i ṱuwa nadzo dzoṱhe ngauri ndi dza onoyo o
swaelwaho. MaAfurika vha na zwinzhi zwine vha nga ḓiṱongisa ngazwo na u
funza ḽifhasi a nga u angaredza ngauri hoṱhe hune vha ya hone, vha
tshimbila vho hwala vhuthu. Hezwo ndi mvelele yavho nahone vha ḓo zwi ita u
isa nga u sa fheli. Ndi a livhuwa. [U vhanda zwanḓa.] (Translation of
Tshivenda speech follows.)

[Ms T E LISHIVHA: Thank you, Chairperson, and all members of the National
Assembly. Today’s topic is crucial to every person in South Africa. We grew
up knowing that humanity is the main thing. If your fellow man is in
trouble, you sympathise with him or her, because he or she is a human being
like any other. Even in the Bible it is written that we should join those
in mourning. It goes on to say that it is better to be with those who are
mourning than those who are celebrating. That exemplifies that we know what
humanity is. That is why when one among us is mourning, we mourn with the
person, because that is an example of humanity.

We should know how to differentiate humanity from other things. We should
not confuse things. We cannot just sit back whilst one of us is in trouble.
We need to be with the person and console him or her so that he or she can
feel better even when the troubles are worse. A person cannot reject his or
her child because of scabies. Whoever is your relative is your relative
forever. Others prefer to be rough with something that does not belong to
them. We in the ANC do not do that.

Visiting a person when there are troubles is something from long ago. We
found it, and it will continue after we perish because it is our culture.
We will not change even though we know that our cultures are different.
When it comes to unity we are united, in fact we are the best. That is the
pride of an African. They belong to us and we are not ashamed.

Let us look at humanity in neighbours. Families that are neighbours are
unified. Whatever one family cooks, it will dish up for the neighbours,
like traditional foods such as zwidzimba, thophi and others. Our children
play together and they know each other; sometimes they eat together. All
this shows that a person is a person because of other people. If a child’s
parent is not there, the child can stay with the neighbour since they
regard the child as theirs.

Let me highlight the importance of social interaction. Long ago when a
woman was pregnant, old women from the families nearby would not go to
places far away, so that they could lend a hand when she went into labour.
That was because in the past there were no clinics and hospitals in the
rural areas. That is humanity and it originated long in the past.

To highlight the social interaction of Africans, we had traditional social
clubs comprised of men, women or youths, who would come to help whenever
one had a task to perform. It is co-operation in this regard. There is no
profit or payment. That is why we say one finger cannot lift a pebble. This
humanity did not start this year. It is our own culture. Those who do not
know should not be frightened. We have come a long way with it.

Humanity can be shown in many different ways. Let us take our chiefs as an
example, because we respect and honour them. When it is summer, all the
people go to plough the chief’s maize field. When it is time to harvest,
all of us go there to harvest. All that shows that there is humanity since
there is no one who forces others to go there.

Because we knew that the chief’s maize was for all the people, we worked
with enthusiasm. When one’s food was finished, one would go to the chief’s
kraal and upon arrival would be given food.  No one went to bed hungry. If
a person went to bed hungry, he or she had decided not to go and fetch food
at the chief’s kraal.

When people are related by marriage, there is a very sound relationship.
The wife’s people and the husband’s people visit each other. When the wife
becomes pregnant with her first child, she goes to her parents to give
birth. When she gives birth and eventually comes back home, traditional
beer is brewed, crushed maize is stamped in a mortar. Vegetables are cooked
and dried and peanuts are ground to be cooked with the vegetables from the
wife’s people. After that, when the wife’s parents come to see the child,
they bring traditional beer, maize crushed in a mortar and a chicken to the
husband’s people. There is a great gathering of people invited to a
celebration; because relatives, friends and neighbours are invited. There
is singing and dancing and people are happy.

We come a long way with humanity. When the youth grow up, they go to
different circumcision schools to learn the precepts which will help mould
their future. That is done to help them be real men and women, who have the
responsibility and know what a human being is. That is why a child of an
African grows up knowing that a child respects someone older than him or
her, regardless of who the person is and where he or she comes from.

They go to circumcision schools like the circumcision school for boys and
group rites school as a preliminary to marriage. Girls go to the initiation
rites schools and group rites school as a preliminary to marriage. The
group rites school, as a preliminary to marriage, is compulsory for all
boys and girls of marriageable age, because they are ready to start a
family. They go to the same group rites school in the evening as a
preliminary to marriage. People may be surprised by this, but nothing
unseemly could happen there. They are taught the precepts of humanity, that
is what one does to be a good person.

That is why a child of an African respects and greets any person. A child
belongs to any parent. That is the culture of Africans. Africans have
plenty that they can be proud of and even impart to the nation. Parties of
flute players are another way of showing the humanity of Africans.
Villagers from one village can go and visit the villagers in another
village and boys and girls perform a dance with a reed-flute ensemble, a
flute of bamboo reed, horn or bone and the performance of a reed-flute
ensemble accompanied by drums. They drink, cattle are slaughtered and food
is cooked.

When they leave they are given a haunch of beef to take to the chief’s
kraal, together with traditional beer. All these are given to people who
come to the chief’s kraal to ask for food. Parties of flute players are
another way in which kings visit each other. These people form friendships.
If one of the kingdoms is attacked, the other kingdoms help with their
armies. This is another way of saying that if one of yours is in trouble,
you have to help him or her. You cannot stand at a distance and laugh,
instead of helping. We as Africans do not know that. What we know is that
we need to help each other.

When something bad happens, that’s when we move closer to those affected,
because humanity is great; that is why there is the Batho Pele programme in
government departments. When it comes to livestock farming, one would not
see people without livestock, because when children go to the pasturage to
herd the livestock, all go - those who have livestock and those who don’t.

When cows or goats are milked, they share the milk. When you visit these
families, you find them eating pap mixed with milk. The one without
livestock is given a calf or a kid, that is kept for him in the original
cattle kraal until the person has grown up and is able to start work. Then
it will be taken out of the cattle kraal and another kraal is made for it
at the person’s home.

Other things to note are that such a cow or goat, even if it has several
calves or kids, is taken along since they belong to the person who was
given the mother cow or goat. Africans have plenty of things they can be
proud of and which they can teach the world in general because everywhere
you go, you carry humanity with you. That is your culture and you will do
it forever. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Modulasetilo, mokgatlo wa ACDP o dumela gore motho ke
motho ka batho, gape re dumela gore ... [Chairperson, the ACDP believes
that a human being is a human being because of other human beings, we also
believe that ... ]

... ubuntu is a very important traditional value, and that it should not be
used as an excuse for not taking action to correct a wrong. When someone is
experiencing difficult times, we should by all means help him or her by
providing practical assistance: love, care, comfort and understanding. But
if a person is going through a rough time as a result of wrongdoing on his
or her part, then those giving moral support should give that support
without creating the impression that they are condoning the wrongdoing.

As adult men and women, we have to face the consequences of our actions and
decisions. When we are wrong we must be big enough to admit that wrong and
apologise. To refer to ubuntu as a mitigating factor is tantamount to a
cover-up, and is an act of opportunism and irresponsibility.

This House must not set a bad precedent by failing to correct wrongs and
address irregular behaviour of some of our members while using ubuntu as an
excuse for the inaction. Rather, this House should set a clear example to
the nation by setting high standards of discipline and accountability, and
by speedily taking corrective action whenever necessary.

We must not bring into disrepute this traditional value, which was passed
on from previous generations in good faith and with good intentions. Doing
so would signify a refusal to acknowledge the dividing line between right
and wrong, and a refusal to honour the practice of assuming responsibility
for one’s actions.

Promotion of ubuntu must not devalue the importance of responsibility in
society. [Time expired.]

Dr C P MULDER: Hon Chairperson, the hon Chief Whip of the ANC, Mr Goniwe,
started off by saying that the values of ubuntu continue to be the
cornerstones of our society and our dispensation. And exactly because of
that, because it plays such a pivotal role, it is important that we find
some time to delve deeper into this whole concept and try to understand one
another when we talk about these issues and what they are.

In die Christelike geloof wat vir my van belang is, leer ons dat die
kernwaarde en hoofgebod sê: Jy moet die Here jou God liefhê met jou hele
hart, met jou hele verstand en al jou kragte. En die tweede gebod wat
hieraan gelyk staan sê: Jy moet jou naaste liefhê soos jouself.

My probleem met ubuntu is, as dit in hierdie verband vergelyk word, dan lyk
dit vir my of die klem hoofsaaklik val op die tweede aspek wat sê dat jy
jou naaste moet liefhê soos jouself. Maar ek hoor baie min van die eerste
konsep rondom die Here jou God en wat daaroor gesê word. Een minuut is
feitlik verby.

’n Dokter vra vir my: waar is ubuntu in ’n staatshospitaal as  verpleegsters
met teetyd gaan, wanneer ’n pasiënt besig is om te sterf? Waar is ubuntu  as
ons mense “necklace” in die struggle. Een minuut is te min.  Ek  wil  regtig
met  u  hieroor  praat.  Ons  moet  dit  beter  verstaan.  [Tyd  verstreke.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)
[In the Christian religion that is of importance to me, we  learn  that  the
core value and primary commandment says: You must love  the  Lord  your  God
with all your heart, your entire mind and  all  your  strength.  The  second
commandment that is equal to this says: Love  your  neighbour  as  you  love
yourself.

My problem with ubuntu, if it is compared in this regard, is that  it  seems
to me as if the focus is mainly on the second  aspect  that  says  you  must
love your neighbour as you love yourself. But I  hear  very  little  of  the
first concept about the Lord your God and  what  is  said  about  that.  One
minute has almost elapsed.

A doctor asked me: Where is ubuntu in a state hospital when nurses go on a
tea break when a patient is dying? Where is ubuntu when we necklace people
in the struggle? One minute is not enough. I really want to talk to you
about this. We must understand it better. [Time expired.]]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Chair, it is beyond any reasonable doubt that our
country is facing a moral crisis, a crisis that touches on our identity as
to who we are and what makes a human being, in terms of how we relate in
our behaviour towards one another.

It would seem that the glue that binds us together has lost its potency and
things are beginning to fall apart. Our daily lives are guided by the
pursuit of material things. We have also embraced with pride the spirit of
individualism that seeks to promote a deep sense of “I come first in
whatever I do”.  Those who are guiding lights in our communities keep on
asking us ... [Time expired.]

Mr M E MBILI: Chairperson, hon Members of Parliament, colleagues and
comrades, this debate is about ubuntu and moral values – moral values like
tradition, laws, behaviour patterns and beliefs. These are the defining
features of a culture. Ubuntu is part and parcel of these moral values,
which form the cornerstone of African society. Ubuntu can be defined as
belief in the universal bond of sharing that connects all humanity.

Chairperson, this is my maiden speech. [Applause.] I was reminded by the
senior comrades that I must not be controversial. However, we are living in
a controversial situation. The question is: How do we come out of it? I
will try not to be controversial, though the environment in which we
operate is controversial. I will try and paint a picture of ubuntu within
the politics of the country under which we operate.

Driven by the desire to bring closure to the past and bring political
tolerance and stability I would like to say that there were many atrocities
that were committed by apartheid operatives such as - again, I will have to
mention names here - Magnus Malan, Adriaan Vlok and even former President P
W Botha. The nation was prepared to forgive them. Instead of my people
calling for the blood of those who committed those crimes, my people
understood that democracy and freedom are the cornerstones of what we
intend to achieve in order to bring about a just society, irrespective of
the harm those apartheid operatives caused most of us.

My fellow Africans and South Africans were and still are prepared to
forgive those who tried to kill them, who maimed them, and who jailed them
and killed their family members, children and comrades. In this regard, I
want to bring the attention of the House to the fact – I am afraid Mr Leon
is not here – that Mr Leon is the son of an apartheid operative who ordered
the execution of comrade Andrew Zondo for fighting. Comrade Zondo’s crime
was to fight the unjust laws of the apartheid ...

Mr C M LOWE: Mr Chairman, if I may address you on a point of order: Is it
parliamentary for the hon member to refer to a former judge of the High
Court of South Africa as an apartheid operative who ordered the execution
of somebody? I would ask you to request the hon member to withdraw that.

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr A Mlangeni): I am not sure what the position
should be. I am informed it is not unparliamentary. Please continue.
[Applause.]
Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, may I address you on a further point of order?
The hon speaker is very well aware of the fact that there is a tradition
that members should not be controversial during their maiden speeches. By
not being controversial, he can expect to be heard in silence. If the
member continues to be very controversial ...

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr A Mlangeni): I think you are out of order.
Please sit down.

Dr C P MULDER: No, Chairperson, I am not. Chairperson, I am addressing you
on a point of order and I suggest that you listen to my point of order
before you make a ruling. If the hon member continues to be very
controversial, he must expect to have a lot of interjections from the other
side of the House.

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr A Mlangeni): Is he being controversial? I
don’t think he is. Please continue with your speech and don’t be
controversial.

Mr M E MBILI: Thank you, Chairperson. The point I am trying to drive home
here is that hon Leon should be happy and grateful, because today he can
easily go and campaign in KwaMashu. He can campaign in Gugulethu and in
Umlazi without having stones thrown at him. Africans and South Africans in
particular want this reconciliation to work and, for me, that is ubuntu.
In my African culture, you don’t kick an enemy while he is down, no matter
how much you despise that enemy – I suppose that would be the case with the
DA and the hon members on the left. The mass movement that I come from,
namely the ANC, strongly believes that it is vitally important to unlock
the chains of the past for the nation to move forward and deal with the
many challenges that we are facing.

Mr C M LOWE: Chairperson, could I ask you if the member would be brave
enough to take a question.

Mr M E MBILI: No. [Interjections.] I will take it after this. Hence we
advocated the establishment of bodies such as the TRC. As we all know, this
was chaired by the renowned leader Archbishop Desmond Tutu, who himself
suffered a great deal of pain under apartheid laws. [Interjections.]
Desmond Tutu and his colleagues did an amazing job in trying to uncover the
truth about the crimes ... [Interjections.]

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr A Mlangeni): Please members, give him a
chance to finish his speech.

Mr M E MBILI: He did an amazing job in trying to uncover the truth about
the crimes of the past and finally recommended that a number of those
perpetrators be given clemency by the nation. This was informed by the
desire to build our beloved country for the good of the nation. For me and
my fellow South Africans, that is what is called ubuntu, reconciliation and
forgetting about the past.

Having said this, the question remains: What is the contribution of the
likes of the DA to advance this cause, the cause of ubuntu and
reconciliation and nation-building? For instance, in African practice, we
respect our elders and we respect our leaders. Our teaching is that these
people should be respected and that is the African way of our upbringing.
When you insult a leader ...

Mr T M MASUTHA: Chair, on a point of order: running commentary is
prohibited by the Rules. I can understand that the DA is taking the heat
but it does not mean that they should indulge in running commentary.

Mr M E MBILI: Chairperson, the point is that when you insult a leader, you
are by definition insulting his or her people. [Interjections.] And that is
not African. His or her people cannot forgive. By implication, when you
insult the people’s leader, you undermine the intellectual capacity of the
people who elected that leader. It is not done in the African way. You
respect the elders. You respect the leaders. [Interjections.]

Hon Gibson, as we all know, has insulted the leader of the people and the
President. This House gave him ample opportunity to apologise to the nation
and to the President and he refused to do so. I am saying to you that that
is not the African way of doing things and you cannot call that ubuntu. We
are working hard to reconcile this country and to build this nation into
one nation. If you have a person who comes and stands at this podium and
insults the President, insults the leader of the people, then we cannot
call that ubuntu. It cannot be condoned. [Interjections.]

May I then remind this House that his party, too, at one stage, asked an
hon Minister in this House how much it costs the state to provide security
for the hon former Deputy President of the Republic, Comrade J Z. I am
still waiting for the day that Gibson or Leon poses the same question as to
how much it costs the state to provide security for P W Botha, for
instance. I said, he was an apartheid operative and he was a chief
agitator.

They are not concerned about that. They have never asked that question.
Last week Botha was taken to a private clinic because he was ill and that
was at the expense of the state. You never asked that question. Why are you
not concerned about the failure of the likes of the DA to pose such
questions in this House? I am not convinced that they are unchained from
the ideology of the past, which we are fighting very hard to bring to an
end in this country.

Despite the pains of yesterday, I am standing here to advocate the concept
of ubuntu. [Interjections.] Hence I can still call Mr Gibson, “an hon
Member of Parliament”, despite his conduct that suggests otherwise. The
kind of ubuntu we want to see is the kind that talks to our conscience and
says: Yes ... [Time expired.] Thank you, Chair. [Applause.]
Mong M T LIKOTSI: Modulasetulo ya hlomphehang, Mokga wa PAC  o  motlotlo  ho
bua ka sehlooho sena se hodimo. Botho ke bo-Modimo, botho  ke  ho  phedisana
mmoho le batho ba bang, botho ke ho hlompha motho ka mong jwalo ka  sebopuwa
sa  mmopi  wa  rona  Tlatlamatjholo.  (Translation  of   Sesotho   paragraph
follows.)

[Mr M T LIKOTSI: Hon Chairperson, the PAC is proud to  discuss  this  topic.
Humanity is next to godliness, humanity is about harmonious  existence  with
your fellow human beings, humanity is about showing respect to  everyone  as
a creation of our God the Creator.]

Ubuntu abukuvumeli ukuba ube yindlavini ngenxa yezinto ezimbi ezenziwa kuwe
ngabanye abantu abaziindlavini. [Ubuntu does not allow you to be a thug as
a result of bad things done to you by other people who are hooligans.]

Botho ke ho rata wa heno jwalo ka ha o ithata. Botho ke ho hloka  makoko  le
boitshepo, botho ke ho utlwela motho e mong ha a o foseditse.  Botho  ke  ho
tshaba Mmopi wa lehodimo le lefatshe. Botho ke ho ba sehlabelo  sa  bahloki,
sa dikgutsana le baphaphathehi.  Botho  ke  ho  phallelana  maqakabetsing  a
bophelong. Ke a leboha  motsamisi  wa  mosebetsi.  (Translation  of  Sesotho
paragraph follows.)
[Humanity is about  loving  your  fellow  man  just  as  much  as  you  love
yourself. Humanity is about being free of pride  and  conceit.  Humanity  is
about forgiving the one who has done you wrong.  Humanity  is  about  making
sacrifices for the needy, the orphaned and the displaced. Humanity is  about
being sympathetic to one another in times of trouble. Thank you.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, I stand here wondering how many South Africans
know what ubuntu is or have heard of it. I will quote a definition I found
that best expresses the essence of ubuntu as a philosophy of representing
one’s personal existence, harmony and morality, where solidarity is the
central element of survival within the community.

Hon President Thabo Mbeki has correctly allied ubuntu to the African
Renaissance, which seeks unity in delivery. South Africa is a diverse
nation with a diversity of needs, wants and composition. We need to attain
unity and common ground where all South Africans may identify the benefit
of a common vision for the future of our country and its people.

Government initiatives such as the Batho Pele campaign, meaning “people
first”, the Letsema programme, meaning “work together”, and Vukuzenzele,
meaning “arise and act”, are instruments to attain the principles of ubuntu
and nation-building. For these to be truly successful, the values of ubuntu
need to be delivered and inculcated in our constituency so that they can
reap their benefits.

The Zulu proverb states, “Umuntu ngumuntu ngabanye abantu” which means a
person is a person through other people. This proverb expresses how our
individual actions in concert benefit the community and promote unity, and
shall give South Africa the strength to grow and develop to be successful
united in diversity.

In an article, reference was made to an old Chinese proverb:


  When a man is at peace with himself, he will be at peace with his family.
  When the families are at peace there will be peace in the village. When
  the village is at peace there will be peace in the country, and when the
  country is at peace there will be peace in the world. Then the man can be
  at peace.

I thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Chair, humanity towards others is certainly one of the most
important values that we need in South Africa in order to bridge the
divides of the past. All South Africans have a general consensus on this
issue. But the question that needs to be asked is: How much is ubuntu a
reality in South Africa?

Every person, especially here, would claim that they embrace the morality
that flows from the values of ubuntu. Again, I have to contest whether
certain members of this government really embrace the value of humanity
towards others. I have found that, especially with Ministers, when they are
questioned in this House and have to think on their feet, their lack of
ubuntu becomes abundantly clear.

For instance, when a coloured member of this House – and that is me - asks
for understanding regarding the situation in respect of the Employment
Equity Act and the undesirable effect it has on the coloured community, the
hon Minister of Labour reacts with a total lack of ubuntu by saying, and I
quote:


  Unfortunately, this thing about coloureds and other things, it’s your
  problem, not ours.


This is the most blatant disregard for the morality that flows from the
values of ubuntu.

Net so het die agb Minister van Veiligheid en Sekuriteit onlangs dieselfde
gebrek aan medemenslikheid, oftewel ubuntu, geopenbaar toe hy mense
kwansuis die land uit wou jaag bloot omdat hulle hul ontevredenheid met die
misdaadsituasie in die land te kenne gegee het. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[Similarly the hon Minister of Safety and Security recently displayed the
same lack of humanity, that is to say ubuntu, when he ostensibly wanted to
drive people out of the country for merely expressing their dissatisfaction
with the crime situation in the country.]

Chair, I want to say to the hon Chief Whip of the Majority Party that he
has a long way to go to make his comrades in the Cabinet understand the
true spirit of ubuntu.

In conclusion, as a Christian, I know the ubuntu value system referred to
here as the love referred to in Corinthians 13, verses four to five. [Time
expired.] I thank you.

Mnu J P PHUNGULA: Ngiyabonga Sihlalo, ngiyabonga Mlangeni, nqokonqoko
endala yakulo mbutho. Ngiyanibingelela nonke eNdlini, ngithi: Sanibonani
ngaphansi kobuntu! (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Mr J P PHUNGULA: Thank you, Chairperson, thank you, Mlangeni, veteran of
this organisation. I greet all in the House. I say: Good afternoon in the
name of ubuntu!]

HON MEMBERS: Yebo! [Good afternoon!]

Mnu J P PHUNGULA: Ngithi sanibonani ngaphansi kobuntu, hhayi ngaphansi
kobulwanyazane. Zimbili lezi zinto: ubuntu nobulwanyazane. Zikhona-ke
izilwanyazane lapha. Ngizobuye nginikhombise zona ngoba zikhona.

Bantu bakithi, ubuntu obalapha kithi. Ake nizwe nje lapho ngiqala
nginikhombisa ukusebenza kobuntu. Kuthi uma indoda ifika laphaya endaweni
yakithi ingenambuzi, ingenankomo futhi ingenankukhu, ahlangane amadoda
akhona bese ethi, “Hhayi, nansi indoda ifika lapha izokhonza enkosini.
Kodwa manje le ndoda ayinalutho, ayiklezi lapha kwayo.” Siye sithi-ke,
ngoba ayiklezi, kuhle ikleziswe lapha kwayo. Sekuzohlangana-ke lawo madoda
bese enye ithi, “Ngimusisela lezi ezimbili.” bese ithi nenye “Ngimusisela
ngalezi ezintathu.” Lowo muntu usezokwazi ukusenga nokulima lapho kwakhe.
Iyona-ke leyo nto esithi ubuntu, hhayi ubulwanyazane.

Uma sikhuluma ngobuntu sisuke sikhuluma ngalezo zinto. Sisuke singakhulumi
ngalabo abathi uma befika ezweni bafike banibuke banibuke bese bethi,
“Hhawu, nigwaza senilapha kanti, thina sishaya ngesibhamu sile kude.” Emuva
kwalokho bese bethatha lonke ilizwe kungasali nembijana, balithathe bathi
elabo.

Kuthi-ke noma sekuhlalwe phansi kwakhulunywa - emuva kokuba sesi-ke sathi
ukuphathaphathana ngezandla baze bathi, cha, akukhulunywe - kodwa baye
bangakufuna ukuyikhuluma le ndaba yelizwe. Yilaba babhemu abahleli
ngalapha. [Ubuwelewele.] Yibo laba. [Ihlombe.] Ilizwe abaze bakhulume ngalo
elaseZimbabwe. Baye bathi, “UThabo Mbeki onguMongameli walapha akamtsheli
uMongameli waseZimbabwe ukuthi akangalithathi izwe labelungu.”

Banengqondo nje laba bantu? Njengoba behleli nathi nje lapha sibanesa kodwa
bengafuni kuneswa, banenqgondo nekusasa nje laba bantu? Maqondana nalezi
zingane esizizele osekwaletha izidakamizwa zilethwa yibona lapha, osuthola
ukuthi zibhema insangu zidla nezidakamizwa, banekusasa laba bantu?
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr J P PHUNGULA: I say good afternoon in the name of ubuntu, not in the
name of wildness. These are two different things: ubuntu and wildness.
There are animals here. I will show you later, because they are here.

Compatriot, ubuntu is our thing. Let me tell you how ubuntu works. In our
culture, when a man settles in our place and he doesn’t have a goat, cow
and chicken, men in that area come together and say, here is a new man, who
is going to be under our chief. However, he doesn’t have anything and he
doesn’t milk. Let us help him to milk. One will then say, “I am loaning him
two cows for milking.” The other one will say, “I am loaning him three cows
for milking.” That person will then be able to milk and farm in the area.
That is what we call ubuntu, not wildness.

When we are talking about ubuntu, we are talking about those things. We are
not talking about those who come into our country, look at you and say,
“Wow, you only stab when you are close, we shoot while we are still far
away.” After that they take all the land, not even leaving a piece. They
take it and say it belongs to them.

When we negotiated, after a short fight with them, they said we must talk
but they refused to talk about the issue of land. They are the ones who are
sitting on this side. [Interjections.] Here they are. [Applause.] They only
talk about Zimbabwe. They say, “President Thabo Mbeki doesn’t tell the
Zimbabwean president not to grab whites’ land.”

Are these people mentally fit? They are sitting with us and we are taking
care of them but they don’t want to be taken care of. Are they mentally fit
and do they have a future? With regard to children who are using drugs
brought by these people, you will find that they are smoking dagga and
using drugs - do they have a future?]

Mr W J SEREMANE: You are out of order.

Mnu J P PHUNGULA: Sikhuluma ngobuntu; sikhuluma ngobuntu. Awuthule baba,
sikhuluma ngobuntu. Wena unale ngqondo yakho yokungabi umuntu wena.

USIHLALO WESIKHASHANA (Mnu A Mlangeni): Awume-ke, Phungula. Phungula, awume
kancane.

Mnu M B SKOSANA: Sihlalo, cha, ngisukumela ukubeka isikhalo sami lapha
kumhlonishwa uPhungula ngoba ngiyazi ubengaqondile ukusho lokho ngenkathi
ethi, “Yilaba abahlezi ngapha.” wabe esebuka thina. [Uhleko.] Angazi-ke
ngoba sikhulume kahle kangaka ngobuntu - ubaba uMpontshane ukhulumile
lapha.

Ubaba uPhungula kuhle phela abeke igama. Uma ethi “abahlezi ngapha”
ngiyakhala ngalokho ngoba ubuntu phela yinto yethu, njengoba eyazi naye.

Mnu J P PHUNGULA: Awuhlale phansi baba. Ngiyakubona ukuthi ukhathazekile
nawe.

USIHLALO WESIKHASHANA (Mnu A Mlangeni): Ufuna ukuyilungisa, Phungula?
Yilungise, mfowethu.

Mnu J P PHUNGULA: Angiyilungise, ngoba uyabona nje le ndoda ethe ngibheke
ngakuyona, uma ngithi ...

USIHLALO WESIKHASHANA (Mnu A Mlangeni): Phungula, awume kancane.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr J P PHUNGULA: We are talking about ubuntu. We are talking about ubuntu.
Keep quiet, please, we are talking about ubuntu. You don’t have the
personality of being a human being.

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr A Mlangeni): Wait, Phungula. Phungula, wait a
little bit.

Mr M B SKOSANA: I am rising to register a concern to Mr Phungula, because I
know that he didn’t mean what he said. He said “It’s those who are sitting
there” and he looked at us. [Laughter.] I don’t know, because we spoke well
about ubuntu - Mr Mpontshane spoke about ubuntu.

Mr Phungula must make comments. But when he says, “Those who are sitting on
this side” I am concerned about that, as he knows that ubuntu is our thing.


Mr J P PHUNGULA: Sit down, sir, please. I understand that you are also
concerned.

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr A Mlangeni): Do you want to correct that, Mr
Phungula? Correct that, my brother.

Mr J P PHUNGULA: Let me correct that, because you see the man that said I
am looking at him, when I say ...

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr A Mlangeni): Mr Phungula, wait a bit.]

Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, I rise on a further point of order: We have had
some rulings by the Speaker in the past that we should refrain from making
racially inciting speeches. The hon member referred to whites as people who
bring drugs into the country, etc ... [Interjections.]

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr A Mlangeni): No, I don’t think he referred to
any population group. I haven’t heard him say “blacks” or “whites” ...
[Interjections.] Order! Order, please!

Dr P W A MULDER: Chairperson, may I address you? I suggest that you should
then ask the speaker whether he referred to whites. [Interjections.]

Mr J P PHUNGULA: Ake ngi ... [Let me ...]

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr A Mlangeni): Awume, Phungula. Awume kancane
ke ngithole izeluleko. [Wait a bit, Mr Phungula. Let me get advice.]

I am advised that the member is not racially fighting anybody. He is making
a general speech. He is saying that some people on this side of the House
are people who have come into the country, used weapons, grabbed the land
and so on and so forth. I am told that he hasn’t made a racial speech.

Dr P W A MULDER: Chairperson, may I address you on what you have just said.
May I suggest that you check Hansard to see if the hon member referred to
whites as people who bring drugs into the country? [Interjections.]

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr A Mlangeni): Qhubeka, Phungula. [Continue, Mr
Phungula.]

Mr J P PHUNGULA: Sihlalo, ake ngiphuthume leya ndoda eshisayo laphaya ...
[Chairperson, let me address that furious man there ...] [Interjections.]

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr A Mlangeni): Order! Order! We will check the
Hansard and come back to you, Dr Mulder. Qhubeka, mfowethu.

Mnu J P PHUNGULA: Ake ngiphuthume leya ... Kahle wena mama. Uyashisa wena
mama. Uyashisa wena.

USIHLALO WESIKHASHANA (Mnu A Mlangeni): Phungula, khuluma indaba yakho
mfowethu. Ake uyeke indaba yokukhomba abantu ngomunwe. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)
[Continue, my brother.

Mr J P PHUNGULA: Let me address that ... Wait you, you are furious, you.

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr A Mlangeni): Mr Phungula, stick to your
speech, my brother. Stop pointing your finger at people.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Chairperson, on a point of order ...

Mr J P PHUNGULA: We mnumzane okusengathi uzwa kabi lapha, cha, ungangizwi
kabi ... [Sir, it seems like you are misunderstanding me, no, don’t get me
wrong ...]

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr A Mlangeni): What’s your point of order, hon
member?

Mr W J SEREMANE: Chairperson, you have just answered part of my point of
order. I think the hon member is really being reckless. He may try to play
games, but he is being reckless.

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr A Mlangeni): I have just asked him to stop
that, hon member.

Mfowethu, ungakhombi abantu ngomunwe. Beka indaba yakho ngoba isikhathi
sakho siyaphela. Qhubeka, Phungula.

Mnu J P PHUNGULA: Asizukuphela isikhathi sami siqedwa yilaba bantu.
Uyadlala wena, Sihlalo. [Uhleko.] We baba! Angizange ngithi mina “abantu
abamhlophe”. Uyabona, phakathi kwenu nina bantu abamhlophe, ngesikhathi
esikude ngo-1952 ngenkathi senza i-defiance campaign lapha, sasinabantu
abamhlophe ababehamba nathi ngoba base benobuntu. Uma ungenabo wena ubuntu,
zazi wena ukuthi awunabo ubuntu. [Ihlombe.]

Kunabantu abamhlophe ababulewe lapha yilo hulumeni odlulile abakade
sebengenwe ubuntu. Uma bungakakungeni wena ubuntu, ngiyeke ngikhulume mina.
[Ubuwelewele.] Umuntu omhlophe mina ngilala kwakhe, ngivuke ngiphila,
angiphe ukudla ngidle. Ngisho umuntu omhlophe, mhlawumbe omhlophe kunawe
ngoba yena umhlophe ngempela-ke nje, akaze aye ngisho epulazini.
[Ubuwelewele.]

Ngithi-ke kuwena, mina anginayo le nto yebala yokuthi: ngimnyama wena
umhlophe. Ungumfowethu wena, uma uvuma. Uma ungavumi, ungenabo ubuntu,
awuyena umfowethu. Sengiqedile. [Ubuwelewele.] [Ihlombe.]

We ndoda ekhulume lapha, ngithi kuwe, cha, baba, ungahlupheki ngoba
bengingakhulumi nawe. Bengingakhulumi ngeqembu lakho. Futhi angikakhulumi
ngaqembu, kodwa iqembu nje enginalo qho elale ndoda ndoda evungama lapha.
Angiyazi nokuthi ivungama nje le ndoda inani – kukhona indoda evungama
lapha.

Mnu W J SEREMANE: [Akuzwakali.]
Mnu J P PHUNGULA: Khuza Sihlalo. Kukhona indoda evungama lapha.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[My brother, do not point your finger at people. Stick to your speech
because your time is expiring. Continue, Mr Phungula.

Mr J P PHUNGULA: My time won’t expire because of these people. You are
kidding, Chairperson. [Laughter.] Sir, I didn’t say, “... it’s white
people”. You know amongst you white people, in 1952 during the defiance
campaign, we were marching with white people because they had ubuntu. If
you don’t have ubuntu, you must just know yourself that you don’t have
ubuntu. [Applause.]

There were white people that had ubuntu, who were killed by the apartheid
government. If you don’t have ubuntu ... let me speak. [Interjections.] I
slept in a white person’s home, woke up alive. He even gave me food to eat.
I am talking about a white person. Maybe he is even whiter than you,
because he has never been to the farm. [Interjections.]

I am saying to you, I don’t entertain this issue of saying: I am black, you
are white. You are my brother, if you agree. If you don’t agree, and are
inhuman, you are not my brother. I am done. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Gentleman, who spoke over there, I am saying to you, don’t worry, I was not
speaking to you. I was speaking about your party. I am not just talking
about the party but the party that I am dealing with is the one for that
man, who is mumbling over there. I don’t know what his problem is as he is
mumbling.

Mr W J SEREMANE: [Inaudible.]]

Mr J P PHUNGULA: Chairperson, call the House to order. There is a man who
is mumbling over there.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Ngiyisilwane nje kuwe ... [I am just an animal to you ...]
nothing else. I have never been a human being to you.

Mr J P PHUNGULA: Akukabi yisikhathi sokukhuluma. Awunikiwe isikhathi
sokukhuluma. [It’s not yet time to talk. You were not given time to talk.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Anybody who is not like you must be an “isilwane”
[animal].

Mr J P PHUNGULA: Awungivikele, Sihlalo. [Please protect me, Chairperson.]

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr A Mlangeni): Qhubeka. [Continue.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: You are a tribalist through and through. [Interjections.]

Mnu J P PHUNGULA: Wena umthetho wakho uyinto engazazi nokuthi iyini-ke,
wena. [Ubuwelewele.]

ILUNGU ELIHLONIPHEKILE: Ubuhlanga! Ubuhlanga!

Mnu J P PHUNGULA: Wena uhlezi lapha ngoba uphakelwa. Uphakelwa ukuze
uphazamise inkululeko yakuleli zwe. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr J P PHUNGULA: You don’t even understand who you are, you.
[Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: Tribalism! Tribalism!

Mr J P PHUNGULA: You are sitting here because you are fed. You are fed to
perturb the democracy of this country.]

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr A Mlangeni): Order! Order members! Order
please! Order! [Interjections.] Please, let us not exchange words and point
fingers and accuse others. Let’s just go ahead with the speech. Finish your
speech, hon member.

Mnu J P PHUNGULA: Niyezwa-ke, sikhuluma ngobuntu lapha. Kuneqembu lapha
elingezwani nobuntu. Kuneqembu lapha eliphazamisa yonke into esiyenzayo
lapha kuleli Phalamende kodwa ngibona nithulile nje nibe ninamandla okwenza
kukhulunywe naleli qembu. Niyayizwa manje incelebana yakhona, iyona ebhoke
ngempela. [Uhleko.] Iyona ebhoke ngempela manje le ncelebana.
Besingakunakile baba ngoba siyazi ukuthi wena uyele ukudla laphaya. Manje-
ke ngoba nakhu sekubonakala ukuthi asikunakile, sewufuna ukuba ubhongoza
manje. Akukho bhongoza lapha, yisePhalamande lapha.
Uma najwayela ngokunquma uVerwoerd lapha ePhalamande, akulona lelo
Phalamendel leli. Siyayazi imikhuba yenu. Niyanqumana lapha. Ngeke-ke
nisinqume thina, siyizinkalakatha. [Uhleko.] [Ihlombe.] U-ANC inggqungqulu.

Mnu W J SEREMANE: Sengathi i-CNA.

Mnu J P PHUNGULA: Yingqungqulu le. Yigama lakho-ke lelo ozibiza ngalo.
Siyabonga, CIA. Siyabonga uma uyi-CIA. Ubuntu-ke mabungene lapha, mabungene
nakule ndoda evungama lapha. Ake niyincenge impela. Ake nincenge le ndoda
evungama lapha. Ayinabuntu, ihlushwa ukungabi nabuntu njengoba niyizwa
ivungama nje.

Lapha sithi kunina yibani abantu. Umuntu ungumuntu ngabantu. Ngiyabonga,
Sihlalo. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr J P PHUNGULA: Do you understand, we are talking about ubuntu here?
There is a party there that doesn’t like ubuntu. There is a party that is
perturbing everything that we do here at Parliament, but you are quiet even
though you have the power to talk with this party. Do you hear, it’s
confident? [Interjections.] We were not concerned about you, sir, because
we know that you are there for food. Now that we don’t care about you, you
want to be a boss. There is no boss here. This is Parliament.

You beheaded Verwoerd here at Parliament; it is not the then Parliament
now. We know your habits. You behead people here. You will never behead us;
we are the boss. [Applause.] [Interjections.] The ANC is ruling.

Mr W J SEREMANE: Like CNA.

Mr J P PHUNGULA: This is the boss. That is your name that you are calling
yourself. Thank you, CIA. Thank you if you are CIA. Have humanity; the man,
who is mumbling there, must have ubuntu. Let us beg him. He doesn’t have
ubuntu.

We are saying to you, be humans, a person is a person through other people.
Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Chairperson, ours is a very diverse society, thus there’ll
be different approaches to one and the same issue. The subject for debate
this afternoon reads as follows: “The values of ubuntu botho, as it
dictates our approaches to and conduct towards others who may find
themselves in difficult times.” It’s quite a mouthful, I must say.

You will notice that I have appended “botho” to “ubuntu” in an attempt to
convey a sense of a wider spectrum to adherents or practitioners of the
philosophy and ethics of human behaviour: botho/ubuntu. Depending on
specific circumstances, I think it is wise to append the description to
such concepts in order to break the false notion of a sectional or mono-
ethnical interpretation of an all-embracing concept and practice. It is no
section’s monopoly.

Furthermore, whilst it is good to be amenable to the dictates of
ubuntu/botho in our approaches to and conduct towards others who may find
themselves in difficult times, we should actually be thinking of the other
side, other people who are victims of malpractice because ubuntu/botho is
an all-embracing concept; it is not sectional.

The individual is as good as the collective; which collective is only as
good as a chain that’s dependent on the strength of each link. Botho/ubuntu
is an inculcated system of belief and conduct regularising human conduct
and interaction. It doesn’t fall from heaven. Botho/ubuntu should also
regulate and temper human behaviour thereby placing humans at a higher
level than other creatures.

Given what the world is today, and we’ve seen part of it today, one wonders
if some humans really behave better than other creatures normally regarded
as subhuman. One wonders whether our modern rat race and dog-eat-dog life
needs a heavy dose of what we call botho or ubuntu in all walks of life.
Our conduct in general towards all people, irrespective of their cultural,
linguistic or social standing should be guided by the simple dictums of the
very concept of botho.
To name a few of these dictums, I’d like to remind members that “Motho ke
motho ka batho - umntu ngumntu ngabantu” [A person is a person because of
other persons]. Motho ga a latlhwe. [You cannot jettison a person like you
cast away debris.] Matlo go ša mabapi ... [We should be each other’s
keepers] ... whether we like it or not.

The foregoing, amongst many others, touch on the intrinsic worth and
dignity of each and every individual. The philosophy seeks to instil a
sense of compassion and caring, reaching out to the less fortunate, those
less endowed with power and even influence for that matter, that human
beings are, as they say, “the jewel of creation.” Nowhere does ubuntu or
botho stipulate differentiation of compassion. [Interjections.] [Time
expired.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I want to thank the
members who participated in the debate. I think that we still need to
continue to engage on these matters.

However, I must very briefly respond to the matters Madam Semple raised
here. I will do this by raising only two things: Firstly, we have been here
for 12 years now. If you read about something in the paper, please spend
some time just to find out whether what you have read in the newspaper is
true - as a member and because we are each other’s keeper. You can then
pass judgment after you’ve made an effort to understand what is being said.
Secondly, Parliament can never be reduced to a haven for debt collectors.
People who must serve others with a summons without any attempt ...
[Interjections.] Can you please give me a chance! Proof must be provided
that someone has been looking for this member and couldn’t find him; and
that it’s known that this member works here in Parliament but couldn’t be
found.

For the purpose of the record, I live in Cradock at number 97A Hospital
Street. That is the place for my private, personal things and this is the
National Assembly. [Interjections.] I just wanted to say, again, that I
would insist that we do not discuss personal family matters in public. We
won’t do that.

Now, I want to restate what we have said in this debate. We have said that
contemporary South Africa is ruled by a Constitution underscored by ubuntu.
This has been the case since the emergence of the Interim Constitution.
When we supported Comrade Yengeni, we were starting to redefine prison as a
community space in which the worth and dignity of an individual are to be
respected.

Our redefinition of prison is part of remaking South Africa into a liveable
world, within the context of ubuntu. Your own brother and sister can be
charged with whatever heinous crime there is under the sun, but he remains
your brother, she remains your sister and your child remains your child. We
need to respect that and extend it consistently in the way we interact with
one another.

Even regarding these artificial barriers that divide people according to
political party affiliation etc, at some stage, for the sake of ubuntu, we
need to rise above those barriers. If we then do that, we will be a nation
in the making that will have a bright future. I thank you very much,
Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 16:50.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           FRIDAY, 13 OCTOBER 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Translation of Bills submitted


     (1)    The Minister of Trade and Industry


          a) Wysigingswetsontwerp op Korporatiewe Wette [W 6 – 2006]
             (National Assembly – sec 75)


             This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the
             Corporate Laws Amendment Bill [B 6 – 2006] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert – T061013E-insert – PAGES 2166-2168

                          TUESDAY, 16 OCTOBER 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Designation of Acting Speaker
                        DESIGNATION OF ACTING SPEAKER

    As I will be absent from Parliament during the period 16 to 27 October
    2006, in accordance with the resolution adopted by the House on 24 June
    2004, I designate House Chairperson Mr G Q M Doidge to act as Speaker
    for this period.




    Baleka Mbete, MP

    Speaker

    16 October 2006

                          TUESDAY, 17 OCTOBER 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration


          a) Public Service Amendment Bill [B 31 – 2006] (National Assembly
             – proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
             notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
             29259 of 29 September 2006.]
         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Public
         Service and Administration of the National Assembly, as well as
         referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification
         in terms of Joint Rule 160.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

2.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)     Bill passed by National Assembly on 17 October 2006:


          a) Corporate Laws Amendment Bill [B 6D – 2006] (National Assembly–
             sec 75).


National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly in
     respect of Bills passed by Council and transmitted to Assembly


    (1)     Bill passed by National Council of Provinces and transmitted
        for concurrence on 17 October 2006:


        (a)      Further Education and Training Colleges Bill [B 23B –
             2006] (National Council of Provinces – sec 76).
             The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
             Education of the National Assembly.


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 23 – Department of Justice
        and Constitutional Development for 2005-2006, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 23 for
        2005-2006 [RP 205-2006].

2.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 14 – Department of Arts and
        Culture for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements of Vote 14 for 2005-2006.

3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Companies and Intellectual
        Property Registration Office (CIPRO) for 2005-2006, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-
        2006 [RP 220-2006].

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


    (a)     Letter from the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
        Development, dated 16 October 2006, to the Speaker of the National
        Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance
        Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in
        the tabling of the Annual Report of the Department of Justice and
        Constitutional Development for 2005-2006:


        LATE SUBMISSION OF THE ANNUAL REPORT


        In terms of section 65(2) of the PFMA, the executive authority of
        the Department must submit an explanation in writing detailing the
        reasons for not tabling the annual report and annual financial
        statements in the relevant legislature within six months after the
        end of the financial year to which those financial statements
        relate (30 September).


        I wish to indicate that the Annual Report of the Department of
        Justice and Constitutional Development was not submitted timeously
        as we only received our audited financial statements from the
        Auditor-General on the 21st August 2006, which led to delays in
        processing the report.


        I trust that you will find the above in order.


        Yours sincerely
        signed
        MRS B S MABANDLA
        MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND
        CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee  on  Communications  on  the  Postal
   Services Amendment Bill [B 22– 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75),  dated
   17 October 2006:

    The Portfolio Committee on Communications, having considered the
    subject of the Postal Services Amendment Bill [B 22-2006] (National
    Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, and classified by the Joint Tagging
    Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B 22A-
    2006].

2.     Report  of  the   Portfolio   Committee   on   Public   Service   and
   Administration on the Annual Conference of the International  Association
   of Schools and Institutes of Administration: Warsaw, Poland: 5 to 8  July
   2006:


   1. INTRODUCTION


Having attended the above-mentioned conference as  represented  by  Mr  M  R
Baloyi, the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration  hereby
submit  a  report  for  consideration  by  the  National  Assembly   as   an
accountability mechanism

   2. BACKGROUND

The International Association of Schools and Institutes  of  Administration,
abbreviated and generally referred to as IASIA,  and  referred  to  in  this
report  as  the  Association,  is   a   non-profit   formation   voluntarily
established to provide a  forum  for  organisations  and  individuals  whose
activities and interests focus on public administration and  management.  It
aims to promote and support cooperation  among  participating  organisations
and individuals, to enhance their capacity to strengthen the  administrative
and management capabilities  of  governments,  organisations,  agencies  and
enterprises they serve.

Having been conceptualised in a document circulated in Viena in 1962, the
Association was formally incorporated in 1971, at the Congress of the
International Institutes of Administrative Sciences (IIAS), which was held
in Rome. It was later formally established as an independent Association
operating broadly to adopt a non-scientific-and-broader-stakeholder
approach, contrary to its mother-organisation, the IIAS, which is purely
scientific.

IASIA now has worldwide membership of over one hundred and seventy
institutions in seventy countries. Most of the member-organisations of
IASIA are academic institutions at tertiary level, public service
institutions as well as individuals who are practitioners in the public
service and administration arena.

As a non-profit entity, the Association  survives  out  of  money  generated
from membership contributions, income from services rendered by its  members
and contributions  from  funding  organisations  such  as  the  Commonwealth
Secretariat, the Ford Foundation, the German  Foundation  for  International
Development,  the  United  Nations  and  the   United   Sates   Agency   for
International Development.

The Association seeks to provide an  opportunity  for  personnel  of  member
organisations and individuals to:

    o Exchange information, ideas, experience and materials  on  issues  and
      developments of common interests;
    o Study public sector management issues and developments of current  and
      future concerns; and
    o Advance their professional knowledge, expertise and development.

In order to  achieve  the  above  aims,  the  Association  organises  Annual
conferences, mobilise  and  organise  Research  groups  and  facilitate  and
sponsor publications.

Although neither Parliament nor the Portfolio Committee  on  Public  Service
and  Administration  is  an  affiliated  member  of  the  Association,   the
Committee has been attending the Annual  conferences  thereof  since  around
2002.

   3. THE REPORT IN DETAILS

   1. PARTICIPANTS

Institutions  and  individuals  from  fifty  two  countries   attended   and
participated  in  the  conference,  including  South   Africa,   which   was
represented   by   the   Portfolio   Committee   on   Public   Service   and
Administration,  the   Public   Service   Commission   and   the   following
Universities:
    o University of the Free State;
    o Tshwane University of Technology;
    o Bloemfontein Central University of Technology;
    o University of the Western Cape;
    o University of KwaZulu Natal
    o University of Pretoria, and
    o University of South Africa.

The Deputy Prime Minister of Poland, the Chairperson of the Poland
Parliamentary Committee on Public Services and the Mayor of Warsaw attended
the official opening of the Conference. The Uganda Minister of Public
Administration attended the conference throughout and she even delivered a
paper sharing the experience of her country in dealing with issues of
public administration, particularly in the area of how they manage the
recruitment process.

Also in attendance were the European Commission, the United Nations and  the
African Training and Research Centre in Administration for Development.

   2.  CONFERENCE THEME, WORKING GROUPS AND DELIBERATIONS

The theme of  the  Conference  was  “In  search  of  the  best:  Attracting,
Developing and Retaining in Public Service”, and it focused  the  conference
in dealing with issues related to  the  recruitment  of  the  most  suitable
public servants, motivating them to stay in the public service and  training
them so that they remain focused on the key priorities of respective  public
service organisations for consistency and accelerated service delivery.

In deciding on this theme, Conference organisers recognised  that  it  is  a
world-wide reality that the success of any public  service  organisation  is
heavily  dependent  on  the  quality  of  the  public  service   that   such
institutions have, and the fact that dealing  with  such  questions  as  the
theme suggests is not an easy exercise,  hence  a  need  to  bring  together
those academic experts and expert practitioners to share their views on  how
best to deal with the questions.

Conference noted that there are some reasons as to why  Governments  of  the
World are confronted  with  serious  recruitment  challenges,  such  as  the
following:

    o Application of passive recruitment strategies

This is a situation  where  Governments  rely  on  the  use  of  newspapers,
radios, televisions and verbal  announcements  for  advertising  posts.  The
argument in this regard was that this is an outdated approach that  tend  to
attract quantities and not necessarily qualities, because, in doing so,  the
message may reach a number of people who may be  available  for  interviews,
become impressive in the process of interviews and convince the  panel  that
they are the best recruits. The panel may have to accept  the  bonafides  of
those who will demonstrate such qualities at the interviews  as  being  able
to answer the questions  that  are  asked,  and  that  may  not  necessarily
translate into guaranteeing that those individuals may be the best  suitable
of the public servants.

During deliberations, and as the various stakeholders were sharing their
experience on this matter, Conference considered that an alternative
strategy for recruiting the best candidates for public service posting
should the one referred to as the active strategy, which include web
recruiting, on-site recruiting, such as considering individuals on the
basis of their contributions say at conferences, meetings and other
instances, the use of referees of a sound standing, the use of internships
or co-opting, the use of credible employment agencies and head-hunting.
What was considered as a diving line between this strategy and the one
referred to as passive, is that this one provide an opportunity during the
recruitment process, to consider the practical side of the assumed quality
and capacity of the candidate, and this minimises the risk of appointing
candidates only on considering their articulate representation and
eloquence during interviews.

    o Time consuming through red tape or proceduralism

Conference noted that, related to the passive recruitment strategy  referred
to above, is the lengthy recruitment processes where  the  governments  will
follow  procedural  steps  to  a  point  where  individual  applicants  find
themselves attracted elsewhere whilst waiting  for  Government  confirmation
of appointment. They loose confidence in the recruitment  process  and  seek
for alternative opportunities.

    o Lack of attraction

Experience shared at Conference suggested that the most  suitable  and  thus
the best candidates are not always readily available and that they are  very
considerate  as  to  what  they  involve  themselves  in,  such  that   they
scrutinise the nature of work and the image of the  organisation  they  join
through  recruitment.  In  the  majority  of  cases,  it  is  seen   as   an
international phenomenon, that of the bashing of the bureaucracy  by  media,
academics and politicians. So much  negative  tend  to  be  said  about  the
public service in the name of being transparent, but that which goes so  far
to a point of discouraging the best from joining the  public  service,  such
as public announcements of the salaries of public servants, more so  if  the
reporting is negative, such as branding the public servants  “fat  cats”  or
branding  them  other  negative  tags.  This  was  identified  as  the  most
demotivating factor for professionals preferring to take up employment  with
the Civil Service. They believe that once they accept job  offers  from  the
public service, they will be joining the  club  of  those  people  who  will
always be at the receiving end without due consideration of  the  sacrifices
they will make from time to time. What was identified as a common  trend  in
the international arena accountable for  these  perceptions  in  the  public
service is the allegation that there is more negative reporting on the  work
of public servants than what they objectively deserve.
However, there is no option  that  does  not  give  rise  to  some  sort  of
challenges that need to be addressed from time to  time,  thus,  debates  in
the  alternative  strategy  to  the  passive  recruitment  one   are   often
characterised by perceptions of favouritism, nepotism and job  reservations.


    o Lack of financial incentives

A global reality noted was that Governments generally  are  not  competitive
with the outside employer bodies as to salaries and salary  packages,  hence
the difficulty to attract the best and to retain those best who are  already
within  public  service.  A  driving  factor  for  this  challenge  is  that
Governments are confronted with a need  of  having  to  balance  expenditure
patterns, such that the salary bill is  not  seen  to  be  higher  than  the
operation account.

Conference deliberated as to whether this is not a foreign impositioning  of
concepts that do not apply to  the  public  service  environment,  hence  it
remains an issue  for  further  research,  because  Conference  agreed  that
without resolving the salary question in Government employment,  Governments
of the World may have to forget about being able to attract the best and  to
retain them within the public service.

Due to this factor,  it  was  argued  that  in  some  countries,  university
graduates with  such  scarce  skills  as  medical  professions  leave  their
countries  as  soon  as  they  graduate,  in  search  of  better  employment
opportunities, and that those who  remain  take  decisions  that  they  will
compensate themselves by indulging in such practices as moonlighting.

It is a converse reality that in  order  to  recruit  and  retain  the  best
public servants, Governments need to  pay  their  staff  competitive  salary
packages so that they do  not  see  themselves  available  to  quit  at  the
slightest excitement.
   3.  FURTHER DELIBERATIONS

Notwithstanding the challenges some of which referred  to  in  this  report,
there  are  some  common  indicators  that  may  assist   the   process   of
recruitment, retaining and development of the best employees in  the  public
service arena  expedient  in  anticipating  future  challenges  and  winning
ongoing battles in the desire to ensure service delivery, determined by  the
immediate  challenges  prevalent  in  any  given  situation,  such  as   the
following:

     1. Choosing the best is relative and contextual

This is a factor that should guide the recruitment process to be  viewed  as
related to addressing the real challenges of each  country  and  Government,
in formed by the priority needs of the people concerned. What is said to  be
the best for a particular environment may not necessarily be  the  best  for
all instances; hence the absence of a one-size-fit-all  recruitment  process
and yardstick for what is seen as quality public service.

Of course this factor does not rule out the possibility of the existence  of
generic processes in recruitment, but the point of emphasis in  this  matter
is that even in those instances, the determining factor is  that  there  has
to be common assumptions leading to those instances.

     2. Choosing the best means the existence  of  systems,  processes  and
        practices

Whereas the best in terms  of  public  servants  relates  to  attributes  of
knowledge, skills,  competencies  and  character,  greater  achievements  is
attainable in the event of a further combination of same with  reliable  and
efficient systems, clear processes and a culture for accountable practices.

     3. Search for the best should be across the organisational  structures
        of an organisation.
Although common trends suggests that more focus tend to be given to  recruit
the best only at senior management level and  less  attention  is  given  to
middle  and  lower  management  up  to  the  general  rank-and-file  in  any
institution, the journey to best performing public  institutions  will  only
be made a successful project with a specific biasness to seek for  the  best
across the rank divide.

     4. The best means ability  to  weather  current  storms  and  pre-empt
        future threats.

Because service delivery does not take place in a vacuum, there is always  a
need that when recruitment is done, it should be directed at  selecting  the
people who will live up to the unique challenges of each unique country.

     5. Experience may not necessarily be cognate or relevant.

A common practice, which Conference established that it is problematic and
misleading, is the one that suggests that the chances are high that
institutions may recruit the best by making reference to experience of
individuals accumulated over years of service in a particular field of
deployment. The problematic part of considering service and experience as a
determinant for choosing the best is that the Public Service environment is
dynamic, such that what becomes a relevant exposure and experience at a
particular time may not necessarily be holding across time-periods, either
because political situations change and influence policy-making or that
policies themselves are subject to review from time to time.

     6. Academic training may not always prepare a person  to  be  suitable
        for a particular work.

The one with an impressive  resume  is  not  necessarily  the  best.  Public
service work is  not  entirely  academic.  It  is  all  about  understanding
policies and internalising the obligations to implement those policies.

On this score, Conference acknowledged that a  system  of  recruitment  that
only places academic achievement as a tool for the best may not  always  get
the good performers out of such, and that cadreship  development  should  be
encouraged as the  best  guide,  which  is  that  individuals  are  prepared
through thorough engagement on  tailor-made  development  programmes  to  be
able to be the best public servants relevant to particular environments.
     7. Business management-type of skills may not always yield good public
        service results.

The idea of running public service institutions like business formations  is
gaining momentum the World-over, in terms of which there is a drive for  so-
called return on investment. This is one of the characteristic  features  of
the New Public Management theories.  In  this  regard,  preference  for  the
recruitment of personnel  for  public  service  goes  to  those  people  who
command such skills and knowledge. Conference stressed  that  this  may  not
always yield good results. Public management  practices  should  be  service
delivery focused and not profit driven, although there should be  an  effort
to be efficient.

   4. CONCLUSION

In conclusion, it suffices to mention that this Conference set a  stage  for
countries and participants to pay special attention  to  issues  related  to
recruitment of the best public servants, retaining  in  the  public  service
and also further developing them.


