---
title: 'National Assembly - 07 February 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-02-07
---

TUESDAY, 7 FEBRUARY 2006
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                                ANNOUNCEMENT


The SPEAKER: Hon members, I have to announce that I have received a copy of
the President of the Republic’s address, which was delivered at the Joint
Sitting on Friday, 3 February 2006. The speech has been printed in the
Minutes of the Joint Sitting.


            DEBATE ON THE PRESIDENT’S STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS


The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I rise on two points of
order, if I may. The first one is that this must be the only democratic
parliament in the world, apart from North Korea, where the governing party
follows on after the governing party in a debate of this nature. I would
like to draw to your attention that there is no provision for the Leader of
the Opposition to follow on after the President as it happens in all
democratic parliaments.

The SPEAKER: Hon Gibson, this is the matter that, as you are aware, is on
the agenda of the NA Rules Committee. You know that that issue was referred
there, and it is still under discussion. The Chair intends to go according
to the speakers’ list that we have in front of us, and now I really wish to
proceed accordingly.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam, my second point of order is that
the Leader of the Opposition is recognised in the Constitution and in the
Rules of Parliament, but there is no speaking turn for him here. There is
somebody called the Hon A J Leon, and I would like you to instruct whoever
is responsible to call the Leader of the Opposition by his correct title in
this House.

The SPEAKER: On the speakers’ list I have the second speaker who will be
the hon the Leader of the Opposition, a matter which, by the way, is quite
controversial among opposition parties, but that is not the point at the
moment. [Applause.]

Mr S L TSENOLI: Comrade President, comrade Deputy President, hon members,
and esteemed guests . . .

 . . . ke isa tlhompho ho lona kaofela jwaloka ha e le tshwanetse.
Letsatsing lena re tlilo buisana ka puo e batsi e hlalositseng maemo a
ditaba ka hara naha. Re motlotlo, Ntate, ka puo ya hao e akgetseng lesedi
le moo maru a neng a thibetse teng.

Re motlotlo ho utlwa hape ka wena hore bafuputsi ba maemo a ditaba ka hara
naha, ba nonyang setjhaba maikutlo ka kakaretso, le a ba kgwebo ka nepo, ba
tlaleha e le a phahameng, mme batho ba thabetse bokamoso ba naha bo
bonahalang bo kganya. Taba tsena di kenyeleditse le hore ditsebi tsa moruo
di re moruo ona o bophelong bo botle ho tloha haesale. [Ditlatse.]

Tsena tsohle ke ditholwana tsa mosebetsi o motle wa tsamaiso e matla ya . .
. [Malahlelwa.] (Translation of Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[ . . . with great respect I greet you all. Today we are going to discuss
the address that explains the status quo in the country. We pride
ourselves, sir, on your address that has brought light where there was
obscurity.

We are honoured to hear from you that those who did research with regard to
the status quo in the country, who conducted general public hearings and
consulted the business sector, reported that it was of a high standard and
that the public is happy about the future of the country, which seems to be
bright. This includes the report by economists that the economy has never
been so healthy. [Applause.]

All these things are the fruits of the good job of powerful leadership . .
. [Interjections.]]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, on a point of order, but not related to what
the speaker is saying: This is the first speech of the debate on the
President’s address, and there is no interpreting, whatsoever. It makes it
very difficult for some of us to relate to that.

The SPEAKER: Okay, we are going to attend to the issue of interpreting.

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, if I can assist the hon member, he will find
English on the Sesotho channel. [Laughter.][Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Can I express my eternal gratitude to the hon member from the
FF Plus, Madam Speaker.

Mong S L TSENOLI: Tsena tsohle ke ditholwana tsa mosebetsi o motle wa
tsamaiso e matla e eteletsweng pele ke wena, Ntate. Re o rolela kgaebane.
Katleho ena ebile ditholwana tsa ba ileng ba tela maphelo a bona leratong
la naha. Ha re bona naha e kgabile, palesa e le tse ntle ka mebalabala,
dishweshwe di kgabile ka bosehlana, ha re hopoleng hore mobu ona o
noseditswe ke madi a bahale boBambatha, ya ileng a fenethwa a ba a kgaolwa
hlooho dilemong tse lekgolo tse fetileng, a tseka botho. Esitana le boJoe
Qabi, ba bolailweng Zimbabwe, jwaloka ha o re hopoditse. (Translation of
Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[Mr S L TSENOLI: All these things are the fruits of the good job of
powerful leadership under your tutelage, sir. Hats off to you! This success
is the fruition of the hard work of those who sacrificed their lives
because they loved this country more. When we see the country being
decorated with flowers of different colours, some in bright yellow colours,
let us be reminded that the soil was irrigated by the blood of martyrs like
Bambatha, who was murdered and beheaded a hundred years ago, fighting for
humanity - even Joe Qabi, who was killed in Zimbabwe, as you have reminded
us.]

The good news throughout our country and the memories we cherish are,
however, grounded in the appreciation that this was never meant to be a
sprint. It remains a marathon. The pace that we now would like to increase
derives from the confidence in the plans your government, sir, is
implementing and to which you referred to in your address. It resonates
with what people themselves have told us needs to be done.

The interaction between communities and the Presidency, the Ministers, the
provincial executives, and the majority of municipalities, including
Parliament itself, has cast light on, and given the direction in which our
efforts should go in order to improve delivery.
It is for that reason that we in the local government community have
welcomed your focused attention on this sphere of governance through the
President’s Co-ordinating Council - the emphasis you once more point to in
your address. The result, we have observed, has been a growing appreciation
and level of awareness of the crucial role that the municipalities play in
the system of co-operative governance.

The huge progress that has inspired the enthusiasm and optimism, today at
large in our country, is partly attributable to the courageous work of
councils in our country. More clean water, sanitation, refuse removal and
better roads are as a result of the work of municipalities, supported by
national and provincial government and by public entities as well.

From the benches in the House, many of us are convinced that government is
learning fast to improve co-ordination and levels of collaboration to meet
challenges of service delivery. I am sure, sir, more needs to be done in
this area.

Recognition of the IDPs as an integrating mechanism of all spheres of
government is a lesson that is being learned quickly by officials across
the three spheres of government, and also in public entities. This is
crucial because these priorities, the IDPs, are influenced by people
themselves in the majority of municipalities through ward committees where
these committees are alive and well.
A lot of work is being done in this area to deepen democracy and local
accountability. The many initiatives that today have been conducted to
evaluate progress with ward committees and how effectively they function,
how and what methods they use to effectively involve people, represent a
significant indication that we meant it when we said, “The People Shall
Govern”, and that the programmes that we have unleashed to date indicate
our determination to ensure that that becomes the standard for how things
happen in our country.

Things are always in a state of flux; it is ever changing. Whereas before
the IDPs’ formulation was heavily dominated by consultants, today the
pendulum is swinging towards less dependence. This will be strengthened if
we retain more of those who are now experienced, recruit appropriate
capacity and improve the system of mentorship that is evolving today.

Many of the people, who have been in local government so far for the last
five years, have gained tremendous experience in understanding the system
that has been put in place to ensure the people’s involvement in decision-
making. This was a complete departure from previous practice and the
previous way in which governance happened in this country.

It is therefore appropriate that we recognise the speed with which people
have, despite the difficulties, made progress in this area. Familiarisation
with the new system of local government, which is now five years old, was
an uphill battle. But now both councils and communities, through a robust
process, have come to understand the system. Things can only improve as
programmes of capacity-building, including the short-term Project
Consolidate, bring about service delivery, which people themselves will
proudly observe.

Comrade President, one of the reasons our 10-year-old Constitution is
admired is because, among other things, its progressive provisions on local
government; especially the relationship it has with the other two spheres
described in the Constitution as interrelated, interdependent, yet
distinct.

This ability of municipalities using their own resources, supported
nationally and provincially, to do what people themselves want to do, using
their own assessment, is one of the most important issues in local
government that many, for whom local government elsewhere is a creature of
legislation, are admiring in our country, as well as admiring how we are
doing things here. Our friends throughout the continent tell us that they
envy this system, and would like to see it in their own countries.

The significant role municipalities will play in Asgisa is bound to have a
major impact. The full economic potential of these structures are yet to
blossom. Asgisa looks to us like the right organic fertiliser that will
allow municipalities to really flourish to the benefit of local residents.
In the manner in which local government operates and prepares IDPs
incorporating local economic development, the linkages with the rest of the
economy are what will make a big difference in the life of our communities
who are entrepreneurial and creative, as long as it is being demonstrated
that it is not the monopoly of the private sector or NGOs.

Both qualities are there for the public sector to increasingly show how it
is managing the challenges it is facing. We already have best practices in
this area. The decisive interventions by the public sector and local
government that are envisaged through Asgisa, among other initiatives, will
have to be what characterises our interventions during our second decade of
freedom.

Our people know what they want. We have heard them. They just need
effective support. In the ANC we have our ducks in a row on this score.
[Interjections.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Sitting ducks! Sitting ducks!

Mr S L TSENOLI: Even when the municipalities have had problems, we have had
enough indicators of success through the Vuna Awards. Even the media, which
often is very critical, has been very conscious of two good examples - they
have left out others - in the Free State, that have demonstrated the
effectiveness of municipalities that work. Even members of the opposition
themselves are in trouble, because they have very little, if anything, to
raise in those municipalities. [Applause.]

This is evidence that often, because of sensationalism, we miss the hard
work that is under way in these communities, that is being done by these
municipalities in these areas. And, we are convinced that given the steps
that are in place now to effectively and increasingly support learning from
the past, we are bound to see major progress in more services and the
changes that we have indicated are showing in all of the areas. I thank
you. [Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, Mr President, colleagues,
President Mbeki brought South Africa a message of hope in his state of the
nation address. He captured the nation’s mood today, abroad and at home.
His words were followed yesterday by those of the Deputy President. She
revealed South Africa’s plans for economic growth and the World Cup in
2010.

All of us are fully behind the government in its mission to make South
Africa a winning nation on and off the field. As the President told us on
Friday, South Africa has a bright future. This is indeed the age of hope.
However, we face several threats – some superficial and some far more
fundamental. Our hope is threatened by corruption. It is threatened by
crime and unemployment. It is threatened by failed service delivery. And it
is threatened by the ANC’s assault on our Constitution. [Interjections.]
And so among the signs of hope, we must also note the signs of warning. The
President correctly quoted a Gallup poll to show that South Africans are
optimistic about the year ahead – and he did well to mention it. But the
same poll also reported that 57% of South Africans expect unemployment to
rise in 2006.

The President mentioned in his speech on Friday a Markinor poll. He
correctly said that two thirds of South Africans think our country is
moving in the right direction. But there are some other numbers in the same
poll. Only 32% think the government is doing well in creating and reducing
unemployment. Only 46% think the government is doing well on crime. And
48%, as the President indicated, have a negative view of local government,
versus only 45% who have a positive view.

And so this is indeed the age of hope - we hope we will have electricity
next month, we hope crime will disappear from our streets, we hope we will
get the houses we were promised so long ago! It is time to turn the age of
hope into the age of delivery. It is time for more action, not more broken
promises. It is time to stand up for change.

The President made some new commitments in his address on Friday. One was
his promise to introduce a regulatory impact assessment system to measure
the effect of laws and regulations on jobs and growth – an altogether
excellent idea, which has been the cornerstone of DA economic policy for
many years. I’m delighted the President is also of that view.

But the President has also made promises before and, regretfully, he has
broken them. For example, last year he promised to complete the system of
exemptions for regulations and taxes on small business. In fact, many of
the President’s promises last Friday were the same promises for 2005, which
have not been met.

Take infrastructure, for example. The President promises new improvements –
he did so last year. But in the past 12 months power cuts have continued in
Gauteng and have now spread to the Cape. Fuel shortages interrupted cross-
country transport in December. There are still not enough classrooms.
Children are still learning under trees. Many municipalities and provinces
are failing to spend even half of their capital budgets.

In education, the President promised on Friday to eliminate fees for the
poorest schools and to improve the output of maths and science graduates –
an excellent idea. But the government has been making the same promise on
school fees since 2002. And last year, in a survey, it was revealed that
only 0,1% of children in formerly black schools and only 3% of children in
formerly coloured schools met international benchmarks for literacy and
numeracy.

At the local government level the President promised on Friday to ensure
municipalities operate - and I use the words from his speech - “effectively
and efficiently”. But last year he promised to make sure that failing
municipalities would “put their house in order”. Instead we saw thousands
of service delivery protests across South Africa – just under 6 000 of
them. Even Project Consolidate, the government’s rescue team for local
government, has missed its own deadline to fill its own staff complement.

The President also left many things out of his state of the nation address
on Friday. We only heard corruption mentioned twice, Aids mentioned once,
and Zimbabwe not at all. [Interjections.] Furthermore, the President failed
to address the delivery problems that are threatening the lives and
wellbeing of all our people. Perhaps he hasn’t seen everything that we have
seen.

Last Sunday I was in Soweto at the Old Vista campus at Dlamini Extension 2
– I presume there’s an MP for that area sitting here somewhere – where 500
people are sharing one toilet. I visited families in a squatter camp across
from the Orlando High School that have been waiting for houses for seven
years. And they have no water and no electricity.

Verlede week het ek in Borchards naby George ’n besoek afgelê by die
familie van die 21-jarige Elmarie Gordon, wat verlede maand verkrag en
vermoor is. Haar geliefdes het haar nog nie eens te ruste gelê nie of haar
vermeende moordenaars is op borgtog vrygelaat. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[Last week I was in Borchards near George where I paid a visit to the
family of the 21-year-old Elmarie Gordon, who was raped and murdered last
month. Her loved ones had not even laid her to rest when her alleged
murderers were already released on bail.]

This past Sunday, at the Mahatma Gandhi hospital in Phoenix, I met patients
with broken bones who cannot be operated on, because there isn’t a single
anaesthetist in that hospital.

In Rustenburg het ek gaan kyk na ’n kragsubstasie wat gedurig breek omdat
die regering dit nie wil nie regmaak nie. Die munisipaliteit is bankrot,
maar die ANC-burgemeester het R80 000 van die belastingbetaler se geld aan
’n verjaarsdagpartytjie vir homself bestee. [Tussenwerpsels.] Die heel
boonste kandidaat op die ANC-lys in Rustenburg is weens aanklagte van
korrupsie en intimidasie inhegtenis geneem. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[In Rustenburg I went to a power substation which is continually breaking
down because the government does not want to fix it. The municipality is
bankrupt, but the ANC mayor spent R80 000 of the taxpayers' money on a
birthday party for himself. [Interjections.] The top candidate on the ANC
list in Rustenburg has been arrested on charges of corruption and
intimidation.]
In Leratong Park in Kimberley I visited an area last week where thousands
of people still use the bucket system. The President quite correctly
promised to replace the 250 000 buckets by next year, but the government
has only replaced 11 000 buckets since 2004.

Let’s talk about the Western Cape. It is not because the DA says so, but it
is the ANC’s own Patrick McKenzie, member of the provincial parliament and
chairman of the provincial housing portfolio committee, who said in the
Cape Argus on 13 October 2005: “2005 has been the worst year yet for
housing in the Western Cape. We have only built 11 000 houses in the past
financial year”. “Today, he continues, “we have people rioting and
demonstrating for houses”. “Between 1994 and 2000”, when the NNP-DP
coalition ruled, “the department built over 130 000 houses” – over 20 000
per year. “Never in the history of this province”, he concluded, “has it
been this bad”.

In Delmas several people died of typhoid last September, because the
council refused to invest in proper water purification and sanitation. So,
yes, the people are optimistic, but they are optimistic often in spite of
major failures by government, and they hope for change.

The President quoted the prophet Isaiah last week. Isaiah had much to say
about hope, and the President told us what he said. But the prophet Isaiah
also had plenty to say about corruption. In chapter 1, verse 23, he said:

   Thy princes are rebellious
   And companions of thieves:
   Everyone loveth gifts
   And followeth after rewards.

Justice Hilary Squires said in a more contemporary milieu: “Corruption can
truly be likened to a cancer.” And like cancer, corruption and
mismanagement are destroying delivery and spreading at every level of
government.

Last week Transparency International released its annual Global Corruption
Report. It said, and I quote:


   South Africa faces major challenges in combating corruption. Corruption
   is endemic at the provincial and local government level, negatively
   affecting the capacity of the public sector to deliver services to the
   poor.

Now in an infamous moment of insensitivity, the President’s spokesman, Mr
Murphy Morobe, said of the controversial Deputy President’s R700 000 trip
on the gravy plane that it was “a drop in the ocean”. But in one sense he’s
right – R700 000 is nothing compared to what some departments waste. In the
last financial year the Department of Safety and Security spent R250
million on hotels, restaurants and travel.

Die Departement van Grondsake het R38 miljoen aan kos, drinkgoed en
reisonkoste bestee, in stede daarvan om plase vir grondhervorming aan te
koop. [Instead of buying farms for land reform, the Department of Land
Affairs spent R38 million on food, drinks and travel costs.]

On Friday former Deputy President Jacob Zuma was an honoured guest in the
gallery. Some of us were a little angry about that. [Interjections.] But I
completely understand why the Zuma camp claims they are being treated
unfairly – because there are dozens of criminally accused in the Travelgate
scandal sitting right here in the parliamentary benches, not just in the
gallery. [Interjections.] Two MPs who were convicted of fraud last year
and, with much ceremony, were removed from the ANC benches, are actually
back on the ANC’s lists for the local government elections – one of the
them in the number one spot in her municipality.

The problem in some instances, I’m afraid to say, goes right to the top.
The President has said nothing about many cases of severe corruption that
have happened on his watch. He said nothing about the Oilgate scandal when
it emerged last year, and he said nothing about it on Friday.

He said nothing when the Auditor-General was forced to reveal his draft
report on the arms deal, proving that the executive did in fact edit the
report. And the President, courtesy of Madam Speaker, still refuses to
answer questions about whether he met with any companies that were bidding
for arms contracts – questions that Jacob Zuma has had to face.

But it’s not that this is something unusual or unexplained. Last May, in
this Parliament, the Chief Whip of the ANC admitted right here that his
party expects empowerment companies to cough up donations in return for
favours from government. [Interjections.] On Friday President Mbeki quoted
a passage from Macbeth. But the same passage – if you read further on –
sums up the government’s promises on corruption: They are “a tale of sound
and fury, signifying nothing”.

The President spoke at length about the Accelerated and Shared Growth
Initiate of South Africa, Asgisa. The goals of Asgisa are excellent, but
there are some issues which arise from it which need to be answered. The
President said that he has entered into an agreement, or South Africa has,
to protect the textile industry from Chinese imports, but that is two years
too late. He says that he is going to implement programmes from the growth
and development summit, but that happened three years ago. The second
national operator for telecommunications is four years too late.

And what about the matter that has involved this Parliament in some of its
most controversial moments, and that is the arms deal? Never mind the
corruption allegations about the arms deal - what about the promised
offsets of the arms deal? The editor of Business Day the other day reminded
us that the Saab corporation owes us about R40 billion. That is about 20
new factories and 14 000 new jobs. But half a decade after those deals were
signed, I don’t think we’ve seen an offset from Saab.

What about labour reform? There have been nearly 500 000 job losses in
agriculture since 2002. Now many would say that is largely because of
stringent regulations and conditions. The President said on Sunday night on
SABC TV that it was inevitable that farms would have to mechanise, but I
don’t think it is inevitable. I think it is often the result of bad labour
policies, policies that need to be changed.

And what about changes in the fiscal policy? Many people think South
Africa’s taxes are far too high for a developing economy. Maybe this will
or maybe it won’t get attention from the new strategy for growth. This is
what the Financial Mail had to say late last year:


   Judging from government’s dismal track record on service delivery and
   consistent underspending on capital investments – which Trevor Manuel
   openly admits – a strong case can be made for that extra government
   revenue not being spent altogether wisely. Government should have used
   its fiscal leeway to provide some relief to companies.
   In the Medium-Term Expenditure Forecast, Minister Manuel poured cold
   water over tax cuts. That is an extremely short-sighted view and
   unfortunately reflects the continued mistrust that many in the government
   have of the private sector.

Meanwhile on Friday, here in Parliament, the President said that he was
going to do certain things, and the jury is out as to whether these will
encourage more investment or actually drive down investment and growth.
Abandoning or reconsidering the willing-buyer, willing-seller principle is,
in our view, a bad idea; so is regulating conditions under which foreigners
can buy land. The President says that these policies will be carried out in
line with international norms and practices. Now he said previously that
Canada has certain restrictive views on land ownership. But what about
Zimbabwe, which the Deputy President said we could learn a thing or two
from in respect of land ownership? [Interjections.]

Nothing will undermine, however, the confidence of investors – and, I
believe, of all South Africans – more than the government’s efforts to
reduce the independence of the judiciary. And on this subject the President
was completely silent on Friday.

It is, once again, not the opposition or the press, but a senior judge of
the Supreme Court of Appeals, Justice Carole Lewis, who wrote very recently
on 23 January 2006, and I quote from her article:

The proposed Bills undermine the independence of the judiciary in a way in
which every South African should be concerned. The proposal of such radical
change without a proper process of consultation is contrary to our
democratic principles.

She concludes:

The Justice department’s claim that there has been discussion of all the
proposed changes is untrue.

I believe when there is a collision between the executive and the judiciary
that it is incumbent upon the President to resolve the issue, and I hope he
will. The President quite correctly, mentioned, Codesa six times and the
Constitution three times in his speech on Friday. But this assault on the
judiciary could destroy the spirit of Codesa and undermine the
Constitution.

So South Africa is not short of optimism, and the President did well to
reflect upon it.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Except you, Tony.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: What we are short of is clean government,
proper service delivery and the deeds to follow the words, Mr Manuel. That
is what the President should have told South Africa.

Firstly, we can boost economic growth by getting rid of unnecessary
regulations, reforming the labour laws, and privatising state assets.
Secondly, we can create truly broad-based black economic empowerment by
encouraging companies to give shares to workers, not simply to political
cronies.

Thirdly, we can stop the brain drain by making merit, not race, the key. We
will improve education by intervening in failing schools, not in successful
ones. Fourthly, we can restore public faith in democracy by getting rid of
what has become a bargain-basement floor-crossing and by introducing
constituencies. [Interjections.]

Fifthly, we can expose corruption by launching proper investigations into
the arms deal and Oilgate. We will punish corrupt officials and
representatives promptly, especially in Parliament, which has to set the
example the rest of the country must follow.

Sixthly, we will protect our Constitution and defend the independence of
the judiciary and all public institutions. Seventhly, we will fight crime
by creating more municipal and rural police forces. Eighthly, we will roll
out more antiretroviral drugs, and teach South Africans that HIV causes
Aids.

Nege, ons sal versoening bevorder om skole en universiteite aan te spoor om
ons inheemse tale te gebruik in plaas daarvan om na Engels oor te skakel.
[Tussenwerpsels.] [Ninthly, we will promote reconciliation in order to
encourage schools and universities to use our indigenous languages instead
of switching over to English.]

Tenthly, we will respect and uphold human rights in other countries,
starting in neighbouring Zimbabwe and Swaziland. Then, I believe, South
Africa will be on the path towards fulfilling the true vision of the
prophet Isaiah:

   Cease to do evil;
   Learn to do well;
   Seek judgment;
   Relieve the oppressed;
   Judge the fatherless;
   Plead for the widow.


   Then shall thy light rise in obscurity,
   And thy darkness be as the noonday.

I thank you, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Prof B TUROK: Madam Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President, it is a
great pleasure to see a woman at the top of the tree. [Applause.] It is
also a pleasure to follow on after the leader of the largest opposition
party in Parliament. He is not the leader of the FF Plus, I understand, but
the leader of the largest opposition in Parliament. It’s a pleasure to
follow on after him because he is so controversial. Let me engage with him,
especially on DA economic policy.

I have always believed that it’s important to keep up to date with what the
opposition has to say. So yesterday I spent some useful time reading
several documents, the election manifestos of the DA of 2004 and 2006. I
have them here. Hon Leon, they are not short of promises and unfortunately
the chances of you realising these promises are very remote. To quote you,
the DA is “a drop in the ocean”. [Applause.]

Let me say that I found the text quite interesting, but what was really
curious was that on nearly every page there was a photograph of one man,
the hon Tony Leon. [Laughter.]

In the manifesto of 2004 there were 14 photographs and in 2006 there is an
improvement, an escalation to 20 photographs. [Laughter.] He appears on
nearly every page. [Laughter.] Let me inform the House that he is on pages
1, 2 and 3, pages 4, 7, 9, 11, 12 and on and on - a total of 36
photographs! And I ask myself: Where is the deputy leader?
[Laughter.][Applause.] Where on earth was Joe Seremane?

By contrast, this afternoon we received this document. It’s about the state
of the nation address by the hon President, and where was the President? He
is on page 12. [Laughter.] I think that the DA must learn a bit of modesty.
What are we to say about one who seeks such a high profile? Has he a future
as a leader of this country? I believe he does not. So, let us ask him to
give us copies of all of those pictures and let us put them in the
parliamentary basement with all the other legacies of history in South
Africa. [Applause.] [Interjections.]

Maybe I’m being unfair to the hon Tony Leon. After all he takes his role
very seriously. I’ve seen him on TV, on the stage with all the lights on
him, waving his arms and behaving like a man with a mission. This is why Mr
Michael Stent said in the Cape Times last week:


   Tony Leon shouldn’t jerk his left arm up and down when he is speaking. It
   creates a bad impression. He looks like the dictator of a small country
   in Africa.

[Laughter.][Applause.]

But the hon Tony Leon is the leader of a political party, the largest
minority party in South Africa; but he is a leader, and we must take him
seriously. So, we ask: What does his party really stand for?

Mhlekazi, ndithetha nawe, mamela! [Sir, I am talking to you, listen!]

As part of the answer to the question of the policy of the DA and the
future of its leader . . . [Interjections.]

Mamela. [Listen!]

So the hon Zille produced an article in the Cape Times last week on what we
might call: “The wisdom of hon Helen Zille”. This is what she wrote, and
this is really what is important:


   We need to focus less on the colour of skin and more on the colour of
   money. Let us get race out of the economy. It is not the colour of the
   people at the top that matters.

So it is not the colour of the people at the top that matters! But you see,
the ANC believes that, given our history, race does matter and the colour
or race of the people at the top matters a lot. Where there is exclusive
white control, such as the DA advocates, it matters very much indeed.
[Interjections.] In fact, hon Leon and hon Zille, this principle of who is
at the top strikes at the very root of our democratic aspirations as a
country.

Today the Cape Times carried an article by a black businesswoman and this
is what she says on the continuous dismissal of race as an issue in the
Western Cape:

Black businesswomen witness every day how contracts and work are given to
white companies who have no inclination to share and transform.

So, for her race matters a lot, and whether the race of the people at the
top is an exclusive entity matters a great deal. [Interjections.]

Let me warn the hon Leon and Mrs Zille: If you want to fight an election on
the principle that race must get out of the economy and that the present
cluster of people at the top can remain unchanged, you will never win an
election and Mrs Zille will never be mayor of Cape Town.
[Laughter.][Applause.] And even calling upon the corrupt Gerald Morkel to
come back as one of your candidates will not help you either.

Last week Business Day carried an article that said: “Local issues are an
election trojan horse for Helen.”

Mamela! Thula! [Listen! Keep quiet!] The problem of who is at the top was
exposed in the Sunday Times special issue. It was rather a unique piece of
writing in the Sunday Times on Christmas day. Some diligent researchers
revealed that of the top 70 earners in South Africa, only four are black;
and of the wealthiest South Africans, 157, only nine are black. It does
matter. [Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: He’s the richest man in Parliament!

Prof B TUROK: For the DA, whose support lies . . . [Interjections.]

Ziphathe kakuhle, mnumzana. Mamela! Thula! [Behave yourself, sir. Listen!
Keep quiet!]

So, to get race out of the economy is not possible in South Africa. That is
the reason we have BEE, preferential procurement and the rest.
[Interjections.]

Madam Speaker, 50 years ago . . . [Interjections.] . . . I have to speak
louder because there is a cacophony here. [Laughter.] The trouble is that
they can’t speak isiXhosa, you see. They only speak English and Afrikaans
as we heard. Fifty years ago I was the national secretary of the Congress
of Democrats, a white organisation, which was part of the Congress Alliance
led by the ANC, and our rival was the Liberal Party.

In the Congress of Democrats we wanted votes for all and we wanted the
Freedom Charter. The Liberal Party wanted votes for the rich and the
educated elite. We supported the liberation struggle, the liberation of all
black people in South Africa, and the liberals wanted merit. Even on Sunday
night the hon Zille said: “Let’s get beyond skin colour.”

The implication is that the only criterion for South Africa is merit. Let
me say, in the nutshell, the truth is that what the DA wants is a phoney
meritocracy based on past privilege. [Applause.] That’s what they want.

The ANC can’t go along with that, and indeed our Deputy President led the
way when she talked yesterday of growth shared by all. But what does the DA
manifesto say? In 2004 the DA’s manifesto, this document with all the
photographs said: “We want accelerated privatisation.” They wanted to
abolish capital gains tax, estate duties and secondary tax on companies. In
fact, what they want is to leave the economic power in South Africa where
it has always been - no change. [Applause.] And all this in the name of
merit, not race; meritocracy and plutocracy, not race.

I have a constructive proposition. [Interjection.] Mamela! [Listen!] I have
a constructive proposal to make to you. Let the DA help us to get all South
Africans on an equal level in education and skills. Let everybody have the
same education and skills, and then we will stop differentiating on the
grounds of race. We can do it then, not now, because we have to adjust the
legacy of our history. Do you agree with the proposition, hon Leon?
[Laughter.] Confess. Equality for all and then we don’t differentiate. Then
you can decide whether you can still be a political leader in South Africa.

Let me turn to other aspects of policy - my time is running out.
[Interjections.] I really required half an hour to deal with you, but
Parliament says I don’t have such time. [Laughter.] But there is one quote
I do want to refer to. In the 2006 manifesto, that’s this year’s, it says:
“The ANC favours only the few, at the expense of the many.” Let’s have a
good laugh. Really!
The ANC favours the few, you favour merits, you don’t like race and you
want to keep the people at the top so that there is no change in South
Africa. I tell you this, to conclude, the ANC will never go along with a
meritocracy, which is based on the privileges of the past. We are in a new
century, in the new South Africa, and that is what we should do. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Madam Speaker, Your Excellency the President, Your
Excellency the Deputy President and hon members, in his state of the nation
address the President has given us a presentation of achievements,
challenges and programmes of action. As I listened to him and prepared my
response to his words, I was reminded of discussions I used to hold with
Inkosi Albert Luthuli. For seven long years I was very close to Inkosi
Luthuli, who was my mentor, and I had the privilege of becoming intimately
conversant with his thinking which we shared, and it gave direction to our
liberation movement at that time. [Interjections.] Yes, I even spoke at his
funeral. I delivered the oration.

At that time of our liberation movement we were strong and well organised.
When taking cognisance of what our movement had achieved, we were proud and
confident that we could move swiftly ahead to overthrow the apartheid
regime and establish a non-racial democracy right there and then. Indeed,
at the time there were some in our midst who thought in that manner and
wanted to accelerate the pace of our engagement.

In those years, Inkosi Luthuli impressed upon me and the others who were
willing to listen that we should not look at our points of strength but
rather focus on our weaknesses. When admitting to our weaknesses, it became
evident that the path we had to endure would necessarily be much longer
than the naive amongst us expected. History proved Inkosi Luthuli right and
we all now know that any action we could have undertaken 50 years ago would
have been futile and counterproductive.

I do not wish to detract much from what our President said in this House
last Friday. However, it is incumbent upon me to sound a warning which this
House should heed in spite of its coming from me. There are enormous
weaknesses in what we are trying to achieve. We must focus on fixing those
weaknesses rather than patting ourselves on the shoulder.

The President has correctly prioritised the training and upliftment of our
people as a necessary condition for our collective progress, and he did so
for many prior years, standing at this podium. We must now admit that this
programme has not produced the intended results at the desired pace. A huge
and almost unprecedented amount of resources has been employed in a
nationwide training effort financed by 1% of the national payroll and yet
we do not see our people becoming more competent and more effective in the
work place or more informed, knowledgeable and educated at community level.

We must reconsider the statist approach used in conceiving this national
training effort. At the time I pointed out in this House the inherent flaws
in the Seta system, which reflects the approach of a command economy
applied in the field of training. There are more effective ways to bring
about effective training and skills for our people, but this requires the
willingness to go back to the drawing board and dismantle the huge,
ineffective and immensely expensive state apparatus built around Setas.

Also dealing with the issue of skills, one must applaud the President for
indicating once again that our country must open its doors to the much-
needed foreign skills. Yet, one must also have the humility and courage to
admit the unmitigated disaster which has originated from the hasty
amendments made by this Parliament to the Immigration Act a mere two months
after I left the office of Minister of Home Affairs. [Interjections].

These amendments were made to eliminate as many as possible of the reforms
I brought about to our system of immigration control to liberalise access
of foreign skills to our country. Two years later the quota system, which I
told this House could not be developed by government, has in fact not yet
been implemented, creating chaos.

All the elements of privatisation I had introduced to expedite the issuing
of permits so that the department could free itself and begin enforcing
immigration laws to get rid of the illegal foreigners, have been
eliminated, with the end result that it is becoming a nightmare for needed
foreigners to get a permit to stay and work in South Africa, while it has
become safe and easy for those whom we do not want to stay illegally in our
country.

There are weaknesses in our political machinery, which have undermined the
structure of our government. I think we must correct these weaknesses
because they are going to cause the downfall of our efforts to complete our
liberation process. Our people cannot be liberated without an effective,
impartial and efficient state apparatus.

We must admit that there are growing levels of corruption and corruptive
practices and attitudes in all spheres of government and organs of state.
The mind-set of too many of our people in government is wrong. There is a
feeding frenzy and a growing notion that service in government is a
platform from which to enrich oneself, feather one’s nest for a future job
or to help friends and family.

Indeed in the same week during which the President delivered the state of
the nation address, an international watchdog organisation, Transparency
International, warned about the unacceptable levels of corruption in our
country at all levels. Of course, they are not telling us what we ourselves
do not know. There is an even more pernicious sense that the state and the
ruling party are one and the same thing, and that the state has the duty to
consolidate the ruling party and serve its leaders.

Many statements have been made against corruption, but let me speak as an
elder brother and a father to some of you and tell you that these things
are not going to be changed with statements alone. We must separate the
state from political parties at all levels of government. We must stop the
looting of state resources. There is a general unwillingness to take
painful measures.

Do forgive me for repeating the statements that I have by now made
consistently and repeatedly for more than 10 years in this House. My having
to repeat them shows the unwillingness to bite the bullet when necessary.
For years we have spoken about bringing much-needed flexibility to our
labour market, yet no single action has been taken in that direction.

When the general council of the ruling party met in Tshwane in July last
year to discuss the inflexible nature of our labour laws, we were all
filled with much hope. It is an issue about which I have repeatedly warned
in almost every response I have made to the President’s state of the nation
address. As we know, the urgent need to address this was swept away by the
leadership issues of the party. This also included the reluctance of the
partners of the ruling party, the SACP and Cosatu, to deal with our
inflexible labour laws.

No less a person than our Governor of the Reserve Bank, Mr Tito Mboweni,
who enacted some of this legislation while he was Minister of Labour, has
tried to warn us to reconsider them. I remember him even quoting his
American counterpart, Mr Greenspan, who said that making it easy to fire,
makes it easier to hire. As long as we do not bite the bullet on these
issues, we will not be able to resolve the mystery of why many countries do
not see our country as a destination for investment. As long as this is the
case, we will not be able to solve the high unemployment rate, which the
survey quoted by the President in his address views as a serious problem
facing our nation.

For 10 years we have promised to lift obsolete exchange controls, yet this
has not been done. Since the time of the launching of the Reconstruction
and Development Programme, we have been discussing the development of a
serious industrial and technological basis for South Africa so that we can
determine now what products and services our country will be bringing to
global markets in 20 years to enable it to ensure not only its survival
but, indeed, its success.

This long-term vision has not materialised. We are preoccupied with
administering what we have with no long-term direction. We are still not
training our people to enable them to support our future productive efforts
because we do not know what they are. I am mortified at the percentage of
young people who receive a matriculation without any basic knowledge of
mathematics and by the low rate of black people who are enrolling in our
tertiary institutions requiring a background in mathematics. As a nation,
we jeopardise our posterity if we do not train our youth in science,
technology and mathematics, and prepare it to compete and succeed in the
global market of an advanced technological world. I say so notwithstanding
my knowledge of how close this subject is to your heart, Your Excellency.

Our liberation movement seems to have lost its long-term vision. I am
concerned about the unspoken agenda, you will hear just now which one, that
some of us seem to be pursuing. That agenda is not the agenda of our
liberation movement, at least not for those who grew up under the shadow of
giants of the likes of Inkosi Luthuli.

Our dream was that of transforming South Africa into a country in which,
one day, the oppressed black majority could enjoy the same levels of
education, progress, prosperity and opportunities once reserved for the
white minority. We are not going to achieve these results by strengthening
the security apparatus while making them accountable to the ruling party.
We are not going to achieve them by infiltrating each and every organ of
state and public enterprise to ensure that they may be controlled by and at
the whims of the top tiers of the ruling party.

The success of our liberation movement does not rely on a power play and
enrichment game. Concentrating all political and economic power in a few
hands and enriching a few thousand people beyond their wildest dreams is
not going to bring about the type of social and economic liberation we once
envisaged. Our liberation is about training and educating our people,
creating efficient and effective state machinery - one that is not looted
by anyone - and promoting an economy that can make the South African
enterprise succeed in the next 20 years.

I appreciate that the President is taking pride in today’s positive
economic results. Yet, none of us can tell where South Africa will be in 20
years. We must admit that we have made little investment to ensure a long-
term future. We must invest more in emerging technology and in assisting
long-term industries. The development of small and medium enterprises is
surely important, but by itself does not ensure progress and prosperity for
our children and grandchildren.

We must have the courage to finally tackle the issue of crime and
lawlessness. This is not just a question of safety and security but first
and foremost it is a national training and education issue. Crime is not
just about law enforcement, but also about finally delivering massive
programmes of civic education.

We must look at the greatest of all weaknesses in our present situation and
acknowledge them. Migration from rural to urban areas is creating explosive
situations in our country. There are some leaders in our midst who may see
that as a possible benefit to accelerating the pace of our liberation.
People are migrating to urban areas because they feel that only there are
they able to receive the benefits of services and assistance delivered by
government.

We must seriously reprioritise our spatial development initiatives in order
to concentrate the delivery of education, training, assistance and services
to rural areas. It might be necessary to build rural hamlets as centres of
growth and development away from the established urban areas. People from
rural areas could bring their dreams and entrepreneurial spirit to those
emerging markets close to home, rather than migrating to urban areas to
sink into a life of despair.

The riots that are taking place in many parts of our country are
reminiscent of those that our people staged to fight apartheid rulers. They
cannot just be swept under the carpet merely for us to feel good.
Everything in the garden is not as rosy as we might wish it to be, and that
is not to diminish or dismiss quite a lot that our government has
accomplished in the last 11 years. We must have the modesty to accept that
these efforts, admirable as they are, are far from enough to complete the
real liberation of our people from the evils of crime, unemployment,
HIV/Aids and corruption.

There are many other weaknesses we must acknowledge, the biggest of all
being the leadership crisis within our nation. Our liberation movement will
not succeed without moral guidance from leaders of stature. Perhaps we may
need to accept that democratic dynamics may not soon produce leaders of the
stature of Inkosi Albert Luthuli, Canon James Calata, Dr Zami Conco, Bishop
Alpheus Zulu, Mr Robert Sobukwe, Mr Oliver Tambo, and several others, too
numerous to list here.

Yet, this is the time to hold the country together and ensure the unity of
our people. All the weaknesses I have mentioned and many others, which I do
not have the time to list, are going to be immensely compounded by this
crisis of leadership and moral credibility.

The American president who followed after the tragic death of Kennedy,
President Lyndon Johnson, said that the hardest task of a leader is not
doing what is right, but knowing what is right. This is a time in which
history demands of us to rise above the petty division in politics, career
interests, and infighting within parties, so that leaders may become
statesmen and command respect, which our people expect of them and deserve.
Dlamini! [Applause].

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Madam Deputy Speaker, President, Deputy
President, hon members, 100 years ago in April 1906, the great mentor of
national unity and co-founder of the ANC, Pixley ka Isaka Seme declared
that:
   The brighter day is rising upon Africa. Already I seem to see her chains
   dissolved, her desert plains red with harvest, her Abyssinia and her
   Zululand the seats of science and religion, reflecting the glory of the
   rising sun from the spires of their churches and universities. Her Congo
   and her Gambia whitened with commerce, her crowded cities sending forth
   the hum of business and all her sons employed in advancing the victories
   of peace, greater and more abiding than the spoils of war.

Seme wrote in the long shadow of Ethiopian Emperor Menelik’s military
victory over Italy at Adowa 10 years earlier. Bambata’s fighters were
confronting injustice in KwaZulu. To the north of us, the Ovambo and
Herero, and the Maji-Maji rebels rose against German butchery. But Seme
wrote before the vicious decapitation of Bambata scarcely a month later, in
May, and just before the other rebellions were crushed. A few months later
Gandhi would launch his passive resistance campaign, and the pendulum of
resistance would swing once more. Across the century of change and
unthinkable horrors, the ANC continued to work in the interests of the poor
and the marginalised.  We remain as firm as ever, challenging the obstacles
head-on, despite resistance.

The state of the nation address defines the strategic moment of a nation in
the making. It re-establishes the common, binding vision of a shared future
for all South Africans; it defines the specific tasks people need to
undertake in partnership with this democratic government. It also reaffirms
the core values and strategic objectives that underpin the very process of
social transformation.

The state’s enabling and catalytic role at every level in this process is
very clear. On the back of explicit and visible progress recorded over the
past 12 years, we South Africans still tend to be overcritical of ourselves
as much as we sometimes take many of our achievements for granted. But
whatever else can be said, the people’s continued march to freedom is
firmly on course.

As we carry out our tasks, we need to give proper meaning to the
overwhelming sense of optimism amongst our people. Mr President, the
English expression that “Hope springs eternal from the breasts of men!” is
meant to describe an almost irrational optimism in the face of many of
life’s challenges.

But our definition of hope is based on the concrete realities of the
present, as reflected in the state of our economy and society. For our
people, democratic government is an instrument to improve their conditions
of life; it is a vehicle through which the concrete expression of the
people’s demands for social change, freedom and human dignity are advanced
and realised. And thus our people express their hopes through their own
movement, the ANC, and their government, not the opportunistic wish lists
of our most vocal critics. The ANC and its allies remain the only true
agents of change in our country.

The ANC has never made empty promises about houses, jobs, and health,
because the needs for which we produce our programmes cannot, in fact, be
met with promises. This can only be done through hard work and the
commitment of all stakeholders and citizens. It is a responsibility of
government, at every level and in every sphere, to deliver on the
programmes the people have endorsed. But again, we should not take for
granted the confidence and trust placed in them by the people.

Asgisa is a catalytic instrument aimed at specific interventions across all
sectors. It reflects the consistency of the ANC’s policy positions in
respect of social and economic transformation from Ready to Govern and the
RDP. Economics is about the equality of life of all the people of South
Africa, of the need to sustain and extend the link between growth and
development. It has everything to do with their access to clean water,
houses, jobs, transport, health and education.

Today, the ongoing restructuring of our economy has created the necessary
conditions for increased public-sector-led investment in infrastructure. An
important contributing factor to this was the reduction of public sector
debt from 64% of GDP in 1994 to about 50% in 2004, assisted by the receipt
of over R34 billion through the restructuring of state-owned enterprises in
that period. We can now accelerate the increases in investment in both
economic and social infrastructure we began to make in 2001.

That infrastructure will lay the solid foundation for sustainable growth
towards, and beyond 6%, and boost our economic development. Our
developmental state seeks fundamentally to transform unequal power
relations in society and create the conditions where the majority of our
people have the skills and access to the means to take control of their own
lives. The potential of all South Africans will be fully realised through
redistributing resources and investing in infrastructure and in our people
as a key resource for the reconstruction and development of South African
society.

The Asgisa projects include large and small ones; multisector and
departmentally or provincially-based projects. Asgisa’s success in
unblocking the network of constraints on our economy will contribute hugely
to the success of other ongoing initiatives conducted at departmental and
local levels.

We recognise that many of our people still live in abject poverty, leading
desperate lives and are unable to meet their basic demands. But, the past
12 years bear testimony to our efforts to address the conditions of those
in desperate conditions. From Nelson Mandela’s first state of the nation
address calling for free health care for pregnant mothers and children
under the age of six to the school feeding scheme, we can today see
expanded investment in the wellbeing of South Africans that addresses the
conditions that give rise to desperation among the poor.

Mr President, just before the formal establishment of the ANC in 1912, John
Langalibele Dube suggested to chiefs and elders in Zululand that unity in
action was the major purpose of the new organisation that would carry
forward the struggle for freedom. A member of the audience then called out:
“I thank Bambata. I thank Bambata very much. I do not mean the Bambata of
the bush who perished at Nkandla, but I mean this new spirit, which we have
just heard explained.”

What we believe that echo from the past means to us today, is that the
people expect the ANC to strive through action to honour the vision and
yearning of our ancestors and those who have gone before. Our role in
government is to provide the muscle and the means to fulfil our people’s
dream in this age of hope.

South Africa has embarked on a journey that gives flesh to the immortal
words of Patrice Lumumba, that -

   History will one day have its say; it will not be the history taught in
   the UN, Washington, Paris or Brussels, however, but the history taught in
   the countries that have rid themselves of colonialism and its puppets.
   Africa will write its own history, and both north and south of the Sahara
   it will be a history full of glory and dignity.


In the 1960s, economic growth was premised on repression and aimed at
entrenching an undemocratic society, riven by inequality and injustice. It
failed gloriously as a growth path to prosperity. The current growth surge
is built on and fed by a democratic state striving to reduce poverty and
inequality. We are confident that the age of hope will mature into an era
of prosperity, on the solid foundations of the collective work of countless
millions of our people. As we prove ourselves a winning nation, rest
assured that we intend to be a nation that not only wins, but a nation that
excels, a nation proud of our success, but humble in our contribution to
development as a whole. Re a leboga. [I thank you]. [Applause.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Madam Deputy Speaker, the hon President, Deputy President,
so much for the hon Uncle Big Ben Turok on the loud noise he made. I am not
tempted to say that he must release the wealth that has been stashed away,
wherever he has put it, for distribution amongst the people who really need
it. I am not going to tell you that “umde ngeentonga” [your works are
taller than your stature] because you know why you are raving so; perhaps
it is because of your height. Let me not play the man but play the ball.

I would like to preface my response to the President’s state of the nation
address by quoting yet again Abraham Lincoln, who said:
   Those who deny others freedom or justice deserve it not for themselves
   and cannot under a just God long retain that freedom.

We observe too that justice is a double-edged sword. It can never be
justice if it is selective or driven by racism, ethnicity or tribalism,
sectarianism or so-called “national vindictiveness”.

The DA welcomes the National Prosecuting Authority amendment of the
prosecuting policy, which sets out the directives for the prosecution of
apartheid-era human rights offenders.

On 15 April 2003, President Mbeki told this House that there would be no
general amnesty for perpetrators of apartheid-era violations as this would
be unconstitutional and it would also undermine the spirit of the TRC
process.

However, we must not be complacent. I believe that the TRC process was
never meant to be a replica of the Nuremberg trials or some punitive
process but a process that sought to encourage disclosure sans the burden
of retribution in order to bring closure to the hurts and conflicts of that
dark patch of our history.

We must not fall into the trap of reigniting the old conflicts despite the
fact that the dark era should not be forgotten; if for no other reason than
to remind us constantly to never again walk that sordid and brutal road.
The ANC National Executive Committee said, in its response to the
Motsuenyane commission and its final report to the TRC, that “violations of
human rights must always be condemned, no matter by who against whom.” That
is the principle that should guide the National Prosecuting Authority.

The head of the NPA, the hon Vusi Pikoli, in a recent interview asserted
that there were “two sides to conflict” . . . [Interjections.] It is not
your reserved right to be called honourable. He also said:


   All the people who were refused amnesty or did not go to the TRC are
   exposed to possible prosecution. People must be made to account for their
   actions.

He noted too that:


   As prosecutors they have to display their impartiality.


The foregoing suggests that justice and not selective justice has to take
its course.

Cases, including the poisoning of Rev Frank Chikane, the abduction and
slaying of the Pebco Three, and the murder of the Cradock Four by security
forces need to be prosecuted to extract full disclosure and obtain closure
in these matters. This is very important for the realisation of peace,
justice, forgiveness and reconciliation for our nation. Equally important
is the need to resolve the unfinished business of prosecuting and
encouraging full disclosure of, and finding closure to, the gross human
rights violations perpetrated in the name of liberation in South Africa and
abroad.

There are quite a number of people in this country who want to be part of
the process of justice, forgiveness, peace and reconciliation, but cannot
do so easily because they know not what happened to their kith and kin,
their flesh and blood or, simply, the remains of their dear ones. We must
bring to an end their nightmare.

The NPA’s discretion to prosecute requires even-handedness and political
balance. We must guard against the danger and the temptation of using
prosecutions to settle old scores. Mr President, I believe that you and all
of us must grapple with these difficult notions of forgiveness and
reconciliation. I thank you. [Time expired.]

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Hon Madam Deputy
Speaker, President Mbeki, Deputy President, members of Parliament and
fellow South Africans, on Friday, Mr President, you presented firm evidence
that our country has entered what was referred to as an “age of hope”. It
is appropriate that we dwell on this today.

The hope that can be deduced from the confidence and optimism expressed by
the South African people in various recent opinion surveys is not a
misguided sense of self-deception and hallucination that all problems of
our divided and socially unjust society has been solved in little more than
a decade. The hope expressed is, however, a realistic assessment that we
are working towards realising a dream that we in the ANC have had and lived
for in this country for many decades. This dream that we have is about
bringing about a democratic and just South Africa in place of what we had:
colonialism, apartheid, exclusion and discrimination.

We have systematically worked towards getting rid of an old evil system. In
a formal sense, we achieved this in April 1994. However, we also knew that
those first elections were little more than the beginning of a new stage of
our struggle - a hard struggle that we are still continuing in the second
decade of our democracy. It is the struggle of building a new society that
embraces and displays the values that we hold dear and which will tangibly
wipe out the injustices of the past.

Václav Havel, the author, activist and first Czech President after the
transition, wrote on the issue of hope, and I quote:


   Hope is a state of mind, not of the world. Hope, in this deep and
   powerful sense is not the same as joy that things are doing well, or
   willingness to invest in enterprises that are obviously heading for
   success, but rather an ability to work for something because it is good.

This is something that is clearly not understood by the Leader of the
Opposition. But what do we expect of someone of his nature?

This is the kind of hope that we as South Africans have. It is an
unwavering hope - even in the realisation that much room remains for
improvement in our efforts and that the road to realising our dream is a
long one - because we are convinced that the society we are creating is one
that is essentially good. It is a society that because of the way in which
it has expressed its ideals in its Constitution, which will be ten years
old this year, is recognised as the most progressive in the world. That is
where our ideals are expressed.

It embraces an internationally recognised human rights agenda and as such
it is in the forefront of engaging with issues pertaining to social justice
in the global arena and democracy and good governance on the African
continent. It is one that acknowledges the importance of a developmental
agenda that is not only one of an economic nature, but that is truly
founded on the empowerment of our people.

The ANC tripartite alliance and South Africans in general are steeped in a
history of where people have displayed this kind of hope even in the face
of severe adversity and most trying circumstances because they knew that
they were working towards realising something good. This was the hope that
the women who marched on the Union Buildings in 1956 had when they refused
to be subjugated to the whims of the apartheid government.

This was the hope the youth felt during and after the 1976 Soweto uprising.
This was the hope that allowed our freedom fighters to continue the
struggle with determination and resilience even after raids such as the one
at Matola and assassinations such as that of Joe Gqabi at the hands of
apartheid assassins in 1981.

In 1994 the ANC made a commitment to the people of our country that our
agenda is one of creating a better life for all. And our ANC-led government
has already achieved much in terms of that commitment. Let’s just remind
everyone that between 1994 and 2004, over 1 200 new clinics were built and
a further 252 clinics underwent major upgrading; 2 298 clinics also
received new equipment and/or underwent minor upgradings. [Applause.]

At a primary health care level, we stepped up services in terms of
immunisation, communicable and endemic disease prevention, maternity care,
integrated management of childhood illnesses and child health care, youth
health services, assisting with taking care of the chronically ill, family
planning and so forth.

Since 1994 up to March 2004, more than 1,8 million houses were actually
completed or were under construction. The average annual rate of
construction of housing under the ANC leadership between 1994 and March
2005 is 166 533, well over the 50 000 which the previous government
mustered. We set ourselves ambitious targets.

However, it still falls short of the 300 000 units which the RDP had
foreseen, therefore there has been a massive increase in our efforts since
2004 because we don’t shy away from saying we want to achieve the
impossible. We are going to make that happen. We have gone a long way. The
social housing policy that we pursue creates an enabling environment for
both private and public investments in social housing policy. This policy
also supports urban regeneration, integration and densification initiatives
that promote greater urban efficiency.

In 1994 we inherited a backlog of 14 million people that did not enjoy
access to clean, safe water. By the end of November 2004, and noticing the
increase in population figures, we had managed to whittle down the number
of people still lacking access to clean water to 5 million. Although this
is unacceptably high since our target is not a single person without such
access, we are on target to eradicating the backlog in water, as well as
sanitation facilities by 2008 and 2010 respectively. We have also already
exceeded the Millennium Development Goals in this respect, because we don’t
just engage in the rhetoric or suggest no hope where we have not reached
those. We are saying we will get there, look at our record.
With the announcement of the Accelerated Shared Growth Initiative the SA,
we are intent on responding to the problem that, notwithstanding our
efforts hitherto, we have not managed to close the gap between the rich and
the poor. By driving specific key initiatives, we are intent on embarking
on a road where we can realise the ideal of sharing the growth and wealth
of our country among all people. In this initiative we creatively combine
the requirements of economic and social development. We believe that the
one without the other will not optimise the situation for all our citizens.

We will continue to place the wellbeing of our people in the centre and
thus there is a great emphasis on skills development in Asgisa, on removing
impediments to people to helping themselves and putting the necessary
social and economic infrastructure in place that will allow all people to
achieve an improvement in their situation, so that systematically we remove
the huge chasm between the rich and the poor.

The state, however, does not abandon its responsibility of providing a
social net to those who are in desperate need. The extent of the social
grant support, which the government currently provides, stands testimony to
this commitment. We believe, however, that fundamentally ours should be a
situation in which the population is empowered and can thrive on its own
creations, given the right circumstances rather than having a large-scale
dependency relationship on social security grants. We are working towards
ensuring that both happen.

In the Freedom Charter we have stated that “The People Shall Govern”. Two
concepts are central in this phrase: “people”, and not merely jobs,
enterprises, legal personae, etc; and “govern”, that is, the willingness to
take decisions and authoritatively allocate the state resources to achieve
some state policy goals, and not about withering away the state and the
market and taking the hindmost, as some would do.

The act of voting and the opportunity of elections in a formal sense allow
people to identify the political party that will govern on their behalf.
During the past rounds of elections, both at national, provincial and local
government levels, the people of our country have chosen to trust the ANC.
They have placed their hope in our hands because they know that,
notwithstanding our imperfections, we represent an agenda - together with
them - that is good. The 1 March 2006 elections offer one more opportunity
to our people to categorically place their confidence in the ANC to
represent them for a further term in every local council across the
country. [Applause.]

The ANC’s commitment to democracy, however, goes much deeper than only
choosing representatives. We consciously seek to involve our people
directly in the governance process wherever the opportunity allows for it:
in community policing forums, in school governing bodies, and in health
committees.

We do so in decision-making processes where we agree on priorities. Note
for example the inclusive processes that we have created through
legislation and in terms of the Integrated Development Planning at the
local level, or in public hearings here in Parliament, or when Parliament
goes out to meet the people, or the process of Parliament going to
communities. And then some chose to stay away when we celebrated the 50th
anniversary of the Freedom Charter, something that was much greater than
the ANC, something owned by the people of our country. But those who don’t
believe in the people’s participation chose to withdraw. [Applause.] Can
you trust such people to represent you?

We do so by asking the community to become full and constructive players in
the provision of our many public services; for example, through school-
feeding schemes, as community health workers and community-based care and
support workers, other participants in our Extended Public Works
Initiatives or Letsema/Vukuzenzele initiatives to mention but a few.

But even more important, we involve our people in assisting with oversight
monitoring and evaluation activities. We want them to help us in keeping
our public servants accountable. We want them to tell us when corruption
takes place. We want them to tell us when our officials are slacking off,
or when they infringe on the democratic rights of our people. We have
created mechanisms for all of these. There are izimbizo. We have created a
host of constitutionally independent institutions that the public can
access to help with the above: the Human Rights Commission, the Public
Protector, the Gender Commission, the Public Service Commission – to
mention but a few. We also want the community to assist the executive and
the duly elected political representatives in bringing pressure to bear on
and communicating the urgency for delivery to the bureaucracy, which in
instances when left to their own devices are inclined to let this slide.

We can proudly say that the system we have created is truly a people’s
democracy. We have entered into a social contract with the people of this
country - all the people - black and white, Christian, Muslim, Jewish,
Hindu, Buddhist, agnostic and all other orientations; rich, middle class
and poor; urban and rural. This contract bestows rights and obligations on
government and the people.

In the state of the nation address on Friday, our President gave further
effect to the ANC’s commitment to assuming the role of the developmental
state, where the state will use its resources to achieve social justice. We
have demonstrated our commitment to responsibly distribute and redistribute
the wealth of this nation. And much of this distribution and redistribution
takes place through the extension of social infrastructure and services to
sectors of the previously underserviced population. We have chosen to
actively advance the cause of the poor, particularly women and youth. We
are deliberately targeting resources in that direction.

We have lived up to our ideal, as expressed in the RDP for health care for
women and children, to provide free health care by introducing our free
health care policy for pregnant women and children under the age of six.
All of these initiatives strive to increase access to health service for
the large majority of people who were historically underserviced, but at
the same time very appropriately targeted to benefit women and children.

We have made significant progress in terms of implementing our policy on
access to free basic services. After the most recent non-financial Stats SA
census of South Africa’s municipalities dated 2004, Africa one could report
that almost 8,5 million households now receive free basic water; close to 7
million receive free sewerage and sanitation; 6,5 million benefit from free
solid waste management; and we are well on our way to where 5 million
households will benefit from free electricity.

The impact that access to these free basic services has on the immediate
quality of life of a significant proportion of our population should not be
underestimated. But there is still that house that we need to reach – the
single house the Leader of the Opposition goes to and he forgets about the
many that have been reached. [Applause.]

On Friday the President also indicated that we will review our willing
buyer, willing seller policy – a policy that, in the way it is meeting with
delay, seems to suggest that it is holding the ability of the state to
redistribute land in substantially large measures to ransom. Across all
historical divisions, we have come to terms with some of the sacrifices
that will have to be made in the interest of building a stronger and more
unified nation over the longer term. We have to recognise the
interdependency that exists and the absence of true security and wellbeing
that will result if some are excluded from the available resources and
riches of our country.

In this respect, in terms of the new urban housing development, we are
intent on redetermining the spatial settlement patterns that came about as
a consequence of apartheid. These are unsuitable and detrimental to the
development that will allow the poor to flourish and have greater access to
job opportunities and the market. We have, and will continue to use the
regulatory powers available to the state to achieve these objectives. I
thank you, Deputy Speaker. [Time expired.][Applause.]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon President and hon Deputy
President, colleagues, the points you have raised, Mr President, are
generally favourable if unsurprising. We support many of the initiatives
you have spoken of and we would be contradicting ourselves if we were to
say otherwise.

We have called for the government to do more, and thus responsible
interventions on land, skills and infrastructure are welcomed. South Africa
must build its own economy, utilising its own resources, and thus avoid
being dictated to by outside forces that flood our markets.

The UDM also supports your position on Iran’s pursuit of nuclear technology
for peaceful means. It is high time that the UN, in particular the Security
Council, realise that if they want to succeed with their nonproliferation
agenda they should be even-handed. It is hypocritical for the Security
Council to do little about the US, Russia, China, India, Pakistan, North
Korea and even Israel and their nuclear warfare capabilities, but to
isolate one country, which insists that it is only pursuing peaceful
nuclear use.

Last year the hon Minister of Finance announced R370 billion in the Mid-
Term Budget Policy Statement for infrastructure projects. Then the ANC’s 8
January statement, according to the media, spoke of R400 billion for local
government infrastructure development. And yesterday the hon Deputy
President announced that R372 billion in spending would underpin Asgisa.

Any reasonable South African would have noted these announcements over the
past six months and felt optimistic that so many thousands of billions of
our taxpayers’ money was being ploughed back into the community. For the
purposes of clarity I would appreciate it if the hon President could
explain in his response whether they are all separate amounts for separate
programmes, or whether this is the same amount that is being talked about
every time.

My input today will be to contribute to two specific issues that I believe
will improve the benefits that the democratic state should be providing to
all its citizens. The hon President has spoken of an age of hope and, yes,
many South Africans, sir, are optimistic about the future. But that hope is
a fragile thing that is regularly dented and undermined by embarrassing
incidents.

The first specific issue that needs attention is the different kinds of
community protests, with underlying party-political tones, which we are
seeing with increasing regularity. At times these protests give expression
to internal tripartite-alliance squabbles. This constitutes a broader
threat to our democracy, I submit, emanating from within the ruling party
and alliance. And it is an undeniable feature of the state of the nation.

Indeed, I can say without fear of contradiction that it formed the basis of
the most sustained and prominent public debate of the past year. It was not
us, of course, who embroiled the upper echelons of the state intelligence
and other state departments in an unseemly struggle for power. These
matters affect the state of the nation like few other matters do at the
moment.

For instance in the Eastern Cape, in the last couple of years, we have
witnessed how these political undertones and divisions have affected the
provincial government and service delivery. If a particular premier comes
to power, the Cabinet and senior administrators who are viewed as loyal to
the previous administration are purged, thereby destroying continuity and
management experience. Similarly, there will be those from the old
provincial administration who remain behind purely to undermine the efforts
of the incoming administration. These divisions have threatened the
stability of government.

There is the example of the ANC councillors in the Qawukeni Municipality
who shot each other in the municipal offices, or there is the well-
documented role of the ruling party’s alliance partner, the SACP, in
Khutsong.

Who would have thought that a decade into democracy, in which no-go areas
operated by political parties had finally become a thing of the past, that
there would be areas where you could not put up election posters, including
even the ruling party itself? Who would have thought that this resistance
to democracy would be led by a ruling party alliance partner?

The SACP needs to be reminded that they have never had the guts to fight an
election on their own. If they want to ride the coat-tails of the ANC, that
is their right. And if the ANC doesn’t mind the burden of dragging them and
their other alliance partners along, that is also their full right.

The ANC must handle its alliance arrangement as it sees fit, but it cannot
forget that it is the party with the mandate of the voters and it should
deliver to them and not be held to ransom by its alliance partners. I am
referring here to more than the local protests that they have fomented, if
you didn’t know.

Members of the ruling party alliance have taken their internal squabbles
and campaigns into the Public Service and disrupted the work of key
institutions of the state. They have openly campaigned against independent
institutions of the democratic state, and they have even vilified the
judiciary for daring to remark upon the behaviour of their political
darlings. And these embarrassing incidents continue to happen.

Just recently another election-shy, coat-tail server of the ANC, called
Sanco, advocated the amendment of the Constitution to allow a third term of
office for the hon President. For now that debate has been quashed by the
hon President, who said that the ANC would respect the Constitution.

We still need to address this issue, because it throws up a very important
issue for the citizens of this country that goes far wider than ANC
internal power struggles. These questions keep cropping up, because those
in the ruling alliance are concerned about who the hon President’s
successor will be. But why should this be their concern solely? Has the
time not arrived for all South Africans - and not just the most powerful
faction in the ANC or in the alliance - to decide who their President will
be? Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr S D MONTSITSI: Madam Speaker, President of the Republic and hon members
. . .

Mhlekazi, i-African National Congress nomfelandawonye azitsho ukuthi
amalungu omfelandawonye . . . [Sir, the ANC and the alliance are not saying
their members . . . ]

. . . cannot engage in other issues. Members of the alliance have the right
to pronounce themselves on a variety of issues. But the only thing is that
the ANC is clear on the issue of the Constitution. I thank you, baba [sir].
Thank you, tata [sir].

Tracing our history from the advent of democracy serves to contextualise
the current optimism, said the President. It is therefore natural and
logical for the young people of our country to vote for the ANC in the
coming local elections.

In tracing this history, we travel along a path in reflecting upon the
stark contrast between South Africa today and South Africa yesterday.

The South Africa of yesterday, 30 years ago, presented a very gloomy
picture, in particular in the education arena – my pet subject. The
explosion that shook the country reverberated with the echoes of demands
for a better education across the length and breadth of our township
schools - the demand to scrap Afrikaans as the medium of instruction; the
demand to abolish Bantu Education; the demand for a free and compulsory
education system; the demand for the recognition of student representative
councils, SRCs; the demand for parents to participate in the education of
their children; the demand for equal rights; and indeed the demand to
abolish apartheid as a political system. These demands were conceived by
young people after a series of meetings.

The I D Mkhize Secondary School in Guguletu was used as a meeting spot for
student representatives. It was under the leadership of a student leader
called Dapepe from the Langa High School, Zakes from the same school, and a
girl student called Ntombintombi Ngezela. The Langa High School was used as
the common venue for convening mass meetings of students from the various
schools and townships of Cape Town.

Therefore, the June 16 explosion took place on 11 August 1976 in Cape Town.
The first casualty was Xolile Musi. These were the same demands, which the
students made in Soweto, which the students made in the Free State, which
the students made in the north in Galeshewe, which the students made in
Pietersburg, and which the students made, again, in Natal.

The advent of our democracy in 1994 ushered in hope and optimism. All gloom
and doom was relegated to the dustbin of history, as the South African
Schools Act was passed in November 1996. The demands made by the Cosas
students’ generation of the 1980s, led by Ephraim Mogale, Shepard Mati and
Lulu Johnson, were also met by the South African Schools Act.

As far as the issue of the language policy is concerned, sections 6(2) and
6(3) state that the governing body of a public school may determine the
language policy of the school, and no form of racial discrimination may be
practised.

Bantu Education was abolished; it was replaced by a universal and equitable
system of outcomes-based education. With regard to compulsory education,
section 3(1) states that every parent must cause every learner for whom he
or she is responsible to attend school. Any parent without just cause who
fails to comply with this provision is guilty of an offence. Therefore, the
onus rests on the parent. The move therefore towards free education
indicates that no learner may be refused admission to a public school on
the grounds of his or her parents being unable to pay the fees.

The present policy of the Minister of Education, Naledi Pandor, is to
identify poverty quantile areas with the objective of declaring schools in
those areas no-fee schools. Section 11(1) states that a representative
council of learners at the school must be established. Such a council is
the only recognised and legitimate representative council of learners.

These are the demands that were placed throughout the length and breadth of
our country, and these are the demands that were accepted by the present
government as part of our national programme to entrench democracy. It is
therefore the duty of the young people of today to vote for the ANC, as
they owe it to themselves and to the their forebears and student martyrs,
like Siphiwe Mthimkhulu.

This year is the 30th anniversary of June 16. The DA, as usual, is going to
jump onto the bandwagon. This is the party that rejected the South African
Schools Act, the very Act for whom so many students lost their lives.
[Interjections.] In November 1996, when the South African Schools Bill was
passed, the DA opposed it. The portfolio committee passed this Bill with a
majority, while the DA staged a walk-out from a meeting that adjourned at
11pm in the evening.

This Act is a beacon of hope for many young South Africans that celebrate
it. You, the DA, what will you be celebrating? You opposed the very Act
that embodied the spirit of the demands of the students. When you call
small groups of young people to come to honour your meetings, what will you
be telling those students? [Interjections.] Why do you have to celebrate
June 16 when you do not abide by the spirit of June 16? Why?
[Interjections.]

I cannot see Helen Zille here. As an MEC in the Western Cape legislature,
she passed a provincial Act, attempting to undermine the South African
Schools Act. She didn’t get very far, because it was dismissed by the
Constitutional Court.

Baba  Buthelezi,  uyazi  siyakuthanda  kakhulu  kodwa  sisakhumbula   ukuthi
ngonyaka ka-1983 abantwana bashaywa kakhulu  laphayana  eNyuvesi  yasoNgoye.
[Ihlombe.] Abanye babo bashona kwathi abanye balimala  kakhulu  kodwa  sithi
baba siyakuthanda futhi siyafisa  ukuthi  ngelinye  ilanga  izinto  ziguquke
sikubone  usuhleli  nathi  ngapha.  [Ihlombe.]   (Translation   of   isiZulu
paragraph follows.)

[Hon Buthelezi, you know that we love you, but  we  remember  that  students
were beaten at the University of Zululand in 1983. [Applause.] Some of  them
passed away and some of them were seriously injured. We are saying  we  love
you. We wish to see changes one day and see you on our side. [Applause.]]

We, who are coming of age like Comrade Cwele, Comrade Zo Kota, Comrade
Hlengiwe Mgabadeli, Comrade Suzanne Shabangu and others, always wipe away
our sorrow and tears with a copy of the South African Schools Act on our
way to the June 16 celebrations. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, I’m now going to suspend
proceedings for 10 minutes to allow members a body break. The bells will be
rung to announce the resumption of proceedings. Proceedings are now
suspended.

Business suspended at 15:59 and resumed at 16:13.

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Deputy Speaker, Madam Deputy President, Mr President,
South Africans may indeed be optimistic about the future, but do we all
have the same vision as to what that future should be? The ID’s vision is
one where the destructive divides of our society are bridged. We will only
succeed as a nation if we recognise the problems that are faced by all our
communities and are prepared to make the necessary compromises needed to
address them.

The problems of the poor are the problems of the rich and the challenge of
building social cohesion rests on the shoulders of all of us. The task at
hand cannot be restricted to the government alone and the ID would like to
see a hand being extended to our citizens, making them partners in our
development. Citizens are not just consumers but active participants in our
economy and we need to encourage them to play this role.

Unfortunately, the divides in our society often lead to the poor having to
compete for scarce resources. This also leads to unscrupulous political
parties exploiting these divides for short-term political gain. We have
graphically seen this in the campaigns that some parties have chosen to run
in this city, for instance. The theme for this year’s address was
“equality”, which seems ironic, given that South Africa is still one of the
most unequal countries in the world. Inequality threatens all of our
achievements and makes the job of uniting our country an impossible task.
As many economic models show, reducing inequality in the country will, in
fact, provide a more sustainable economic base and allow us to achieve that
elusive 6% growth rate.

The ID is happy to see that the term “Shared” is included in the
Accelerated Shared Growth Initiative. We hope that this finally leads to
benefits going to all our people. The infrastructure is clearly not in
place for benefits to trickle down to the poor. What we need now is for
those benefits to bubble up. Many of the poorest communities live in the
rural areas and the ID has constantly been arguing for a comprehensive
rural development strategy that will improve their actual livelihoods. The
government must partner with these communities and address their real needs
for basic services and training in subsistence plus agriculture.

It is also depressing to see our children in rural areas being educated in
broken and mud structures without any form of electricity, water or
sanitation. This is despite your promise two years ago that no child would
have to suffer this indignity.

Hon President, if we do not address the educational divide in this country,
we will inherit a divided future. The ID has always supported the concept
of a developmental state. Only a fool can’t see that he needs to play an
active role in addressing the huge socioeconomic challenges that confront
us. This developmental state also needs to become a partner to business and
put a necessary investment into key growth areas. The ID welcomes the
agreement that has been reached with China on the protection of our
clothing and textile industry. Is this not a bit too late, though? We have
already seen the closure of many factories around the country and over a
quarter of a million people being put out of work due to the government
removing protection too quickly.

This is not the only industry in which the government has destroyed the
livelihoods of people through its actions. Many poor fishing communities
are currently being torn apart by unjust policies that deny fisherpeople
their right to practise a centuries-old tradition. To them the age of hope
has become an age of despair.
Although we need a strong developmental state, our current Public Service
is weak. Capacity is often quoted as the excuse. The government had 11
years to build capacity and failure to do so is holding the entire country
back. By putting in political appointments you have undermined the Public
Service and made it a less attractive place for people to work.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, I don’t think that we are going to
continue to have that kind of heckling between you two. You know who you
two are. Do that once more and I am going to call you by name and order you
out of the Chamber. If you have any differences, outside is the place to
air them. Here we are going to respect this Chamber and anyone who is at
the podium, speaking. [Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: The Public Service needs to become a prestigious
institution where skilled people compete to find work and vacancies are
nonexistent. Corruption also plays a huge role in preventing the Public
Service from delivering on promises. There are a few corrupt people in
government who are making a mockery of our attempts to deliver quality
service. The ID wants to help you, Mr President, in rooting out this
corruption so that we can all be served better.

The ID welcomes the Gipsa initiative but we hope that it is able to succeed
where the National Skills Authority has not. We support your stand against
budget rollovers but we would like to see strong action taken against those
Ministers who are unable to spend their budgets. In a country that has such
enormous socioeconomic backlogs, it is a crime for us not to be able to
spend our budgets. The ID hopes for the day when government departments are
able to spend their money as efficiently as Sars is able to collect it.

Hon President, when you talk of the age of hope, you talk about our future.
Those who will inherit the future are our children but it is their present
reality that we have to worry about. Seven out of 10 children in South
Africa live in poverty and those that live in poverty are four times more
likely to die. This is a shocking statistic. We should all be ashamed of
it. It has gotten worse over the last 11 years. Hope and the promise of
sanitation will not prevent these children from dying of diarrhoea. Hope
and the promise of clean water will not prevent these children from dying
of gastroenteritis. What these children really need is the delivery of
basic services now. Your age of hope will become nothing but a pipe dream
unless we put the needs of our children first in this country.

HIV-Aids is a major contributing factor to child mortality in South Africa.
It is one thing to state that we have one of the largest antiretroviral
roll out programmes in the world but we also have the largest number of HIV-
positive people. Our programme is currently only reaching 5% of the actual
need in the country. Almost 3 million South Africans are in stages 3 and 4
of the disease and need these lifesaving drugs now. The ID had to march on
the Department of Health in Pongola to get the regional hospital to deliver
ARVs.

This is not the time for us to pat ourselves on the back, nor is it the
time to be creating political divisions over the issue. We need to give
South Africans hope, both those who are positive and those who are still
too scared to go for the test. Only in this way will we be able to confront
one of our greatest challenges.

In conclusion, the ID wants to warn the executive not to interfere with the
judiciary and the independence of the judiciary. The transformation that is
desperately needed in our judiciary is justice to be made accessible to the
poor. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms H C MGABADELI: “We must, constrained by and yet regardless of the
accumulated effect of our historical burdens, seize the time to define for
ourselves what we want to make of our shared destiny.”

Chairperson, hon President, members of the executive, hon members and
fellow citizens, when Comrade President Thabo Mbeki, in his state of the
nation address on 3 February 2006, decided to revisit these words, as they
were pronounced by the former President of the Republic of South Africa,
Comrade Nelson Mandela, in May 1994, it became the reality that we
ourselves and nobody else will define what we want to make of our shared
destiny.

This is indeed a heavy responsibility that demands unity, love, tolerance,
co-ordinated minds and, above all, a high level of patriotism based largely
on respect for our Constitution, our policies, as well as our institutions
as instruments for ensuring that delivery is of a high quality.

We will seize the time and celebrate the lives and ideals of our forbearers
who never rested but who became the path-finders of the process of critical
thinking, on behalf of the whole nation when the colonisers, together with
those colonisers of the special type, were introducing what was, in years
to come, going to lead to landlessness, cheap labour, uprooting and
resettling, family disunity, etc.

Through their barbaric actions of raping the economic independence, an
African agriculturist and pastoralist, Inkosi uMbhambatha ka ma Cinsa, saw
it coming that, in years to come, we would be sitting like this, saying,
“Let us review what has happened to our land. Why are foreigners the ones
who are now in possession of 97% of our land, etc?”

Colonisers, in partnership with colonisers of the special type, driven by
capitalistic greed, were quick in finding painful ways of impoverishing the
once-rich Zulus, by forcing them to succumb to the Poll Tax Act, which was
two pounds per head for an adult man.
This meant going to the mines, as a man, to get these two pounds, leaving
your riches behind, unguarded, your family unprotected, in search of two
pounds. The Zulu nation, led by Inkosi uBhambatha in particular, left the
indelible history, which will forever be celebrated by generations to come.

Hence, 16 June 2006 will be the celebration of the centenary of that
occasion, as the President shared with the country on 3 February. We still
say, “constrained by and yet regardless of the accumulated effects of our
historical burdens”.

We will celebrate this centenary and think critically in order for us to
define for ourselves what we want to make out of that celebration.

Through such thinking together, guided largely by this history and others,
we will find the solution to questionable uneven ownership of land, family
disunity, the socioeconomic state of rural areas, as well as the
socioeconomic state of pseudo-urban areas where they’re “urban”, as they
term it, but still use the bucket system type of toilets.

The likes of Tony Leon have got constituencies in those areas. They are
using the bucket system, yet it is called an urban area. How urban is that?

Indeed, we are continually seizing the time and we are continually trying
hard to bring about an undivided South Africa, with one nation sharing a
common citizenship, patriotism and loyalty, pursuing, amidst our diversity,
freedom, equality and security for all irrespective of race, colour, sex or
creed; a country free from apartheid or any other form of discrimination or
domination. That is what the Codesa declaration of intent, as was revisited
by the President, tells us.

Unfortunately some people who are permanent tourists in our country are not
even celebrating our humbleness for even forgetting and forgiving them for
what they have said. [Interjections.] Shut up.

The fruits of such a commitment are innumerable . . . [Interjections.] . .
. I am like you . . . but one will highlight the following areas, among
other things, using KwaZulu-Natal that was ravished by violence prior to
and after the Codesa declaration.

These fruits are the following: Exposure programmes, particularly on issues
of environment and agriculture. Through these programmes, working
relationships with countries like India, Germany and others have led to the
identified areas that need special attention to make the environment and
agriculture an answer to empty stomachs, eg there has to be water
provision, and low-cost irrigation techniques suitable for mass production.

The third fruit is the Maphophoma maize project where 1 450 hectares are
producing between six and seven tonnes of maize per hectare. The fourth is
the rehabilitation of the irrigation scheme, and R1,8 million has been
invested for the purchase of seeds, fertilizers and other inputs, and the
planting of high-income crops such as tomatoes, potatoes, beans, etc.

There was the investment of R400 000 for processing equipment to add value
to the crop. Already, 300 people are employed full time in this project.
There is also the cotton growers’ scheme in Makhathini, and the on-going
purchasing of Nguni cattle to bring back the lost dignity and pride of the
Zulus, which I have already spoken about in particular.

There are the mushroom and the dry-land rice projects at the launch of the
Empangeni project. This is something that the nation needs to applaud.
After only one year of the democratically elected people in that province,
not in the country now, all these and others have been celebrated. Indeed,
siyavuna, we are harvesting. The nation is winning.

Local government elections are coming at a time when sober-minded South
Africans from the KwaZulu-Natal province in particular are able to separate
rebuilding and reconstruction for a better life for all from fighting for
individual gains.

It is, however, sad that, though we try hard as a nation to concretise the
whole concept of three tiers of government so that service delivery can be
a source of hope to the masses of our people so that it is possible for all
of Africa to hear mountains and the hills singing before them, at local
level, poverty is seen and not heard.

We still have leaders like those in the Vryheid, uMvoti and Harding
municipalities to cite but a few. Here delivery is robbery. Delivery is the
suppression of human rights and a suppression of peaceful solutions.

Let me tell you about Vryheid. In 2005, just when the people of Baqulusi
were trying to make their shared destiny by critically looking at the need
to investigate the unauthorised use of municipal property, corruption
mismanagement, etc, the matter of instituting an investigation was put to a
vote. Those members who voted for the investigation were fired, and this
action led to a division within the IFP ranks.

Why would people be fired when they are exercising their rights, when they
are practically being the eyes and ears of the masses of Vryheid? When they
are closely monitoring developments in order to identify all factors
threatening to derail the process in Vryheid, and to issue early warnings
accordingly, why are they being fired?

The IFP lost the case in court, which in turn resulted in a reinstatement
of the dismissed IFP councillors. This, economically, meant paying salaries
for two IFP members, two deputy mayors and two speakers. That is double the
salary bill. Tensions were forever and ever gaining momentum.

A R1 million budget for the building of a stadium in Mondlo Township, which
was never built and the money not accounted for, as well as other issues,
led to the intervention of the provincial government.

If only these things were not covered up, for the provincial government
surely was not going to intervene. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Hon Deputy President, hon President, Deputy Speaker, hon
members, the President surprised most people in this nation by quoting from
the Prophet Isaiah not only once, but three times. His speech, which was
well received by most of us, instilled hope and optimism, and raised the
expectations of our people.

I was asked by Tim Modise on his show why I thought the President chose to
quote from the Prophet Isaiah and not from the other prophets, and what I
thought was the significance of the quote. While not knowing his real
reasons for doing it, I nevertheless expressed my appreciation for the
President doing that, and gave Tim my thoughts about the matter, which
includes the following: The name Isaiah means Jehovah saves or salvation of
Jehovah. I hope the quotation of Isaiah simply means that the President,
like me, hopes for the salvation of Jehovah. The fact is, Mr President, we
need God’s help to make our nation a truly winning nation. You did the
right thing, sir. And I hope you will continue to search for answers in
God’s word.

May I remind the hon President and members of this House that before the
nation can go out with joy and be led forth in peace, and before the
mountains and hills shall break forth into singing, there are conditions
that the Prophet Isaiah referred to in the same chapter containing the
verses quoted by the hon President, which must be met.

The three conditions I have time to mention are, firstly, to seek the Lord
while he may be found; secondly, to let the wicked forsake their way and
the evil men’s thoughts; and thirdly, that we return to the Lord who will
have mercy on us and will pardon us.

Now I want to focus on areas in which I believe the President’s speech fell
short. Firstly, the President only mentioned HIV/Aids once in his speech
and thereby failed to deal with this pandemic as a national priority. The
ACDP believes that HIV/Aids has to be included in government’s priority
lists alongside poverty and unemployment.
It is not good enough to be told that about a hundred thousand patients are
receiving antiretroviral treatment. According to the Actuarial Society of
South Africa, another 520 000 HIV-positive people urgently need treatment.
The government must address the problem of HIV/Aids much more aggressively,
and we believe the President must take the lead in that.

Government must have a clear policy of not only providing treatment for
those who need it but also have programmes to help those who are HIV-
negative to stay negative. I know that on paper government does refer to
their ABC strategy, which they do not seem to be convinced about.
Government has to urgently do something to prevent predictions that 5,8
million South Africans will be infected with the Aids virus by 2010 from
coming to pass.

The most reliable way of ensuring that children do not easily get infected
with the Aids virus is to teach them to refrain from sex until marriage.
While it is primarily parents’ responsibility to teach their children to
abstain from premarital sex, we believe that schools must teach the same
thing.

The President had an opportunity to endorse Education Minister Naledi
Pandor’s call to schoolchildren to abstain from sex and focus on their
studies, and the President didn’t do that.

The ACDP hereby endorses the Education Minister’s call. I know that it will
not be easy to convince some schoolchildren and the nation to abstain from
premarital sex while they are bombarded with pornography every day of their
lives. Our country is losing the fight against child pornography and the
rape of children because this Parliament does not want to outlaw
pornography that is damaging the minds of our children. [Interjections.]

I knew you were going to say that, Professor. It is the children who look
like me who are being raped, not those who look like you.

Where on earth do you hear of an 11-year-old girl being raped in a
classroom in front of other children, while 10-year-old boys are pinning
her legs and arms down to help the rapist? Where on the continent of Africa
have you heard of a 13-year-old schoolgirl being raped by 18 boys, many of
them her schoolmates, as was reported in the media two weeks ago?
Pornography is the theory and rape is the practice.

Mr President, if you truly want the nation to go out with joy and be led
out in peace, and the mountains and hills to break forth into singing, then
you should not support any future move that this Parliament might want to
make to amend the Marriage Act in order to include same-sex marriages.

All nations, tribes and religious groups and cultures worldwide believe
marriage should only be between a man and a woman. This Parliament must be
seen to be promoting and protecting our children, families and the covenant
of marriage between a man and a woman only, and not undermining it.

I agree with you, sir, in your quotation of former President, hon Nelson
Mandela, that, “We must seize the time to define for ourselves what we want
to make of our shared destiny.” What the ACDP wants to make of our shared
destiny is to have a prosperous nation that embraces the plan of God and
enjoys His blessings and not one that rebels against Him. The so-called
homosexual marriage is nothing but rebellion against God the Almighty, and
the ACDP will oppose it with every fibre of its being.

We truly want this nation to go out with joy and be led out in peace and
hear the mountains and hills breaking forth into singing before us. We want
all the trees of the field to clap their hands, as the Prophet Isaiah said,
but for this to happen, Mr President, we must not be seen to be challenging
God’s authority or fighting him - because the nation, if it does that, will
lose badly which will be much worse than seeing Bafana Bafana losing all
their games.

From what many business leaders and economists are saying, it looks as if
unemployment will remain this nation’s greatest challenge for many decades
to come. While they agree that the economy is creating some jobs, they
believe that job creation is not happening fast enough to drastically
reduce the high unemployment rate. Many have blamed the economy’s failure
to create sufficient jobs on the country’s rigid labour laws, which make it
difficult for employers to fire nonperforming employees. The ACDP agrees
that the labour laws must be relaxed, and that regulatory reforms must be
put in place to bring more flexibility into the labour market.

The unwilling and unproductive workers must know that they will be replaced
if they stay away from work without valid reasons, and that for the economy
to grow, they must make a greater effort and choose to be more productive.
They must know that if they do not perform, they will be replaced by other
keen and industrious workers who know that having a job is a privilege and
not a right, and hence have to give their maximum output.

If government manages to root out corruption, drastically reduce crime and
manage to instil a culture of hard work and productivity in our people,
then we will be on our way to ending jobless economic growth, as domestic
investors will be encouraged to invest more in this beautiful country.

Then, Mr President, we will go out with joy and will be led forth in peace,
and the mountains and the hills will break forth into singing before us.
When that happens, South Africa will truly be a shining model among nations
of the world in the true sense of the word. I hope, Mr President, that that
is going to happen. Ke a leboga. [Thank you.] [Applause.]

Mr T S DODOVU: Madam Deputy Speaker, Comrade President and Deputy
President, today I feel elevated by the honour bestowed on me to be one of
the participants in the state of the nation debate.

I am indeed proud to present the perspectives of our movement, the ANC, as
we mark the year of mobilisation of the people’s power through democratic
local government.

I will preface my contribution in this debate by noting with disbelief and
consternation the manner in which the Official Opposition in particular is
prevaricating and waffling instead of entering into constructive engagement
on the strategic perspective that the President outlined on Friday.

Unfortunately, the Official Opposition chooses to pour venom, make direct
vitriolic attacks and pander to cheap populism. It wants to pull us down to
its level so that it can beat us with its experience: an experience full of
negativity, arrogance, pessimism and political right-wing politics. If we
allow the DA to pull us down to its level, it will definitely beat us with
experience. We dare not allow it space to pull us down to its level.

Having noted the above matters, I believe that the principal challenge that
is facing all of us is to be mindful of the profound responsibility we bear
to continue the struggle to transform our society and to achieve the
strategic objectives of the national democratic revolution.

What propels us should be a burning desire to satisfy the spiritual and
material wellbeing of our people. We must be steadfast in our commitment to
better the lives of our people. In fact, what underpins our conviction
should be an unflinching commitment to create a new set of opportunities
for and challenges to the cause of social transformation in South Africa.

We say without any fear of contradiction that the confluence of encouraging
possibilities we see today, are as a result of strategic and tactical
choices that the ANC-led government made since 1994. As we walk along the
same path and along a solid foundation laid by President Mandela since
1994, we owe him a special debt of gratitude because he has enriched our
lives with the magic of his words, the enchantment of his images, the
acuity of his insights and the magnitude of his vision.

Today we are deeply inspired to witness his equally illustrious successor,
President Mbeki, continuing along the same path with undiminished vitality
and determination. His activities, interests and pronouncements remain, for
millions of our people, a constant source of hope and encouragement.

In the North West province, for example, we are convinced and confident
that the ANC government is on course in terms of giving practical meaning
and substance to the basic political commitment that, “The People shall
Govern.” As we speak today, more people than ever before in the cities of
Matlosana and Potchefstroom have access to clean water and have electricity
in their homes.

The government has promoted the interests of children, persons with
disabilities, youth, women and older people in Madibeng and Moses Kotane
better than before. More people in Mafikeng and Ditsobotla have
opportunities to improve their lives, to become better educated and acquire
skills and to help build better communities where they live.

The economy of Rustenburg, for example, is one of the fastest growing in
the country, and the discovery of more platinum is creating jobs and
enabling poverty reduction in the area. More people in the areas of
Ventersdorp, Taung, Vryburg and Makwassie have gained access to housing,
land and education; and the services in the clinics are improving.

Project Consolidate, a hands-on local government support initiative,
focusing on the service delivery challenges and capacity constraints, is
beginning to yield positive results in the 14 targeted municipalities of
the North West province. In all municipalities across the province, more
than 90% of the ward committees that promote community participation have
been set up and are functioning very well.

A plan of action of the North West government to achieve higher rates of
economic growth and development, improve the quality of life of our people
and consolidate our social cohesion is bearing positive results. The
Expanded Public Works Programme focusing on providing training, work
experience and temporary income, especially to women and youth, has been
intensified.

However, as the ANC, we observe that despite the monumental achievements
mentioned above, there are still daunting challenges facing the province
which need our immediate attention. These include the complete eradication
of the bucket system and the curbing of the proliferation of informal
settlements.

During December last year, this Parliament passed the Cross-Boundaries
Municipalities Law Repeals Act, which among other things effectively
incorporated the Merafong Municipality into the North West province. This
decision was met with some dissatisfaction from some sections of the
community who felt that their interests would have been better served if
the whole municipality were to be incorporated into Gauteng.

We in the ANC reaffirm our strategic objective of creating a united and
democratic state because we know no boundaries. We believe that we are one
country, one people who share a common destiny as envisaged by President
Mandela.

We in the ANC are traditionally and fundamentally attached to the ideals of
peace and freedom. We share the perspectives of creating a nonracial and
nonsexist society and this is what we have fought for over 94 years.

It is in this context that we deplore and record our deep sorrow at the
tragic incidents of violence and arson that are occurring in Merafong,
especially in the Khutsong area. We send our deepest sympathy to those who
are affected, and we are committed to ensuring that the law should deal
with those who choose violence to further their own political ends. At this
juncture, we shall implore the North West government, together with the
Merafong municipality, to enhance and deepen local democracy, to
qualitatively improve the participation of residents in the decision-making
processes and to provide effective service delivery to the communities of
Merafong.

In conclusion, there are those amongst us - especially the DA members - who
are the self-professed genuine mouthpieces of our people who pursue a
blind, cheap popularity that has nothing to do with our interests and those
of the overwhelming majority of people.  At a time when the government is
contending with serious challenges of governance, these opportunists, such
as the hon Mr Leon, attempt to gain popularity on the basis of radical
sounding but impractical propositions by exploiting the situation in
Merafong. They need votes like predators who smell blood. [Time
expired.][Applause.]

Dr J T DELPORT: Agb Adjunkspeaker, agb President, ons is met rede trots op
ons regstaat. Min dinge is egter so negatief vir die volle ontplooiing van
’n regstaat as ’n konfrontasie of selfs maar net spanning en wantroue
tussen die regbank en die uitvoerende gesag. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[Hon Deputy Speaker, hon President, we are justly proud of our
constitutional state. However, few things are as detrimental to the
development of a constitutional state as a confrontation or even merely
tension and distrust between the judiciary and the executive authority.]

The Constitutional Court has made it crystal clear that judicial
independence entails much more than a mere noninterference in judgments by
other state forces. The court stated clearly that the key aspects of
judicial independence included institutional independence -

. . . as well as judicial control over administrative decisions that bear
directly and immediately on the exercise of the judicial function.

Ten spyte hiervan vind ons die 14de wysiging aan die Grondwet ter tafel,
wat gewoon verklaar dat die Minister van Justisie gesag sal uitoefen oor
die administrasie en begroting van alle howe. Die Konstitusionele Hof eis
judisiële kontrole oor administratiewe besluite; die 14de wysiging gee juis
daardie kontrole aan die Minister. Ongekwalifiseerd soos dit staan, beteken
dit dat die Minister ook oor die hofkalender, die resesse, die dag-tot-dag-
hofrol en die toewysing van bepaalde sake aan bepaalde regters sal kan
beslis. Dit kan nie.

Die 14de wysiging gaan egter verder en beperk die inherente reg van die
Konstitusionele Hof om die inwerkingtreding van ’n wet wat na hul oordeel
in botsing is met die Grondwet, op te skort. Onwillekeurig moet ’n mens die
vraag vra: is ons dan nou op pad terug na die idee van parlementêre
soewereiniteit? Ek kan nie verder in die beperkte tyd praat oor die ander
probleme in die meelopende wetsontwerp oor die Hooggeregshof nie.

Genoeg om te sê dat die Algemene Balieraad reeds sy ernstige bedenkinge
uitgespreek het. Die Balieraad sê hierdie wetgewing “interferes
fundamentally with the independence of the courts”. Regslui, insluitende
baie regters, steun hierdie siening.

Die vraag ontstaan egter: waarom hierdie wysigings? Blykbaar is die
departement - of die regering, ek weet nie – nie tevrede met die wyse
waarop die howe funksioneer nie; veral nie, so lei ek af, met die
produktiwiteit in die howe nie. As dit so is, lê die remedie elders. Die
remedie lê nie daarin om die administrasie van die howe aan die Minister en
natuurlik sy amptenare oor te dra nie. Dit is nie die antwoord nie.

As die administrasie van die howe verbeter moet word, moet ’n
ondersteunende raamwerk geskep word wat funksioneer onder toesig en leiding
van die Hoofregter en, waar gepas, die Regterlike Dienskommissie. Dit is
die instansies wat moet regstel wat verkeerd is. Soos dit nou staan, is die
14de wysiging en meelopende wetsontwerp ’n resep vir agterdog en spanning
wat tot ’n konstitusionele konfrontasie kan ontwikkel. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[In spite of this, we find tabled the 14th amendment to the Constitution,
which simply states that the Minister for Justice shall exercise authority
over the administration and budget of all courts. The Constitutional Court
demands judicial control over administrative decisions; the 14th amendment
gives precisely that control to the Minister. Unqualified as it is, this
means that the Minister can also determine the court calendar, recesses,
the day-to-day court roll and the allocation of specific cases to specific
judges. That cannot be.

However, the 14th amendment goes further and limits the inherent right of
the Constitutional Court to suspend the commencement of an Act that in
their judgement clashes with the Constitution. One cannot help but ask: Are
we returning to the idea of parliamentary sovereignty? In the limited time
given to me I cannot further discuss the other problems in the accompanying
Bill on the High Court.

Suffice it to say that the General Council of the Bar has already expressed
serious doubts. The Council of the Bar states that this legislation
“interferes fundamentally with the independence of the courts”. Legal
practitioners, including many judges, support this view.

However, the question arises as to why we have these amendments. Apparently
the department – or government, I don’t know – is not satisfied with the
manner in which the courts are functioning, even less so, I gather, with
productivity in courts. If that is so, the remedy lies elsewhere. The
remedy does not lie in handing over the administration of courts to the
Minister and, of course, his officials. That is not the solution.

If the administration of the courts is to be improved, a supportive
framework should be created which functions under the supervision and
guidance of the Chief Justice and, where applicable, the Judicial Service
Commission. These are the institutions that have to rectify what is wrong.
As it is currently, the 14th amendment and accompanying Bill are a recipe
for distrust and tension that could develop into a constitutional
confrontation.]

May I address the hon President directly? You are ill advised, sir, on this
issue. Avoid distrust in you government’s commitment to the independence of
the judiciary and request the portfolio committee to map an alternative
course that will build confidence and stability. It is possible to do just
that. [Time expired.]

Ms A VAN WYK: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President,
Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon members . . .

. . . dit is ironies dat mnr Delport hier staan en praat oor die
onafhanklikheid van die reg terwyl hy deel was van die party wat in die
vyftigerjare van die 20ste eeu die Appèlhof genader het om bruinmense van
die kiesersrol te verwyder. [Tussenwerpsels.] Verder het sy leier drie uur
gelede hier gestaan en die regstelsel gekritiseer wat borgtog aan mense
gegee het. [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[. . . it is ironic that Mr Delport stands here and speaks about the
independence of the legal system while he was a member of the party who
approached the Appeal Court in the fifties of the 20th century to remove
Coloureds from the voters’ roll. [Interjections.] Furthermore, his leader
stood here three hours ago and criticised the legal system that granted
people bail. [Interjections.]]

In opening his address to the nation on the 3rd of February, President
Mbeki took us back to 24 May 1994 and reiterated the challenge put to the
nation by the then President Mandela. President Mbeki then expanded on his
speech and reminded us about the sense of hope that the ANC government
brought to the majority of our people: to define, ourselves, what we want
to make of our shared history.

The enormity of this challenge and the immense responsibility that comes
with it can and should never be underestimated. Our 12 years of shared
history since our first democratic elections have brought us to the age of
hope; yet 12 years are, in fact, like the blink of an eye in the history of
a nation. The past 12 years have brought us to the dawn of the age of hope;
and of that we need to be proud collectively as South Africans.

The bigger challenge now remains, namely what it is that we are going to do
with this age of hope. How are we going to apply it so that we continue to
define, ourselves, what we want to make of our shared history? Whether you
are king or servant, rich or poor, man or woman, young or old, in
government or opposition, we are all co-authors writing this shared
history, artists drawing the outlines of the picture that will be coloured
by generations to follow, for, yes, we have entered the age of hope, and
hope is the pillar that holds up the world, the dream of a waking man.

The age of hope is another instrument given to us to define, ourselves,
what we want to make of our shared history. The fields have been worked,
the seed has been sown, the rain fallen, and the crops are growing. All
that remains is for us to ensure that every South African shares in the
reaping so as to reach their full potential.

Elkeen van ons staan stewig in die era van hoop, maar wat elkeen van ons
met hierdie geleentheid gaan maak, bly ons individuele keuses. Die oorgrote
meerderheid Suid-Afrikaners, ongeag ras, het reeds deur woord en daad
aangedui dat hulle met entoesiasme en ywer saamwerk om ons gedeelde
geskiedenis te bepaal.

Daar is egter steeds klein groepies wat hulself rangeer tot randeiers en om
beperkte emosionele redes nie entoesiasties deel in die nuwe geleenthede
wat oopgaan en wat die demokrasie en die ontwikkeling van ons land ons bied
nie. Hierdie groepies vind ons oor die hele land, maar veral ook in die Wes-
Kaap.

Baie van die mense wat hulle as deel van hierdie groepies bevind, doen so
uit eie keuse. Baie ander doen dit as gevolg van die stappe van ander en
leuens wat versprei word. Nóg ander is daar weens ongegronde vrese. Wat ook
al die rede, die mense vorm steeds nie deel van ’n geïntegreerde Suid-
Afrika nie. Ek wil my vandag tot hierdie groep wend.

Op 1 Maart het hierdie mense die geleentheid om hulle vir eens en altyd te
bevry van die kettings van die verlede en deel te word van en te deel in
die suksesse van ’n demokratiese Suid-Afrika. Moenie toelaat dat julle
langer aan die neus rondgelei word nie. Kyk klinies na die feite en vorm ’n
oordeel gebaseer, nie op emosie nie, maar op werklikhede. Vra die nodige
vrae wanneer iets aan jou voorgehou word en oordeel dan volgens die feite
waar jy jou stem gaan uitbring. Die tyd het aangebreek om vir jouself te
definieer - nie volgens die verlede nie, maar volgens die hede en die
toekoms - die rol wat jy kies om te speel in ’n vrye, demokratiese Suid-
Afrika. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Each of us stands firmly in the era of hope, but what each of us is going
to do with this opportunity remains our individual choice. The vast
majority of South Africans, regardless of race, have already indicated by
word and deed that they are working together with enthusiasm and diligence
in order to determine our shared history.

There are, however, still small groups who relegate themselves to being
outsiders and who, for limited emotional reasons, do not participate
enthusiastically in the new opportunities that arise and that the democracy
and development of our country offer us. We find these small groups
throughout the country, but especially also in the Western Cape.

Many people who find themselves part of these small groups do so by their
own choice. Many others do it as a result of the actions of others and lies
that are spread. Still others are there as a result of unfounded fears.
Whatever the reason, these people still do not form part of an integrated
South Africa. I want to address myself to this group today.

On 1 March these people have the opportunity to free themselves once and
for all from the shackles of the past and become part of and share in the
successes of a democratic South Africa. Do not allow yourselves to be led
by the nose any longer. Look at the facts in a clinical way and form an
opinion based not on emotion, but on the realities. Ask the necessary
questions when something is put to you, and then judge, according to the
facts, for whom you are going to vote. The time has come for you to define
for yourself - not according to the past, but according to the present and
the future - the role you choose to play in a free, democratic South
Africa.]

The ANC is a nonracial organisation. For any organisation to brand the ANC
as racist is for that organisation to expose itself as one that lacks
policy and direction. [Applause.] A party that focuses on the upliftment of
the poor and the improvement of the lives of all, even those who are
privileged, cannot be seen as racist. To have policies in place such as
broad-based black economic empowerment cannot be seen as being racist.

What the ANC does is to deal with the reality of our country, it’s history
and our people. Broad-based black economic empowerment is necessary to
level the playing fields economically, as well as socially. What we have in
South Africa . . . [Interjections.] If you listen you might learn. What we
have in South Africa is a situation that can be compared to a marathon. A
certain group of people were only allowed to join the race when it was
already halfway under way. We now need measures that can allow them to make
up for lost time and lost ground.

That is in essence what broad-based black economic empowerment sets out to
achieve. Not only is it the policy of the ANC, but it is a requirement of
the very Constitution that mr Delport came to defend here in the Bill of
Rights, where it ensures equality for all.

In this House we all share a responsibility to assist the people who
elected us to serve them, to ensure that they know about and are able to
access the many programmes that have been put in place by the ANC
government to improve their lives. The housing policy does not
differentiate between races, but has only the economic status of the
beneficiary as a national departing criterion; so too have social grant
programmes and free basic services.

Too often in our work with the electorate we come across people who have
been told by people serving in this House that government programmes are
only there to benefit a specific racial group.

Maybe the time has arrived for the presiding officers to look into the
possibility of members of Parliament not only reporting back to their
political parties regarding the work that they have done during
constituency periods, but maybe Parliament should also develop a mechanism
of reporting to Parliament itself what it is that we as representatives
have done to ensure that government programmes are brought to the attention
of the people and that they are assisted to access those programmes.
[Applause.] It is, after all, through money provided by Parliament that we
are enabled to open constituency offices throughout the country.

While playing the race card may earn a policy-deprived political party
cheap political points in the short term, it is dangerous and irresponsible
in the long term. No responsible public representative can be seen to
encourage a group of one race to act against a group of another race,
moving into an area like we have seen happening in Bokmakierie in Cape
Town.

This morning we also saw newspaper reports of a radio advertisement that
clearly incites racial tension, aimed at a certain sector of the working
class, telling them that they are not African enough to benefit from the
ANC government. [Interjections.] The listeners to the station called in and
complained that the advertisement was inciting racial tension.
[Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: [Inaudible.]

Ms A VAN WYK: Despite this the DA defends it and continues with it. The
working class and the poor are not as gullible as the DA wants to believe.
They know what was done for them and by whom. They know because they see it
in the improvement of services that are delivered to them. They know that
the ANC has ended the deliberate underfunding of disadvantaged areas and
now . . . [Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: The
hon Minister of Finance said, “Tony Leon is a racist”. I maintain that that
is unparliamentary and he should be instructed to withdraw that comment.

The SPEAKER: Hon Manuel, did you say that? If you did, I’d like you to
withdraw.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: No, the ad that the hon member is referring to
uses the voice of the hon leader of the DA, and the ad is fundamentally
racist! It is the most offensive ad I’ve ever heard. It is a racist ad by
the leader of a racist party! What am I to do; ignore the fact that the ad
is on the radio? I’m sorry, Madam Speaker.

The SPEAKER: Hon Manuel, did you call the hon Leon a racist? If you did and
you did it here in the House, I’d like you to withdraw it, because it is .
. . [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: I said it was the racism of Tony Leon. I didn’t
call him a racist. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I will actually go and look at the Hansard to see
what the hon Minister said, and then I will take it forward.

Ms A VAN WYK: They know that the ANC has ended the deliberate underfunding
of disadvantaged areas and now has a propoor policy in place.

They know that you cannot be serious about representing the poor when you
have the same candidates standing in four or five wards. They will choose
to become an integral part of the age of hope and turn their back on those
who want to exploit them in the crudest and most deplorable way. In the
words of Abraham Heschel –

  Racism is man’s gravest threat to man – the maximum of hatred for a
  minimum of reason.

The elections on 1 March will long be over, the councillors in their
positions, hon Zille back in this House, but if race has been the rallying
point to gain support, the dangers and feelings that it provokes will still
remain on the ground, leaving a volatile situation. The City of Cape Town
starkly contrasts the divides that still exist in our country. While a lot
has been achieved in the short time in which the ANC has governed the
province and the city, a lot still remains to be done. Many people living
and working in Cape Town still feel like visitors in their own city. In
this regard policies of the past such as the approval of R3 million in 2002
by the DA for the building of a Berlin-type wall between the white and
black residents . . . [Time expired.]

Dr G G WOODS: Madam Speaker, hon President, colleagues, while the
President’s speech engaged many of the more important issues facing the
country, we found its scope somewhat limited; in broad terms, this was
dominated by aspects of economic policy. The state of the nation, in our
opinion, however, also concerns the political and social state of affairs
of the country.

In the South African reality these two are areas of dramatic transformation
and are areas that are significantly influenced by government policy. For
example, we would have wished to learn of the President’s thoughts on the
democratic health of the nation and, as importantly, we would have been
interested in his views on the evolving postapartheid society and how
government is trying to facilitate a more unified nation. We see the
progress that has been made towards social integration over the past 12
years as quite exceptional against the world experience, and would have
been encouraged to hear that the President also sees it in the same way.

Even when focusing his speech on the economy the President narrowed it by
limiting his terms of reference to the more formal, urban-based economy. I
think this highlights government’s ongoing weakness regarding rural
development, and this is the area in which Nadeco would like to make some
specific comments this afternoon.

This fact that over 40% of South Africans live in rural areas, where
poverty and unemployment are considerably worse than in the urban areas,
therefore requires greater policy attention. It is where most of the so-
called second economy exists. It is where Gallup and Markinor pollsters
don’t go when surveying public opinion. It is where worsening poverty and
growing basic needs problems therefore often go unnoticed.

Would it be unfair to deduce from the President’s speech that the rural
economy is somewhat incidental to government’s bigger scheme of policy
themes and that in the main it is to rely on the trickle-down or
redistributive effort flowing from a growing mainstream economy? If this is
the case it would indicate a disturbingly lopsided approach to the
realisation of government’s developmental state. If anything, government
initiative and leadership should, in Nadeco’s opinion, prioritise the
shortcomings in the rural quality of life.

And so we would have wished to hear the President speak on the rural
predicaments that have grown over the past decade and, with that, we wish
to hear him give more specific attention to government action in this
regard. In fact, given the seriousness of the rural situation, we would
wish for more than specific policies; we would wish for a well-strategised
and comprehensive rural development plan. A plan, which, amongst other
things, tries to address questions such as what should be done to get more
fixed investment into rural areas; in other words, what must be done to
make such an investment a viable proposition for the investors.

Clearly, municipal infrastructure plans, private-public partnerships,
Expanded Public Works Programmes, and spatial development initiatives, in
themselves, do not go nearly far enough and are not likely, in themselves,
to coax private-sector investment to follow. And then the question: What is
being done to develop and retain the relevant economic-related skills in
the rural areas? Of course, we appreciate the difficulty of keeping sought-
after skills in the rural areas when there is a shortage of the same skills
in the cities.

Support for emerging farmers is welcomed. There is sufficient evidence to
suggest that it is not an industrial area or one where a major growth
potential exists. For the same reason, land reform, while necessary, is not
a significant part of the answer. Housing developments near rural towns,
like the Expanded Public Works Programmes, bring only passing income
opportunities and for relatively few, and therefore are not likely to
stimulate meaningful rural economic activity. Then, of course, there is the
problem of unemployed people being unable to meet the financial commitments
that come with owning these houses.

So, it is not that we do not acknowledge the government initiatives that
there are; it is that we see these as too few, too narrow and too
incremental, given the nature and the magnitude of the rural developmental
problems.

In addition to the weaknesses of the rural economy, as has been raised by
other speakers, there are also issues surrounding poor delivery of social
services to these communities. Here, however, in areas such as health,
education and grant distributions, we are happy to acknowledge the renewed
efforts of government and, indeed, to acknowledge improvements that are now
being achieved in such areas of service delivery. We are also pleased to
see the wide-ranging interventions at various levels of government intended
to bring new levels of competence and efficiency into the municipalities.

While expressing our reservations about government’s rural development
policies and approaches we, like most other parties, appreciate your state
of the nation address, both in substance and style, and we share your
optimism regarding the country’s overall economy. We feel that Asgisa has
its finger on most of the critical pulses, and that the soon-to-be-reached
6% growth will be well earned through the policy approach of your
government. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J P CRONIN: Madam Speaker, Comrades, President and Deputy President,
Comrade President, as you noted in your address to us on Friday, there has
been economic growth averaging some 3% per year since 1994.

This sustained growth and the current high levels of business and consumer
confidence present us with an ideal platform from which to confidently
define for ourselves what it is we want to make of our shared destiny.
There are real opportunities, but also challenges. The present growth is
not necessarily sustainable. No one can be sure just for how long the
international commodity prices will remain buoyant. The domestic demand-led
growth is based on burgeoning credit and it also draws in imports.
Shadowing all of this, there is deep-seated poverty and high levels of
unemployment.

As Parliament, as government and as South Africans, as we take stock of the
positive opportunities and challenges of our situation, we should remind
ourselves, I think, that there have been other periods of growth in our
country.

In the last quarter of the 19th century and into the first decades of the
20th century, South Africa, or at least what was to become South Africa,
experienced massive and accelerated growth. There was a mining revolution,
booming growth, infrastructural investment in cutting-edge technology for
deep-level mining, and massive logistic infrastructure investments in rail
lines and port expansion.

Constraints were swept aside. Among them was the lingering existence of
some still unconquered independent African societies and two Boer republics
that had been solemnly recognised by Britain in the 1850s. Colonial
conquest and the Anglo-Boer War quickly removed these constraints within a
matter of decades.

Then there was the matter of the labour market, and its so-called
constraints. The labour market was deemed to be “insufficiently flexible”.
Defeated African societies still had access to some land and to some
livestock, and were reluctant to abandon themselves to the tender mercies
of a cash-based labour market. The poll tax, for instance, that was imposed
in Natal, and which resulted in the Bambata Rebellion, whose centenary we
marked this year, was informed of course by an inhumane and racist colonial
ideology.

But it also had a perfectly logical, level-headed, market-based rationality
about it. Accelerated growth, driven by the mining sector, could not be
sustained unless the constraint of a large pool of potential labourers
remained outside of a money economy, and that had to be forcibly ended from
the perspective of that particular kind of growth.

There have also been other periods of economic growth. There is a tendency
these days to remember apartheid as if it were simply a market distortion.
True, in its last decade, apartheid was indeed experienced by big capital
as a hindrance to profitability and as a source of instability. But, in the
granite years of apartheid, between 1963 and 1972, there was nearly a
decade of sustained growth, and it reached 6% and 8% on average between
those years.

After the Sharpeville massacre, business confidence plummeted. The
decolonising winds of change seemed to be blowing through our continent,
and the days of white minority rule seemed numbered. There was a
significant outflow of capital between 1960 and 1962, but as the apartheid
regime responded with increased brutality and the liberation movement
suffered a major strategic defeat with its leadership killed, imprisoned or
exiled, lo and behold, business confidence revived.

A key turning point came when the Anglo-American Corporation persuaded the
US company, Engelhard, in the face of calls for sanctions, to make a major
investment in Anglo itself. Anglo-American also practically gave away the
General Mining and Finance Corporation, later known as Gencor, to emerging
Afrikaner capital, the better to integrate the agenda of big mining capital
with the political elite of that day.

For nearly a decade, in the midst of these granite years of apartheid, an
exceptionally investor-friendly climate was created. British capital
averaged annual returns of 11% to 12%, considerably better than anywhere
else in the world.

I make these points to underline the fact that where there is growth, you
can be sure that somebody is benefiting. But growth in itself is not
necessarily a benefit to all. How we assess growth, and what we identify as
constraints to that growth, are not class or race or ideologically neutral
realities.

As we take forward our own contribution here in Parliament to the
Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa, we will need to
be very clear about this. There will be a tendency, from some quarters, to
interpret the initiative as being almost entirely about accelerated growth,
with the word “Shared” disappearing or being relegated to a second
movement, a trickle-down consequence of somebody else’s growth somewhere
else.

The Asgisa that is being driven by our Deputy President, and that was
outlined by you, President, in your address to us on Friday, is, I believe,
a qualitatively different kind of growth. It is a growth process that will
have to be inherently systemically shared. If we fail to do this, we risk
history repeating itself.

Earlier growth periods, like the golden years of apartheid, saw wealth
accumulated, power realities consolidated and the syndrome of growth of a
first economy and simultaneous deepening underdevelopment of a second
economy further entrenched.

Those realities are still with us today, and it would be naive to believe
that simply removing racism from the Statute Book and leaving the rest to
the market would overcome these systemic realities. In this context, we in
the ANC welcome government’s commitment to review, for instance, the
willing-seller, willing-buyer approach to land reform. Such a review does
not herald an imminent and anarchic land seizure. A sustainable agrarian
reform that is capable of sharing growth and of helping to halve poverty
and unemployment by 2014 is not going to be delivered by anarchic land
seizures, or by the untrammelled market forces.

Comrade President, in your address to us on Friday you said, “The years of
freedom have been very good for business.” You went on to say:

I believe that this should have convinced the investor community by now
that, in its own interest and as part of the national effort, it has to
invest in the expansion of that freedom.

I have read that verbatim, but admit, with a different intonation and
emphasis to the way in which the original was delivered. I don’t have to be
presidential! [Laughter.]

Clearly and quite correctly, Asgisa requires that government should work
constructively with all of its social partners, including business.
Clearly, we must address the bottlenecks in our export/import freight
logistics system, for instance. We must help to lower the cost of doing
business, for yes, big business. But we must never forget that for the
poor, logistics infrastructure is a rural road, or a pedestrian-friendly
pavement or reliable and affordable public transport.

If we are to prevent the “Shared” in Asgisa from being marginalised, we
will need to address both dimensions equally. This will require a
determined, active and developmental state. It will also require very
active support from Parliament, hopefully from all parties, but certainly
from those of us in the majority party.

In particular, as parliamentarians and as public – not corporate –
representatives, we will need to be supportive of and vigilant about those
elements that have the capacity to begin to shift our growth path out of
where the late 19th century mining revolution has left us - out of a growth
trajectory that tends to be excessively primary commodity export-oriented
and import-dependent; that constrains our national market by marginalising
millions of our people into poverty; that fails to develop skills and that,
in more recent decades, has become excessively capital intensive and labour
shedding; and that reproduces acute social, economic and spatial
polarisation locally, nationally and even throughout sub-Saharan Africa.

The key elements of Asgisa that work against the grain of a century and a
quarter of habit, of short-term profit-taking for the few, include: a major
focus on skills development, not least the commitment to use our state-
owned enterprises to train tens of thousands of new artisans; a key focus
on local economic development, ensuring the use of labour-intensive methods
in infrastructure construction wherever is possible; support for co-
operatives and micro businesses, ensuring that they can access capital and
markets for sustainable livelihoods and communities; ensuring that the
financial sector commits to social investment, and that there is no more
foot-dragging, as there seemingly is, with the R42 billion pledged for
housing at the financial sector summit.

As we approach our work in committees and constituencies, as MPs, I
believe, we need to pay particular attention to these and other
transformational elements embedded in Asgisa. In line with the Freedom
Charter vision that the wealth shall be shared, in line with the RDP vision
that growth and development have to be inextricably linked, let’s keep the
fist “S” in Asgisa firmly on the agenda. There is no other sustainable
route to accelerated growth in our South African reality. [Applause.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker, President and hon members, there is every
truth in the adage, “If wishes were horses, beggars would ride”. When one
listens to any state of the nation address, the government of the day puts
across its wish list through such a vehicle.

The speech is delivered because it has to be. In other instances, it is
delivered with the full knowledge that human and financial resources may
not be sufficient, while in other instances it is done to set the pace to
be followed by the country.

In our case, we know the greatest constraint may be human resources. That
is why the government is looking to the East for people to come to our aid.
We hope the register of skilled yet unemployed graduates will remain open
to be updated from time to time. The retention of people in the Public
Service simply because they have been involved in the struggle against
apartheid, at one time or another, has to be reviewed. Only productive
people should be kept in government.

We have noted that the Public Service is set to burgeon with the
incorporation of those in municipal service. The UCDP has always maintained
that we should keep a lean, mean Public Service that will respond promptly
to the needs of the people. There is inadequate service delivery because
most public servants, contrary to sections 30 and 36 of the Public Service
Act of 1994, are more politicians than state employees. This has to be
discontinued, as no one can be a referee and a player at the same time. It
is contrary to the Constitution, which demands that public servants should
serve the public without fear, favour or prejudice. Then we can speak of
Batho Pele.

A reflection on the wishes that were spelled out from this podium two years
ago amidst great excitement such as the Transnet investments in Durban and
Cape Town harbours, the launch of the national Social Security Agency and a
pledge to expand the number of police areas for focused multidisciplinary
interventions have yet to see the light of day.

The country has been led into yet another ambitious programme, named the
Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa, which seeks to
take us to our economic Canaan and get us out of the grinding bondage of
poverty. We take the point, and our word of advice is that the government
should not fear to take unpopular decisions, even when it comes to ridding
itself of deadwood that stalls service delivery.

Service delivery will be compromised by the unhealthy chemistry within
government or state departments. The contradictory statements by members of
the North West executive council on the question of the department of
agriculture in that province will do great harm to all the intended good
work. What becomes even scarier is the situation that is playing itself out
between the SA Police Service and the National Prosecuting Authority around
the question of witness protection. The results are too ghastly to
contemplate if the situation is not harnessed in time.

The controversy flies in the face of the President’s address to the effect
that aggressive measures have to be taken with regard to the criminal
justice system to improve the safety and security of our people. The
improvement, we hope, will result in policing areas serving the people in
their locality. People nearer the Nietverdien police station should not
have their cases investigated by officers at Motswedi, while Braklaagte
people have to drive through Zeerust for their cases to be heard at
Welbedacht. There is no doubt that if this situation at these places, and
elsewhere where it still occurs, can be set right, people will really go
out and break into singing and clap their hands.

The dream that there will soon be no classes under trees will remain an
inaccessible mirage for as long as the Departments of Public Works and
Education do not sing the same song from the same score.

Grinding poverty and lack of infrastructure in the rural areas, as
articulated by the first lady and the ANC Deputy President, Jacob Zuma,
will remain with us despite the billions of rands being bandied about if
people are not prepared to work hard. Only hard work will make us prosper
as a nation, and thus make Asgisa a success.
Incompetence and ineptitude in some government departments that should
provide the basis for Asgisa have to be faced squarely and phased out. The
Expanded Public Works Programme has to be invigorated to offer employment
to people in townships such as Braam Fischer and Tshepisong in Gauteng,
Khuma and the sprawling informal settlements in Potchefstroom and
Klerksdorp where people go to bed without anything to eat. The less said
about the rural areas, the better, as they are the worst hit by
deprivation. This is despite what the statistics say about the age of hope.
For some people, they seem to be reliving Charles Dickens’ times, and
characterise this age as one of despair, incredulity and the worst of
times.

It has to be borne in mind that there are two sides to every story, and
this is the picture we depict: Amidst splendour in some areas, there are
expanses of shortages and hunger which will cause people to have no peace,
and not break into singing and clapping their hands.

We have noted the veiled threat in an open letter by one Willie Marais,
leader of some fringe right-wing party, the Herstigte Nasionale Party, to
the effect that they do not recognise the democratically elected government
of this country. We in the UCDP dare them to jump into the nearest sea.
Until they stand for elections, they should not hope to have control of any
centimetre of this country.

The UCDP looks forward to the celebration of Codesa, because we are one of
the parties that played midwife on the occasion of the birth of the child
called democracy. It is fitting that the portrait of the UCDP leader and
his negotiating team at the time is one of only three that adorn the walls
of this Parliament.

We may differ in our outlook to life, and the extent to which the glass is
half full or half empty, but all we know is that we shall prosper, the Lord
being our helper. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms M M SOTYU: Mofumahadi Spikara, Ntate Mfundisi, ke tla kopa hore o ke o
tsamaye dikopano tsa dikomiti tsa Polokeho le Tshireletso, e le hore o tle
o tsebe phapang pakeng tsa Puo ya Setjhaba le vouto ya bajete. Le hore o
tle o tsebe hore Thaba Nchu, mane moo Ntate Mangope a neng a laola teng, re
ntse re lwantshana le manyofonyofo a phepelo ya ditshebeletso ka hara Thaba
Nchu. Ho thata hore re sebetse. [Ditlatse.] (Translation of Sesotho
paragraph follows.)

[Ms M M SOTYU: Mr Mfundisi, I would like to request you to attend meetings
of the safety and security committee, in order for you to know the
difference between the state of the nation and the Budget Vote. Then you
can also know that in Thaba Nchu, where Mr Mangope once governed, we are
still struggling with the effects of corruption in service delivery. This
makes it difficult for us to work.]

Hon President and members of Parliament, the ANC in its Ready to Govern
document stated, and I quote:

   Underdevelopment, poverty and abuse of human rights are regarded as grave
   threats to the security of people since they give rise to conflict
   between individuals, communities and countries. They threaten security of
   the state as well.


Because of the above statement, our response to the challenges of poverty
and underdevelopment that the President spoke about should be understood
within the context of promoting security, peace and stability in our
country and beyond.

Even before the 1994 democratic breakthrough, we stated in the Ready to
Govern document that the ANC believes that national and regional security
should not be restricted to military, police and intelligence matters but
should reflect political, economic and environmental dimensions.

In giving effect to the people’s contract, the ANC will continue to
mobilise all our communities in the fight against crime. It will also work
to strengthen our community policing forums and give support to our law-
enforcement agencies. The President indicated that we needed to strengthen
our intelligence structures. This is necessary to provide security for our
state and its people.

The ANC Stellenbosch conference unequivocally expressed a decisive view
that the elimination of poverty and unemployment and an improvement in
living standards will ultimately minimise crime, especially amongst the
youth.

While the current overcrowding in South African prisons cannot be viewed as
a creation of our democratic state but as a product of the apartheid past,
our government continues to seek solutions to the problems of overcrowding,
which compromises the human dignity of the inmates. Therefore the building
of four additional correctional facilities and the reduction of the number
of children in custody that the President announced purport to address
overcrowding in our prisons.

Former President Mandela, when he opened Emthonjeni Youth Centre in 1998,
had this to say, and I quote:


   Offenders are human beings too. They are our brothers and sisters, our
   sons and daughters who have disappointed us.


Hence our treatment of the prison population must be based on our
Constitution. The ANC seeks to give effect to the resolutions of the
Stellenbosch conference, where our democratic movement resolved to
intensify campaigns at all levels to reduce crime, especially the
proliferation of illegal firearms, drugs, corruption and fraudulent
activities, the abuse of women and children and the elderly; as well as to
focus on implementing social crime-prevention measures.

The commitment made by the President on the need to speed up the processing
of firearm licences and reduce drug trafficking is a bold step forward in
our ongoing fight against serious crimes. Because of the endemic criminal
activity and corruption, which continue to undermine our constitutional
democracy, President Mbeki also made reference to the critical challenge of
further improving our criminal justice system and the processing of
legislation concerning the rationalisation of our courts. This is in line
with the Mafikeng conference resolution wherein our movement resolved to
rationalise the High Court system in our country so as to promote access to
justice for all and to provide a High Court in each province.

With regard to continental and international issues, our democratic
movement believes that South Africa’s peace and stability within its own
borders can be threatened by instability on the continent. Our commitment
to Africa is to ensure that there is peace and democracy in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, Côte d’Ivoire and Sudan. This includes our intervention
in international conflicts relating to Israel and Palestine, and Iran. As
we heard, the opposition does not care about Palestine and Israel; their
concern is Zimbabwe only.

The Freedom Charter requires South Africa to strive to maintain world peace
and to settle all international disputes by negotiations. Therefore our
quest for a better Africa and a better world derives from the
internationalist tradition of our democratic movement, hence our commitment
to the pursuit of negotiated agreements.

We welcome the emphasis on increasing our conviction rates to strengthen
the message that crime does not pay, as stated by the President.

Urhulumente okhokelwa yi-ANC ngurhulumente wabantu ngabantu. Ndiza kuthanda
ukubhengeza kuluntu luphela ukuba masibhinqele phezulu, silwe olu lwaphulo-
mthetho. Amazwe onke ajonge kuthi ngokubhekisele kukhuseleko lwabemi bawo
njengoko silungiselela ukusingatha ukhuphiswano lweNdebe yeHlabathi
kwiBhola ekhatywayo ngonyaka ka-2010.

Siyakubulela, Dlamini, ngendima oyidlalayo ukumisela uxolo kumazwe
angaphandle, ngakumbi lawo simelene nawo. Masiyeke ukuthi singabemi
boMzantsi Afrika sihambe sizibiza ngokuba siliqela eliphikisayo, sihamba
sichaza ukuba ilizwe lethu linobundlobongela kuba sifuna ukugxotha abantu
abazisa utyalo-mali eMzantsi Afrika. Ndiyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The ANC-led Government is the government for all. I would like to appeal
to everyone that we should pull up our socks in the fight against crime.
All nations are looking at us concerning the safety of their citizens as we
make preparations to host the Soccer World Cup in 2010.

We thank you, Dlamini, for the role you played in bringing about peace in
other countries, especially our neighbouring states. As South African
citizens, let us stop calling ourselves the opposition party, telling the
world that crime is rife in our country because we want to chase potential
investors away from South Africa. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Madam Speaker, hon members, your Excellency the
President, Madam Deputy President, before I say anything further I wish to
remind the hon Ben Turok that he was directly involved in the
collectivisation of agriculture in Tanzania, which led to that country
becoming the poorest country in the world. He is thus personally an
accomplice in impoverishing hundreds of thousands of people in Africa. They
probably do not find him so funny.

Now, for some serious business, Mr President . . . [Interjections.] Mamela!
Thula! [Keep quite and listen!] You deserve that treatment, because that is
how you treat us. If you listen, you learn.
South Africa will never be able to roll back the frontiers of poverty and
underdevelopment as long as corruption continues to pervade our society.
Corruption enriches the few at the expense of many, and corrodes the proper
functioning of our public and private institutions.

Therefore, Mr President, it is heartening that you have committed your
government to rooting out this cancer from our society. However, in order
for this commitment to become reality there is a desperate need for
government to take swift and decisive action against those who engage in
corrupt activities.

It is in this context of matching words with deeds that the government is
failing dismally. Any commitment given to fighting corruption will remain
empty rhetoric as long as those guilty of corrupt activities go unpunished.
Furthermore, any commitment to fighting corruption must be measured against
the litany of examples showing that the ANC tends to protect its own at all
costs.

Why have only 21 MPs been prosecuted in the Travelgate scam? What about the
100 who still sit in this House? Mr President, you yourself have
acknowledged that, and I quote:

The ranks of our movement are being corrupted by a self-seeking spirit that
leads some among us to view membership of our organisation as a stepping
stone to accessing state power, which they would use corruptly to plunder
the people’s resources for their personal benefit.
Therefore, Mr President, if the ANC is serious about fighting corruption,
it should remove from its election list in the Ugu District Municipality
the disgraced former MP Ruth Ntshulana-Bengu, who pleaded guilty to her
role in the Travelgate scandal, because if elected, she will again be in
charge of taxpayers’ money.

Through her previous conduct she has shown herself to be wholly unsuitable
for such a responsibility. If the government is serious about fighting
corruption, then it should slay the ghost of Oilgate once and for all. For
the government to see nothing wrong with the ANC pocketing what is
effectively R11 million worth of taxpayers’ money illustrates a moral
bankruptcy of the worst kind.

If the government were serious about fighting corruption, then it would not
drag its feet in response to the Oil-for-food scandal. It has now been 13
weeks since the release of the UN report on the matter and the government
has yet to indicate what steps it is going to take to deal with the various
serious allegations of wrongdoing contained in that UN report.

There are still a number of outstanding questions surrounding the ill-fated
arms deal, and in particular the role you played in this regard. This is
because of the unsatisfactory answer you gave, with all due respect, with
regard to whether you attended a meeting in secret in Paris in December
1998, during a critically sensitive stage of the arms procurement process.
As long as such questions remain unanswered about this incident, then the
entire fight against corruption will be undermined. It is time that this
government showed that it is in touch with the needs of the people of South
Africa. It is an indictment that the Deputy President can spend over R700
000 worth of taxpayers’ money on a private holiday and then wish it away as
merely a drop in the ocean. I mean, how many books could you not have
bought for some poor students at school.

The fight against corruption and abuse of state resources at the top is
unacceptable and therefore there is an urgent need for you, sir, and Madam
Deputy President, to set the right example and to send out a message that
the ANC government is prepared to fight corruption even when it is not
politically expedient for it to do so. I thank you. [Applause.]

Adv S P HOLOMISA: Mhlalingaphambili, uya kundixolela andikwazi ukuxoxa
nenkcenkce ekhenkcezayo njengeli lungu lisuka apha, kuba imbongi yesizwe,
uMqhayi waseNtabozuko, yayitshilo ukuba: “Abakhalazayo abazange baphela.
Abakrokrayo basazalwa nanamhla oku. Bathe nqo ngezisu; bathe ga
ngemisimelelo. Abayazi into abayenzayo.” Thina ke ‘nto zaziyo apha kwi-ANC,
ithambo lenyoka elihlaba abayizondayo, asothuki xa sidibana nabanjalo.

Liyinyaniso, nje ngamanye amaninzi, ilizwi elithethwe nguMongameli, iZizi
elimnyama neenkomo zalo, elithi “namhlanje kungcono kunayizolo.” Kanti ke
siqinisekile ukuba ngomso kuza kuba ngcono kunanamhlanje.

Le nyaniso ingqinwa ngabo bonke abaqiqayo, abasixhasayo nabangasixhasiyo,
abo sele bexhamle kwiziqhabo zenkululeko; kanti nabo bangekaxhamli kuzo.
Bayazi ukuba isixeko saseRoma asizange sakhiwe ngosuku.

Ndiwenza la mazwi ndiphuma, kwaye ndibhekise kwiphondo leMpuma Koloni,
elidume ngendlala nentswela ngenxa yokuphathwa kwalo kakubi ngexesha
lengcinezelo. Nam nditsho ndithi namhlanje kungcono kunayizolo; kanti ke
ngomso kuza kuba ngcono kunanamhlanje, kanye ngoku ndaziyo ukuba base
baninzi abantu abaswele imisebenzi. Mininzi imizi engekabi nawo umbane,
engakabi nawo amanzi aphuma empompeni; zaye zininzi neelali ezineendlela
ezihambeka nzima.

Nditsho ndisazi ukuba zisezininzi izikolo ezakhiwe ngezitena zodaka,
zafulelwa ngengca. Nditsho kuba ngale nkululeko siyixhamlayo, yonk’ imizi
iyaqhumis’ eziko ngeemali zezibonelelo zikarhulumente. Mininzi imizi esele
inayo imibane, kanti zininzi iilali ezinamanzi aphuma empompeni. Zikwaninzi
neelali ezineendlela ezityeneneziweyo. Zingamakhulu-khulu izikolo ezakhiwe
kule minyaka yenkululeko ezikumgangatho wala maxesha. Kwabo bangekabi nazo
ezi mpawu zokuxhanyulwa kwenkululeko, ithemba likhulu lokuba ngomso kuza
kuba ngcono. [Kwaqhwatywa.]

Nditsho kamnandi kuba isizwe sakowethu, samaHegebe, sinexhala lokuba kazi
baza kuwafumana phi na abantu amatanki okugcina umbona wesivuno salo nyaka.
Kaloku iSebe lezoLimo, lihlangene norhulumente wela phondo,
lilizalisekisile iphupha labo ngokuthi xa kuqala ukulinywa kulo nyaka
uphelileyo lisiphe okwentonga yomnquma iiteletele ezine, inye ihamba
namakhuba, isikofolo, izicoli-magada, isixhobo sokutyala, kunye nesikhotshi
sayo. Ezi zixhobo zolimo phofu zongeza kwiiteletele ezimbini nezixhobo zazo
esasikwaziphiwe yiBhanki yoPhuhliso yoMzantsi Afrika.

Sinombulelo. Izicwangciso zorhulumente wela phondo kungoku nje
kukusebenzela ukuba kungabikho xesha apha enyakeni apho amasimi aza kulala,
kube kungekho nto ilinyiweyo okanye evunwayo kuwo.

Eli phulo liza kwenziwa ngokuthi onke amasimi abiyelwe ngocingo. Lawo ami
phezu kwemilambo aza kufakelwa izixhobo zonkcenkcesho, khon’ ukuze
nangexesha lembalela kusebenzeke. Kanti ke kolunye uhlangothi oomasipala
bezithili, ngakumbi abaseMathole nase O R Tambo, nabo bamaxhaphetsu,
bahambela phezulu bencedisa abantu ngolimo.

Izikimu zonkcenkcesho ebezikhe zahleleleka ngenxa yomoya wenguqu
ziyavuselelwa. Amasimi eepayinapile ayalinywa kwakhona. Kunyaka ophelileyo
uMasipala weSithili saseMathole unikezele ngeeteletele ezingama-51 kunye
nezixhobo zazo kwiilali ngeelali, evuselela ulimo. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
Kwisithuba esingangeenyanga ezintathu uluntu olo lubonelelwe ngedizili
nangezixhobo zokulungisa iiteletele ezo, kanti ngaphezulu banikwe imbewu
nezichumiso ukuze bakwazi ukuqalisa ukulima. Kulo uphezulu unyaka e-O R
Tambo naseMathole isebe lezolimo laseMpuma Koloni liza kunikezela ngama-27
eeteletele nezixhobo zazo kumakomkhulu ukuze zisebenzele uluntu.
[Kwaqhwatywa.]

Kwicala lemfuyo, iigusha, iibhokhwe neenkomo zohlobo nazo ziyaphuhliswa,
kanti neembongolo ziyasetyenziswa ukuncedisa ekulimeni kwiindawo
ezingamageduka. Xa bencediswa ngolu hlobo ke abantu bakuthi bangangangqini
njani ukuba namhlanje kungcono kunayizolo kwaye baqiniseke ukuba ngomso
kuza kuba ngcono kunanamhlanje? [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[Adv S P HOLOMISA: Chairperson, I would like to ask you to pardon me for I
am unable to engage with empty vessels such as the hon member who just
spoke. Mqhayi of Ntabozuko, the national poet, said that those who complain
never stop. Sceptics are born every day. Their bellies are extended. They
do not have a purpose in life. In the ANC, those of us who know are not
surprised, for the bone of a snake pricks the one you hate.

What was said by the hon President, son of the amaZizi clan, that today is
better than yesterday, is true. We are also certain that tomorrow will be
even better.

This is a fact supported by everybody who can use their brains, those who
support us, those who are our opposition, those who have benefited from the
fruits of our freedom and those who are yet to benefit from the fruits of
our freedom. They know that Rome was not built in a day.

I am on my way to the Eastern Cape, a province well known for its poverty
status because it experienced severe maladministration during the apartheid
years; and I hail from there. I agree that today is better than yesterday,
and tomorrow will be even better, and that view I maintain even though
there may be quite a lot of people who are unemployed. Many households do
not have access to free basic water yet, and it is difficult to get to
certain areas because of the poor road infrastructure.

I know that there are still a number of a mud schools with thatched roofs.
I also know that all houses have been electrified and many households are
now able to feed themselves because of the grants that the government
provides. Many rural areas have access to clean, potable water. Roads in
some areas have also been constructed. Hundreds of schools of a very high
standard have been built in the past few years in the new dispensation.
Those who have not yet benefited from these developmental processes will
soon do so. [Applause.]

This I say with pride because some people among Hegebe clan are already
concerned about where we shall keep this year’s harvest. The Department of
Agriculture and Land Affairs presented us with four tractors accompanied by
all the equipment necessary for working the soil. They are additional to
the two tractors that the Development Bank of South Africa donated to us a
while ago.

We are grateful. The provincial government is working hard to ensure that
fields are utilised maximally throughout the year.

Ploughing fields will be fenced through this programme. Irrigation
equipment will be installed in those fields that are situated on riverbanks
for easy access to water should there be drought. District municipalities,
especially the Mathole and OR Tambo District Municipalities, continually
assist people in their farming activities.

Irrigation schemes have been underfunded, and are now being revitalised and
rehabilitated. Pineapple fields are being ploughed for commercial farming
again. Last year the Mathole District Municipality sponsored several
villages with 51 tractors, thereby revitalising farming. [Applause.]

In a period of three months, communities have been provided with diesel and
maintenance material and equipment for the sponsored tractors, on top of
the seeds and fertilisers, in order that they can begin to cultivate the
land. During the current year the Department of Agriculture and Land
Affairs in the OR Tambo and Mathole District Municipalities will hand over
27 tractors and the necessary equipment to the House of Traditional Leaders
for use by community members. [Applause.]

Sheep, goat and cattle farming are being encouraged and donkeys are used
extensively to assist in areas where there is no infrastructure. How could
our people not attest to the fact that things are better than yesterday
when support is being offered to them in this manner? [Applause.]]

“Freedom has been good for business”, utshilo uMongameli. [. . . so said
the President.] You could say almost too good, if you consider the fact
that the greatest bulk of the economy is still in the hands of a small
minority.

The means of production as well as the wealth so created must be shared by
the people of our land. It is for this reason that the poor and the
landless are overjoyed to learn that their voice has been heard regarding
the need for a review of the principle of willing-buyer, willing-seller as
a determinant of land redistribution. There are more willing buyers than
there are willing sellers.

The prices asked by most of the current landowners tend to be too high even
for government and other prospective buyers to afford. It has to be
remembered that according to African culture, it is immoral for any family
not to have land on which to build itself a home and on which to produce
food for itself.

Intertribal wars were fought for the acquisition of land. For hundreds of
years wars of resistance were fought by Africans against the marauding
hoards of foreign invaders in defence of the land. The formation of the ANC
was precipitated by the prospect of the passage of the 1913 Land Act the
sole aim of which was to legalise the land robbery, which had occurred in
the course of the previous wars of dispossession.

In spite of the injustices of the past on the land question, our own form
of land redistribution is informed by the rules of fairness and justice,
with the payment of equitable compensation to those whose land has been
found to be required for redistribution being the guiding principle.

We have no evidence to show that anywhere in the world has the so-called
free market ever brought justice to those who had lost their land as a
result of colonialism. [Applause.] We set out to address the imbalances of
the past confident in the belief that our magnanimity as the historically
dispossessed would be reciprocated with enthusiasm by the beneficiaries of
colonialism and apartheid. Alas, that was not to be!

Also to be welcomed wholeheartedly is the announcement of a review of the
sale of South African land to foreigners. This is a matter that calls for
urgent action, if we are to avoid waking up one day to find ourselves
living on foreign-owned land. [Interjections.] We need foreign investment,
but it must not come at the cost of our land and our sovereignty.

Zizi, siyabulela ngentetho yakho eyakhayo nephilisayo. Usizobele umfanekiso
onguwo nonika ithemba ngemeko nekamva lesizwe sethu. Namhlanje kungcono
kunayizolo. Saye siqinisekile ukuba ngomso kuza kuba ngcono kunanamhlanje.
Siqhwab’ izandla njengemithi yasendle. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Thank you, Zizi, for your encouraging speech. You have drawn us a picture
that gives us hope and direction for the future of our country. Today is
better than yesterday. We are certain that tomorrow will be better than
today. We clap our hands like the trees of the forest. [Applause.]]

Mr M DIKO: Madam Speaker, hon President and Deputy President, Ministers and
Deputy Ministers, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, the UIF would like to
take advantage of this occasion and thank the hon President of the Republic
for further committing the government to accelerating economic growth with
the announcement of the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative of South
Africa, known as Asgisa.

Although details about this initiative are still sketchy, the UIF hopes
that with proper implementation, careful monitoring processes and point
indicators to identify problem areas and challenges, this initiative will
be a success.

Mr President, the UIF urges your office and that of the Deputy President to
monitor the process and ensure that the economic growth we are talking
about will not be a jobless economic growth that enriches the few, as we
have seen in the past. It must be aimed at speeding up poverty alleviation
programmes and social development for all.

The UIF noted with enchantment last Friday when President Mbeki, in his
state of the nation address in this House, said, “Land reform and
restitution are critical to the transformation of our society”. We were
further encouraged to hear this morning that the Land Claims Commission is
ready to proceed with expropriation of land in certain provinces where
stakeholders have not fully co-operated with government’s land reform
programme.

The UIF believes that the current skewed ownership of national resources in
our country, especially land, hampers every effort of accelerating growth
and development for all and that therefore the government must intervene
unashamedly.

Abantu, Mongameli, mabazive okokuba le nkululeko yeyabo ngenene
nangenyaniso; akukho mntu ubanjelweyo kuyo. [President, people must feel
that this freedom is rightfully theirs and that nobody is being rewarded.]

A co-ordinated approach is further needed in the sphere of local government
if we are to achieve the government’s goal of eliminating the duality of
living spaces inherited from apartheid. Housing development, since the
advent of democracy in 1994, has not contributed positively to this
objective. In fact, what we have seen was and is, to a large extent, the
continuation of separate development in which the poor continue to live on
the outskirts of our cities and far from their workplaces. The UIF hopes
that the agreement between the Housing Ministry and Salga will go a long
way in addressing this as a matter of urgency.

While the president has again set out targets and deadlines for
government’s delivery programme, the UIF is concerned that some of these
targets, such as the eradication of the bucket toilet system by 2007 -
given the challenges facing a number of municipalities that are tasked with
these responsibilities - will once again be failures.

We all know by now, Mr President, that once the deadline has been missed,
the term “accountability” quickly loses its meaning and relevance and that
desperate attempts to conceal shortcomings begin. The UIF hopes that,
unlike the deadlines you set in this House before that were not all met,
you will lead by example and come back and account so that those
responsible for their implementation can follow in your footsteps.

The UIF believes that all government officials must account for their
failures to deliver on each and every mandate. We therefore propose, Mr
President, that a proper performance management system for councillors and
council officials and improved project management and technical skills in
areas such as engineering be put in place in order to ensure that deadlines
are adhered to.

As Asgisa has identified other constraints to growth and development, apart
from the shortage of skills, the UIF is concerned that details are missing
as to how existing programmes such as the Umsobomvu Youth Fund will be
streamlined to ensure that they contribute to the economic development of
our youth. Lack of access to capital is the main obstacle for many of our
youth.

Through our consultative process with different youth structures across the
country, we have established that the Umsobomvu Youth Fund is still not
accessible to all, especially to those living in rural underdeveloped
areas. These young people, who are supposed to be economically active in
their respective communities, continue to be on the sideline of their fast-
developing counterparts in cities and developed areas.

Those who identify with this unequal access to opportunities flock to the
cities as their last resort, leaving their communities even poorer and, at
the same time, contributing to the unemployment statistics in our cities.
The necessary resources for the development of our youth, including those
in rural areas, should be made available to all in order to ease the burden
on government and the private sector in creating jobs and employment for
the youth.

While Asgisa is an initiative with noble intentions, the UIF has noted with
great concern the lack of details in the working relations between the
elected municipal officials and traditional leaders especially on
integrated rural development. Our experience has shown that rural
development cannot succeed when traditional leadership is not on board.
Here the government needs to outline their roles and their powers so that
there can be greater co-operation that will result in the genuine
development of our people.

Everyone’s stake and role in the country’s development is important and
therefore should be spelt out and respected. So, leaving out the
institution of traditional leadership is one of the gravest mistakes that
might rob the rural communities of much-needed socioeconomic development,
Mr President.

Lastly, as the President failed to give more details about the government’s
plan to tackle corruption, we wonder how pledges alone can deter people
from continuing to steal from the poor. The UIF believes that the President
should have shared with the nation how his government intends to intensify
the fight against corruption, as some senior leaders within his
organisation continue to disregard his efforts in this regard, thereby
perfectly fueling the long-held view of two sets of laws that govern our
country – one for the ANC that protects comrades at all costs, and the
other for the rest of the country. We thank you.

Mrs L S CHIKUNGA: Madam Speaker, hon President, Deputy President, Ministers
and Deputy Ministers, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, an African proverb
says, “Tomorrow belongs to people who build it today”. This simply means we
have to continue to come up with the right strategies so that tomorrow is
better than today.

Comrade President, you are right to say that South Africans have a lot to
celebrate in this second decade of freedom. And, yes, you are also right to
say that as South Africans we must take collective responsibility to define
for ourselves what kind of society we want to establish.

The ship is indeed on course, as many of us would agree. Our scorecard
makes for interesting reading. Owing to time constraints, I will just give
a brief outline about what the growing economy means for ordinary South
Africans.

As we are all aware, tourism makes up a significant part of South Africa’s
economy, especially in the new democratic dispensation. According to
Asgisa, it is among the priority and readily implementable development
sectors. Statistics from SA Tourism reveal that, for instance, Mpumalanga
province alone, received about R6,1 billion revenue from both domestic and
international tourism activities in June 2003.

Direct spending by international tourists amounted to R4,5 billion, with
the main source of visitors being from Europe, particularly the UK,
Germany, France and the Netherlands, as well as other countries. This
simply means that as a country we are continually creating a very conducive
physical, political and social environment for our tourists in terms of
tourist attractions, thus becoming a leading tourist destination.
This sector continues to create job opportunities in most parts of the
country. For instance, in Mpumalanga alone, it provided direct and indirect
employment to about 331 000 people and it has managed to produce 85 black
tourism product owners to date, compared to two in 2000 and none in 1993.

It thus follows that today tourism is a major contributor to our economy.
It is therefore correct for Asgisa to suggest that tourism remains very
relevant for poverty alleviation and job creation in areas where shared
growth is desperately needed.

In the state of the nation address, the President mentioned that five
months from now the Fifa World Cup tournament would come to an end and
that, from then onwards, all of the world’s countries would focus on us.

One can assume that the soccer fans will surely not wait for 2010 to come
to South Africa, but may want to visit us earlier and, it is hoped, even
post 2010. This shows the potential tourism has of growing even bigger and
actually contributing towards putting our country in the international
arena and further creating jobs and wealth.

There are challenges, which include further transformation of the sector in
terms of broadening the participation by those from previously marginalised
communities. For instance, in Mpumalanga of about 1 000 tourist guides,
only 285 are black, and this situation may apply to other provinces. We now
have to identify inefficiencies and bottlenecks, which may include the cost
of doing business in this sector, access to finance and no financial
assistance for small entrepreneurs and a lack of business skills and its
impact on job creation, and we must continue to address them. We further
need to sharpen our local business industry strategy.

We have a contract with the people of South Africa to provide work and
fight poverty. Mining is another sector that plays a key role. Our country
is rich in minerals such as platinum, diamonds, coal, gold and others. Rich
as this country is in minerals, historically minerals have not benefited
the majority of our people. Only this government has continued to take
concrete steps towards ensuring that the wealth of this country is shared
amongst its people.

Some mines in KwaZulu-Natal were mothballed in the past. We think that
recommissioning them should be considered. For instance, the three
coalmines being recommissioned in Mpumalanga, which are Camden, Grootvlei
and Komati, will create about 2 400 permanent jobs and 600 contract jobs.
We think that such job opportunities can be created in other parts of the
country, but it should be mentioned that between 1995 and 2002 jobs in the
formal economy increased by 1,6 million to total 11,2 million, thanks to
our democratic government.

One of the challenges we are faced with, as a nation in the mining and
energy sector, is first and foremost a shortage of skills. Eskom alone
states that if it were to meet its expansion demands, it would have to
employ at least two skilled staff every day, with one being a woman
engineer, as its recruitment plan calls for 1 000 extra staff each year
until 2010.

We also have to fast-track support for small-scale miners. There is an
urgent need for a review of broad-based black economic empowerment to be
truly broadly based, particularly in the mining sector, because the
challenge for the small-scale miner are the old, big captains of this
industry.

We have to broaden the participation of blacks in general and Africans in
particular. The participation of women, particularly rural women, is still
a challenge. What is encouraging, though, is the fact that we have policies
that are beginning to bear fruit and we are continually improving them.

The present economic upswing is not a flash in the pan. All sectors, all of
us, have to power it. Hence, I say we have a lot to celebrate in this
second decade of our freedom.

Somlomo, libuyile eloobawomkhulu. [Hon Speaker, the land of our forefathers
has been restored.]

Coming from Mpumalanga, I just want to say something about typhoid in
Delmas. It is regrettable that people in Mpumalanga and Delmas died of
typhoid, and that can never be underplayed. But I want to say further that
yesterday typhoid was defined as a water-borne disease affecting the low
socioeconomic groups. Today, as the ANC, we are saying that we define it as
a preventable condition. And, it is for this reason that if it happens we
all become worried, because we know it is preventable and that people
should not die from it. That was not the case yesterday. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Rre G G BOINAMO: Motlotlegi Mmusakgotla, Tautona ya Aforika Borwa, Motlatsa-
Tautona le maloko a a tlotlegang, maatlametlo a modisa ke go gorosa. Mme fa
a gorosa a timeditse, modisa o a itlalea gore ke timeditse mme a dire
tsholofetso ya gore tse ke di timeditseng ke tla ya go di batla ke bo ke di
gorosa. Ka go dira jalo, modisa o bona boikanyego le tshepagalo mo go bao a
ba direlang. Ke buela mo tsebeng ya gago motlotlegi Tautona mmogo le
baetsana ba gago. (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[Mr G G BOINAMO: Hon Speaker, the President of South Africa, Deputy
President and hon members, action speaks louder than words. If you failed
you must admit that you failed and thereafter promise to rectify the
situation. By so doing, you will be trustworthy and reliable to those you
serve. I am referring to you, President, as well as the executive.]

Over the past 12 years, many promises have been made by this government
about improving the conditions that children learn under and the
effectiveness of the teaching they receive. It is no exaggeration to say
that in 12 years none of these promises have been fulfilled. The legacy of
the ANC’s rule has seen a dramatic increase in the number of dysfunctional
schools and an overall drop in the skills of learners, and a flight of
teachers with scarce skills from the profession. [Interjections.] If you
listen you might learn. [Interjections.]

Let me give a few examples. In his state of the nation address in 2004,
President Mbeki promised the nation that in 2005 no child would learn under
a tree, but learners of Father Smangaliso Mkhatshwa in Winterveldt North
are learning under a tree now, [Interjections.] Listen!

Whilst matric learners, in a tent full of holes, are struggling valiantly
not to repeat the dismal 36,6% pass rate of 2005, learners at Nkosinathi
Primary School in Berlin in the Eastern Cape have been receiving education
in a shack for more than 11 years. In Limpopo, at Mogodiwa school in
Tshivulane - about 20km west of Thohoyandou and Makumbe Primary School in
Makungwi village, Nzhelele, learners learn under trees because they have
abandoned four of the six learning spaces which are falling apart. Perhaps
what the ANC should do now is to cut down all the trees so that no children
can attend classes under the trees! [Applause.] It is indicative of the
failure of education that the number of children, who even make it through
the school system, is dropping.

The Human Development Report 2005 released by the UN shows that the number
of Grade 1 learners who reach Grade 5 declined from 75% in 1990-91 to 65%
in 1999-2000. Another large group of children, that is 50%, between Grade
10 and Grade 12 dropped out of school.

We cannot begin to build a future for our children if so many of them drop
out of school before they are functionally literate or numerate. So many
more live without a matric certificate. But it is even more alarming that,
even regarding those who stay in school, only a handful are adequately
prepared for the job market or for tertiary education.

A survey of 34 000 Grade 6 learners across the country in 2004 conducted by
the Department of Education showed that five out of 10 learners were not
attaining international benchmarks in the natural sciences; six out of 10
were not achieving them in their language of learning, and eight out of 10
were not achieving them in mathematics.

The key to improving South Africa’s dismal performance in education, in
comparison to other countries, lies in improving the quality of teaching.
But the Minister seems deeply reluctant to grasp this thorn. There is no
real effort whatsoever to reward teachers who teach well and to encourage
underskilled and demotivated teachers to do their jobs better . . .
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon member, I regret that your time has expired.

Mr G G BOINAMO: . . . at the same time, the government is fiddling around
with other aspects of education that will put many pupils at a serious
disadvantage. [Interjections.][Applause.]


The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Madam Speaker, the difference between the hon
member and me is that I have hope, and I know for sure that there will be
no children learning under trees in this country. That’s the difference
between him and me. [Interjections.]

Secondly, it is his performance that is dismal, and he is displaying his
ignorance.

Madam Speaker, it is accomplished.

Kugqityiwe! Siza kuba ngathi siyateya ke, Dlamini. Ungahlupheki wena,
yimivuyo nemincili yodlwabevu lwentetho yakho ngoLwesihlanu. Thina ke ‘nto
zingamaKrestu angaphezulu koMfundisi uMeshoe siyazi ukuba sonwaba bhetele
xa siphakathi kombutho wethu iNkongolo, sivakalisa ubuKrestu bethu, ngoba
kulapho sikhonza khona iNkosi yethu uYesu Krestu, sisazi ukuba sinethemba.
Ebesitsho uMongameli ngoLwesihlanu.
Ndimele ke ngoko ukuba ndiqale ngokubulela ndileleze, ndivumelane noDiliz’
iintaba, ukuba ngokwenene unamhlanje wahlukile kunayizolo, sinethemba
lokuba ingomso liza kwahluka kule mini yanamhlanje. Lo mhlekazi usuka apha
ke yena akayazi loo nto.

Okwesibini, Mongameli, ndidanile kuba bendinethemba lokuba amalungu
ahloniphekileyo, ngakumbi la e-DA, aza kuyibamba noko ngobunono le ngxoxo,
angabi ngala mahamte nala macangci enza nje ingxolo apha kweli qonga.
Bathetha ngathi baqengqa amatye, bazaneke izandla, njengokuba bebezanekile
apha ooTony Leon abahloniphekileyo. Inqaba kukusibonisa ukusebenza
ngaphandle kokuhamba bexhoma iipenti apha esithubeni. Nantso into
endiyaziyo, nendiyibonileyo abayenzayo. [Kwahlekwa.] Wena ke, Zizi, uma
phambi kwethu uthi masilandele.

Sukuyikhanyela, mhlekazi, uTony Leon ebehamba exhoma iipenti nawe.
[Kwahlekwa.] Kutheni ukhanyela nje ngoku? Sukukhanyela. Andikwazi ukuba
ubuzithatha phi na iipenti, sukubuza kum. [Kwahlekwa.]

Ukubangaba, mfo kaBawo uDiko, uthetha ngolu hlobo ubuthetha ngalo, ngathi
noko wenze kakuhle ukuba uphume kwi-UDM. Ntonje kuza kufuneka sikulungise
kancinci nje, kuba apha ekugqibeleni ukhe waphantse ukukhasela eziko. Hata
mntan’ am, uza kurhawuka! [Kwaqhwatywa.]

Tat’ umfundisi, wena uthetha ngathi unesixhiba ngokuphela kwephandle lakho
iBophuthatswana. Sincede torho, le nto kuthiwa ziinzingo nokudumba
kwentliziyo yakho nengqondo okudalwe kukuphela kwephandle lakho
iBophuthatswana musa ukuza kuyikhuphela kuthi. Asinqweneli ukubona ukudikwa
kwakho sithi. Siyacela ke. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The mission has been accomplished! We feel like dancing, Dlamini. Do not
be disturbed; the excitement emanates from the state of the nation address.
We Christians, who are greater than Rev Meshoe, are satisfied that we are
with the ANC and proclaim hope in the name of Jesus Christ. The President
pointed that out in his address on Friday.

Let me show a sense of appreciation to Diliz’iintaba and agree with him
that today is different from tomorrow, with the hope that tomorrow will be
different from today. The hon member who has just been here does not know
that.

Secondly, President, I am disappointed by the actions of the hon members,
more especially members of the DA, because I had hoped they would handle
the debate well. They come to the podium to make empty talk. They throw
stones, as hon Tony Leon did, and yet nothing is forthcoming from them.
They cannot perform better, except for hanging panties in public. This is
what I know and what I have witnessed. [Laughter.] Zizi, you are in front
and you lead us.

Do not deny this, sir. Tony Leon was hanging up panties with you.
[Laughter.] Why are you denying this now? Do not deny it. Do not ask me, I
do not know where you got the panties. [Laughter.]

If you meant what you said, hon Diko, you were right to quit the UDM. But
we need to correct you on some issues, as you nearly made a blunder at the
end. Beware, you will get into trouble! [Applause.]

Reverend, you talk as though you have a problem with the dissolution of
Bophuthatswana. Please do not come and show your frustrations here. We do
not want to experience your unhappiness. Please.]

Regarding Patricia de Lille, I do want us to look at how we articulate the
matter of the HIV and Aids. As a person who comes from Keiskammahoek . . .

. . . kuQoboqobo eZingcuka, ndibhaqe ukuba esi siNgesi senu siyabalahlekisa
abantu. Esi sifo asinayeza, asinyangeki. Kodwa simile ngesilungu, sithetha
ngee-life-saving mechanisms and treatment. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraph follows.)

[ . . . from eZingcuka in the vicinity of Keiskammahoek, I noticed that
people there do not understand English. This disease cannot be cured, but
when we speak in English we talk of life-saving mechanisms and treatment.]

Yet there is no cure for this disease.

NgesiXhosa ke, i-treatment, lunyango. Xa usithi: “It has no cure”, uthetha
ukuba ayinyangeki. Kutheni le nto niphixanisa iingqondo zabantu, endaweni
yokuba nithethe inyani? Yekani ukwabelana ngesondo ngaphandle kokufaka
ikatriva entongeni. [Kwahlekwa.] Masithethe loo nto ebantwini. Masixelele
abantu ukuba mabaphile ubomi obungcono. Abantu mabatshintshe indlela
abaphila ngayo. Nantso into emasiyishumayele, hayi le yokuba kukho iyeza,
libe lingekho.

Ndiyayicela le nto, torho; masizame kangangoko sinakho ukuba singakhumshi
gqitha xa sithetha nabantu. Andazi ke ukuba ekaMfundisi uMeshoe ndiza
kuyithini, Mongameli. Kunyaka ophelileyo ndithe kuye masihambe siye
kushumayela ebantwini. Abantu mabayeke izono, Mfundisi uMeshoe. Musa ukuza
kushumayela apha. Eli qonga asililo lenkonzo yaseRhabe. Uyandibona nam
ndilibambe ngobunono. Ukuba bekuseRhabe bendiya kude nditsibe nangaphaya
kwalo. Apha ke kukho imithetho.

Masihambe sobabini ke, siye kushumayela ebantwini ukuze abantu bayeke
izono. Yeka ukuza kuqwenga thina apha. Asifuni kuqwengwa nguwe thina. Mna
ndiyavuya ngokuba uMongameli ethi wacaphula kwiBhayibhile ngoba ubonise
ilizwe ukuba umongameli we-ANC uqamele ngelizwi likaThixo. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[In isiXhosa the word “treatment” means to cure. When you say there is no
cure, that means it is not curable. Why are you confusing people instead of
telling the truth? Stop having sex without the use of a condom. [Laughter.]
This is what we are supposed to preach to the people. Let us tell people to
practise better lifestyles. People must change their bad ways of living. We
must tell people that there is no cure for the disease, and not the
opposite.

I plead with you, let us try not to use too much English when we speak to
the people in order for them to understand. I am not sure how to deal with
Rev Meshoe’s case, President. Last year I asked him to accompany me to go
and preach to the people to stop their sins. This podium is not a platform
for the United Congregational Church of South Africa. You can see that I am
also handling this situation with care. If I were in my church I would talk
nonstop. Here there are rules.

Let us go to the people together to preach about abandoning their sins.
Stop coming here and throwing stones. We do not want to see your anger. I
am pleased that the President quoted from the Bible, showing the nation
that he believes in God’s word. [Applause.]]

As the ANC we have always envisioned a prosperous, equitable, stable,
democratic, nonsexist and nonracial society. And this vision is
increasingly becoming a reality in South Africa, as the President
indicated.
The economy has grown to levels never seen in the past decades and is
positioned to grow at a faster pace in the next period, linked to Asgisa.
And our vision, as enshrined in the Freedom Charter, of decent work, decent
living standards for all, equity ownership, a skilled nation and equal
access to opportunities for all is increasingly becoming a reality.

In the Freedom Charter we committed ourselves to ensuring that there shall
be work and security, and this is one core message of the decent work
agenda. We do not shy away from it. We agree therefore with the President
when he said, in the state of the nation address, that yesterday is another
country and that our country has entered its age of hope.

It’s a pity, President, that I won’t have time to debate some of the
matters that some of the hon members have raised. However . . .
[Interjections.]

Khawume kancinci wena mhlekazi, ngoba ndiza kusuka ndikubethe. [Kwahlekwa.]
[Wait a minute, sir, because I will hit you. [Laughter.]]

Mnu W J SEREMANE: Yeka ubundlobongela, ubethela ntoni? [Stop being
aggressive, why do you have to hit anyone?]

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: It is important that I say the following in
relation to this matter of flexibility and inflexibility. The first thing
that I want to say is that it must be clear that the ANC is not going to
deregulate the labour market or to erode the rights of workers.
Deregulation would be a disaster for this country, because it will cause
anarchy, chaos and instability.

I’m saying this because I know that the vision of the ANC has always been
that of a stable and democratic society. Without regulation, the ANC will
not be able to fulfil its vision. The ANC also does not advocate
overregulation of the labour market, because that, again, would spell
disaster for our objective of making our labour market sufficiently
flexible. Therefore the ANC is correct in its view that we deal with this
matter in the way that the National General Council of the ANC has asked us
to do.

That is precisely the reason, Comrade President, you have commissioned us
to handle this matter. You know, Comrade President, that those labour
experts in the Republic of South Africa have indicated to us that there are
certain matters around efficiency and the functioning of the labour market
that we need to deal with: issues of the CCMA, issues of collective
bargaining, as well as matters that affect small, medium and micro
enterprises.

Comrade President, we are going to have a round-table discussion on 7
March. The businesspeople of this country, Business SA, in particular, do
warn that if you are going to change or overhaul the labour market in South
Africa, you may cause instability in a country that is particularly very,
very stable.

You see, hon members, I’m going to make an appeal to some members,
particularly from the DA, because they understand English better than I do.
The appeal is that they must read what many, many educated people say about
these matters. For instance, Roderick, whom I like quoting because I met
him in person the other day - before that I had only read about him – says
that the matter of freedom of association and collective bargaining have
brought about the stability that we have in this country.

There are many people who think that this economic stability comes from
heaven, like manna. No, it is precisely because of the policies of the ANC
that we have it. [Applause.] You know that before 1994 you would never have
had such stability in the economy. We have it, because of the ANC. We have
it, because of the President of the ANC. You may laugh, sir, but I can
assure you that the hon Tony Leon will never take you to heaven. I don’t
know where he will take you; that I will not tell you. [Interjections.]

It is very important that we understand that strong democracy, freedom of
association and the collective bargaining rights of unions are the only
reason we have stability in this country. I don’t want to imagine what will
happen, Ndabezitha, in KwaZulu-Natal if we were to remove all the laws,
because deregulation and inflexibility mean exactly that; that there must
be no laws.

Can you imagine what would happen if there were no laws or a constitution
in the IFP? Can you imagine what would happen if there were no laws even in
your own house, Ndabezitha? [Laughter.]

Ndabezitha, all I’m saying is that inflexibility and deregulation mean
exactly that, if you look at all the books that have been written about
this matter. Argentina tried it, and they failed. Today the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank do admit that they have failed Argentina.
Do you want them to come back and say that South Africa has failed? Hon
member, I’m just about to finish. Comrade President . . .

. . . ndincede ngent’enye: ungabamameli bonke aba thwanxu. Indlela
oyihambayo intle. Anga uThixo angakusikelela, akubabale akugcine.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] [Help me with one thing: Do not listen to these fools. You
are on the right track. May the Lord keep you and bless you. [Applause.]]

Debate interrupted.

The House adjourned at 18:22.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                          THURSDAY, 19 JANUARY 2006




ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill [B 33B – 2005] Constitution
         Twelfth Amendment Act of 2005 (assented to and signed by President
         on 22 December 2005);
      2) Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters Bill
         [B 36B – 2005] – Act No 23 of 2005 (assented to and signed by
         President on 22 December 2005);
      3) Road Accident Fund Amendment Bill [B 64B – 2003] – Act No 19 of
         2005 (assented to and signed by President on 23 December 2005);
      4) Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B 2B – 2005] – Act No 22 of 2005
         (assented to and signed by President on 23 December 2005);
      5) Close Corporations Amendment Bill [B 6B – 2005] – Act No 25 of 2005
         (assented to and signed by President on 8 January 2006);
      6) Auditing Profession Bill [B 31B – 2005] – Act No 26 of 2005
         (assented to and signed by President on 12 January 2006); and
      7) Special Pensions Amendment Bill [B 28B – 2005] – Act No 27 of 2005
         (assented to and signed by President on 12 January 2006).

National Assembly

1.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

     1. The following paper is  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
        Housing for consideration and report. The Report  of  the  Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements is  referred  to  the  Standing
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Home  Builders
             Registration Council for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for  2004-2005  [RP
             185-2005].


     2. The following paper is  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
        Finance and  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Water  Affairs  and
        Forestry for consideration:

        (a)      Government Notice No 1040 published in Government  Gazette
             No 28150 dated 28  October  2005:  Borrowing  powers  of  water
             boards listed under Schedule 3 Part B  of  the  Public  Finance
             Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).


     3. The following papers are referred to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
        Justice  and  Constitutional  Development  for  consideration   and
        report:
          a)  Report  on  the  provisional  suspension  from   office   with
             remuneration of Mr M K Chauke, an additional magistrate at  the
             Pretoria Magistrate’s Court.


          b) Progress report in terms of section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates
             Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993) on magistrates (M S E Khumalo;  K
             Sulliman and M F Mathe) suspended for alleged misconduct.


          c) Proclamation No R.51 published in Government Gazette  No  28039
             dated 23 September 2005: Notification by President  in  respect
             of entities identified by the United Nations  Security  Council
             in terms of section 25  of  the  Protection  of  Constitutional
             Democracy Against Terrorist and Related  activities  Act,  2004
             (Act No 33 of 2004).


          d) Proclamation No R.57 published in Government Gazette  No  28136
             dated 14 October 2005: Notification by President in respect  of
             entities identified by the United Nations Security  Council  in
             terms  of  section  25  of  the  Protection  of  Constitutional
             Democracy Against Terrorist and Related  activities  Act,  2004
             (Act No 33 of 2004).


     4. The following papers are referred to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
        Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The Reports of the
        Independent Auditors are referred  to  the  Standing  Committee  on
        Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South  African  Forestry
             Company Limited (SAFCOL) for  the  year  ended  30  June  2005,
             including  the  Report  of  the  Independent  Auditors  on  the
             Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2005.
          b) Report and Financial Statements of Alexkor Limited  for  the  9
             months period ending 31 March 2005, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the  Financial  Statements  for  the  9
             months period ending 31 March 2005.


     5. The following paper is  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
        Public Enterprises and to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
        for consideration:

        (a)      Letter from the Minister of Public  Enterprises  dated  22
             November 2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms
             of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act,  1999
             (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of  the
             Annual  Reports  of  South  African  Forestry  Company  Limited
             (SAFCOL), Alexkor and Denel for 2004-2005.


     6. The following papers are referred to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
        Water Affairs  and  Forestry  for  consideration  and  report.  The
        Reports of the Independent Auditors are referred  to  the  Standing
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Botshelo Water for the  year
             ended 30 June 2005, including the  Report  of  the  Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
             2005.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of Bushbuck Ridge Water for the
             year ended 30 June 2005.
          c) Report and Financial Statements of Albany Coast Water  for  the
             year  ended  30  June  2005,  including  the  Report   of   the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for  the  year
             ended 2005.


          d) Report and Financial Statements of Amatola Water for  the  year
             ended 30 June 2005, including the  Report  of  the  Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
             2005.


          e) Report and Financial Statements of Lepelle Northern  Water  for
             the year ended 30  June  2005,  including  the  Report  of  the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for  the  year
             ended 30 June 2005.


          f) Report and Financial Statements of Mhlathuze Water for the year
             ended 30 June 2005, including the  Report  of  the  Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
             2005.


          g) Report and Financial Statements of Namaqua Water Board for  the
             year  ended  30  June  2005,  including  the  Report   of   the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for  the  year
             ended 2005.


          h) Report and Financial Statements of Overberg Water for the  year
             ended 30 June 2005, including the  Report  of  the  Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
             2005.


          i) Report and Financial Statements of the Pelladrift  Water  Board
             for the year ended 30 June 2005, including the  Report  of  the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for  the  year
             ended 30 June 2005.
          j) Report and Financial Statements of  Rand  Water  for  the  year
             ended 30 June 2005, including the  Report  of  the  Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
             2005.


          k) Report and Financial Statements of Sedibeng Water for the  year
             ended 30 June 2005, including the  Report  of  the  Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
             2005.


          l) Report and Financial Statements of Umgeni Water  for  the  year
             ended 30 June 2005, including the  Report  of  the  Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
             2005.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Finance

         Government Notice No R 1105  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         28226 dated 14 November 2005: Amendment of prescribed fees, made in
         terms of section 36 of the Pension Funds Act, 1956 (Act  No  24  of
         1956).


 2. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

         Notice of Regulations made in terms  of  section  44(1)(a)  of  the
         Regulation of  Interception  of  Communications  and  Provision  of
         Communication-related  Information,  2002  (Act  No  70  of  2002),
         submitted in terms of section 44(4) of the Act.


 3. The Minister of Education

      a) Government Notice No 1056 published in Government Gazette No  28159
         dated 25 October 2005: National Policy regarding Further  Education
         and Training programmes: Approval of  the  amended  schools  policy
         document, namely a resume of instructional programmes  in  schools,
         Report 550 (2005/09), made in terms of sections 3(4)(l)  and  7  of
         the National Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996) and sections 6(A)
         and 61 of the Schools Act, 1996 (Act No 84 of 1996).


      b) Government Notice No 1175 published in Government Gazette No  28300
         dated 7 December 2005: National Policy regarding Further  Education
         and  Training  programmes:  Approval  of  additional   Agricultural
         subjects to be listed in the National Curriculum  Statement  Grades
         10-12 (General), made in terms of sections 3(4)(l)  and  7  of  the
         National Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996) and sections 6(A) and
         61 of the Schools Act, 1996 (Act No 84 of 1996).


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker
    a)     Letter from the Minister of Public Enterprises dated 19 December
         2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms  of  section
         65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act  No  1  of
         1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report and
         Statements of Denel (Pty) Limited for 2004-2005:

         Late tabling of Denel Annual Report


         I write to explain reasons for  failure  to  table  Denel’s  Annual
         Report and Financial Statement within six months after the  end  of
         their financial year.


         In terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management  Act,
         1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), as amended,  the  Minister  must  table  a
         written explanation to Parliament setting out reasons  for  failure
         to table annual reports in Parliament within six months  after  the
         end of the financial year to  which  those  statements  relate.  As
         Denel financial year ended on 31 March 2005, the Annual Report  and
         Financial Statements should have  been  tabled  in  Parliament  not
         later than 30 September 2005.


         The delay was due to the concern raised by Auditors on the issue of
         a material irregularity in terms of section  20(5)  of  the  Public
         Accountants and Auditors Act, 1991  regarding  solvency  of  Denel.
         This matter delayed the auditing process and was only resolved upon
         receipt of a letter from the Minister of Finance,  concurring  with
         the issuance of a guarantee in the amount of R 765m by the Minister
         of Public Enterprises.


         Denel also deliberated on the issue of  the  Rooivalk  and  decided
         that the funding was uncertain, and that a provision for an  amount
         should be determined and provided for in the AFS.


         Denel held its Annual General Meeting on 14 November 2005  and  has
         submitted their Annual Reports for tabling in Parliament.


         I trust that you will find this in order.




         Yours sincerely


         Alec Erwin, MP



        Minister of Public Enterprises


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly


1.    Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
    Development on the Amended Prosecution  Policy  which  commenced  on  1
    December 2005.


         The Portfolio Committee on Justice and  Constitutional  Development
         on 17 January 2006 received a  briefing  on  the  contents  of  the
         amendments to the Prosecution Policy, which  amendments  relate  to
         the prosecution of criminal matters arising from conflicts  of  the
         past. These amendments were tabled in Parliament  by  the  Minister
         for  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development  and  the   National
         Director of Public Prosecutions in  terms  of  section  35  of  the
         National Prosecuting Authority Act, 1998 (Act No. 32 of 1998).

    The Committee notes the relevant amendments to the Prosecution Policy.


                           MONDAY, 23 JANUARY 2006



TABLINGS


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


   a) Request from the Chief Justice of the Republic for the National
      Assembly, in terms of section 6(4) of the Electoral Commission Act,
      1996 (Act No 51 of 1996), to recommend the candidate from the
      nomination submitted for appointment by the President to the Electoral
      Commission.


      Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs, the committee to
      report as soon as possible.



                          THURSDAY, 26 JANUARY 2006




ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism, on 25 January 2006 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(6)(b), classified the following Bill as a section
         75 Bill:


         (i)     Prohibition of Mercenary Activities and Prohibition and
              Regulation of Certain Activities in Areas of Armed Conflict
              Bill [B 42 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75).

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    1) Government Immovable Asset Management Bill, 2006, submitted by the
       Minister of Public Works on 7 December 2005. Referred to the
       Portfolio Committee on Public Works and the Select Committee on
       Public Services.
    2) Carriage by Air Amendment Bill, 2006, submitted by the Minister of
       Transport on 12 December 2005. Referred to the Portfolio Committee
       on Transport and the Select Committee on Public Services.
    3) Constitution Fourteenth Amendment Bill, 2006 submitted by the
       Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development on 21 November
       2005. Reffed to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
       Constitutional Development and the Select Committee on Security and
       Constitutional Affairs.


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

    1. The Minister of Finance


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board
         on the Registrar of Collective Investment Schemes for the year
         ended 31 December 2004.


      b) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board on
         the Registrar of Pension Funds for 2004.


      c) Government Notice No 1179 published in Government Gazette No 28306
         dated 7 December 2005: Approval of allocations to provincial and
         local government spheres, in terms of the Division of Revenue Act,
         2005 (Act No 1 of 2005).


2.    The Minister of Public Enterprises


   a) Report and Financial Statements of Denel (Pty) Ltd for 2004-2005,
      including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
      Statements for 2004-2005.

3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


         a) Report and Financial Statements of Bushbuckridge Water for the
            year ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent
            Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
            2005.
         b) Report and Financial Statements of Ikangala Water for the year
            ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent
            Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
            2005.

         c) Report and Financial Statements of Magalies Water for the year
            ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent
            Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
            2005.

         d) Government Notice No 1180 published in Government Gazette No
            28307 dated 9 December 2005: Invitation to submit written
            comments on the proposed list of particular trees and particular
            group of trees under section 12(1)(a) and (b) of the National
            Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


   a) Reply from Auditor-General to recommendation in Sixty-Second Report of
      Standing Committee on Public Accounts on South African Diamond Board,
      as adopted by the House on 8 November 2005.


      Referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts.

                           MONDAY, 30 JANUARY 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bill

        1) Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 23D – 2005] – Act No 24 of 2005
           (assented to and signed by President on 23 December 2005)



 TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


      a) Medium-Term Strategic Framework for the Department of Justice and
         Constitutional Development for 2005/06 – 2008/09.




COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly

1. Annual Report of the Portfolio Committee on Communications, dated
  January-December 2005:
      Chairperson:  Mr MK Lekgoro, MP


      Committee Secretaries: Ms T Madubela and Ms R Schaafsma
      Committee Assistant: Ms N Stemele


   1. Chairperson’s overview:

      I have been privileged to lead a committee that, on behalf of the
      South African public, has been charged with the responsibility to
      legislate for and oversee an activity that is unquestionably at the
      cutting edge of human development. It is not an overstatement that the
      technologies that drive electronic communication and the dissemination
      of information in general, hold a key to enabling humanity to reach
      beyond the present limits in addressing its problems.


      We have had a very exciting and busy year. Interacting with the
      Department of Communications and the Government Communication and
      Information System and their entities had been an experience that
      allowed us to explore the possibilities and potential that they have
      in addressing the fundamentals of our country.


      The four hectic months that we interacted with the industry and the
      public on the Convergence Bill (now the Electronic Communications
      Bill) and the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa
      Amendment Bill was a rewarding experience. To me it further
      demonstrated the good will that comes from South Africans, with their
      diverse viewpoints, when they are put together to find a solution.


      I thank members of the committee and staff for having allowed me to
      steer the committee thus far. Our thoughts go to Mr Ali Maziya, who
      was injured while carrying out an assignment of our committee.


      I wish all members a happy Christmas and a prosperous new year.

   2. Mission and Vision of the Committee:




     1.  Mission


      Ensure that communications services are available to all South
      Africans and that they have access to both traditional and electronic
      media and communications and information technology

      Deal with bills and other matters falling within its portfolio, as
      referred to it by the NA, or assigned to it in terms of legislation

      Maintain oversight over the Ministry and the Department of
      Communications and the Government Communications Information System

      Where necessary, make recommendations concerning any organ of state,
      constitutional institution or other body or institution

      Work towards the goal of a better life for all

      Approve fiscal transfers to the Department of Communication,
      Government Communication and Information System and portfolio
      organisations

      2.2 Vision


      To promote the development and implementation of policy for
      telecommunications, postal and broadcasting services

      To control fiscal transfers to the portfolio organisations such as the
      SA Post Office, the SABC, the Independent Communications Authority of
      SA, the National Electronic Media Institute of South Africa, and the
      Universal Service Agency



   3. LIST OF ENTITIES OVER WHICH COMMITTEE EXERCISES OVERSIGHT
      The Department of Communications
      Government Communication and Information System (GCIS)
      Independent Communications Authority of SA
      Media Development and Diversity Agency
      National Electronic Media Institute of South Africa
      South African Broadcasting Corporation
      Sentech
      South African Post Office
      Telkom
      Universal Service Agency

   4. Number of meetings held and those cancelled:


      45 held and 5 cancelled


      The Committee plans its programme ahead of time and whenever the
      Parliamentary programme changes, the Committee also has to amend its
      programme accordingly and therefore has to cancel some meetings.

   5. Legislation referred to the Committee

      5.1.1       Convergence Bill [B9-2005] [renamed as Electronic
            Communications Bill [B9B-2005]]


                • Referral date:  1 March 2005
                • Briefing by the Department of Communications: 8 April
                  2005
                • Number of submissions received: 52
                • Public Hearings and processing of legislation:

               ➢ 8 April         Briefing by DoC on Convergence Bill
               ➢ 24 May:    Hearings: Icasa, Competition Commission
               ➢ 27 May:    Sentech, Orbicom
               ➢ 7 June:         Internet Society SA Chapter, B-Tel
                 (Bokamoso
            Consortium)
               ➢ 10 June         SABC, Mnet, Multi-Choice
               ➢ 14 June         Telkom, SNO shareholders, SA Institute of
                             Electrical Engineers
               ➢ 21 June         Vodacom, MTN, Cell C
               ➢ 10 August  Link Centre, Storm, T Systems, Wireless
                 Business
                            Solutions, Wireless Application Service
                            Providers’ Association (WASPA)
               ➢ 11 August  CUASA, VANS Awareness Campaign
               ➢ 12 August  Universal Service Agency, Freedom of
                 Expression, Internet Solutions
                          ➢ 15 August  John Joslin, National Community
                            Radio Forum, Independent Schools Association of
                            SA
                          ➢ 16 August  SA Communication Forum, E-Commerce
                            Committee of the Law Society of SA, Print
                            Media, Online Publishers Association, Media
                            Institute of SA (Misa)
                          ➢ 17 August  Autopage Cellular, Motorola,
                            Vodafone, Nashua Mobile (Pty) Ltd, Mweb
               ➢ 18 AugustMDDA, Primedia
               ➢ 19 August  E-TV, ISPA, Hartraq
               ➢ 23 August  Deliberations on Convergence Bill
               ➢ 26 August  Deliberations on Convergence Bill
               ➢ 30 August  Deliberations on Convergence Bill
               ➢ 2 Sept          Deliberations on Convergence Bill
               ➢ 6 Sept          Deliberations on Convergence Bill
               ➢ 9 Sept     Deliberations on Convergence Bill
               ➢ 13 Sept         Formal deliberations on Convergence Bill
               ➢ 16 Sept         Publication of interim report
               ➢ 16 Sept         Formal deliberations on Convergence Bill
               ➢ 28 October Adoption of report and presentation of an
                 amended Bill
               ➢ 2 November Publication of report


           Debate in NA: 3 November 2005

       5.1.2     Icasa Amendment Bill [B32-2005]


           Referral date: 22 September 2005
           Briefing by Department: 21 October 2005
           Number of submissions received: 15


               ➢ 24 October Public hearings and processing of legislation
                             Icasa, SA  Post  Office,  Internet  Solutions,
                               Freedom  of  Expression  Institute,  Orbicom,
                               Misa, Sentech, ISPA, MDDA, NCRF, SNO, Cell C,
                               Telkom, Vodacom, NAB,
               ➢ 25 October Deliberations
               ➢ 26 October Deliberations
               ➢ 27 October Formal deliberations
               ➢ 28 October Adoption of report
               ➢ 2 November Publication of report
                               Debate in NA: 3 November 2005

      5.1.3      Other meetings

                             ➢ 1 February    Introduction to IT industries,
                               Vans, Ispa, SAVA, etc
                             ➢ 15 February   Transtel briefing
                                                                                                                             ➢





   6. Oversight (Local) visits


   The committee planned a visit to the Limpopo Province from 01-04 August
   2005. Its programme included the oversight of structures that fall within
   the communications portfolio, such as USALs. Post Offices, MPPC’s,
   community radio stations and cyberlabs.The visit had to be cancelled, due
   to an accident that happened while MP’s and staff members were travelling
   towards Polokwane, when five members of the delegation were injured and
   had to be hospitalised. They are Mr A Maziya, MP, Ms R Schaafsma, Ms T
   Madublela and Mr L Brown (committee secretaries) and Mr N van Zyl, a
   researcher.


   It was agreed that the planned visit be undertaken at a later stage.


   7. Budget Votes

   7.1.1 Government Communication Information System (GCIS): Vote 7

        a) Referral date: 2 March 2005
        b) Briefing by GCIS:  8 March 2005
        c) Public Hearings: 8 March 2005: GCIS, IMC and MDDA on 8 March
           2005
        d) Report publication: 13 April 2005
        e) Debate: NA: 15 April 2005


   7.1.2 Department of Communications: Vote 26

        f) Referral date: 2 March 2005
        g) Briefing by department: 4 March 2005
        h) Public Hearings: 4 March: SA Post Office, USA, Telkom; and
        i) 11 March: Icasa, Sentech and SABC
        j)  Report publication: 17 May 2005
        k) Debate: NA: 19 May 2005


   8.  Annual reports of the Executive (30 September)


      Department of Communications

      8.1.1   Referral date: 3 October 2005
        2. Briefing by department: 8 November 2005
        3. Public Hearings: 8 November 2005
        4. Report publication: To be adopted at next meeting


      National Electronic Media Institute of SA (Nemisa)


        5. Referral date: 29 September 2005
        6. Briefing: 8 November 2005
        7. Public Hearings: 8 November 2005
        8. Report publication: to be adopted at next meeting

      South African Post Office


        9. Referral date: 29 September 2005
       10. Briefing: 8 November 2005
       11. Public Hearings: 8 November 2005
       12. Report publication: To be adopted at next meeting

      Sentech

       13. Referral date: 22 September 2005
       14. Briefing: 8 November 2005
       15. Public Hearings: 8 November 2005
       16. Report publication: to be adopted at next meeting

      South African Broadcasting Corporation


       17. Referral date: 23 August 2005
       18. Briefing: 8 November 2005
       19. Public Hearings: 8 November 2005
       20. Report publication: To be adopted at next meeting


      Universal Service Agency & Universal Service Fund


      8.1.21 Referral date: 30 September 2005
      8.1.22 Briefing: 8 November 2005
      8.1.23 Public Hearings: 8 November 2005
      8.1.24 Report publication: To be adopted at next meeting


      Telkom


      The Minister of Communications submitted a written explanation to the
      NA on the non-tabling of Telkom’s Annual report and financial
      statements, that are in line with Telkom’s exemption from certain
      provisions of the Public Finance Management Act of 1999 (see ATC,
      Wednesday, 9 November 2005).

      Government Communication Information System (GCIS)

      8.2.1 Referral date:  21 September 2005
      8.2.2 Briefing by GCIS: 4 November 2005
      8.2.3 Public Hearings:  4 November 2005
      8.2.4 Report publication: To be adopted at next meeting

      Media Development and Diversity Agency (MDDA)


      8.2.5 Referral date:  1 September 2005
      8.2.6 Briefing: 4 November 2005
      8.2.7 Public Hearings: 4 November 2005
      8.2.8 Report publication: To be adopted at next meeting

      International Marketing Council


      8.2.9   Referral date: 29 August 2005
      8.2.10 Briefing: 4 November 2005
      8.2.11 Public Hearings: 4 November 2005
      8.2.12 Report publication: To be adopted at next meeting


9.    Attendance of seminars, conferences, workshops, training, meetings
   away from Parliament and other committee activities

   9.1.      Conferences and workshops


       27-29 May 2005  Conference on Broadcasting content regulation 2005
                          Attended by Mr R Pieterse and Ms M Smuts

       3 June 2005:    Seminar on Under Serviced Area Licences: Polokwane
                          Attended by Mr MK Lekgoro and Ms C Nkuna


       4 June 2005:    World Telecommunications Day: Polokwane
                          Attended by Mr MK Lekgoro and Ms C Nkuna

       4 July 2005:    Conference on Progressive Governance: Johannesburg
                          Attended by Mr G Oliphant

      12 July 2005:    Hearing on Convergence Bill (USA and USALs) and on
                          Transformation Charter on the Advertising and
                          Marketing Industry: Johannesburg
                       Attended by Committee


      20-21 July 2005:       Second Powerline Communications in Africa
                            Conference: Johannesburg
                            Attended by Mr MK Lekgoro, Ms M Smuts and Mr KM
                            Khumalo


      28-29 July 2005  Africa Institute of SA: Progressive Governance
                            Conference in SA: Johannesburg
            Attended by Mr G Oliphant

      26 August 2005   Workshop on Broadband 3G:MTN & Icasa
                            Attended by Messrs MK Lekgoro, R  Pieterse,  GG
                            Oliphant, R Mohlaloga, Ms M Smuts and S Vos

      28-30 September 2005    Meeting  with  Icasa;  Federal  Communications
                            Commission Regulatory Consultations
            Attended by Messrs K Khumalo and R Pieterse
   2.  Training

                            24 to 28 January 2005
                            Parliament on general and committee specific
                            issues (compulsory)


                            18 February 2005
                             Icasa introduction to its mandate


                            22 February 2005
                            Sentech introduction to its mandate and a visit
                            to the Milnerton office and the Constantiaberg
                            Tower

                            14-16 March 2005 Strand Beach Hotel: Link
                            Centre:


                            ▪ Telecommunications and Regulation,
                            ▪ Broadcasting
                            ▪ Postal policy and law
                            The whole committee attended


10.     Appointment of persons to statutory bodies

         1. Council of the Independent Communications Authority of SA

                 31 May 2005:      Interviews
                 2 June 2005      Interviews
                 8 June 2005      Recommendations and report


    10.2   Media Development and Diversity Agency


                 1 November 2005  Interviews
                 4 November 2005        Recommendations and report

11.   Adoption of Annual Report for 2004


       The Annual Report for 2004 was adopted on 29 March 2005



12.   Budget of the committee


    10.1 Allocated to the committee:                    R544 158,00
    10.2 Expenditure: Catering:                    R  57 202,00
    10.3 Provincial Visits:                             R336 338,00
                                     ➢ Subsistence/Hotel           R 71
                                       034
                                     ➢ Attendance/Mileage Claims   R 46
                                       100
                                     ➢ Domestic Air Travel   R209 304
                                     ➢ Attendance  R 9 900         R    9
                                       900


    10.4 Conferences/workshops:   R111 782,58
    10.5 Advertisements:                           R  83 278.00
    10.6 Legal Fees:                               R264 080,56
    10.7.Transfers to Staff Travel:                     R  17 136,00
    10.8 Equipment:                                R       570.00


13.   SUPPORT STAFF


Committee Secretary: Tyhileka Madubela and Rita Schaafsma
(Ntabiseng Borotho and Vuyokazi Majalamba stood in on a temporary basis)

Control Committee Secretary: Marc Philander

Committee Assistant: Nzwaki Stemele


Secretary to Chairperson:  Nina Pasensie

Researcher (Research Unit): Nickie van Zyl


………………………………………
COMMITTEE SECRETARY                               DATE: 16 November 2005
DATE …………

………………………………………………
CONTROL COMMITTEE SECRETARY             DATE: 16 November 2005      DATE
…………

…………………………………
COMMITTEE CHAIRPERSON                             DATE: 16 November 2005
DATE  …………


                          TUESDAY, 31 JANUARY 2006



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


     a) General Report of the Auditor-General on the Audit Outcomes for
        2004-2005 [RP 223-2005].

2.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation


      a) Report and Financial Statements of Boxing South Africa for 2004-
         2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2004-2005.


                          THURSDAY, 2 FEBRUARY 2006




ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

        1) Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 40 – 2005] – Act No 31 of 2005
           (assented to and signed by President on 27 January 2006); and
        2) Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 41 – 2005] – Act No 32 of
           2005 (assented to and signed by President on 27 January 2006).


2. Message from President

   The Speaker and the Chairperson received the following message, dated 25
   January 2006, from the President, calling a Joint Sitting of the National
   Assembly and the National Council of Provinces:


        CALLING OF A JOINT SITTING OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY AND THE NATIONAL
        COUNCIL OF PROVINCES


        In terms of section 84(2)(d) of the Constitution of the Republic of
        South Africa, Act No. 108 of 1996, read with Rule 7(1)(a) of the
        Joint Rules of Parliament, I hereby call a joint sitting of the
        National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces on Friday, 3
        February 2006 at 11:00 in order to deliver my Third Annual Address
        to the Third Parliament.


        Regards,

        T M MBEKI



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Communications


    (a)    Final Acts of the Plenipotentiary Conference in Marrakesh,
        Marocco in 2002 of the International Telecommunications Union,
        tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (b)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Final Acts of the Plenipotentiary
        Conference in Marrakesh, Marocco in 2002 of the International
        Telecommunications Union.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs on the nomination
    of a judge to serve on the Electoral Commission, dated 01 February
    2006:

        The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs having considered the
        matter of the nomination of a judge to serve on the Electoral
        Commission, referred to it, reports as follows:


        The Committee was requested to nominate the candidate for the
        appointment of a judge to fill the position on the Electoral
        Commission in terms of section 6 of the Electoral Commission Act
        (Act No 51 of 1996).


        The Committee met on 23 January 2006 to deliberate on the matter.
        After having considered the candidate recommended by the panel, the
        Committee recommends that the House in accordance with section 6 of
        the Act, make a recommendation to the President that Judge Herbert
        Qedusizi Msimang be appointed to serve on the Electoral Commission.




        Mr H P Chauke, MP
        Chairperson: PC Home Affairs


    Report to be considered.


                           MONDAY, 6 FEBRUARY 2006




ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bill


     (1)    The Minister of Public Works


            i) Government Immovable Asset Management Bill [B 1 – 2006]
               (National Assembly – sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
               prior notice of its introduction published in Government
               Gazette No 28135 of 14 October 2005.]
         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Public
         Works of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule
         160, on 7 February 2006.



         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.




COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Assembly

1.    Date of Meeting

      The report of the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs on the
      nomination of a judge to serve on the Electoral Commission, published
      in the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of Thursday, 2
      February 2006, on page 94 contained an error in that it indicated the
      date on which the Committee met as 23 January 2006. It should read:
      The Committee met on 1 February 2006 to deliberate on the matter.


                          TUESDAY, 7 FEBRUARY 2006


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    REPORT OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION  ON  THE  CONSIDERATION
    OF THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT  OF  EDUCATION  VOTE  15  ON  25
    OCTOBER 2005

1.    Background

      The Constitution of the Republic of South Africa  (Act  108  of  1996)
    recognizes that legislatures have a critical role to play in overseeing
    and monitoring the performance of Departments and Public Entities.

      Section 65 (1) of the Public  Finance  Management  Act  requires  that
    Ministers table the Annual Reports for Departments and Public  Entities
    for which they are responsible. The date for tabling of Annual  Reports
    of Public Entities and Departments responsible for is 30 September each
    year.

      Section 65 (1) of the Public  Finance  Management  Act  (1996)  states
    that when tabling a report the Executive Authority  responsible  for  a
    department  or  entity  must  table  in  the  National  Assembly  or  a
    Provincial Legislature, as may be appropriate. The  Annual  Report  and
    Financial Statements referred to in section 40 (1) (d)  and  the  audit
    report on those within one month after the Accounting Authority for the
    Public Entity received the audit report.

      All Parliamentary Portfolio Committee’s are required to  consider  and
    report on  Departmental  and  Public  Entities’  annual  reports  after
    tabling and referral. The Committee decided to invite the Department to
    come before it on 25 October 2005.

    The purpose for consideration of the annual reports is  to  assess  the
    performance of the department or public entities  against  the  targets
    set in the previous financial year.

2.    2004-2005 Annual Report of the Department of Education Vote 15

      The Acting Director-General, Mr. Philip  Benade,  briefed  Members  of
    the Committee on the 2004-2005 Annual Report of the Department for  the
    year ended 31 March 2005. The presentation focused

    ➢  Administration,  Planning  and  Monitoring,  General  Education   and
      Training,
    ➢ Further Education and Training,  Higher  education,  Higher  Education
      Strategic Objectives, Quality Promotion
    ➢ and Development and Challenges facing the Department.

2.1   Administration

      The original allocation for the Department included in  the  Estimates
    of National Expenditure  2004  amounted  to  R11,344,957  million.  The
    Adjustments Estimate for  2004/05  included  an  additional  amount  of
    R60,138 million which increased the allocation to R11 405,095 million.

2.2   Planning & Monitoring

      To facilitate the equitable distribution of  financial  resources  and
    norms and standards for funding, a Budget Monitoring Support office was
    established in accordance with education funding norms  policies.  This
    was done  to  facilitate  organisational  and  systems  improvement  of
    provincial education departments  in  the  monitoring  of  schools  and
    setting up a uniform reporting system.

      In relation to physical planning, draft  norms  and  standards  policy
    documents are in the process of being finalised for internal  approval.
    Reports from Provincial Education Departments have been  collected  and
    collated and presented to HEADCOM and CEM. These reports are not always
    received on time and they are not always of an acceptable  quality.  To
    improve collection, processing, retrieval analysis, as well as  quality
    data,  a  national  Education   Management   Information   System   was
    implemented.

2.3   General Education & Training

      To ensure effective delivery of viable Early Childhood Development,  a
    total of 500 000 learners enrolled in Grade R. To develop and  maintain
    operational systems for effective delivery of  Outcome-Based  Education
    (OBE) in the GET band with particular focus on ECD, a total  of  4  500
    practitioners enrolled for Level 4 training and 3  967  graduated  with
    full ECD qualification.

      For effective ECD  learning  programmes,  a  successful  collaboration
    with the South African Broadcasting Corporation was launched to support
    curriculum implementation.
      To ensure implementation of national policies  in  order  to  increase
    access to quality education and training  for  vulnerable  children,  a
    Guideline for the  Development  of  Inclusive  Learning  Programmes  to
    assist teachers in the classroom to manage  diverse  needs  within  one
    class has been completed.

2.4   Further Education & Training Schools

      To improve the quality of teaching and learning in  schools,  the  new
    curriculum for Grades  10-12  was  finalised.  A  new  National  Senior
    Certificate for Grade 12 would be finalised in 2008.
      Colleges
      The merging of 150 technical colleges  into  50  multi-sited  colleges
    was supported in the  establishment  of  academic  boards  and  student
    support services.  To ensure Colleges develop plans for  consolidation,
    Management and governance structures at all colleges were  established.
    Plans for recapitalisation of  colleges  have  been  completed.  It  is
    envisaged  that  the   re-capitalisation   would   increase   to   R1,5
    billion.over 3 years.

2.5   Higher Education

      The Higher Education  Branch  has  been  able  to  meet  most  of  the
    strategic objectives that were identified in the Department’s Strategic
    Plan.  The  2003/04  Strategic  Plan  identified  six   (6)   strategic
    objectives and their respective performance measures.

2.6   Higher Education Strategic Objectives

      The six strategic objectives identified were:
    ➢  to  produce  quality  graduates  needed  for  social   and   economic
      development in South Africa,
    ➢ to achieve  equity  in  South  African  higher  education  system,  to
      achieve diversity in the South African higher education system,
    ➢ to sustain and promote research  in  South  African  higher  education
      system,  to  provide  institutional  support   to   higher   education
      institutions,
    ➢ to provide quality Management Information System for Higher  Education
      (HEMIS).
2.7   Quality Promotion & Development

      To ensure sustainability of the National School  Nutrition  Programmes
    through the establishment of vegetable gardens or other  food  security
    initiatives, the NSNP continues to make a significant difference in the
    health, nutritional and educational status of learners in poor schools.
    Collaboration with the Department of Health has seen  the  mobilisation
    of health workers to visit schools on  a  regular  basis  in  order  to
    promote a healthy lifestyle as well as to identify learners who are  in
    need of health-related intervention or treatment.

2.8   Auditor General’s Opinion

      The Auditor-General, without qualifying the audit opinion,  emphasized
    the following:
      ➢ The Accounting Officer,  in  terms  of  the  Treasury  Regulations,
        should take full responsibility  and  ensure  that  proper  control
        systems exist
      ➢ In terms of the  Public  Finance  Management  Act,  the  Accounting
        Officer must ensure that the provisions of the Division of  Revenue
        Act are complied with when transfer of funds take place
      ➢ The information technology security did not  specify  any  security
        requirements for the transversal systems.

2.9   Challenges facing the Department

      The following are challenges faced by the Department.
      ➢ To promote social cohesion, societies still find  it  difficult  to
        transform and integrate diverse cultures
      ➢  Lack of Infrastructure at schools inhibit active participation  by
        all and interest in school enrichment programmes
      ➢ Effects of fronting as Small, Micro and Medium Enterprises  (SMMEs)
        and the monopoly by large  businesses  in  NSNP  inhibits  economic
        development and poverty alleviation
      ➢ Teacher development in Maths and Science and future training  needs
        remains a priority area
      ➢ Education  Management  Information  System  to  update  the  School
        Register  of  Needs  (for  detailed   exposition,   see   copy   of
        presentation).

2.10  Conclusions

      The Chairperson thanked Members for attending the meeting. He  further
    thanked the Acting Director-General and his  team  for  the  manner  in
    which each Programme Director had briefed the Committee explicitly.



2.11  Recommendations

      Having interrogated the 2004/05 Annual Report  of  the  Department  of
    Education in terms of the requirements  of  Public  Finance  Management
    Act, the Committee recommends as follows:  That the Department:

         ➢ Put in place proper Asset  Management  Systems  to  ensure  that
           proper control of assets exists

         ➢  Put  in  place  Education  Management  Information  System  for
           retrieval, storage, and provision of accurate and reliable data.

Report to be considered.

2.    REPORT OF THE  PORTFOLIO  COMMITTEE  ON  EDUCATION  ON  ITS  EXTENSIVE
    HEARINGS ON THE ANNUAL REPORTS 2004/2005 OF PUBLIC ENTITIES ON THE  11-
    12 OCTOBER 2005

1.    Background

      The Constitution of the Republic of South Africa  (Act  108  of  1996)
    recognizes that legislatures have a critical role to play in overseeing
    and monitoring the performance  of  Departments  and  Public  Entities.
    Section 65 (1) of the  Public  Finance  Management  Act  requires  that
    Ministers table the Annual Reports for Departments and Public  Entities
    for which they are responsible. The date for tabling of Annual  Reports
    of Public Entities and Departments responsible for is 30 September each
    year.

      Section 65 (1) of the Public  Finance  Management  Act  (1996)  states
    that when tabling a report the Executive Authority  responsible  for  a
    department  or  entity  must  table  in  the  National  Assembly  or  a
    Provincial Legislature, as may be appropriate. The  Annual  Report  and
    Financial Statements referred to in section 40 (1) (d)  and  the  audit
    report on those within one month after the Accounting Authority for the
    Public Entity received the audit report.

      All Parliamentary Portfolio Committees’ are required to  consider  and
    report on  Departmental  and  Public  Entities’  annual  reports  after
    tabling and referral. The  purpose  for  consideration  of  the  annual
    reports was to assess the  performance  of  the  entities  against  the
    targets set in the previous financial year.
      The Committee invited the five Public Entities to come  before  it  on
    the 11-12 October 2005. It also conducted hearings  on  the  Education,
    Labour Relations Council even though their report had not been referred
    to the Committee. The Public Entities that participated in the hearings
    were:

2.     UMALUSI:  Council  for  Quality  Assurance  in  General  and  Further
    Education and Training

      The Chief Executive Officer, Dr Peliwe Lolwana briefed the  Committee.
    The main focus of the briefing was on lack of  financial  resources  to
    execute  Constitutional  functions,  appointment  of  New  Chairperson,
    moderation and monitoring process, evaluation and  accreditation  unit,
    challenges and way forward. While they were proud to  execute  most  of
    the functions stipulated in  the  General  and  Further  Education  and
    Training Quality Assurance Act of (No 58 of 2001),  lack  of  financial
    resources and the hiatus caused by the uncertainty around the  outcomes
    of the review of the National Qualifications Framework stalls progress.
    She said  that  if  these  challenges  were  not  addressed,  it  would
    compromise the credibility of the  ETQA  in  the  general  and  further
    education and training sectors.

2.1   Appointment of New Chairperson

      For the financial year under 2004-2005, saw  the  appointment  by  the
    Minister of Mr. John Pampallis the Director of the Centre for Education
    Policy Development taking over from Dr Cassius Lubisi who moved to  the
    National Department of Education.
      She said  the  year  was  significant  in  the  quality  assurance  of
    assessment due to the fact that the processes for the quality assurance
    assessment had been  significantly  improved.  The  research  that  was
    conducted into the standard of the Senior Certificate  Examination  had
    enabled the Council to strengthen the processes.

2.2   Moderation and monitoring process

      While attention was paid to the maintenance  and  improvement  of  the
    moderation and monitoring processes relating to the Senior Certificate,
    much was put into Adult Education and training and vocational education
    and training  to  establish  the  broader  framework  for  the  quality
    assurance of assessment. In assuring the quality of assessment for  the
    Senior Certificate, they moderated about 2600 question papers. Monitors
    were deployed to monitor the conduct of exams as well  as  the  marking
    and processing and capturing of  results.  Moderation  of  exam  papers
    uncovered irregularities  in  the  results  of  the  Mpumalanga  Senior
    Certificate examinations. The discovery resulted  into  them  (Umalusi)
    conducting an investigation in various phases and stretched  over  more
    than two months. A team of twenty independent specialists assisted them
    in the probe resulting in withholding results of 843 candidates.

2.3   Evaluations and Accreditation Unit

      The Evaluation and Accreditation Unit developed into  a  fully-fledged
    functional entity. The  unit  undertook  provisional  accreditation  of
    independent schools, further education and training colleges and  adult
    basic education and training providers. Provisional accreditation  were
    accredited to 127 Further Education and Training Colleges and  72  ABET
    providers on a three year accreditation. The research  and  development
    unit started to function and a three year research plan was  developed.
    A total of nearly 700  000  certificates  were  issued  which  includes
    Senior,  National,  N3  and  the   General   Education   and   Training
    certificates. A new certificate was designed replacing  the  old  South
    African Certification Council.
      In terms of section 38 (1)  of  the  Public  Finance  Management  Act,
    entities  should  implement  effective,   efficient   and   transparent
    financial  management  and  internal  control  systems.  The  financial
    performance of Umalusi resulted in a net surplus of R5,1 million due to
    the additional R5 million received from the Department on the 23  March
    2005.  Their  spending  is  within  allocated  budgets  and   strategic
    priorities.

2.4   Challenges

      Even though the spending is  within  allocated  budget  and  strategic
    priorities, they are faced with the following challenges, uncertainties
    clouding the future role and finances of the entity need to be  solved;
    non-continuation of the accreditation process due to lack of  available
    funds and lack of finding an acceptable and accessible language in  the
    conceptualization of standards.

2.5   Way forward

      Even though there are challenges hampering its  progress  to  perform,
    they are advancing their understanding of the strengths and  weaknesses
    of  the  bodies  they  are  assessing  a  new  quality   assurance   of
    qualifications and  curriculum  unit  had  been  developed  to  develop
    criteria and procedures within which it would conduct its  function  of
    monitoring  the  adequacy  and  suitability   of   qualifications   and
    curriculum  and  the  soon  to  be  implemented  new  National   Senior
    Certificate  as  well  as  the  Further  Education  and  training   and
    vocational Certificates are receiving urgent attention.

3.    Council on Higher Education

      The Chief Executive Officer of the Council on Higher  Education,  Prof
    Saleem Badat briefed the Committee. The main focus of the briefing  was
    on responsibility of CHE, the  highlights  and  challenges  facing  the
    institution.

3.1   Advising the Minister at his/her request or proactively on all  policy
    related matters relating to higher education.

      In advising the Minister, the advice focused on  aspects  of  Distance
    Higher Education in South Africa; student enrolment planning in  Public
    Higher   Education;   minimum   admission   requirements   for   Higher
    Certificate, Diploma  and  Bachelor’s  Degrees,  the  Higher  Education
    Qualifications Framework  and  the  Ministry’s  Draft  Code  for  Cross
    Border/Transitional Delivery of Higher Education programs
3.2   Assuming executive responsibility for quality assurance within  Higher
    Education   and   Training,    including    programme    accreditation,
    institutional audits, programme evaluation and  quality  promotion  and
    capacity building.
      In advising the Minister  on  its  own  initiative  on  HE  issues  in
    providing policy advice the advice focused on GATS and its implications
    for Higher Education and Government Regulation, institutional  autonomy
    and academic freedom.
3.3   Monitoring and evaluating whether how and  to  what  extend  and  with
    what consequences the vision, policy goals and  objectives  for  higher
    education are being realized, including  reporting  on  the  status  of
    South African education
      In advising the Minister on the appropriate shape and size of  the  HE
    system, including its desired institutional configuration,  the  advice
    focused on aspects of Distance Higher Education  in  South  Africa  and
    student enrolment planning in Public Higher Education.
3.4   Contributing to developing higher education, giving leadership  around
    key national and systematic issues. Advising the Minister in particular
    on the  new  funding  arrangements  for  HE,  the  advised  focused  on
    Commissioning of  investigation  into  financing  of  Higher  Education
    Institutions.
3.5   Consulting with stakeholders around higher education  and  formulating
    advice for the  Minister  which  included  ongoing  collaboration  with
    Department of Education  and  South  African  Qualifications  Authority
    regarding Higher Education Management Information System in relation to
    CHE databases for monitoring and quality assurance.
3.6   Finances
      For CHE to carry out  its  five  mandated  areas,  an  amount  of  R18
    million had been set aside. In terms of section 38 (1)  of  the  Public
    Finance Management Act, entities should implement effective,  efficient
    and transparent financial management and internal control systems,  CHE
    achieved its seventh unqualified report from  the  Auditor-General  and
    achieved by all Black women representation.
3.7   Challenges facing CHE
      The CEO outlined five strategic areas, which he  regards  as  priority
    if quality  in  higher  education  would  be  achieved,  and  they  are
    Increasing  investment  in  National  Student  Financial   Aid   Scheme
    Improving learning and teaching of previously  disadvantaged  students;
    extending and deepening  the  curriculum  innovation  and  renewal  and
    restructuring that is needed; mobilizing and  securing  additional  and
    adequate  finances  in  producing  the  next  generation  by  equipping
    academics  to  deal  with  new  generation  of  students  and   capital
    infrastructure to be improved to equip  and  advance  the  intellectual
    prowess  of  academics  in  producing  the  quality  of  students   and
    attracting young black women to institutions.

4.    South African Qualifications Authority

      The Chief  Executive  Officer  of  SAQA,  Mr.  Samuel  Isaacs  briefed
    members of the Committee. The main focus of the briefing was on overall
    highlights and challenges facing SACE, standings and settings,  quality
    assurance,   national   learner   records   database,   research    and
    communications and challenges facing SAQA.
4.1   Overall highlights
      There overall highlights of the  financial  year  under  review  were,
    SAQA successfully utilized the Joint Implementation Plans; they and IEC
    signed a JIP agreement to generate qualifications  and  unit  standards
    for  various  aspects  pertaining  to  elections;  they  developed  the
    qualifications and unit standards under the auspices  of  the  SGB  for
    Democracy, Human Rights, Peace and elections and through  the  auditing
    of twenty  ETQAs  the  goal  of  quality  education  and  training  was
    supported and the findings of the audit reports  showed  a  substantial
    improvement nationally in quality management systems.
4.2   Standards and settings, SAQA generates and  registers  unit  standards
    and qualifications that are nationally recognized  and  internationally
    comparable;  a  major  achievement  saw  the   registration   of   more
    qualifications and unit standards in 2004 than any other year combined;
    it registered standards and qualifications that were responsive to  the
    needs of the economy under Human  Resource  Development  Strategy,  the
    national skills development strategy and  the  growth  and  development
    summit targets.
4.3   Quality Assurance
      It is the South African Qualifications Authority’s  responsibility  to
    guarantee quality qualifications for a learning nation  and  fosters  a
    culture of quality qualifications in education and  training  by  means
    of, quality auditing of ETQAs to determine the  extend  to  which  they
    comply with their statutory obligations; accreditation of Education and
    Training Quality Assurance bodies (ETQAs)  to  ensure  the  quality  of
    delivery  of  specific  qualifications  and  unit  standards  and   the
    monitoring of  the  ETQAs  to  ensure  continuous  improvement  of  the
    processes that deliver quality qualifications
4.4   National learner  records  database,  the  National  Learners  Records
    Database manages SAQAs comprehensive database of learner achievements
4.5   Research and communication
      SAQA first mooted the idea of reviewing progress  in  the  development
    and implementation of the  NQF.  The  first  cycle  of  the  Study  was
    completed and the findings were  published  as  Report  1  establishing
    criteria  against  which  to  measure  the   progress   of   NQF;   the
    establishment of the NQF regional forums was a big step in  support  of
    the advocacy and communication of  the  NQF,  SAQA  had  supported  the
    harmonization of qualifications in the SADC region it assisted  in  the
    development of the concept paper on the  Regional  Qualification  which
    was approved by SADC Integrated Council of Ministers in June.
4.6   Challenges facing SAQA
      Even though SAQA is able to implement its Constitutional  obligations,
    it faced  the  following  challenges,  of  moving  from  compliance  to
    performance, the lack of coherent policy development and implementation
    and finalization of the NQF review and ensuring appropriate funding.

5.    South African Council for Educators

      The Chief Executive Officer, Mr. M Govender briefed the  Committee  on
    2004/05 annual report and audited financial statement.  The main  focus
    of the briefing  was  on  finances,  service  delivery,  organizational
    structure, levy increases, information  and  communication  technology,
    and action plan for 2005/06.

5.1   Finances
      The CEO reported that the income  for  the  financial  year  2004-2005
    amounted to R11 million and was made up of education levies at  R2  per
    month per educator. SACE experienced a surplus amounting  to  R772  281
    mainly due to the delay in the appointment of the new Council.  Out  of
    the R11 million allocated, R6 million included  paying  for  the  legal
    expertise required for code of conduct activities, data  capturers  and
    professors for registration  and  research  capacity  for  professional
    development. The R5 million that remained was mainly for administration
    costs relating to meeting expenses.
5.2   Service delivery
      The three main areas of delivery as per it mandated in  the  SACE  Act
    2000  are  registration  of  educators,  professional  development  and
    ethics.  10  264  educators  were  registered  of  which  3  132   were
    provisionally registered. By the end of 2003-2004 financial  year,  464
    959 were registered of which approximately 18 000 were provisional.
      In its quest to promote  professional  development,  the  professional
    development portfolio (PDP) and policy  formulation  continued  in  the
    continuous professional teacher development. It processed 60 complaints
    against educators for the  year  under  review.  Three  educators  were
    struck off the register, one was  suspended  and  others  escaped  with
    lesser punishment. One case came  under  the  spotlight  where  it  was
    alleged that SACE “slapped” an educator on the wrist for raping  a  13-
    year girl.
       To  remedy  unethical  conduct,  the  Council  conducted   workshops,
    networked and trained educator. The Ministry requested the  Council  to
    conduct more workshops on the ethics of the profession  in  respect  of
    corporal punishment and to scrutinize the exam fraud.
      To enhance service delivery, the  Chief  Executive  Officers  managers
    managed a 24-hour help line (012) 663-0419 and a complaints  suggestion
    box.  Lifts  facilities  had  been  installed  to   assist   physically
    challenged visitors.
5.3   Levy increase
      The levy increase had been delayed. Council considers  increasing  the
    levy from R2 to R4. Once that  has  been  secured  it  would  be  in  a
    position to deliver optimally.
5.4   Way forward 2005/06
      To improve the register update including verification  and  completion
    of register; improve advocacy and  outreach  regarding  ethics  in  the
    profession  and  processing  of  priority  cases;  ensure  professional
    development of teachers and initiatives to ensure  that  all  educators
    are able to track  their  professional  growth  in  an  organized  way;
    systematize  professional  development  of  educators  to  ensure  that
    programs provided by providers  are  evaluated;  ensure  that  suitable
    programs and  activities  are  advocated  and  ensure  that  educator’s
    achievements are recognized, recorded and rewarded.

6.    Education, Labour Relations Council

      The Chief Executive Officer, Mr. M  Govender,  briefed  the  Committee
    and focused on  service  delivery,  dispute  resolution,  disputes  per
    province, case-load per province, negotiations, finances and research.
6.1.  Service delivery
       The  CEO  said  that  over  the  past  11  years,  they   contributed
    significantly towards the development and delivery  of  quality  public
    education.
      He said the core business of ELRC, is to promote  the  maintenance  of
    labour peace in the public education  through  dispute  prevention  and
    resolution. It provides for negotiations and consultation on collective
    bargaining both provincial and nationally.
6.2   Dispute resolution
      Dispute resolution service is the core function  of  the  Council  set
    out in Chapter 4 of the Constitution  which  includes  inter  alia,  to
    maintain and promote labour peace, prevent and resolve labour  disputes
    and to conclude and enforce collective agreements.
      In 2004-2005 financial year a total of 671 disputes were  referred  to
    the Council. Of those that were referred, 467 were  successfully  dealt
    with through conciliation and arbitration, 160 cases  are  still  being
    processed.
6.3   Number of disputes per province
      According to statistics  provided,  KwaZulu-Natal  tops  the  list  of
    disputes followed by the Western Cape Province.
6.4   Case load per issue
      In terms of disputes statistics per issue in  the  year  under  review
    almost 60% of disputes referred  were  about  unfair  labour  practice,
    unfair  labour  practice  such  as   promotion,   demotion,   benefits,
    suspension and training.
6.5   Negotiations
       Through  the  process  of  negotiations,  the   national   collective
    agreements had been successfully concluded resulting into major changes
    in the lives of educators in the public education sector.
6.6   Finances
      SACE generates funds from the  levies,  revenue,  operating  surpluses
    collected.
6.7   Levies
      The total levies collected amounted to R13.5 million  as  compared  to
    R15.6 million the previous year. The decrease of R2 million  was  as  a
    result of the decrease in levies per educator that came into effect  in
    the middle of the previous financial year.
6.8   Revenue
      The amount of revenue collected amounted R19.8  as  opposed  to  R17.3
    the previous financial year. An amount of R6.3 million was  transferred
    from the reserves to meet the budgetary requirements.
6.9   Operating surplus
      The amount  of  operating  surplus  amounted  to  R3.7  million.  This
    surplus is as a result of the postponement of some capital  expenditure
    to the next financial year.
6.10  Research
       During  the  financial  year  under   review,   meaningful   research
    concerning ‘”determinants of supply and demand” and “post  provisioning
    norms and educator workloads” had been initiated. The outcome  of  this
    research will serve to inform and guide stakeholders on  the  necessary
    action that needs to be taken to enhance service  delivery  of  quality
    education. The research is not exhaustive in itself.  Findings  of  the
    research are as follows per province.
      Challenges facing ELRC, the inability  of  provincial  departments  to
    pay temporary teachers in time thus resulting into  teachers  marching;
    absenteeism by educators at schools, lack of implementation of the IQMS
    resulting into teachers not rewarded  and  assessed  and  the  role  of
    school Principals need to be reviewed.

7.    National Student Financial Aid Scheme

      The Chief Executive Officer, Mr. Allan Taylor  briefed  the  Committee
    and focused on; improved levels of allocations, increased  collections,
    improved  communication  with  stakeholders,  formalization  of   Human
    Resources structures and administration and the audit report.

7.1   Improved levels of allocation
      The levels of maximum award allocations for the previous year  2003/04
    was R20 000, and improved to R25  000  for  the  financial  year  under
    review with an interest rate of 10.4% decreasing to 7%.  The  CEO  said
    that the aim is to achieve a maximum award equivalent to  the  national
    average full cost of study.
7.2   Increased collections
      The awards value for the previous year was R893.7 million and for  the
    financial year under review the awards value amounted to R985.5 million
    resulting into an increase of 10%. The recovered funds in the  previous
    year was R211 million and in the 2004-2005 financial years increased to
    R263 million resulting into an increase of 24.6%. The CEO said that for
    2005/06 financial year they expect to give R1.2 billion in the form  of
    120 000 awards. The increase is  due  to  an  additional  R223  million
    received from Treasury for the financial year 2005/06.
7.3   Improved communication with stakeholders
      The average monthly recoveries have  increased  significantly.  As  at
    March 2003, the average monthly recovery was R13 million resulting into
    an increase of 39%. As at  March  2004  the  recovery  rate  was  R17.3
    million resulting into an average percentage of 34%. As at March  2005,
    the average monthly  recovery  was  R20.4  million  resulting  into  an
    average percentage of 18%.  This  prompted  the  fund  to  continue  to
    implement improved  loan  recovery  strategies  resulting  in  improved
    collections.
7.4   Formalization of Human Resource structure
      Key structural achievements were achieved. A  Deputy  Chief  Executive
    Officer, an Information Analyst including research,  a  Human  Resource
    Manager, Communication Officer and  `Finance  Compliance  Officer  were
    appointed.
      The Chief Executive Officer said that in their advocacy programs  they
    are  considering  to  use  Members   to   advocate   NSFAS   at   their
    constituencies. He will send each Member a  number  of  brochures.  The
    Secretary was tasked to provide the Chief  Executive  Officers  with  a
    list of their constituency officers.

8.    Committee Observations

      Based on the presentation  made  by  the  department  and  its  public
    entities on 2004/05 annual reports and financial statements  ending  31
    March 2005, the committee has observed and noted that.

8.1   Umalusi
      Despite the progress reported by Umalusi during the  financial  period
    under review, the Committee was concerned with the reasons that  render
    Umalusi unable to perform its Constitutional obligations due to limited
    financial resources; the continued uncertainty around  the  outcome  of
    the review of the National Qualifications Framework and  the  continued
    operation of non-accredited providers.
8.2   SACE
      Despite the progress reported by SACE, the Committee was concerned  by
    the unresolved alleged rape case  of  one  educator.  Particularly  the
    continuous employment of the accused and the plea bargain entered  with
    SACE. In the view of the Committee it defeats the mission and vision of
    the Council.
8.3   SAQA
      Despite the progress reported by SAQA during the financial year  under
    review, the Committee expressed its concern relating to the  continuous
    lack of finalization of the NQF Review.

9.    Conclusion

      The Chairperson acknowledged the responses from  the  Chief  Executive
    Officers of the respective entities at short notice. He emphasized that
    as conducting oversight and monitoring over the Executive, hearings  on
    annual reports would be institutionalized.
      The Committee acknowledged the progress that  entities  have  made  in
    the financial year under review. However, the Committee  was  aggrieved
    when  entities  are  hamstrung  into  performing  their  Constitutional
    obligation due to the outstanding Review of the National Qualifications
    Framework.

10.   Recommendations

      Having interrogated the 2004/05 annual reports of  the  Department  of
    Education and its Public Entities tabled to Parliament in terms of  the
    requirements of Public Finance Management Act, the committee  concludes
    and recommends to Parliament as follows, that:

10.1  Umalusi, the South African Qualifications Authority  and  the  Council
    on  Higher   Education   should   jointly   compile   a   comprehensive
    recommendation to the Committee with regard to lack of progress on  the
    Review of National Qualifications Framework.
10.2  The Committee to seek more information from  Umalusi  in  relation  to
    budgetary constraints that inhibits it to execute its mandate
10.3  The fate of an educator who allegedly raped a  learner  and  continues
    to  practice  in  his  position  despite  that  positive  evidence  was
    collected which singled him out as the perpetrator should be finalized.

Report to be considered.

3.    REPORT OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION ON A STUDY TOUR TO  THE
    UNIVERSITY OF FREE STATE ON THE 25 FEBRUARY 2005

1.    Background

      The Portfolio Committee on Education visited the  University  of  Free
    State on the 25th  February  2005.  During  the  visit,  the  Committee
    interacted with Top Management of the  University,  the  Task  Team  of
    Vista Campus and the Student Representative Council of QwaQwa Campus.
      The procedure in which the meeting  was  conducted  was  that  parties
    were allowed to make their presentation and thereafter, the  floor  was
    opened for Members of the delegation  to  seek  questions  of  clarity.
    Since that the QwaQwa Campus Student Representative  Council  President
    was present the programme was changed to accommodate them.

2.    Delegation

      The delegation was constituted of  a  Multi-Party  Delegation  of  the
    Committee, 3 ANC, 1 DA, and 1  IFP.  The  delegation  was  led  by  the
    Chairperson, Prof Shepherd Malusi Mayatula  (ANC),  accompanied  by  Ms
    Lorna Maloney (ANC), Mr Ben Mthembu (ANC), Mr George Boinamo  (DA)  and
    Mr Albert Mpontshane (IFP) and Mr BG Mosala (joined the  delegation  in
    Bloemfontein  as  the  visit  of  the  Committee   falls   within   his
    constituency) and Mr Steve Morometsi, Committee Secretary.

3.    Purpose

      The purpose was to examine and monitor a crisis that  existed  between
    Management and Vista Campus Task Team. The Committee conducted a  fact-
    finding mission to investigate what the cause of the crisis was, and if
    possible, come up with recommendations that would  broker  the  impasse
    and enable the parties to return to normality.

4.    University of Free State

      When the delegation arrived at the Du  Toit  Administration  Building,
    Main Campus, Prof Izak Steyn, the Registrar of the institution who  co-
    ordinated the visit, led the delegation through to the Rector and Vice-
    Chancellor’s office.


4.1   Welcome by the Rector and Vice-Chancellor of the institution

      The Rector and Vice-Chancellor, Prof  Frederick  Fourie  welcomed  the
    delegation. Prof SM Mayatula the leader of  the  delegation  introduced
    Members of his team. Prof F Fourie stated that  they  felt  honored  to
    host the Committee because often they felt neglected. The visit by  the
    Committee would expedite progress and that they need assistance.
      The incorporation of Vista and QwaQwa Campuses into the University  of
    Free State was significant because they happened at  a  time  when  the
    institution was celebrating 100 years in existence.  The  incorporation
    of the two institutions, brought with it uncertainty  and  people  felt
    marginalized. With regard to QwaQwa Campus, the incorporation went  off
    well. As soon as the Vice-Rector of that institution was appointed, the
    Campus changed dramatically. The University of Free State has big plans
    for QwaQwa Campus and it is way ahead of Vista Campus  because  of  the
    manner in which it is managed.
      Prof SM Mayatula explained the role of the Committee  that  it  is  to
    allow parties to ventilate and they listened to what the parties had to
    say.  After  that,  the  Committee  would  if  possible  come  up  with
    recommendations. When  the  Committee  is  in  session,  the  Rules  of
    Parliament applies, meaning that the meeting is open to the public  and
    the press.

5.    Meeting at the Council  Chambers,  Main  Campus,  University  of  Free
    State, Bloemfontein.

      Opening and welcome

       The  Chairperson,  Prof  S  M  Mayatula   welcomed   the   respective
    delegations at the meeting.  He  outlined  the  responsibility  of  the
    Committee as one of holding the Executive  accountable  and  monitoring
    programme implementation. The Committee  does  not  have  an  executive
    authority. They  already  visited  different  institutions  during  the
    process of incorporation and mergers.
      They are visiting the UFS due to correspondence from Vista  Task  Team
    and correspondence thereafter. They received the report on the  meeting
    of 16 November 2004 and documentation. He outlined the process for  the
    meeting and said QwaQwa SRC would be afforded an opportunity to make  a
    presentation. The stakeholders that presented were Vista Campus, QwaQwa
    Student Representative Council and University of Free State  Management
    Board.

5.1   Presentation, by Prof Thomas  Acho,  Deputy  Chairperson  of  the  UFS
    Vista Campus Task Team.
      The presentation highlighted several unresolved issues  between  staff
    and students of Vista Campus  and  Management  of  University  of  Free
    State. He said that there seems to be a hidden agenda on  the  part  of
    Management to frustrate the merger/incorporation process so as to  make
    Blacks feel that the Government has failed them. Vista Campus community
    are passionate about changes  in  Higher  Education  because  it  would
    benefit the Nation as a whole, thus they are disturbed by  Management’s
    attitude  which  smacks  of  racism,  deviousness,   intimidation   and
    cosmeticism when  it  comes  to  transforming  the  University  into  a
    institution which all would be proud of.
      Management aims to steamroll them into submission thus protecting  the
    Afrikaner hegemony. They did that to  QwaQwa  campus.  Despite  several
    attempts  by  the  Task  Team  to  change  Managements’  thinking,   on
    transformation, resistance from every angle occurred. The  Rector,  who
    stated that the Task Team should either choose the painful or  painless
    way  in  negotiating  their  Conditions  of  Service,   displayed   the
    threatening  stance  of  Management.  The  unresolved  issues   between
    Management and the Task Team were outlined as follows:

5.1.1 Integration
       In  terms  of  the  merger/incorporation   Guidelines,   related   to
    representation on the Statutory structure, Vista Campus is supposed  to
    have elected representatives on all UFS statutory bodies,  such  as  on
    the  Institutional  Forum,  the  Senate  and  the  University  Council.
    Presently they have none. Mainly White staff  from  Vista  Campus  were
    selectively absorbed into Management at the Main Campus and placed into
    various positions.

5.1.2 Conditions of Service
      The Conditions of Service had not yet  been  aligned.  At  the  former
    Vista University, staff were granted annual salary increases. The  Main
    Campus staff received increases for 2004 and 2005  they  are  about  to
    begin negotiations for 2006 salary increases. Vista  Campus  staff  had
    not received any salary increase for the same period.  Management  said
    staff at Vista Campus  would  not  have  salary  increase  until  their
    Conditions of service had been  aligned.  The  imminent  visit  of  the
    Committee had pressurised Management to  table  the  offer  during  the
    meeting of the 21st February 2005. A promotion Committee had  been  set
    up to oversee the promotion process.

      Vista Campus  Task  Team  were  surprised  when  one  of  their  White
    colleague were promoted to a Senior  Lecturer  position.  What  further
    aggravated the promotion issue were  that  Black  colleagues  at  Vista
    Campus who satisfied for  the promotion  criteria  were  excluded.  The
    White person concerned resigned at Vista Campus, but was reappointed on
    the Main Campus in the same capacity.
      Previous taxation policy at former Vista University had been  violated
    and was substituted with  the  UFS  taxation  scheme  even  though  the
    Conditions of Service has not yet been aligned.  At  the  former  Vista
    University,  staff  and  their  immediate  family  members  were  given
    bursaries  for  financial  assistance  to  study  at   any   recognised
    institution of their choice. However, at  UFS  they  provide  for  such
    studies for institutions recommended by the university.

      Despite Management agreeing to consult the Task Team on the future  of
    the Campus they (Management) let sections of  the  institution  out  to
    external bodies. Staff members at those affected sections were given an
    ultimatum to  vacate  their  offices  in  order  to  accommodate  other
    institutions. It is a transgression on the part of  Management  as  the
    merger/incorporation Guidelines  stated  that  all  campuses  that  are
    incorporated should remain as delivery sites for Higher  Education  and
    no access point should be closed.

      At students’ residences, hostel accommodation is provided on  racially
    segregated lines  only  one  hostel  is  racially  integrated.  In  the
    Rector’s  opening  address,  he   remained   unapologetic   about   the
    segregation. Names of buildings, emblems  and  flags  are  named  after
    architects of Apartheid  such  as  HF  Verwoerd.  Symbolic  emblems  of
    Afrikaner Nationalism are an insult to the advocates of  democracy  and
    transformation.  Students  who  attend  lectures   on   both   campuses
    experience  problems  when  clashes  occurred  on  the   time   tables.
    Management is inflexible in accommodating  students  at  Vista.  Hence,
    some students cannot attend some  lectures  thus  resulting  into  some
    students failing certain courses. Course codes changing  from  example,
    BIO to BLG affects the fee structure and students who had to graduate.

      Pipeline students who had registered with Vista campus  prior  to  the
    incorporation process should be allowed to register for any  incomplete
    programme on condition he/she would graduate on  or  before  2009.  The
    disparity in course content especially when a student is  compelled  to
    take courses, which are not equivalent  to  Vista’s  one  disadvantages
    students when it comes to performance in exams. The high fee  structure
    at UFS makes access for poor students virtually impossible. There is  a
    need for the Department to intervene. Predominantly White and Afrikaans
    speaking lecturers  find  it  difficult  to  lecture  in  English  thus
    negatively influencing the  academic  performance  of  Black  students.
    Afrikaans as a language seems to  supersede  that  of  English  despite
    University  of  Free  State’s  official  policy  of   parallel   medium
    instruction.

      Members of the Delegation asked the following Questions:

    ❑ Whether it is a rule of thumb for Black lecturers to be  competent  in
      Afrikaans?
    ❑ What is the Task Team’s understanding after the  announcement  of  the
      incorporation, whether there  should  still  be  Vista  Conditions  of
      Service?
    ❑ With the increase of fees at registration from  R900  to  R4000,  what
      were Vista’s expectations?
    ❑ What is the lifespan of the Task Team if there is any?

      Responses from the Task Team representatives:

      In response to competence  of  Black  lecturers  in  Afrikaans,  often
    Black lecturers are told by Management that they cannot be guaranteed a
    position if they are not multilingual.
      In response to alignment of Vista’s conditions of  service,  the  Task
    Team said that when it was announced that Conditions  of  service  were
    going to be harmonised, discussions followed and decisions  were  taken
    that binds both parties. When a vacancy arises, staff from Vista campus
    would be considered  before  the  post  is  advertised  externally.  It
    happened to a lecturer from Vista campus that was  appointed  into  UFS
    Service but the conditions of service of Vista applied.
      In response to accessibility, the Task Team  said  that  Vista  campus
    had a programme on access, but no new students were accepted for 2005.
      In response to the lifespan of the Task Team, the  response  was  that
    the team would only be discontinued as soon as the  outstanding  issues
    with Management had been addressed.

6.    Presentation by  Mr  Tello  Motloung,  SRC  President  of  the  QwaQwa
    Campus.

      The presentation focused mainly on registration  issues.  However,  he
    registered his dismay at the manner in  which  registration  at  QwaQwa
    Campus was handled this current financial year and said that they  were
    not consulted. Such practices indicated that Management was undermining
    the student formation. Post the incorporation  process,  students  were
    expected to pay 100% of their outstanding fees to be regarded as  fully
    registered students. Pipeline students were  expected  to  pay  20%  of
    their outstanding fees before  being  regarded  fully  registered.  The
    Student  Representative  Council  requested  that  students   who   had
    committed to  pay,  should  be  allowed  to  make  arrangements  on  an
    individual  basis  and  Management  should   consider   granting   them
    extensions beyond the  deadline  of  the  8  March  2005.  The  extreme
    financial background of students who had debts amounting into R10  000.
    Students would be unable to settle the debt. The SRC  proposed  that  a
    Debt Collection Unit should be established to  facilitate  the  process
    and ensure that students honour their commitment.
      In 2004, an audit on the performance of students was conducted on  the
    extended  students  programme.  The   audit   report   came   up   with
    recommendations, such as  dismissal  of  lecturers,  issuing  of  study
    materials and the renovation of Tshiya residences were not implemented.
    Tuition fees in the last  financial  year  increased  by  6%,  in  this
    current book year, tuition fees were increased with  another  6%.  This
    resulted in a 12% increase within two years.

      The SRC support Management’s initiative in turning the institution  to
    become financial viable. However, no student at QwaQwa campus has  been
    awarded with the differentiated/ academic bursaries. They proposed that
    the bursaries should be extended to their campus.

      Questions of Clarity asked by Members of the delegation:

    ❑ When the fees at QwaQwa, Vista and Main campuses were increased, were
      students sufficiently consulted? Or did Management unilaterally
      decide?
    ❑ The 8 March 2005 extensions on students who owed, how should these
      extensions be handled?
    ❑ Are you implying that the fee structure should be different from one
      campus to another?

      In response to fee increase, the  SRC  President  said  that  for  the
    current year, students  were  not  consulted,  Management  unilaterally
    implemented the fee increase.
      In response to the extension for students who owe, he  said  that  the
    cases would be considered on an individual basis.  Those  students  who
    commit themselves should be allowed to make arrangements as to how they
    intend to pay the outstanding fees.

7.    UFS Management presentation

      The Rector Prof F v Fourie, presented an  overview  of  the  strategic
    thinking and said that UFS is an institution of higher learning that is
    multi-racial,  multi-lingual  and  multi-campus.  Its  vision,   is   a
    university of excellence, equity and innovation.

      UFS adopted its parallel-medium tuition in 1993  that  made  room  for
    the inclusion of Black students. 30-35 Black  students  registered  and
    the student demographics changed. The demographic changes resulted into
    an increase in  student  numbers,  changes  in  institutional  culture,
    management became more inclusive, the research  and  academic  sections
    were revitalised and all these changes resulted into UFS  developing  a
    financial turn around strategy.

      Central to the priorities of UFS was the incorporations of QwaQwa  and
    Vista campuses as valuable constituent parts of  the  institution.  The
    incorporations resulted into changes in the staff composition,  changes
    in the institutional  culture,  workshops  for  staff  were  organised,
    campuses were taken  through  sessions  on  cross  culture  and  social
    contracts were entered into with staff on both  campuses.  A  diversity
    office was established to promote cultural diversity and the  community
    service on learning and  research  were  conducted  and  students  were
    engaged at academic level in partnership with the private sector.
       A  comprehensive  transformation  plan  was  drafted  to  provide  an
    overarching framework to articulate the transformation challenges.  The
    transformation challenges brought with it a new  institutional  culture
    for the University of Free State. The need for  representivity  in  the
    staffing of QwaQwa and Vista in the main campus of University  of  Free
    State. Prioritising and enhancing excellence in  the  overall  academic
    life of UFS and addressing outstanding issues in the  incorporation  of
    the QwaQwa and Vista campuses.

      In enhancing quality and excellence in  teaching  and  learning  there
    was a need to cater  for  a  diverse  student  population  and  enhance
    students’  opportunities  for  academic  success   such   as,   African
    orientation  in  curricula,   tutor   systems,   language   proficiency
    development. Achieving excellence in research by promoting and engaging
    relevant research institutions.

      On regional co-operation and  engagement,  the  incorporation  of  two
    satellite campuses created new opportunities  to  serve  education  and
    training  needs  of  the  region.  It  also  served  as  stimulus   for
    transformation. The strategic priority of UFS is to see  QwaQwa  campus
    become fully integrated centre of academic excellence  in  the  Eastern
    Free State region and for Vista  campus  to  meet  the  Human  Resource
    Development needs  of  the  region  in  a  non-traditional,  innovative
    manner.
      Challenges faced by both QwaQwa and Vista  campuses  as  a  result  of
    incorporations; At QwaQwa campus students and staff felt  marginalized,
    their campus is geographical distant from the  main  stream,  financial
    situation and student debts exert pressure on them, students felt  that
    the infrastructure at their campus had been  neglected.  Vista  campus’
    staff were concerned about the delay in the alignment of conditions  of
    service and job security. Students were concerned about the phasing out
    of pipeline students and the strategic reconfiguration of Vista Campus.

7.1   Questions of clarity asked by Members of the Delegation:

    ❑  Will  Vista  campus  be  regarded  as  a  delivery  site  for  Higher
      Education? If yes, what plans are in place to improve it.
    ❑ Has Vista Campus been part of the  reconfiguration  process?  If  yes,
      why do they feel alienated?
    ❑ If a student gets less  than  he  expected  from  the  NSFAS,  is  UFS
      topping it up in paying the difference?
    ❑ Can any student at UFS campuses become  a  member  of  the  “Here  17”
      student organisation?
    ❑ What logical explanation can be given as to why the  staff  compliment
      of Vista was not considered for the centenary bonuses?
    ❑ Why did Management at the beginning of the year increase fees  without
      consulting the student formations on the campuses?

      In response to the questions of clarity,  the  Rector  indicated  that
    some operational issues are being dealt with. On strategic matters, not
    everyone could be consulted. Consultations had been done but  sometimes
    decisions need to be taken by Management.

7.2   The Vice-Rector: Academic Planning

      Prof Magda Fourie, said that strategic  planning  for  reconfiguration
    could not be done at the pace at which one would like to make progress.
    Each time when Management met with Vista staff, operational issues took
    up  much  of  the  discussions.  He  indicated  that  with  regard   to
    consultations, Mr Sekoto, the  former  member  of  the  Task  Team  was
    involved.

7.3   Vice-Rector: Academic Operations
       Prof  Theuns  Verschoor,   indicated   that   no   particulars   were
    communicated  to  him  with  regard  to  proficiency  in  English   and
    Afrikaans. If the matter was brought  to  Management’s  attention,  the
    matter could have been solved. Management is looking at  an  innovative
    way of addressing the language problems. It would be an advantage to be
    fluent in both languages, but it is not  compulsory  for  staff  to  be
    fluent in  both  Afrikaans  and  English.  In  relation  to  bursaries,
    bursaries are available to all students.
      In 2003, fees increased for the  main  campus  and  no  increase  were
    effected for QwaQwa students including  accommodation.  However,  there
    was an increase for class fees for all students. Pipeline students  are
    still paying fees they paid when they registered. The  salary  packages
    of QwaQwa and Vista campuses are higher than those of the main  campus.
    Centenary bonuses were part of  the  negotiations  with  staff  on  UFS
    conditions of service. Such bonuses would also be part of  negotiations
    with Vista staff compliments.

7.4   Vice-Rector Student Affairs

      Dr Ezekiel Moraka, indicated that the policies dealing with  residence
    needs to be revisited. The current policies  were  designed  mainly  on
    student’s  request.  A  Monitoring  Committee  has   been   established
    representative of all stakeholders that looks into student’s needs.
      The student organisation with the name “Here 17”  is  an  organisation
    of students and anyone can become a member  of  that  organisation.  An
    investigation is underway to establish their operations. A copy of  the
    findings would be made available to the Minister and the Committee.

7.5   Director: Diversity

       Mr  Billyboy  Ramahlele,  Director:  Diversity  said  that   he   was
    responsible for getting people  to  talk  on  the  three  campuses.  He
    undertook to get everybody talking.

7.6   Interim Administration Head: Vista Campus

      Rev K Jaftha, Interim Administration Head at Vista  campus  said  that
    he would be under-taking good administration on  the  campus.  For  the
    past six months Prof Schultz was the campus head, subsequent to him  Mr
    Sekoto became the campus head. He truly  believed  that  the  level  of
    suspicions could be managed by embracing trust.

8.    Committee observations

      The delegation, having listened to the concerns  by  Vista  Task  Team
    and responses from Management, observed the following:

    ❑ That there seems to be a lack of understanding that by  law,  the  two
      entities, namely, Qwaqwa and Vista had been  “incorporated”  into  the
      University of Free State, and as such, they form one entity.
    ❑  Normal  administration  problems  have  been  conflated  into  merger
      issues.
    ❑ That Top Management is predominantly white and does  not  reflect  the
      composition of the university community.

       The  Committee  having  conducted  a  fact-finding  mission  to   the
    University of Free State recommends to Parliament as follows:

9.    Recommendations

      That the University of Free State:

    ❑ Establish a consultative forum with representation from QwaQwa,  Vista
      and the Main Campus to  attempt  resolving  issues  such  as  extended
      programmes for students,  fee  increment,  non-representation  on  UFS
      Council, salary increases, promotion policies and study bursary etc.
    ❑ Establish a task team that would facilitate the integration  of  staff
      into the main campus and the phasing out of pipeline students.
    ❑ There  is  a  need  for  Management  and  the  satellite  campuses  to
      communicate meaningfully on a regular basis.
    ❑ There needs to be a separate process for the equitable  redistribution
      of resources.
    ❑ Both the Department of Education and the Council on  Higher  Education
      must pay closer attention in monitoring issues such as representivity,
      equity and racism.

10.   Conclusion

      It is clear that a very comprehensive consultative  process  had  been
    followed with regard to the merger of the institution. One of the major
    challenges facing  the  institution  is  effective  communication.  The
    Rector challenged all stakeholders to move  beyond  the  rhetoric.  The
    Chairperson of the Task Team said that they are prepared to engage in a
    process of discussions in order  to  reach  consensus.  The  delegation
    advised management to respond robustly on the issues that  were  raised
    by the Task Team and students, and provide the Committee with a copy of
    the report.

Report to be considered.


