---
title: 'National Assembly - 15 November 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-11-15
---

WEDNESDAY, 15 NOVEMBER 2006

                                    ____





                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 15:05.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC

       Significance of South Africa’s election to UN Security Council

19.   Mr M P Sibande (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:

      (a)   What is the significance of South Africa’s election to the
      United Nations Security Council for our country and Africa and (b) how
      will South Africa utilise its nonpermanent seat on the United Nations
      Security Council to advance the cause of Africa and the other poor
      countries of the world in the creation of a more equitable
      dispensation between developed and developing countries?
                                                   N2151E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Madam
Speaker, our election to assume a nonpermanent seat on the Security Council
of the United Nations, by 186 of its 192 members, is significant in many
respects. In the first instance it serves as an affirmation by the
international community of nations that, despite the fact that South Africa
is a new democracy, the world believes that we have the integrity and the
capacity to contribute meaningfully to the work of this important forum.

Secondly, we assume this UN seat fully conscious that nations that serve on
the Security Council have been mandated by the rest of the members of the
United Nations to shoulder primarily the responsibility to preserve global
peace and security. Members of the Security Council are consequently
enjoined to execute that mandate for and on behalf of the remainder of the
United Nations members, having regard at all times to the principles and
purposes of the United Nations.

The UN Security Council seat will undoubtedly help us as Africans to
advance the African agenda, which is predicated on the vision of the
renaissance of our continent, given concrete and practical expression
through the Constitutive Act of the African Union, as well as the
development programme of the AU, namely the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development, Nepad.

Among other things, both the Constitutive Act of the AU and the
prescriptions contained in Nepad emphasise the central importance of peace
and security in the regeneration of the continent. We as Africans recognise
that we cannot achieve our main strategic objective of defeating poverty
and underdevelopment as well as create a developed and prosperous Africa in
conditions of war, conflict and instability. In this regard our work in the
Security Council will give more impetus to the efforts of African
countries, including South Africa, through the AU, in conflict resolution,
peace-building, and post-conflict reconstruction and development. Indeed,
the challenge of the Security Council seat should be seen as a continuation
of the work we have done and continue to do to help our sister African
countries to find peace and end international conflicts. This includes
ensuring permanent peace and stability in the DRC, Burundi, Côte d’Ivoire,
Sudan and others.

The Security Council is currently seized of a number of African issues,
including those in Western Sahara, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Côte d’Ivoire,
the Democratic Republic of Congo, Burundi, Sudan, Somalia, Ethiopia and
Eritrea. This means that a large part of the work of the Security Council
deals directly with our continent.

As I have indicated, South Africa will therefore use its two years on the
Security Council towards contributing to the resolution of these conflicts
and promoting post-conflict reconstruction and development.

Clearly, we see membership of the Security Council as a significant
opportunity to augment the work done by our fellow African countries and
many other partners that have served on the Security Council before us. In
that sense we shall be building on past achievements.

But, Madam Speaker, as all of us are aware, the Security Council is called
upon to act not only in the interests of the peoples of the African
continent, but broadly to promote and protect the security and welfare of
all the nations of the world. Accordingly, we will continue to do what we
can to contribute to peace-building in other regions of the world, such as
the Middle East, and in countries such as Haiti, and this includes issues
of nonproliferation and terrorism.

In all these endeavours we will be informed by our own firm commitment to
peace, security, democracy, equality, fairness and justice among and
between all nations, big and small, and this of course raises the critical
matter of accelerating the process of the reform of the United Nations,
including the Security Council. Indeed, our participation in the Council
will afford us the possibility, together with the other nonpermanent
members in particular, relentlessly to pursue this important goal of the
reform of the Security Council, thereby addressing the disparity in the
distribution of power between the more powerful countries and the less
powerful members of the United Nations.

At all times, in whatever we do, we shall do so in consultation and
collaboration with the African Union, and since the birth of the AU we are
focused on strengthening this continental body so that it can, among other
things, improve its capacity in terms of conflict prevention and peace-
building. It is therefore important that the result of the combined efforts
and actions of the Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council are indeed the attainment of peace, security and stability
in all our countries.

The Security Council, Madam Speaker, as you know, is continuously in
session and can therefore meet at any time of the day or night to address a
situation anywhere in the world that is seen to be a threat to
international peace and security. This means that our country will need to
have the systems and capacity to enable us to meet this challenge. We have
made the point that membership of the Security Council is a national task
to which we have to respond in unity.

Furthermore, we have also said that this will require that we build the
necessary all-round capacity, both in Pretoria or Tshwane, and New York, so
that we can meet our obligations as a member of the Security Council. I
thank you very much, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr M P SIBANDE: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the President for his
response. Also, I’d like to congratulate the President on his role in
Africa and beyond that has resulted in South Africa being elected to the
United Nations Security Council as a nonpermanent member. As a country we
are proud.

Could the President elaborate on what the global balance of forces is, as
we believe that the multilateral system of global governance remains the
only hope for challenges facing humanity today.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Well, I would say to that, Madam Speaker,
that I think there is general agreement that the arrangements at the United
Nations, particularly as they relate to the Security Council, derive
essentially from the situation as it was at the end of the Second World
War, but that the world has changed and that we cannot continue with a
multilateral system based on that particular outcome.

That’s why there is agreement that you need a fundamental restructuring of
the Security Council and other organs of the United Nations so that they
more equitably represent the situation in the world today, and increase the
role of the developing world within these institutions. That is why Latin
America, Asia and Africa should also – I think it is generally agreed –
have permanent seats on the Security Council.

It’s a critical matter and it also affects other institutions, of course,
in the global system, and those include the Bretton Woods institutions, the
World Bank and the IMF, and that reform process must indeed take place,
because, clearly, the balance of power in the world today doesn’t reflect
the current situation and is clearly undemocratic, and therefore puts these
major institutions such as the Security Council not in a position to
respond effectively to the demands and needs of the developing world, which
constitutes the overwhelming majority of humanity.

I think that is the central matter to ensure that we indeed promote that
agenda, which will result in better representation of the developing
countries and therefore better capacity by the developing countries to help
to define the global agenda in a manner that does indeed address the needs
and interests of the developing world. Thanks, Madam Speaker.

Mrs S M CAMERER: Mr President, the internationalisation of the Darfur
crisis has not yet had any visible positive impact as conflict and disease-
related deaths appear to be mounting unhindered. The ongoing humanitarian
crisis has seen over 200 000 people die, 2,5 million people flee their
homes and the brutal systemic rape of many thousands of women and children.
Given that, to date, South Africa has no recognisable profile on the Darfur
crisis, what steps will South Africa take now that it holds a nonpermanent
seat on the UN Security Council to persuade the United Nations to act
decisively with the international community to prevent this African tragedy
turning into a Rwandan-style genocide, and, given that the Minister of
Foreign Affairs told Parliament that another African tragedy, Zimbabwe, is
currently not on the agenda of the UN Security Council, what steps will
South Africa take to ensure that the ongoing crisis in Zimbabwe is solved
or ameliorated? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, we are not ... I appreciate
the hon Camerer’s impatience, but we are not yet on the Security Council.
That will come in January. [Laughter.]

As the hon member knows, this issue of Darfur is indeed on the agenda of
the Security Council. There’s a specific resolution that was approved,
providing for the deployment of UN troops in Darfur to take over from the
African mission that has been in Darfur for some time. As the hon member
knows, the African Union had agreed to this because that would bring in the
necessary resources which the African continent doesn’t have, to ensure
that we have this beefed-up capacity to deal with this matter.

This issue is under discussion between the Sudanese government, the United
Nations, the African Union and the European Union to resolve this question
so that indeed this further deployment is effected. Everybody agrees. The
Sudanese government agrees, the UN agrees, the African Union agrees, all
countries agree that indeed there should be this additional deployment. The
issue that’s arisen is the nature of that deployment.

I had a discussion with the president of Sudan, President Al- Bashir, about
this particular matter about 10 days ago, and indeed he informed me that
the government of Sudan was involved in discussions, particularly with the
United States and the United Kingdom on this issue so that all the matters
that are in dispute are resolved.

I would like to think that indeed this will be resolved and this bigger
deployment will take place, hopefully as soon as is possible. Certainly,
the mandate and the resources of the African Union would be exhausted
within the next few weeks and therefore it’s important that the matter be
resolved during that period.

As you know, we have soldiers and police units in Darfur. I do not know if
that’s low profile, but I’d think that our people in Darfur are doing a lot
of good work with regard to the maintenance of peace and security in that
area to the extent that they can, given the limitations that the African
Union has with regard to the provision of resources to beef up the numbers.
But I’m quite certain that there will be progress with regard to this,
given that everybody is agreed about this larger deployment, including the
Sudanese government.

With regard to the question about Zimbabwe, I don’t know. The Security
Council has never put this matter of Zimbabwe on its agenda, and the reason
for that is that, essentially, the UN Security Council, according to the
charter, has got to determine that a matter constitutes a threat to
international peace and security, and that’s how a matter is put onto the
agenda.

The Security Council has never made a determination that the issue of
Zimbabwe constitutes a threat to international peace and security, and
that’s why it’s never put it on this agenda. I don’t know if the Security
Council would change its position on this matter in future. Thanks, Madam
Speaker. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Thank you, Speaker. Hon President, I thank you for that
exhaustive reply. You just said that all the forces and parties that have
an interest in the resolution of the problem in Darfur have agreed that
additional deployment is needed in that area.

Now, my question is, is the Sudanese government prepared to accept
additional deployment, also from the UN, or are they only looking at
additional deployment from the African Union, because to our understanding
in the past few weeks they have been refusing to allow the UN forces to
also come to help in that area. So, are they also in agreement that
additional deployment is necessary, also looking at the UN, or are they
only interested in the African Union? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: No, Madam Speaker, the Sudanese government
agrees that there should be UN deployment. Indeed, there is UN deployment
in Darfur now. There are UN troops in Darfur, deployed in support of the
African mission.

So the issue in dispute between the Sudanese government and the United
Nations, and of course, therefore with the African Union to the extent that
the African Union had agreed to the UN deployment to replace the African
mission, is indeed the nature, not the presence of the UN, as there is a
presence of UN troops now, but the impact that that has on the African
character of the deployment. That is what’s being discussed, and that’s
part of the reason why one of the proposals that’s being discussed by
everybody now is a joint mission of the United Nations and the African
Union.

So no, the Sudanese government is not opposed to the presence of UN troops
in Darfur, but it is insisting that the African continent must continue to
lead with regard to this matter.

Part of the problem, hon member, is contained in the resolution that was
approved by the Security Council, which has raised very serious concerns on
the part of the Sudanese government. This latest resolution of the Security
Council, which took the decision to effect this deployment of UN troops,
includes certain provisions which relate to the judiciary, the legal
system, rule of law and all that, as well as policing.

The particular contentious points about that are that those particular
sections, and some other sections of that resolution, refer, not to Darfur,
but to Sudan as a whole. So that resolution, therefore says, for instance,
in the section on policing, that the United Nations is going to go into,
presumably, Darfur, but with the purpose of the transformation of the
policing system throughout Sudan, so the Sudanese government is asking why
that is.

There is UN deployment now, for instance, to help monitor and assist in the
peace between the north and the south as a result of the conclusion of the
Naivasha Agreement between the north and the south. There are UN troops
there, attending to that matter, so this is one of the issues that are in
contention, because it is not clear why the Security Council decided to
extend its mandate beyond the borders of Darfur to the rest of Sudan. It
was never discussed with the Sudanese government, the African Union or
anybody.

But I’m saying this is one of the matters that are in contention, which has
resulted in continuing debate about this deployment, because of lack of
clarity as to what it is that the United Nations intends to do. In
principle the Sudanese government is not opposed to this UN deployment, but
does want the African Union to continue leading with regard to the
resolution of the Darfur crisis, and that’s why I’m saying that, currently
part of the discussion is about joint deployment both by the UN and the
African mission, maintaining the African character of that presence in
Darfur. Thanks, Madam Speaker.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, hon President, with reference to the
possible reconstruction of the United Nations, a body that has been in
existence for more than 60 years, what proposals could South Africa make in
respect of reconstruction to enable the United Nations to operate more
effectively to prevent wars, like the ones in Iraq and in Africa; to
prevent poverty and misery all over the world? What proposals could we
make?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: One of the proposals that we have made is
that, with regard to the restructuring and reform of the Security Council,
we believe one of the steps that could be taken would be to establish a
specific mechanism to discuss that. There is none now. This should be some
mechanism through which people could negotiate this restructuring of the
Security Council.

As the situation stands now, there is a general discussion of this matter,
without a particular institution and a process, which is targeting an
outcome within a particular set period. That is part of what we are
proposing.
With regard to the other matters that relate to development, the fight
against poverty and all that, what is critically important is that ways and
means have to be found to implement the various decisions that the United
Nations has taken. In reality, I think the United Nations has taken all of
the major decisions that you need with regard to this, whether it is the
Millennium Declaration or the outcomes of the Johannesburg World Summit on
Sustainable Development, the other major conferences of this kind, the
Beijing process with regard to women, the Conference Against Racism in
Durban and all of that. I think there are all sorts of decisions that have
been agreed to globally and that constitute the global agenda. We need the
mechanisms and the institutions to make sure that that agenda is addressed
properly, and to ensure that bodies like the World Bank and the IMF are
locked into those processes. This is what is missing.

Indeed, as part of the restructuring of the United Nations as a whole,
which includes addressing the powers and functions of the General Assembly
and the powers and functions of the Economic and Social Council, we need to
seek to find ways and means by which we can in fact implement what is an
agreed agenda to eradicate poverty globally and to address matters of great
disparities between the rich and the poor, between the North and the South.

I think it is a matter of focusing on that to ensure that you indeed have
the institutions that would implement that agreed agenda. Thank you, Madam
Speaker.

              Government’s measures to improve service delivery

20.   Mr K K Khumalo (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:

      What measures will the government implement to improve service
      delivery to realise its stated objectives of providing a better life
      for all our people?
      N2152E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I do believe that our
government, together with all other institutions of state has made enormous
progress to better the lives of all the people of South Africa. In that
process, we have sought to manage the economy efficiently to put it on a
sustainable growth path, while we release resources to meet the basic needs
of our people.

Increased spending levels have enabled us to provide social grants to over
11,5 million beneficiaries. We have built and upgraded more than 1 300
clinics; installed new equipment in more than 2 300 clinics; extended the
childhood immunisation programme which now stands at 82% coverage;
increased patients’ hospital and clinic visits to more than 100 million
patient visits a year; attained steady progress in school enrolment, both
in primary and secondary schools; built over 64 000 classrooms; registered
over 200 000 young people for learnerships, and so on. That includes 2
million housing subsidies and houses built; 3,5 million houses connected to
the electricity grid since 1994; 3,9 million poor households with free
basic water, and 2,9 million with free basic electricity.

In order to roll back the backlog that’s emerged in the public
infrastructure sector, public sector investment is planned to rise to the
level of about 8% of the gross domestic product.

As indicated in the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, government and
public enterprise investment expenditure for the Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework period will, as you would know, hon Speaker, be R409 billion. Of
this, R108 billion will be spent by Eskom and Transnet, and R63 billion
will be spent on roads. Of this,       R30,5 billion has been set aside
over the next three years for integrated housing and human settlements.
There is R5,6 billion for electrification of homes, and R6,8 billion for
hospital revitalisation with R550 million to procure radiology and oncology
equipment, and R24,7 billion would be allocated to municipalities to roll
out basic municipal services.

The aggregate spending on schools and other education infrastructure over
the MTEF period will be R10 billion. During the year 2007 the number of
learners who will not be required to pay any school fees will be just over
5 million throughout the country.
Protection service expenditure on courts, police stations, and prisons is
expected to total R6,5 billion, and the water sector, which includes dams,
pipelines, reticulation and treatment plants, will amount to R19 billion.

Despite the progress we have made, I am certain we all agree that there is
still much to do to better the lives of our people, and one of the
challenges is further and vigorously to improve service delivery to our
people.

In this regard, there are numerous measures that government has put in
place to improve service delivery and offer a real prospect of a better
life for all our people. On a number of occasions we have alerted this
House to those measures, and many of the critical measures have been
directed towards the sphere of local government, because this is where most
of the service delivery takes place.

In this regard, and as we have said in the past, the biggest challenge
facing our municipalities is lack of capacity, which makes it difficult for
many of them to provide services as they should, especially to poor
communities. Accordingly, to address the problem of capacity and therefore
better service delivery, special measures have been put in place, including
targeted recruitments and secondments to ensure that our municipalities
have available people with the requisite skills, such as engineers,
building inspectors, architects, health workers, project managers,
accountants and others.

Further, a municipal leadership development qualification has been
developed for councillors and senior local government officials to improve
their efficiency and effectiveness, and thus in turn to further improve
service delivery.

In addition to the councillor induction programme directed at the more than
9 000 councillors who were elected in March 2006, we are also looking at
the technical side of our local government’s functional status. This
includes municipal performance management regulations that are key to the
finalisation and issuing of a generic set of prescribed performance
contracts.

We have also recently launched the local government anticorruption
strategy, in an effort to promote a culture of good and ethical governance
that is totally intolerant of corrupt and fraudulent behaviour in
government. This, as we know, is very important to ensure that our people
do in fact benefit from the resources deployed to make goods and services
essential to a better life available, especially to the poor.

The Department of Provincial and Local Government and the Department of
Public Service and Administration are also finalising the conceptualisation
of a contribution to be made by Project Khaedu towards enhancing national
and provincial government support for priority municipalities.

Let me stop there, Madam Speaker. This clock keeps going up and up.

Mr K K KHUMALO: Madam Speaker, I thank the President for an informative
response.

Hon President, our Constitution provides for co-operative governance as a
model for effective service delivery. The question is whether the
government is considering additional institutional arrangements in order to
strengthen this model of co-operative governance. Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: As I’ve just mentioned, we are in the
process of launching Project Khaedu, which is intended to further reinforce
and enhance support provided by national and provincial governments to the
municipalities. Indeed, it has come about as a result of a survey that was
conducted by the Department of Public Service and Administration to assess
this particular question as to what the national and provincial governments
are doing effectively to support local government.

In that regard, let me say that, as a reflection of that co-operation, I am
very happy to report that 98% of all municipalities have revised their
integrated development plans, benefiting from intergovernmental
collaboration and support, the co-operative governance that the hon member
has just talked about.

Indeed, it is through this process that we are beginning to forge a better
alignment between the national spatial development perspective and
provincial growth and development strategies, and the municipal IDPs.

The hon member also knows of course about the other initiatives we have
launched, such as Project Consolidate whereby national government deploys
experts to various municipalities identified through the Project
Consolidate process.

The Development Bank of Southern Africa, the DBSA - again the hon member is
aware of this – as a result of an intervention by national government, is
handling Siyenza Manje, which has already recruited 144 experts and young
graduates for deployment in priority municipalities.

We continue as national government, provincial government and local
government to meet through the process of the Presidential Co-ordinating
Council, and that is an important body through which we express this co-
operative governance. Government, at all levels, is implementing the
Intergovernmental Relations Framework Act to put in place the institutions
required by that law to effect that system of co-operative governance.
So, no, hon member, I do not believe that we need additional institutions,
but I think what we need is to make sure that we do indeed implement the
decisions that we’ve taken to reinforce that system of co-operative
governance.

Mr S E OPPERMAN: Madam Speaker, I thank the President for giving us and
emphasising inputs and outputs. I think the question this afternoon is
whether we have a proper analysis of outcomes as prescribed by the Public
Finance Management Act. There is a lot of activity; people are busy. The
question is whether just being busy betters the lives of people.

We have, for example, under the Expanded Public Works Programme, hundreds
of thousands of job opportunities. The problem is that the average duration
of such a job is just over four months. Under these circumstances, proper
transfer of skills cannot take place, and we know the Joint Initiative for
Priority Skills Acquisition accentuates skills development as being
essential for economic growth to better the lives of people. It is clear
that we need serious intervention. I would appreciate your response. Thank
you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I would agree with the hon
member that we indeed should do the necessary work and analyse the
outcomes. I agree fully with him that indeed we can all be very busy - and
I am sure many of the hon members of this House are very busy - but I don’t
know what outcomes they get as a result of that busyness. [Laughter.]

The hon member is correct. That is in part why I was quoting these
statistics earlier, because you can measure outcomes. You can tell how many
houses have got electricity, how many houses have got water, and so on. I
think that if you look at that you can see that there is progress that has
been made.

The hon member is correct with regard to the matter of skills, but I think
it must be accepted that from the beginning, with regard to the Expanded
Public Works Programme, we did say that some of the outcomes you would get
from that would not only be temporary jobs, but also the possibility to
train people while they are working, so that when they emerge from that
programme they are people with some skills and who have the capacity to get
jobs.

Indeed it is necessary to measure whether we are producing the results that
were intended, and of course that also includes other interventions with
regard to the skills area such as the outcome of the training programmes
carried out by the Setas. I am sure the hon member knows that it has been
done, and I would imagine that the Minister of Labour has, in the past,
even given reports here about the performance of the various Setas, which
is uneven, but we are able to discover that level of unevenness because we
try and assess precisely the issue of the outcomes.
The hon member is quite correct. The government departments are supposed to
submit annual reports to Parliament, which would reflect on those outcomes.
I do hope that the hon member would want to have a look at those so as to
see whether those reports – at the end of the year – reflect the outcomes
that would have been reflected in the budget, and so on, that the National
Assembly would have provided.

It is an important question and perhaps we could all act together - the
executive and the legislature – to ensure that we indeed insist that our
system of government does not just focus on being busy, but indeed gets
busy in order to produce specific results. Thank you.

Mr P F SMITH: Thank you, Speaker. Mr President, the IFP would agree with
you that human capacity is a major constraint on service delivery. We would
also agree that there are problems in respect to performance contracts. Mr
President, if you look at the way performance contracts work countrywide,
the problem is, of course, a national issue, as well as a provincial and
local issue. It is not purely a local government problem.

In fact, there are too many instances countrywide of managers whose
contracts are not very challenging, and too many cases of managers who are
paid performance bonuses, when in fact they have failed to comply with the
terms of the contract. We do agree with you that the whole issue of
performance contracts needs to be revisited.
The question I put to you, Sir, is firstly, are these regulations going to
apply to all three spheres of government or simply local government?
Secondly, when will they come into effect? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC:  Well, yes, the hon member is correct. As
far as I know - and I can check this - there is indeed a system in place, I
know certainly, in terms of national government. It is a system of
assessing performance by senior management in national government, which
includes assessing the directors-general.

For instance, last week I was looking at the assessment of the performance
of the Director-General in the Presidency. I wouldn’t say what it was, but
it is not bad. The assessment is not bad. [Laughter.] [Interjections.] No,
no, it’s good. It is actually good. [Laughter.] It’s because he is in the
House, you see. I think we shouldn’t praise him too much.

There is a system like that, but it may very well be that we continue to
have a look at it, to make sure that it achieves the results that are
necessary. Certainly, at the level of the national government, there should
be a regular annual system of assessment, not only in the departments but
also in the Public Service Commission as part of the process of assessing
this performance. It has to be throughout all the spheres of government.

The hon member referred to senior managers who get bonuses for having done
nothing and all that. I would be very glad to know who those managers are,
because obviously he knows. No, it is not Reverend Chikane. Reverend
Chikane is okay. I would be very glad to know who those are because,
clearly, if there are people like that, it might help us to identify what
is wrong with the assessment system if it permits people to come through
and get approved, get the bonuses and get their A plusses and all that,
when in fact they have not performed.

I am saying that I would be very pleased if the hon Smith could give me the
names of those managers. Give it to Koos van der Merwe to bring to me. That
would be very good indeed. [Laughter.]

Mr N T GODI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question that I want to ask,
Comrade President, is around capacity, which I think you touched on in your
initial response to the submitted question, in so far as municipalities are
concerned. My take will be at a more generic and higher level. I think that
in the Asgisa programme the challenge of strategic leadership in government
departments has been identified.

I wanted to check what it is that government is doing or has done to meet
that challenge, especially in the light of the high turnovers that we have
in departments amongst very senior managers. There is a high level of
vacancies, as well as the challenge of maladministration of these very same
public resources that are supposed to be used for service delivery, whose
timeous and qualitative delivery is obviously impacted upon by capacity
within these departments.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I am not quite sure about how
to deal with this. Of course, it’s agreed that this capacity problem – as
it was said earlier by the hon Smith – is not only confined to municipal
government. That is correct. It affects national government too, including
this matter that the hon member talks about, which is, in some instances,
perhaps an unacceptably high turnover of senior civil servants. It does
happen.

The reasons for this would vary from department to department, but it is
true. In some instances it is a matter of people with professions having
the capacity to get better salaries outside of government. There is very
little you can do about it. There are some things, but very little that you
can do fundamentally, because I do not know if ever government salaries
would be able to compete with private sector salaries in particular areas.
Certainly, that is one of the issues.

The hon member would be familiar with the work that the national government
has been doing, led by the Department of Public Service and Administration,
which is to look in detail at each of these national departments, and in
particular to address this matter of vacancies. I am quite sure that the
hon member will remember that we have spoken about this before.

It is specifically within these departments where we identify vacancies,
what kinds of skills are needed, how many vacancies in number, and so on,
in order to put in place programmes and processes that would help us to
address these things. So, I would say, therefore, in general, that yes,
there is continuous work that we are doing to make sure that the
departments are properly staffed with a sufficient number of people with
sufficient skills, to be able to discharge their responsibilities.

With regard to the matter of strategic leadership in government
departments, I should imagine that all of them are led very strategically.
I don’t know which department doesn’t have that strategic leadership.
[Interjections.] It has, but Tony Leon says that Home Affairs doesn’t have
a strategic leader. Maybe we might offer him the job of Minister of Home
Affairs. [Laughter.] Thanks, Madam Speaker.

   Terms of reference and status of investigation of Donen Commission iro
                        Iraq’s Oil-for-Food Programme

21.   The Leader of the Opposition (DA) asked the President of the
      Republic:

      (1)   What is the current status of the Donen Commission’s
           investigation into the United Nations report on Iraq’s Oil-for-
           Food Programme;

      (2)   whether the Commission’s terms of reference have been redrafted
           in accordance with the Pretoria High Court ruling on 9 May 2005;
           if not, why not; if so, (a) what are the new terms of reference
           and (b) when is the Commission scheduled to start its work;

      (3)   whether, in the event that the Commission’s terms of reference
           have not been altered, he will consider revising them to include
           an investigation into the allegations surrounding the so-called
           oilgate scandal; if not, (a) why not and (b) how does the delay
           in establishing new terms of reference for the Donen Commission
           reflect on his commitment to fight corruption; if so, when will
           the new terms of reference be approved?
           N2147E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, the term of the commission of
inquiry into the Oil-for-Food Programme in Iraq expired on 30 September
2006. The commission submitted its report on 6 November, earlier this
month. Government is studying the report and will take appropriate
decisions on it in due course.

The Pretoria High Court did not rule that the commission’s terms of
reference should be redrafted. What happened is that government informed
the court that it may consider other ways in which to make it possible for
the commission to complete its work without giving rise to legal
challenges. The court accepted this. The course of action proposed by
government may have included the withdrawal of the commission’s regulations
or the redrafting of the terms of reference. However, it was not necessary
to consider this matter further since the term of the commission expired
while a challenge to its mandate and powers was pending before the courts.

The commission of inquiry was set up to evaluate the report of the
independent inquiry into the United Nations Oil-for-Food Programme and
advise government on whether any conduct by South Africans referred to in
the report amounts to a contravention of our law. Should an examination of
the report reveal any breaches of the law, the matter would be taken up by
our law enforcement agencies. The commission of inquiry was also asked to
advise government on how best to implement such UN decisions in future.

We remain committed to ensuring that recommendations of the UN commission
are addressed with the necessary urgency. The legal challenges to the
mandate and powers of the commission resulted in unforeseen delays.
Government will, after studying the report, decide on the most expeditious
manner to give effect to the recommendations it makes. Thank you very much,
Madam Speaker.
The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr President you,
of course, are correct about the legal issue involved, but I would like to
put it to you, Mr President, that there is some disquiet about the very
narrowly drawn terms of reference for this commission and obviously we
await the decision of your office when you have read the report thoroughly,
which you received on 6 November.

In view of the fact that the ANC, or Mr Sandi Majali, using your name, I
might say, in Iraq in December 2000, accompanied by very senior officials
of the governing party, the ANC, were said in a chapter of the IIC report
to have benefited from this particular transaction, namely oil for food, is
it not a problem, Mr President, that the commission did not hold public
hearings? It did not hear testimony from any witnesses under subpoena for
the very reasons you explained, namely that it was legally impossible for
them to be so subpoenaed because of the court situation and that key people
identified in the report such as the Treasurer-General of the ANC, Mr Mendi
Msimang, were simply not capable of being subpoenaed before it.

I put it to you, Mr President, that one of the reasons for this is that the
terms of reference which were drafted by the Department of Justice
contradicted the provisions of the Commissions Act, because the Commissions
Act on the one hand allowed any witness the right to give evidence without
incriminating himself, whereas in fact the terms of reference which were
drawn up for this commission did not so provide. Surely that needs to be
rectified and this matter needs to be considered afresh because of this
shortcoming?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I am not sure that we are
able now to discuss this matter any further.

You see, I have said that the commission has reported, we are studying the
report and at the end of the study of the report, upon which we may indeed
come to the same conclusions as the hon member, we will then take the
necessary decisions.

I would imagine the most sensible thing to do in this circumstance is
indeed to study the report, come to the necessary conclusions and act on
that. I do not believe that any further discussion of this matter would
take us anywhere. So that is what we will do. Thank you.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Sorry, Madam, may I ask another question?

The SPEAKER: Yes, hon member.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you, Mr President, for your assurance.

When do you think it is reasonably likely that the Presidency will release
its findings of the commission?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: I don’t know. [Laughter.] [Applause.] If I
may ask, Madam Speaker, when does the hon member go on Christmas leave?

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: On 10 December.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: I will release them while the hon member is
on holiday. [Laughter.]

No, I can’t make that commitment in the event that we are unable to meet
it, because there are lots of other things that we have got to be doing in
addition to studying that report. There are many, many other things. I
think it would be incorrect for me to make a commitment which comes off the
top of my head, which we may very well not be able to meet. But I would
like to wish the hon member a good rest as from 10 December. [Laughter.]

  Reduction of levels of crime and strengthening of criminal justice system

22.   Ms M M Sotyu (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:

      (1)   Whether the current strategies implemented by the government
           across all sectors to address the occurrence of serious crimes
           are proving to be successful in providing safety and security
           for all citizens; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
           details;

      (2)   whether the government plans to implement any measures to
           strengthen the criminal justice system; if not, why not; if so,
           what measures?                                           N2153E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, for many years now reducing
the levels of crime in our country has been an important and central
priority of government. We have been particularly concerned with crimes
targeted at the person; hence our commitment to reduce these forms of
crimes in particular between 7% and 10% per annum until 2014.

Over the past year, and consistent with trends we have observed during the
preceding years, levels of contact crime have come down. We have observed a
decrease in crimes such as common robbery, attempted murder, common
assaults, robbery with aggravating circumstances, murder, rape and indecent
assault.

We are confident that we have the resources, the strategies and the will to
take the war to the criminals. In this regard, we commit ourselves to
ensuring that we work continuously to improve our performance.

Police investigations are now more co-ordinated across police station, area
and provincial boundaries. Expertise available within the police is being
redeployed to the station level where it is acutely required.

We will increase the number of police officers to 193 000 by 2009. Most of
the new members will be deployed in deterring crime rather than reacting to
it, based on the age-old principle that prevention is better than cure. In
the meantime we are training and improving the skills of our detectives.

Among other measures, another forensic science laboratory will be built in
the Western Cape in order to augment the current capacity that is capable
of processing 800 DNA samples per day. The current forensic laboratory
capacity in the Eastern Cape will soon be upgraded to deal with the first
phase of DNA analysis.

The capacity of the intelligence division of the SA Police Service is being
increased considerably, in terms of numbers, focus, expertise and other
enabling infrastructure.

We are encouraged by the co-operation of the private sector, particularly
the banking and retail industries in dealing with organised and aggravated
robberies. As a consequence of this partnership, between July and October,
the police arrested 154 people who were behind the recent spate of violent
and aggravated robberies. There is also good co-operation with the National
Prosecuting Authority in this regard.

Similar interventions are being implemented in other departments that make
up the criminal justice system. Retired prosecutors and magistrates have
been appointed specifically to help us reduce the backlog of cases with
regard to cases pending trial and pending finalisation.

We have started making it difficult for those who have committed serious
and violent crimes to obtain bail. In this regard, the National Prosecuting
Authority is closely co-operating with the police to ensure that people who
are out on bail for other offences are not granted bail again anywhere else
in the country.

This measure derives from the fact that, as a country, we have a serious
problem of repeat offending. The intervention by the Department of
Correctional Services that gives adequate attention to rehabilitation is
therefore critical and, for it to succeed meaningful partnerships with
families of offenders, communities, community-based organisations and civil
society in general required.

In October 2005, to improve capacity in the justice system, no fewer than
75 posts for magistrates were created. During the 2006-07 financial year,
more of these magistrates will be deployed, including regional magistrates.

We have isolated the areas that account for the most crime in our country.
Further, the affected areas have had their socioeconomic profiles
developed. It is clear that in this regard it is imperative that we co-
ordinate with the provincial and local authorities to do more in these
areas with a view to preventing crime from taking place.

As a country, we also need to understand and deal with the extraordinary
levels of violence that accompany the commission of various crimes. In this
regard, it is worth noting that most of these crimes, about 70%, occur
among people who know one another. Knowledge of this reality is important
in terms of both preventing and catching those who commit crime.

But at the same time we must say that, notwithstanding the positive
statistics reflecting some reductions in the crime levels, as government we
are obviously not satisfied and cannot be content while our citizens
continue to experience violent and brutal attacks by criminals.

Let me stop there, Madam Speaker. This clock stops me.
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good afternoon, Mr President. It is now the Deputy
Speaker.

Ms M M SOTYU: Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker. Ndiyabulela [I thank
you.], Comrade President. Mongameli [Mr President], from your response it
is clear that the ANC government is seriously committed to breaking the
cycle of violent crimes. Many of these crimes are committed against women
and children, as you have correctly mentioned.

Could the President inform this House about specific programmes of
government aimed at this phenomenon? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Deputy Speaker, I am sure the hon member
knows the answer to that question. [Laughter.] I am absolutely sure she
does. But what I would like to say with regard to that is that we have the
60 Days of Activism Against ...

An HON MEMBER: Sixteen days.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Yes, that is what I said. [Interjections.]
Did I say 60?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: It sounded like 60.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Well, I should have said the beginning of
the process of 352 days of activism against violence against women and
children. [Applause.] [Laughter.]

It is important, hon members. I do hope that the hon members of the
National Assembly will indeed participate in that campaign. It is important
that there should be that kind of visibility by people who are very well
known in the country, such as the hon Tony Leon. If you see him there, you
see him on TV and he is campaigning for this thing. You can imagine the
millions that would join because he is such an important role model.
[Applause.] [Laughter.]

It is important indeed that the hon members join this because we know that
a lot of this kind of violence occurs behind closed doors. It occurs within
our families and communities. The police have got to do what they have got
to do; the courts have got to do what they have got to do; the prosecutors
and all of that. But, there is a critical role that we have got to play to
address these particular challenges; to let the idea of zero tolerance with
regard to this kind of crime be something that imbues the communities so
that indeed the sorts of interventions that are necessary are then made.

Therefore, I really want to say, hon member, in response to your question:
Let’s indeed all of us participate in this particular programme of 16 Days
of Activism Against Violence Against Women and Children.
Mr B H HOLOMISA: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon President, when we consider
the nature of crime in South Africa, the overwhelming feature that also
causes the most distress for the general public is the exceptional violence
that is committed in the commission of many crimes, seemingly by well-
trained perpetrators from our country as well from our neighbours.

In order to respond to this type of violence, I submit that we require a
certain type of police force. It therefore follows that at various
strategic and command and management levels the people who lead the police
force and make decisions must themselves be highly trained and experienced
police specialists.

This scenario differs widely from the current one where some of the senior
police decision-makers are civilians with little or no real police
experience or expertise. I am not suggesting that civilian oversight should
be scrapped. Indeed, perhaps some arrangement along the lines of the
civilian oversight used for the Defence Force can be explored.

My question, Sir, is: Will government pursue such an approach for the
police force where you have a civilian structure, but the commissioners and
all strategic decision-makers are experienced and trained police
specialists?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I would imagine that one
would have to listen to this proposal by the hon member in better detail to
hear what it contains, because I would imagine that, for instance, where
you have a national commissioner of police you don’t expect him to lead a
team of robbers who might be robbing a bank and be there in the front line
with a gun, ordering the troops and so on. I wouldn’t imagine that you need
that. That would not be the job of a national commissioner.

Therefore, with regard to the fact that the national commissioner is a
civilian, I don’t know what impact it would have. What the hon member says
about particular skills for particular kinds of situations that arise
during the course of policing is probably correct. Whether you need
military officers to be national commissioners, that I am not sure about.
[Laughter.]

Maybe the hon member might want to put this thing down in writing. Let us
have a look at it, because indeed the concern that he expressed is quite
correct; the concern about the level of violence involved in the commission
of many of these crimes and about the sense of impunity that one senses
among the criminals that they do anything. They can shoot and kill a lot of
police officers and for some reason they feel emboldened to do this and it
may very well be that we look at the necessary preparation of the police in
a manner that the hon member suggests. I do hope that he agrees to convey a
more specific proposal so that indeed let’s have a look at it. Sivumelene.
Ndiyabulela. [We agreed. Thank you.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Deputy Speaker and hon President, there is a massive
lack of policing resources in our rural areas. The absence of police
stations in the community means that police are simply not visible enough,
nor do they always attend to reports by the community of criminal activity
or behaviour.

The question, Sir: Could the President consider a specific role for
traditional councils in strengthening law and order in traditional areas? I
thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Deputy Speaker, the matter of the judicial
functions and processes and this kind of issue that the hon member is
raising with regard to the communal traditional areas is a matter that has
been under discussion, certainly, between the provincial and local
government and the Ministry of Justice.

I think it is possible within that context if there are additional issues
that we believe need to be addressed. I hope the hon member is not
proposing that we should establish rural kitskonstabels [special
constables.] [Laughter.] But it is possible to be open in the national
government to look at the proposal given the fact that we all accept that
there are some judicial law enforcement roles and so on, that must be
played by our traditional authorities. I would imagine that there would be
no resistance to further discussing any other intervention to reinforce and
address this matter - which is serious - of the level of policing in rural
areas.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Madam Deputy Speaker and Mr President, the criminal
justice system in South Africa is in danger of imploding under the weight
of our horrific levels of crime due to a lack of capacity, huge backlogs,
massive staff vacancies, forensic laboratory delays, corruption,
overcrowding and gangsterism in our prisons.

The current systems are just not working and there is no doubt in our minds
as the DA that we need to create a multiparty commission determined to
drive the revival of our Police Service, our courts and our prisons as a
means of ensuring the safety of South Africans across the length and
breadth of the country; safety they do not currently enjoy - your good self
and your Ministers excluded, of course.

President Mbeki, your opinion, please, of such a call.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Deputy Speaker, I am quite certain
that there is absolutely nothing that stops the National Assembly or
Parliament as a whole and the parties here getting together to look at the
agenda that the hon member mentions. I would say please go ahead, hon
member ... [Laughter.] ... with a multiparty discussion like that and all
the matters that you mentioned. I would say it is fine and has my full
endorsement.

However, I wouldn’t personally proceed from the position that we are facing
a situation of a justice system that is imploding. It is not by any means
imploding. But, indeed, let Parliament have a look at all these matters.
The executive would appreciate very much any views from the legislature,
which would help us to improve any and all of the elements within the
criminal justice system. Thank you very much.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: That concludes questions to the President.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Deputy Speaker, I am terribly sorry.
Could I say something before I leave this podium? I wanted to say that on
behalf of the government we want to say thank you very much to Kasper
Hahndiek, the Secretary in the National Assembly, who I understand will be
retiring from active service in Parliament, having served here for many,
many years, even before 1994. We wish him a good time and success in
whatever he is going to do next. I would like to say as well that in
addition to the good wishes I extended to the hon Tony Leon as he goes on
holiday next month, those good wishes go to everybody else as well.
[Laughter.] Merry Christmas and Happy New Year. Thanks. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr President, and Merry Christmas
and a little bit of rest also for the President and the Presidency.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

 FAREWELL TRIBUTES TO OUTGOING SECRETARY TO THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY, MR KASPER
                                  HAHNDIEK

The SPEAKER: Deputy Speaker, may I start by recognising the family of Mr
Kasper Hahndiek who are sitting in the Speaker’s bay. [Applause.] We owe
you a whole lot of gratitude for having been there, for having been of
support to Kasper and for having sacrificed him, actually, and allowed us
to use him. This is because he is a very hard-working person and he spent
many hours here when, I am quite sure, you would have preferred to have had
him with you.

We don’t take that for granted, and we are very grateful for your patience
with us and for your support for him, and we wish you a good time with him
when he leaves us. [Applause.]

I got the letter giving notice that Mr Hahndiek was going to be retiring at
the end of this year quite early in the year. I must say that I just didn’t
know what to do with this letter. I didn’t feel like responding, but I knew
that the man had to retire. He had been here for more than 30 years. He has
been here for 36 years. [Applause.] But I also knew that it was not in the
interests of the National Assembly for him to go.

But then, surely, after 36 years, 12 of those spent helping our new
democracy to settle down ... [Applause.] Twelve of those years were spent
sharing perspectives, coming from the first 24 years he had spent here -
just to share the technical knowledge he had amassed - and also being
willing to understand the new situation, to learn what it was that was new
that had to be infused into the knowledge he had been gathering over the
earlier decades.

What I must say about Mr Hahndiek is how humble he has always been, how
helpful, how willing he is to listen to people’s problems, and also how
able he is to think on his feet and to come up with the most incisive kinds
of commentary and advice as soon as possible. He is a person who has always
been willing to really go the extra mile.

At some point in the middle of the year, I said to him - because I thought
he needed to know - that I hadn’t forgotten his letter. I said to him, “But
you know that I’m not impressed.” He said, “Yes, Madam, I know”.

We have since had to discuss some kind of way to still make use of what
this place has invested in him. Of course initially we have to allow him to
spend some months with his family. But because he is not yet an old man,
surely we can still call upon him to give training, to even go abroad too
and help other parliaments? I mentioned him to the Speaker of Ethiopia who
approached me and said that it was the first time that they were going to
have a multiparty democratic parliament. So, it was going to be a totally
new experience. I said: “Well, I believe that we have just the right man in
our Parliament, but he is retiring.”

So I believe, Mr Hahndiek, you need to know that it was not only
Afghanistan. He was called upon, by the way, to go to help set up the
Parliament of Afghanistan ... [Applause.] ... but unfortunately he could
not go, because he was so busy here in our Parliament. [Laughter.]

I am just trying to point out that he has recognition beyond the borders of
South Africa. He has, on a number of occasions, represented our Parliament
at the Inter-Parliamentary Union’s Association of Secretaries-General of
Parliaments, and I guess it is there that colleagues and counterparts
became exposed not just to his knowledge, but also to his personality and
how well he is able to relate to other human beings.

So, it really is not easy to part with Kasper Hahndiek, but he deserves his
retirement. The retirement he is going on is a very well-deserved one, and
I really wish him a good future whatever else he decides to do. But he must
never forget us because we will not forget him. Thank you. [Applause.]
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Speaker, I know that you have gone beyond your
time, but you made it very difficult for me to stop you. Initially, when I
saw the speakers’ list earlier on, I said: “I don’t think she will be able
to say everything she would like to say in five minutes.” I think I was
right.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, thank you very much indeed. It’s
obviously a huge privilege to follow the hon Speaker, and one must begin by
saying that we certainly would endorse everything you have said about Mr
Hahndiek today, Madam Speaker.

But, as you have said, Mr Hahndiek certainly has been here a very long
time. He has seen Prime Ministers come and go; he has seen Presidents come
and go; he has seen Speakers come and go; he has seen Chief Whips come and
go, and he has throughout his time retained a neutrality which is both
admirable and, at times for all parties, I suspect, very frustrating
indeed. I think we would all have liked Kasper Hahndiek to have taken sides
at some stage, but he steadfastly refused to do so.

Now, Mr Hahndiek’s biographical notes generally make for very interesting
reading indeed. But for me there are two points that really and truly stand
out. The first is that a young Kasper Hahndiek joined Parliament in 1970 as
a committee clerk and junior Hansard reporter and worked his way up the
ladder to become the Secretary to the National Assembly by the mid 1990s –
a really highly successful career of which he can be extremely proud.

The second, I think, is even more amazing, in that after school he studied
actuarial sciences for two years, with subjects such as pure mathematics,
applied mathematics, mathematical statistics, logics and metaphysics. These
were some of his subjects. Now, quite frankly, what an extraordinary thing
to do! What sort of mind sets about studying subjects like that? I am very
glad to say that after two years he gave up those studies because, as he
says, he found the air too rarefied.

I want to say that, clearly, Kasper Hahndiek is a person with a very sharp
analytical mind, who is a deep thinker, a problem solver - qualities with
which he has served Parliament magnificently for 36 years.

Quite frankly, Kasper Hahndiek is far more than this. He is a remarkably
warm person, extremely generous with his time and he is always willing to
share his knowledge, which, quite frankly, is vast.

These are the attributes that I believe he will be long remembered for, and
his staff I believe will bear testimony to this, for he has built up a
strong, loyal and highly efficient team who respect him deeply and admire
him greatly for the true professional that he is.
But we all will miss Kasper Hahndiek, the person, greatly. During his 36
years he has been involved in so much in this institution, and since 1994
in particular he has been synonymous with the development of the new
democratic Parliament of which we are all very proud members.

I have had the privilege of working closely with him on a number of
projects and have attended so many meetings where he has been present,
offering his quiet, excellent advice in that highly professional manner of
his. He has the ability to make presiding officers and chairs of committees
believe that they know everything, whereas in fact it is Kasper Hahndiek
who knows it all. He really is a remarkably astute man.

Throughout his career in Parliament, Kasper has created documents.  As one
official said to me yesterday, there are literally hundreds of Hahndiek
documents floating around Parliament. He has involved himself in so many
areas of work and is able to offer insight and advice on so many issues.

It is therefore not surprising to discover the very prominent role he
played in writing the current Rules for this Parliament and for the
National Assembly, and in the training of new members in terms of
parliamentary procedures and the constitutional governance structure.

He is, as Madam Speaker has said, highly regarded generally, but he is
highly regarded too as a procedural expert, an absolute boffin on procedure
within not only the National Assembly and the National Council of
Provinces, but also within our provinces themselves that I know do consult
him regularly.

Furthermore, as Madam Speaker has said, he is regarded at an international
level as an expert in procedure. Madam Speaker has mentioned certain
countries. Ireland and Canada are but two countries that have already used
his services.

However, I have no doubt that he has often been a very frustrated person in
this establishment, when he has worked tirelessly to produce a document at
the whim of a presiding officer or committee, only to note that that
document never saw the light of day as far as implementation was concerned.
I do believe, regrettably, that there are many of these documents.

But Mr Hahndiek is far more than a formidable parliamentary official. As
his staff will tell you, one of his greatest attributes is his capacity to
share his knowledge and to teach others what he knows. That is why the
National Assembly staff are as competent as they are, and when he leaves,
apart from his personality which we’ll be missing, there will, in fact, be
no gap in the efficiency of the Office of Secretary to the National
Assembly. In true Kasper Hahndiek style, he has made sure of this and we
respect him and thank him for his attitude.

In this regard, we again congratulate Kamal Mansura on his appointment and
wish him every success, and trust that he will follow in Mr Hahndiek’s
footsteps in doing a truly fine job in a truly fine manner. [Applause.] We
are confident that he will do this because that is the nature of the man
and that is also the nature of Kasper Hahndiek, his tutor.

So, we say to Kasper Hahndiek: Thank you for a job truly well done.  Your
commitment to Parliament as a whole and your energy, your ability and your
personality will seriously be sorely missed. We will miss the image of you
too, Kasper, with a cigarette in one hand, a cup of coffee in the other,
and the ever-ready pencil close by waiting to make the correction to a
document that you know is inevitable.

We wish you well in your retirement and trust that it will be as fulfilling
as your career in Parliament has been. To you and your family, we wish you
all the very best. We are losing a pillar of strength in Parliament and a
true gentleman. Thank you very much indeed. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I agree with the words
expressed by Madam Speaker, and in particular those expressed by Mike. I
thought that was a good speech, and I agree with everything.

With the departure of Kasper Hahndiek, a cornerstone of Parliament is sadly
being taken out. I want to tell members that there is an interesting
resemblance between Kasper and Koos, myself. [Laughter.] Kasper is the
longest-serving official of Parliament, and I am the longest-serving Member
of Parliament. By the end of this month, Kasper would have served 36 years
and I would have served 29 years. There are a number of members here today
who were not even born when Kasper and I were running around here in
Parliament. [Laughter.]

Kasper and I have served under five heads of state. We served under Prime
Minister John Vorster, President P W Botha, President F W de Klerk,
President Nelson Mandela and President Thabo Mbeki. But where I would score
extra points over Kasper, is that I will hopefully also serve under a sixth
head of state, whose identity at this moment is unclear, but who could
possibly be President Jacob Zuma. [Interjections.]

Madam Deputy Speaker, Kasper was Kasper 36 years ago, and today he is still
Kasper, as efficient as ever. Kasper is a prime example of an official who
has acquired a massive portfolio of exceptional skills, which so many
officials sadly lack today. Kasper is a master of every division of
Parliament. His doors were always open to us. He never complained; he
always assisted.

Kasper is the parliamentary version of the Encyclopaedia Britannica. It
would be interesting to know what his retirement plans are. I am sure the
International Parliamentary Union is not going to allow him to rust in
retirement, but will soon call upon him to serve all over the world,
offering his formidable skills to numerous other parliaments. I think the
Commonwealth Parliamentary Union will do the same, as well as the Pan-
African Parliament. Therefore Kasper’s retirement is only a retirement in
theory. Hard work, Kasper, lies ahead!

I wanted to celebrate Kasper’s 36 years of parliamentary service by
presenting him with an object, and, I carefully say today, an object with
36 candles on it. [Laughter.] But I have been advised that while you,
Madam, are in the Chair, that may cause me another day outside this House!
[Laughter.]

Finally, in saying goodbye to Kasper - note carefully, we are not saying
“farewell” to Kasper – I wish to convey my own special, personal thanks to
him for all the assistance he has given me personally over 29 years. Thank
you very much, Kasper.

As Kasper was born in Holland, it is appropriate for me to say goodbye to
him in pure Dutch: Dag! Gaat je wel, jonge! [Goodbye! May all be well with
you, young man!][Applause.]

Ms N C NKABINDE: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members, the institution of
Parliament, even though we may often forget this, is constituted of more
than the public representatives whom the citizens vote for in regular
elections. As any member of this institution comes to learn very quickly,
it is the staff who support the institution and its administration who make
it possible for us as parliamentarians to perform and meet our
constitutional mandate and obligations.

It is a sad farewell that we therefore bid Mr Hahndiek, who has become an
institution at this institution. He possesses a wealth of knowledge,
experience and expertise that we will sorely miss with his retirement.

The work of Parliament and democracy is not only vastly more open to the
public, but also as a result much more complex and intricate. Even in this
state of transparency there is a huge portion of this institution’s work
that depends upon complicated procedures and processes that the public
never gets to see and that even we as members are often not fully aware of.
Behind the scenes, Mr Hahndiek has played a pivotal role in ensuring that
we comply with the procedures that give legitimacy to the legislative
duties that have elevated this institution and the National Assembly in
particular to the highest level of regard among its peers internationally.
That is no small achievement for an institution that is barely 10 years
old.

We hope, Sir, that you will leave with the knowledge that you have
contributed to something truly remarkable, namely the practical expression
of the freedom that all South Africans obtained with the advent of
democracy. We assure you that we will continue to build upon the foundation
that you have helped to lay. It is apt that we bid Mr Hahndiek this
official farewell to recognise the excellent work he has done over the
years and to publicly acknowledge his vital contribution, which has been
performed without public acknowledgement or fanfare. We thank you, Sir, and
wish you all the best for your retirement. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A HARDING: Madam Deputy Speaker, Mr Hahndiek has been at Parliament for
longer than the joint age of younger MPs like me and the hon Koos van der
Merwe! The ID fully agrees with other speakers before me, and those who
still have to come, and pays tribute to Mr Hahndiek’s excellent service
record.

Mr Hahndiek has served this institution proudly. As you know, Mr Hahndiek,
as MPs we are frequently called up here to say nice things about people to
whom we have hardly spoken two words. In your instance, I can definitely
say that that is not the case.

Most striking to me is Mr Hahndiek’s humility and his ability to remain
calm in this challenging environment. I would like to go as far as to say
that Mr Hahndiek is the embodiment of the Batho Pele principle. I am
certain that your advice to many political parties, which in many instances
was not taken, will be sorely missed.

At the same time the ID wishes to congratulate Mr Mansura on his
appointment, and we also want to wish Mr Hahndiek a well-deserved
retirement. Thank you. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I first want to agree with
everything that the Speaker has said about Mr Hahndiek and also with what
other colleagues had to say.

We have come to know him as a hard-working, modest, humble and down-to-
earth man and one who, in all his dealings with both MPs and the public,
pays due consideration to honouring and upholding the name of the
Parliament of the Republic of South Africa.

When we first came to Parliament in 1994, the name Kasper Hahndiek was
almost synonymous with the institution of Parliament. For many of us, he
has become a trademark of the National Assembly, and we are surely going to
miss him. Mr Hahndiek was very helpful in our general orientation about
Parliament when we first arrived, but particularly in co-ordinating our
training and introduction to the Rules of Parliament.

Until today, his door has always remained open to MPs whenever we needed
clarity or help regarding our work. I believe I would not be wrong for
giving him all the credit for the knowledge and instruction we received
about how to run a democratic Parliament.

Therefore, on behalf of the ACDP, I wish him and his family the Lord’s
richest blessings during his retirement, and trust that he will enjoy his
much-deserved rest. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Deputy Speaker, it is a privilege and an honour for
me, on behalf of the FF Plus, to participate in this very important debate
this afternoon.

However, I think I should start off by saying to Mr Hahndiek that I’ve got
some good news and I’ve got some bad news. The good news is I think he can
rest assured that no one in this Chamber this afternoon will be calling for
a division at the end of this specific debate. [Laughter.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Don’t be too sure!

Dr C P MULDER: He presided over many, many divisions, but I can  assure  him
nobody will call for a division this afternoon – that is the good news.

The bad news, however, is that I think Mr Hahndiek should take note  of  the
reality, for example, that in a  country  called  Germany,  they  have  just
extended the retirement age to 67. So I  think  Mr  Hahndiek  will  have  to
reconsider. He’s got another seven years of service to  give  to  Parliament
and South Africa.

Mevrou die Adjunkspeaker, ek wil graag namens die VF Plus baie dankie sê
aan mnr Hahndiek vir die diens wat hy hier gelewer het. Soos u sal weet,
het hy hier gekom in 1970. As ons dan nou ouderdomme moet vergelyk, dan
moet ek bieg dat ek op daardie stadium 11 jaar oud was. Toe ek in 1988 by
hierdie Parlement gekom het, was mnr Hahndiek reeds 18 jaar in die
Parlement en was hy reeds ’n senior amptenaar op daardie stadium.

Sy totale diens het hy gelewer in die Parlement en ek wil op ’n persoonlike
vlak vir hom sê: in baie vergaderings en in baie komitees het ek mnr
Hahndiek raakgeloop en hom in aksie gesien waar hy sy werk effektief doen.
Ek het hom nooit, nie een keer, kwaad sien word of sy humeur  sien verloor
of dat hy emosie gewys het dat hy ongelukkig is met wat gebeur in ’n
vergadering of dat hy verskil met wat daar gebeur het nie. Hy het hom
altyd, ten alle tye, 100% professioneel gedra, nooit sy eie standpunt
voorgestoot nie en die Parlement en die Suid-Afrikaanse demokrasie gedien
op sy beste manier.

Ek wil vir hom sê baie dankie. Ek wil vir hom alle sterkte toewens namens
die VF Plus. Mag hy ’n welverdiende rus hê, maar hy moet asseblief terugkom
en verder sy kennis vir ons kom gee. Ons het hom nog steeds nodig. Baie
dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Madam Speaker, on behalf of the FF Plus I would like to thank  Mr  Hahndiek
for the service he rendered here. As you know, he started here in  1970.  If
we should compare age, I must confess that  I  was  11  years  old  at  that
stage. When I came to this Parliament in 1988, Mr Hahndiek had already  been
at Parliament for 18 years and was already a senior official at that stage.

He gave his all in his service to Parliament and on a personal level I  want
to tell him: In many meetings and committees I encountered Mr  Hahndiek  and
saw him in action whilst doing his work effectively. I never  once  saw  him
getting angry or losing his temper or showing emotion when  he  was  unhappy
about something that happened in the meeting or that he disagreed with  what
happened there. He conducted himself  100%  professionally,  at  all  times,
never pushed his personal viewpoints and served  Parliament  and  the  South
African democracy to the best of his abilities.

I just want to thank him. On behalf of the FF Plus I want to wish him well.
May he have a well-deserved rest, but he must please come back to give more
of his knowledge to us. We still need him. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Deputy Speaker and hon members, we bid farewell to a
stalwart, a trailblazer, a workaholic and somebody who is the embodiment of
a gentleman and humility personified: Mr Hahndiek.

My first encounter with this gentleman was in 1999 when the UCDP first came
to Parliament. I say without any fear of contradiction that the UCDP is the
only party that entered Parliament without anyone in its caucus having had
experience of Parliament post-1994.

Mr Hahndiek acted as a real pedagogue. He led us by the hand regarding all
matters relating to Parliament and naturally even came to show us the
National Assembly Chamber. My party is really indebted to this tireless
servant of the people for all the tutelage he offered, like Gamaliel of
old.

As Secretary of the National Assembly, Mr Hahndiek showed that the price of
greatness is responsibility. He showed that greatness is not displayed by
doing extraordinary things, but by doing ordinary things extraordinarily
well. Mr Hahndiek excelled in this. Whenever he was asked to prepare a
document, conduct some research to find out information, he and his staff
would always, without fail - I must emphasize - present a well-researched
document that would require no further interrogation. Whatever frills or
additions there were would be of a political nature to be left to political
parties.

The UCDP wishes Mr Hahndiek well in his deserved retirement. I am inclined
to echo the words of the Master of all masters when he congratulated one of
His servants on a job well done. He said, and I quote:


  Well done, thou good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over a
  few things, I will make thee ruler over many things.

This is from Matthew, chapter 25, verse 21.

He surely has what it takes to traverse the globe, to share some of his
experiences. Surely Mr Hahndiek leaves his office and this Parliament with
his head held high because of the good race he ran in discharging his
duties and may He who is able to keep us from falling present Mr Hahndiek
faultless in the face of the world. Farewell, Kasper. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Dr G G WOODS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I think the Reverend Meshoe reminds us
of the intake of the class of 1994, of the presence of Mr Hahndiek at that
particular time, how he mentored us, and how he came around to the caucuses
of our various parties and how, perhaps more than any other individual, he
gave function and productivity to the new Parliament, to a lot of us who
were very awe-struck and bewildered at the time.

We want to associate ourselves with many of the compliments – they are very
deserved compliments - that have been given to Mr Hahndiek today by our
colleagues. I will have to add our own take, which is that I think that Mr
Hahndiek and his knowledge must be recognised - the abundance of knowledge
- and the proper way in which he has always dispensed that knowledge.

I have particularly valued the accessibility of his office. One could go
there at any time with any particular problem and, if he could, he would
always put aside whatever he was busy on and consult with you.

I had a particular experience with Mr Hahndiek, back in the old days of the
arms deal, when many of the conventions of this Parliament - the
Constitution and the Rules - were being tested and stretched. On many
occasions, I had to go and speak to Mr Hahndiek. I will always be grateful
for that calm and astute and clear way in which he gave me a workable
interpretation of how to proceed on a particular issue.

With that in mind, and for everything else you have given us, Mr Hahndiek,
thank you very much. Go well. We also take this opportunity to welcome Mr
Mansura into the seat. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, Mr Hahndiek has served this Parliament
for 36 years. He has witnessed the transition of South Africa from its
horrific past to our promising democracy. He has indeed travelled this road
with us, and carries the history of our transition with him.

I come to the podium on behalf of the MF, and thank Mr Hahndiek for his
service and great contribution to the running of this House. Indeed, after
36 years you have built great relations and your contributions to the House
can certainly not be praised enough.

You retirement is certainly well earned after 36 years, and we wish you the
best of days to come. May they be filled with love, family and all the
relaxation which you sacrificed over all those years.

Madam Speaker, I want to echo your sentiments when you said thank you to
the family of Mr Hahndiek for giving him to us for all these years. Now we
say, yes, take him back, but not all of him. [Laughter.]

You know, Madam Speaker, while on the visit to China with you, every time I
looked when we went for supper and for lunch, I saw Mr Hahndiek having
soup. So the other day, I sent him a letter that said, ``Get out of the
soup’’. I want to tell his family: Stop giving him more soup now.

Mr Hahndiek, we are going to miss you. Over my seven and a half years with
you, we worked very closely. I think I know you better than I do my own
family. We wish you all the best. I am sure you are going to come and say
hello to us, and you still have your responsibilities.

I also want to take this opportunity to welcome Mr Kamal Mansura, who too
has served Parliament for many years. Mr Mansura will certainly fill these
shoes well, and we look forward to having him on board as our new
parliamentary Secretary. You have certainly earned this position. Our
warmest congratulations and well wishes to you, Mr Mansura.

Go well, Mr Hahndiek, and don’t forget us. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Ms N M MDAKA: Madam Speaker, hon members, I used to go to your office
crying, Mr Hahndiek. You know that, and you wiped my tears. I am also
crying today. [Interjections.]

I rise today to recognise an outgoing public servant, Mr Kasper Hahndiek,
who has served Parliament with distinction and dedication during the last
three decades, starting in 1970 as a junior Hansard reporter until he was
appointed Secretary to the National Assembly.

Mr Hahndiek is the epitome of the South African Public Service. When I
speak of him, I am speaking about a person with humility and warmth who
would even go to the extent of kneeling down when he greeted people. That’s
him.

I join with my colleagues in this House today in wishing Kasper, his wife,
Margaret, and their three boys the very best for his retirement years
ahead.

In preparing for this speech, I found it both difficult and rewarding at
the same time: difficult because Mr Hahndiek will be gone but far from
forgotten; rewarding, because those of us who know you, know how special
you are.

Mr Hahndiek doesn’t need any titles nor did he wear them. He would often
introduce himself as just Kasper. He is a humble and down-to-earth person.
He always captured the attention of anyone. He even spoke with those
overhearing what he had to say.

Mr Hahndiek embodies sincerity and passion for public service and that of
the management community. I want to thank you, Mr Hahndiek, for your
service. Mr Hahndiek, we thank you for your leadership role. You upheld and
maintained an open-door policy all the time.

You always ensured that all those who required assistance had easy access
to you. I wish you success in all your future endeavours. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon member. I think these speeches are
actually helping Mr Mansura understand his job description, including
having to wipe away tears! [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, hon members,
on the first of November, the Speaker announced the retirement of Mr Kasper
Hahndiek, Secretary to the National Assembly. The Speaker indicated that 30
November would be the last day of Mr Hahndiek’s dedicated tenure in this
House.

It is with great pleasure that the ANC takes this opportunity to express
its gratitude to Mr Hahndiek for the dedicated manner in which he has
served Parliament and the nation for 36 years. The outgoing Secretary has
set a high standard of professional integrity and diligence.

On our continent, it is said that when an elderly person passes away, it is
as if a library has burned down. I should say that this saying fits Mr
Hahndiek in respect of his knowledge of this institution.

It is thus ironic that at this very moment that when we are happy for the
opportunity to express our gratitude to the outgoing Secretary we, at the
same time, feel displeasure in losing a person of his calibre and
experience. He has been here longer than many of us. We are told that when
he is asked how long he has been here, he appropriately answers,
``Forever’’. When people try to find out whether he was here AD or BC, they
are told, no, in fact, he was here BBC, ie born before computers.
[Laughter.]

Mr Hahndiek joined Parliament in 1970 as a committee clerk and junior
Hansard reporter. In-between working for Parliament and studying part-time,
he managed to find some time to get married. He is married to Ms Margaret
Versveldt, and they have three sons. [Applause.] He was formally appointed
as a Hansard reporter in 1975, and promoted to senior Hansard reporter in
1977. A further promotion to assistant editor of Hansard followed in 1984.

He was transferred to the Table and worked as a Table Assistant in 1985,
and was formally appointed to the Secretariat of Parliament as
Undersecretary in 1988.

In this capacity, he was directly responsible for providing procedural
support to the then House of Delegates and the House of Representatives as
well as managing a number of services, including language services,
legislation and proceedings, and security.

In 1992, he became Senior Undersecretary. During this time, his management
duties included the introduction and subsequent application of a
performance assessment system, contributing to the restructuring of the
parliamentary service to meet changing needs, reviewing policy and
directing recruitment drives as the service expanded.

When the new democratic Parliament was established in 1994, Mr Hahndiek was
assigned the responsibility for the National Assembly under the former
Speaker, the hon Frene Ginwala, and also served on the Management Board of
the Parliamentary Service.

Amongst many other assignments not directly related to his line function
responsibilities, he was called upon to co-ordinate training workshops and
international conferences, and chaired a technical committee to develop new
Rules under the direction of a steering committee of members.

In June 1997, with the appointment of Mr Sindiso Mfenyana as Secretary to
Parliament, the post of Secretary to the National Assembly was created, and
Mr Hahndiek was formally appointed to that post by a House resolution.
After the 2004 elections, he continued to serve under the current Speaker,
the hon Baleka Mbete.

The new democratic Parliament brought with it many challenges for support
staff. Primary amongst these was the need to develop and apply Rules and
practices consonant, initially, with the interim constitution, and
subsequently, with the new Constitution. A related challenge was the need
to provide relevant training on parliamentary proceedings and governance
structures.

Mr Hahndiek has insisted on maintaining an open-door policy, ensuring that
all who require assistance would have ready access to him, and would obtain
meaningful and practical advice. We can add that his open-door policy was
accompanied by a covered-desk policy, and that people tell us that there
are parts of his desk which have not seen the light of the sun for many,
many decades!

Notwithstanding that, he claims - and we have no reason to dispute his
claim - that he has absolute knowledge of where every one of those files is
and what it contains.

We should acknowledge his instrumental role in the production of a number
of publications on the core business of Parliament, including the National
Assembly Guide to Procedure, the regularly issued Procedural Developments
in the National Assembly and the Audit of Statutes: Guide to Parliament’s
Obligations under the Constitution and Legislation.

When we asked some of the people who have been privileged to work with Mr
Hahndiek what type of person he is, they all had the same thing to say.
They praised him for always being a good team player. In the heat of
pressure, other people lose their tempers, experience frustration or give
up. Mr Hahndiek never loses his serenity. Maybe it is because of his
frequent visits to the smoking zone. [Laughter.]

In fact, there are those who allege that Mr Hahndiek’s retirement is
brought about not by the fact that he has been here for 36 years, but
because of the new rules and laws that outlaw smoking in offices, and that
those have forced him to go! [Applause.]

Mr Hahndiek has worked in this institution under different political
systems, and with various leaders and colleagues. He has served all with
great distinction. Of course, without suggesting that there were no
difficulties, this is a great human quality.

On the topic of different political systems, we have tried for very long to
ascertain what political party Mr Hahndiek actually belongs to. We have
finally been informed that in fact he belongs to the CCPP, the Coffee,
Cigarette, and Pencil Party. [Laughter.]

Now we have made the point that the outgoing Secretary to the National
Assembly has set a high standard of professional integrity and diligence.
The challenge of creating the society envisaged in the Constitution
requires people who are able to translate the principles contained therein
into a lived reality.

The outgoing Secretary has ensured that we, the institution, the people he
served, come first. He exemplifies the caring cadre that we should populate
our governance structures with. He is accessible and flexible. He, at all
times, listens to different views and never sought to gain popularity by
undermining those in positions of responsibility.

He has made an immense contribution in reinforcing our confidence in the
ability of the institution to support us. Even as he departs, we feel
fortunate that there are men and women of our country such as him whose
conduct is a reflection of the humanist and uplifting tradition of ubuntu
and the practice of Batho Pele.

The ANC wishes him, his wife and their family happiness and success in
their future plans, and welcomes his successor, Mr Kamal Mansura, and
wishes him all of the best. Thank you. [Applause.]

                         SOUTH AFRICAN AIRWAYS BILL

                           (First Reading debate)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I wish to remind members that there is no speakers’
list for this type of First Reading debate. After the introductory speech,
members who wish to participate in the debate must press the ``To Talk’’
button on their desks, and when recognised by the presiding officer may
speak from the floor microphones.

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Madam Deputy Speaker, I add my own
best wishes to Mr Hahndiek, and to the incoming Secretary. It’s really a
quite moving occasion, I think, to get such a moving farewell.

Deputy Speaker, ladies and gentlemen, I am tabling another Bill today that
continues the process of restructuring Transnet. I have had the difficult
task of negotiating with the chair of the portfolio committee, the hon
Carrim, to allow me to place yet another burden on the committee’s
shoulders at this late stage. However, we will deal with the Bill first
thing next year, and not this year.

The focus of our attention this time is on the South African Airways. You
will recall that our intention is to focus Transnet on the movement of
freight by means of rail, ports and pipelines. Given this focus, the
location of SAA as a Transnet subsidiary is not optimal. SAA is a major
enterprise in its own right, and it operates in an industry that has
markedly different conditions to that of the rail and port freight systems.

Accordingly, to ensure that there is full focus by the boards and the
management on these differing domains, it has been decided to take SAA off
Transnet’s balance sheet, and to move its shareholding to the Department of
Public Enterprises.

Let me briefly locate SAA in the very dynamic airline industry. SAA has
been in operation for more than 70 years. It now carries more than 6,5
million passengers each year, and serves 34 cities in 26 countries on 6
continents. It employs close to 12 000 people worldwide, including 3 600 at
SAA technical. The staff includes about 2 800 flight attendants and more
than 800 pilots. By any standards, SAA is a significant airline in a
rapidly changing aviation environment.

International air transport grew at double-digit rates from its earliest
post-1945 days until the first oil crisis in 1973. Much of the impetus for
this growth came from technical innovation and, combined with increased
dual incomes and more leisure time, the effect was an explosion in the
demand for air travel.

The dampening of the industry growth as a result of 9/11 therefore came as
a real shock to the airline industry. No one was prepared for the scenario
and as a result many airlines around the globe find themselves in dire
straits.

According to Iata, the International Air Transport Association, the global
airline industry suffered losses of around US$5 billion in 2004 alone,
meaning that the industry was still reeling three years after the 9/11
event.

However, global passenger traffic is expected to grow by about 6% per annum
between 2006 and 2008, driven by particularly strong growth and demand for
air travel in China and India, and between Asia and Europe.

Iata also projects that air travel to and from South Africa will, for the 5
years to the year 2010, grow at an average annual rate of 5%. Such growth
will require additional aviation capacity in general, and airline capacity
in particular, to increase by about 30%.

Accordingly, the next few years are critical years for South Africa air
passenger transport and indeed the same applies to the whole of Africa.

As Africa’s largest airline by a wide margin, there is no doubt that SAA
plays a crucial strategic role and, like many countries around the world,
the state will retain decisive ownership of SAA.

At this particular point in our economic and geopolitical history, we must
use a strategic asset such as the national carrier to attain certain trade,
air service and tourism objectives. Over time, as we realise these
objectives, we will take a pragmatic and economic approach to the airline
industry and location of SAA.

We do need to inject capital into the airline if it is to meet the
challenges and realise the opportunities of the next few years. Ways of
doing this are currently under consideration and, as I have indicated on
previous occasions, we are in principle supportive of a future IPO should
the situation warrant it.

However, the immediate task is to improve operational performance, manage
costs, stabilise routes and aircraft usage, and strengthen the balance
sheet. In all these areas we are making progress.

The draft Bill gives legal effect to the decision to separate SAA from
Transnet. The separation entails a transfer of the entire shareholding held
by Transnet and South African Airways to the government of the Republic of
South Africa, including any assets, liabilities, rights or obligations
which Transnet had in South African Airways.

The government, through the Department of Public Enterprise, will therefore
assume the responsibilities of Transnet and various guarantees given on
behalf of South African Airways to third-party lenders and other entities
such as the International Air Services Licensing Council. The terms and
conditions of this transfer are contained in an agreement reached in June
this year between the three parties involved, namely the DPE, Transnet and
SAA.

One of the salient features of this agreement is ownership risk, and any
benefit in SAA will be transferred to government, effective from 31 March
2006.

South African Airways will be sold to government at the carrying value of
SAA on Transnet books, which was R2,049 billion, and this will be effected
through Transnet’s buy-back of R2,049 billion shares from government.

Transnet will convert the current account facility held by SAA into a R1
billion transitional loan facility. SAA employees, all of whom are members
of the Transnet Pension Fund, will continue to have their share of the fund
fully funded when the Transnet Pension Fund is restructured into a multi-
employer fund, as part of the agreement reached with the Transnet trade
unions in April 2006. We dealt fully with this matter yesterday.

Between the signature date and closing date, my department, together with
Transnet, will jointly carry oversight responsibilities in respect of SAA
to ensure the efficient handover of direct control to government.

This Bill will complete one of the suspensive conditions contained in the
agreement referred to above. The Bill also allows for the conversion of SAA
from a Pty Ltd to a public company. This places it on the same footing as
the other large state-owned enterprises, thereby facilitating capital
market activities, recapitalisation and future partnerships.

Once again, I would like to thank the chairperson of the portfolio
committee and the committee members for assisting us in getting the Bill
before this House at such short notice and so late in the year.

I appreciate the extra work they have done to achieve this and thank them
for their understanding. This will allow us to complete the separation
process, and begin the further strengthening of SAA’s balance sheet. I
thank you, Madam Speaker.

Mr P A C HENDRICKSE: Madam Deputy Speaker, as the Minister has just stated,
the Bill deals with two issues in general, the first being the transfer of
SAA from Transnet to the Department of Public Enterprises, and the second
being the provision for the conversion of SAA into a public entity.

The first aim of this Bill should not present any problems to either the
House or the committee. It essentially gives effect to a fait accompli.
SAA, for all intents and purposes, has already been transferred to the DPE
subject to certain suspensive conditions being met, this piece of
legislation being one of them.

The transfer is part of the restructuring and the refocusing of Transnet
for the freight industry only. Yesterday we passed the Transnet Pension
Fund Amendment Bill, which deals with the pension provisions of those SAA
employees who worked for Transnet at the time of transfer, and the relevant
unions have all agreed to this transfer.

It is with regard to the second part of this Bill that the committee will
need much more information. For example, what does the future conversion of
SAA mean to the country and the freight industry, particularly the
transport industry? What is the function of SAA? Will it still be a
national carrier and what does that mean? What will be the bottom line in
future - that of service to the country or profits? Who will be able to buy
into SAA? Will there ultimately be a listing? If so, will there be any
restrictions? Will routing decisions be based on financial considerations,
as they appear under the current CEO? Will foreign banks, for example, be
allowed to buy shares and to determine the operations of SAA? This is
because one would want to ask what the motives would be for anyone buying
shares in SAA and one would assume it would be to get a good return on
investments.

How will the future SAA be different from British Air operating as Comair
or Nationwide? Also, Minister - as you would know - have we learnt anything
from our Swiss experience? The SAA CEO mentioned to us the other day with
their annual report to Parliament the example of an Irish airline - I think
it is called Aer Lingus - that listed publicly. Then there was a bid by
Ryanair to purchase shares in Aer Lingus, and the government was trying to
block this. Will we face such challenges in the future?

It may therefore be necessary for the committee to advertise for comment
and possibly to hold public hearings on this matter. This Bill, if I may
say, once again illustrates the need for committees to receive the kind of
technical assistance they require to deal with Bills like this.

Until such time that we have engaged the Minister and the department on
some of these questions, we are not able to express ourselves on the second
part of the Bill dealing with the preparation for the future conversion of
SAA as a public entity.

This morning’s business report refers to the possible refund to SAA by
certain former executives of bonuses paid to them. Now, we must assume that
these payments were approved by the then CEO, the board and the Minister. I
raise this as an illustration that we must always be aware that when we
legislate, we do so not only for the here and now, but also for the future.
We therefore should not be influenced by the present incumbents when we
consider the issues before us. Who knows who the next Minister, CEO or
board will be; even more so, who the next chairperson of the portfolio
committee will be?

It is in this spirit that we raise the kinds of questions that we do.
Minister, we do appreciate that there is a sense of urgency and we want to
assure you that we will bear this in mind as we process the Bill. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, noting the cumbersome duties of
Transnet and the position of SAA, the MF supports the transfer of SAA to
the state. While I would have liked to have spoken about how SAA should
become a far more economical airline and far more accessible to South
Africans in view of costs, I redirect attention to clause 3(1)(a) in which
greater clarity is needed to explain what is being communicated.

While we are certain that this will assist in making SAA more financially
stable, we question how the state is managing its role as a shareholder
while the suspensive conditions are being met? Interest is also expressed
as to what Transnet’s role is during the interim period. The MF supports
the SAA Bill. Thank you.

Mr H B CUPIDO: Hon Deputy Speaker, as with the Transnet Pension Fund
Amendment Bill discussed in the House yesterday, the South African Airways
Bill represents another legislative mandate that will facilitate Transnet’s
shift to a focus on core operations.

The ACDP repeats its support for initiatives that enhance economic growth
through strengthening our country’s infrastructure. Within this context,
the contribution of proceeds of selling of noncore assets to Transnet’s
capital investment programme is ensured of a smooth passage. By July this
year, SAA’s domestic market share had shrunk to below 50% for the first
time in history.

This Bill will provide support for the decision to make SAA a stand-alone
state-owned enterprise. The ADCP expresses the hope that both the country
and SAA will benefit from this exercise, and we support the First Reading
of the Bill.

Mr J J M STEPHENS: Madam Deputy Speaker, as the hon Minister said, this
Bill is in fact part of the restructuring process of Transnet and, as such,
the DA supports the basic principle of the restructuring and therefore
supports what follows from that.

The Bill itself we only had short sight of but it seems a very
straightforward and a very short Bill. However, one can only hope that when
we start interrogating the detail thereof it will not turn out to be the
dog’s breakfast that the previous one was that will require us to sit days
on end to rewrite. But even rewriting this Bill will, I think, be an easier
process than the previous one was since it is not such an involved Bill.

The major thing, I think, that really needs interrogation is the question
of the public company, but one can see that the changeover from a Pty Ltd
to a public company obviously has the idea of financing behind it. Since
the idea is that all these state- owned enterprises must be self-financing,
it becomes a much better proposition to have a public company seeking
finance because it has so many more options to gain financing, not only
because of IPOs but also from investment banks that would not be prepared
to invest in private companies but would certainly look at investing in
public companies. So, one can see the reason behind this.

We would like to be assured, however, about the checks and balances that go
into that changeover, so as to make quite sure that SAA does remain a
strategic carrier for South Africa under all circumstances. And, of course,
we don’t know whether, as a matter of policy, the fruits of this are going
to expand to include more than Mangoes and whether we are going to have
banana freight and pawpaw charters as well eventually. Are they going to
keep on creating subsidiary companies to manage each and every one of the
divisions of SAA? It might turn into a whole fruit basket.

But, as the Bill stands at the moment, we have no obvious objection to it.
We support the principle of it, and we wait to be further briefed and to
interrogate the detail thereof. I thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.

Mr J P CRONIN: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Like the previous speakers, I
obviously support the principle behind the draft Bill, namely the
separation of SAA from Transnet and its conversion into a public company in
its own right. This will help Transnet to focus on its core rail, ports and
pipelines business and will also help all of us, but particularly the
Department of Public Enterprises, to focus, amongst other things, on SAA in
its own right as a public company.

Despite many problems that have confronted the airline industry, including
the technical insolvency of SAA at one point, and the Swissair collapse –
I’m not sure if it was a banana or a banana skin - as well as obviously the
global shock post-9/11 to the airline industry, I think it is very
important to recognise just how important this sector has been to South
Africa over the past 15 years.

One example is that 15 years ago 1 million international travellers arrived
at our airports. By last year, the figure was 7 million travellers arriving
at our airports in South Africa and, obviously, SAA has been the key player
in this respect, but of course not the only player.

Going forward the big question is: Do we need a national carrier; and, if
so, what do we mean by a national carrier? The Department of Transport’s
July Airlift Strategy 2006, which was apparently approved by Cabinet in
July of this year and tabled, as it happens, in Parliament this week, makes
a very persuasive case for the importance of a national carrier for South
Africa.

South Africa, of course, is much better off than many other African
countries. The stories of having to travel via a former colonial capital to
get from one African country to another are legion. In South Africa,
obviously, we have SAA and some 75 foreign-scheduled airlines flying into
our country. But the frequency of the flights to and from South Africa by
the non-South African carriers is often determined by seasonal demands and
other short-term commercial factors, rather than by the need for regular,
if not daily, commuter traffic.

South Africa’s growth and development and our role on the continent cannot
be held hostage to seasons or to irregular demands. We must retain our
capacity for international and regional integration, and SAA as a national
carrier is a very important strategic asset in this respect.

Of course SAA must be placed on a commercially viable footing to be sure,
but SAA is much more than just another commercial operation; it’s a
national strategic asset and its future institutional and ownership
features must bear this in mind. That doesn’t mean that we must preserve
some mechanical and bureaucratic state ownership for its own sake - there
are some unfortunate examples of airlines of that kind on our continent -
but it does mean ensuring that the future of SAA is not subject to the
short-termism that is often characteristic of the marketplace.

I am therefore somewhat reassured by what the Minister has said - his
pragmatic approach – and also by his strategic understanding of this very
important asset. Like previous speakers, I think this is an area that we
need to debate, discuss and watch very carefully as we go forward. Thank
you, Deputy Speaker.

Ms O R KASIENYANE: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. In 2004, Cabinet approved the
separation of SAA from Transnet to become a separate state-owned
enterprise. Now, to repeat what previous speakers have said, this Bill will
provide for the transfer of SAA shares, SAA interest and SAA claims from
Transnet to the state, as well as the conversion of SAA Pty Ltd into a
public company with share capital. Finally, the Bill provides for the
listing of SAA as a major public entity in terms of Schedule 2 of the
Public Finance Management Act.

As the Freedom Charter states, there shall be work and security, and the
state shall recognise the rights and the duty of all to work. Furthermore,
given a long history of protecting worker rights, the ANC welcomes the
Bill, as it will not affect the terms and conditions of service of SAA
employees. This is a big step towards the realisation of a better life for
all South Africans.

In the event of the public share offering of SAA, care should be taken to
safeguard the interests of the South African public and to avoid the
mistakes made with the public share offering of certain other state-owned
enterprises. Once again, we welcome the assurance of the Minister that the
rights and privileges of workers will not be negatively affected. We will
keep a close watch on the progress of the entire Bill in the Portfolio
Committee on Public Enterprises and will interact with them if and when
necessary.

The ANC supports the South African Airways Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr Y I CARRIM: Madam Deputy Speaker, comrades and friends, obviously SAA is
financially challenged and needs money. Obviously, there is a variety of
forms of securing that money, and when we take this into account, we might
choose a number of options. We also have to consider the experience that
SAA has undergone not so long ago.

I am not sure whether it is parliamentary for the hon Fatima Chohan-Khota
to smile in the way she is smiling when I am speaking and I am not saying
anything funny, but I’ll leave that for her to think about.

All I’m simply saying is that the committee met this morning. We obviously
will get a briefing on the Bill very early in the new year, and will decide
what course of action to take. We certainly mean to meet the deadline,
which I understand to be the beginning of the next financial year, and, if
need be, we will look into the possibility of public participation. We will
certainly have public participation, but the issue is what form it will
take. In the first instance, we will alert the key stakeholders that this
Bill is before us and we are processing it and, if need be, we will in fact
have public hearings.

We must obviously take into account the experience we had, as I was saying
before I was so rudely interrupted by the hon Fatima Chohan-Khota’s smile.
[Interjections.] Now Mr Ben Martins is intruding on my space and the longer
he does that, the longer I will take to speak.

I need to tell this House that yesterday I achieved an unprecedented goal.
Never in the history of parliaments has a member spoken for a fifth of the
time he or she was allocated. I achieved that yesterday, and I’d like to
exceed that today. So, people, don’t interrupt me, and I’ll finish
promptly.

I was saying, once again, before I was rudely interrupted by the hon Ben
Martins, who, for the fact that he lives in the same town as I do, doesn’t
qualify to be so unduly intrusive, especially as I am from the same party
as him.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please come back to the South African Airways Bill.

Mr Y I CARRIM: But, coming back to the point, we have this experience of
the partnership with Swiss Air, and clearly we drew many lessons from that.

The Minister, no less, has told our committee on more than one occasion
that it is difficult, at times challenging, to say the least, to secure a
national agenda when you enter into these partnerships with companies that
rightly have other agendas as well. So that, too, must be taken into
account in processing the Bill. I thank you and I wish you all a happy
Christmas. [Applause.]

Ms F CHOHAN-KHOTA: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: I want to say
that it is highly inappropriate for the hon Yunus Carrim to use this
opportunity to try to sap money from the hon Ben Martins and me, because he
knows a lot about being financially challenged. He obviously has tried to
raise funding for the party, Madam Deputy Speaker, and we’ve refused.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! That is not a point of order.

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Thank you very much ...
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I am waiting for the hon members to acknowledge
that the Minister is just about to address the House, please. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. They are a
little bit remiss this late in the afternoon, I can see.

Thank you very much to the hon members. They have raised some very
interesting points, and whilst I know there’s another debate waiting, I
would like just, in a minute or two, to deal with some of these issues,
because as we go forward we should think about them.
Firstly, I think there is general agreement that we should separate SAA
from Transnet. These are two of the biggest companies in South Africa and
to have them under one umbrella was very difficult. The issues that are
arising are, I think, mainly two very important issues. Firstly, I am
interested to hear the views of members on the issue of the strategic need
for a national airline. I would really like to stress this. I think that
anyone who watches the situation around the world will agree that, where a
country has been unable to maintain a national airline, their air traffic
position changes. There is no question about it.

Now in the modern world it’s very difficult for small countries to maintain
a national airline, and that is why I did make those comments about the age
of SAA and its size. So we have not only a national asset here, we have a
very unusual national asset, and I would put it in the same category as
Eskom. These have been built up over a long period of time, so there is no
way that we could possibly do anything to weaken this asset. It’s a very
important part of our structures.

In public hearings, you will get many viewpoints as to whether this should
be in private hands, whether we should be opening low-cost carriers,
whether we are not going into the terrain of the private sector in the
marketplace. The point that we are making very strongly is that, in respect
of modern airlines, outside of Europe, you’ll see very often that an
airline has an airline as we understand it, and then they have one or other
form of low-cost carrier.

If you look at the South African situation, the major low-cost carrier,
Kulula, is effectively part of the chain of airlines from British Airways.
So we are doing something similar. There is a totally new market emerging,
of younger people, people with rising incomes who would like low-cost
carriers. So if you want to provide a strategic airline service, you must
also provide that service in the market and it’s got to operate
commercially. This is very clear.

So having the national airline, particularly for South Africa, particularly
for Africa, is very important. The point that we have made very clearly is
that the state will retain decisive ownership of this for the foreseeable
future. The circumstances are going to remain the same for some years,
maybe more than a decade, we don’t know. It would be silly to quote an
actual number, but what we know is that for all operational purposes, the
state will be the decisive owner, for some time to come.

The public company aspect is important. Now, what we are doing here -
members of the committee will be very familiar with this – is that SAA will
become a state-owned enterprise. So we will expect it to function in the
same way as Eskom and Transnet, that is, they’ve got to enter the capital
markets, they’ve got to cover their costs and, we’ve already made it clear
- the Minister of Finance has made it clear - we will not recapitalise SAA
from the budget. So it’s going to have to be done through normal commercial
financial methods.

That is why - and it is a very simple and important reason the hon Stephens
was raising – it is much easier to do that with a public company. This is
no different from what Eskom and Transnet are. So we are doing it for that
reason, there is nothing else behind that. We will have to recapitalise
before the next financial year. How we do it is a matter under discussion,
as I indicated. But the notion that we are subsidising is not correct. All
around the world, there are very few airlines in the world today that
haven’t received state support in one or other form. With regard to the
fact that we did underwrite the very big losses as a result of the hedge
book: yes, we did that, because the consequences of closing SAA were just
too great.

But what we are driving for in this future period is that SAA will function
in the same way as Eskom and Transnet. They have to go under the capital
markets, they have to operate efficiently, and they’re state-owned
enterprises, so we expect a rate of return on the operations, but as we’ve
continuously defined it, this is an economic rate of return, ie it takes
into account the economic effect of the enterprise. So it is not a profit
maximiser, but it must make a profit. And this is the distinction,
essentially, between the big state strategic companies and an ordinary
private company.

I think it is a fairly sophisticated model, one that we increasingly
understand better. Management has to be efficient, costs have to be
managed, we have to function properly and we are not a national carrier in
the old sense of the word. I think this is what the hon Cronin was
referring to, saying that there are bad examples of this, where you can do
what you like because if you make a loss we’ll put money in. Well, that’s
not the case. This has to operate effectively. I am generally pleased with
the progress, and I thank you for the support.

We should have public hearings because I think it is very important for
people to understand exactly what it is we are doing, so that people can
express themselves. We do need to try to get this through before the end of
the financial year. It speeds processes up and allows us to move forward on
the recapitalisation. Thank you. Applause. [Time expired.]

Debate concluded.

    THE 2010 FIFA WORLD CUP AS A MECHANISM TO ACHIEVE SOCIAL COHESION BY
 UNITING SOUTH AFRICANS TOWARDS A COMMON GOAL AND THE PROMOTION OF NATIONAL
      IDENTITY, UBUNTU AND A CARING COMMUNITY WITH A FOCUSED AND PROUD,
                             DISCIPLINED YOUTH.

                     (Debate on the 2010 Fifa World Cup)

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, hon Deputy Minister, we
have requested this kind of discussion to keep the people of South Africa
informed of the very important changes and processes that are going on
around the world, particularly in South Africa.

Thank you, Chairperson for this opportunity. It is a great pleasure for me
to submit our view of the state of affairs; the progress made in South
Africa; the efforts that have been put forward for the 2010 Fifa World Cup.
The best ever World Cup is going to be staged on our own African soil; a
beautiful game in a beautiful country, South Africa.
I would like to sketch for you just how we were blessed with this
opportunity to host this once-in-a-lifetime important event in South
Africa. The history of the Fifa World Cup has been running for more than 74
years. This is the first time that Fifa has awarded an African country -
South Africa to be more specific - this grand, auspicious occasion.

For members to fully understand what we are dealing with here we must first
understand the many challenges that beset South African football in the
past years and understand that we cannot remove football history from the
considerable difficulties that the country faced as a result of our
apartheid past.

The history of South African football dates back to the 19th century. In
fact, the earliest recorded football match in this country was a match
played amongst the British soldiers in Port Elizabeth in 1862. A year after
that game, there was the establishment of the English Football Association
- the oldest in the world. We were the first to play this beautiful game
outside Europe, on this continent, and we must pride ourselves on this
achievement. Therefore, football is not foreign in this country: South
Africa is a home of football. [Applause.]

Football was beset by racial segregation, like the rest of the country in
those dark days. There were boycotts and protests, and administrators and
even Fifa itself at one stage expelled South Africa from participating in
the world terrain.

In fact, Fifa put this very clearly to South Africa: that South Africa must
free itself from a racial environment before it seeks to be readmitted to
Fifa again. That was a tremendous milestone in our people’s push for
nonracialism and for a sport that has no colour. Later South Africa was
asked to be an observer in a Congress of Confederation of African Football
in Dakar, Senegal, in 1992. South African membership of the world body,
Fifa was confirmed later in Zurich in June 1992.

All these efforts did not just come from heaven, but through a tremendous
struggle that we as a continent and as a country went through because we
wanted to be counted in the nations of the world, as well as to be part of
a nonracial, nonsexist sport.

Our readmission to the Fifa family came as a result of South Africa
fulfilling one of the cornerstones of Fifa policy, which asked that we rid
ourselves of apartheid. We acknowledged that and it was a condition that we
fulfilled in 1994. Therefore, we are participating in the sport today
freely because that is one priority that we have to fulfil.

The second step is that the process came after a highly successful peaceful
election in 1994. This helped us to achieve the highest marks in an
irreversible test of whether the dispensation in South Africa was ready to
host the World Cup. All these were culminations of the events to test
whether South Africa is a fully democratic country. And indeed we are a
fully democratic country.

Let us look at the position we were in when we bid for this World Cup.
South Africa’s pursuit in the World Cup is therefore firmly located in the
principle that gave birth to a new South Africa in 1994.

The three complementary desires converged to form a national consensus that
followed the national emergence from 400 years of colonial rule and the
struggle to free ourselves from apartheid. A primary focus in this
consensus was readmission to the sporting world. This was necessitated by
the country’s isolation stemming from the dehumanising policies of
apartheid until we became a democratic country.

Securing the right to host the Fifa World Cup was therefore a logical
progression for this strategy and another milestone in creating and
bringing about a better economy, a better world and a better South Africa.

This readmission also gave us a voice to say that we would be able to bid
for this World Cup and successfully mobilise the countries of the world to
support South Africa as a better destination to host this august occasion.

During the bidding phase of this event our President articulated the
commitment of the nation to this process when he remarked in a letter to
Fifa and Sepp Blatter that the fundamentals of this bid lie in our resolve
to ensure that the 21st century unfolds as a century to grow and develop in
Africa.

He continued by stating that the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
was launched to open new doors for economic progress in the continent and
work still remains to be done, but the successful hosting of the Fifa World
Cup in South Africa will provide a powerful monument to this resolute
African Renaissance.

The Fifa World Cup is one of many fronts with regard to which we seek to
create a real African century on the continent. The legacy programme of the
2010 Fifa World Cup brings together the highest profile people from all
institutions around the world, to discuss some of the most difficult issues
facing this continent.

We have seen during the unveiling of the emblem in Germany the most
powerful world leaders. Our President joined the German Chancellor, the
United Nation’s Secretary-General, Kofi Anan, and the African Union
Commission Chairperson and other world-renowned luminaries to pledge their
support for the African world to host the World Cup.
Many people ask questions such as: Is South Africa ready to host this World
Cup? The Fifa World Cup is much more than just 90 minutes of football. We
do not want to forget that the World Cup in Germany has just ended in July
2006. It has only been four months since we concluded the World Cup in
Germany.

But there is something very interesting. On the Fifa website they still
show that 2006 has not ended and therefore Germany is still the destination
for the World Cup. South Africa will become the destination in 2007, not in
2006, because the proper World Cup handover to South Africa will be in
January 2007.

This is the first World Cup in which South Africa has unprecedented
interest and criticism and the big question is: Can we do it? Today we are
committing ourselves and telling the world and the nation that yes, we can.
We are going to do it and one of the world’s best soccer World Cup events
ever will be held in South Africa.

We can confirm that everything so far is on track. We have a commitment
from government and therefore we are committing ourselves and without
apology and without any contradiction hosting the best World Cup ever in
South Africa.

Hon members, we still have 48 months to go and construction is going to
start in January 2007. Fifa has properly given us 48 months and it is now
the time for South Africa to begin to do the work. And we will be meeting
that target. We are still on track. There is no fear that something could
go wrong, apart from all those criticisms and the prophets of doom who say
that South Africa is behind schedule. At this stage we are far ahead of
where any other country that has hosted the World Cup before has been at
the same stage.

The Fifa World Cup is about providing world-class infrastructure that can
be used to build our economy for generations to come. It is about providing
a world-class transport system. [Time expired.] Thank you, Madam
Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr S J MASANGO: Hon Chairperson and hon members, the 2010 World Cup has
been embraced by all political parties in this House, as well as by the
people of South Africa. It is therefore difficult to understand what it is
that we should be debating about the Soccer World Cup today. The World Cup
has been awarded to South Africa. It is not going anywhere else. It is
here; it is official; and it is a reality.

Ngelimi likamufi uBrenda, kuthiwa: Ayifuni irula. [According to the song of
the late Brenda, it is said: It does not need a ruler.]

As the DA said from the start, the 2010 Soccer World Cup is a prestigious
occasion for all of us in Africa, and most importantly, for all South
Africans. It represents a unique opportunity to showcase our abilities and
skills. We should do everything in our power to rise to the occasion.

Okuqakatheke khulu, leli kulithuba ebantwini abatjha abanomnqopho
wokudlalela IBhegere yePhasi yeBholo erarhwako lokobana bazimisele, khona
bazakukhethwa bonyana babe yingcenye yesiqhema esizakudlala ngo-2010.
Akuzokuba ngetjhudu ukuba sesiqhemeni. Kuzakufuneka bonyana kusetjenzwe
nzima; kuliswe utjwala ngombana utjwala ngebabantu abadala. (Translation of
isiNdebele paragraph follows.)

[The most important thing is that this is an opportunity for young people,
who have set themselves the goal of playing in the 2010 FIFA World Cup and
they need to be serious about it so that they can be selected and be part
of our team that will play in 2010. It will not be a walk in a park for
them, though. Our kids have to work very hard and stay away from alcohol,
because alcohol is for older people.]

Thus our goal with regard to every project, every subcontract, every
stadium and, indeed, every element of the 2010 World Cup should be to
ensure that it is the best tournament ever. We should not compromise. We
should see every challenge as an opportunity to set the bar at the highest
possible level. We have a chance to redefine how best to host a World Cup,
to set a new international standard of excellence and to achieve a new
level of success.

The 2010 Soccer World Cup in South Africa is an event that will remain in
our minds for years to come. It is upon us to make it a memorable one. We
have signed guarantees with the host cities, the Department of Sport and
Recreation and other relevant departments that we commit ourselves that we
shall deliver. Every element of our society must now do its part to ensure
that we make good on our promises and that we use them as a chance to show
the rest of the world how good we are.

I think it is important that one should applaud the Minister of Finance for
showing his commitment during the medium-term budget, by making the much-
awaited move to allocate R15 billion for the 2010 World Cup. This is one of
the areas that needed clarity and I am pleased to say that it has now been
sorted out. Without the funds for the 2010 World Cup, the World Cup would
have remained a dream for South Africans.

It is now time for those who are responsible for the construction of the
infrastructure to get out of their offices, take their spades and
wheelbarrows and start with the real job, and that is building the
stadiums. They now have no excuse for not starting with the work. Of
crucial importance is that we should not only plan for the 2010 World Cup
event, but should look beyond the 2010 World Cup. Whatever we plan or
implement should aim to take us beyond the 2010 World Cup and into the
future.

We have so far received only one progress report from the Local Organising
Committee, or LOC. By far the most critical factor highlighted by the
committee in its report is the acquisition of land for the construction of
stadiums. All the host cities have acquired land as per the report of the
LOC, except the Municipality of Mbombela in Nelspruit. They are still
awaiting approval. This is an issue that I have raised before in this House
as a member’s statement.

I outlined the problem and I hope that it will be sorted out as a matter of
urgency so that construction can begin early next year as planned. The
Local Organising Committee must communicate as much as it can but, most
importantly, it must communicate in one message so that we can be kept
abreast of the progress of the preparations.
Failure to communicate properly will result in the media having incomplete
or inaccurate information, the consequence of which can only be negative
for South Africans both here at home and internationally. As much as we
anticipate that the 2010 World Cup will unite the people of South Africa
and Africa as a whole, we must just remember that this is not going to
happen automatically. It is upon this government to create conditions that
are conducive to achieving cohesion, uniting South Africans, and promoting
national identity and a caring community with a focused and proud
disciplined youth.

This prestigious event should not only be enjoyed by people from Gauteng,
Cape Town or Durban, but this excitement should also be extended to
Mapulaneng, Siyabuswa, KwaNongoma and even to the deep rural areas called
“Matlapa a nkwaletše.” It should not only be enjoyed by the Minister of
Sport and Recreation, Safa members or members of the Local Organising
Committee for Fifa, but by all citizens of South Africa. I thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr E J LUCAS: Chairperson, there was great excitement when it was announced
that South Africa will be the host country for the 2010 Fifa World Cup. We
will be the first nation on the African continent to host this greatly
watched event. This historic announcement did not only create excitement
and prospects of financial gain for many industries and entrepreneurs, it
also gave hope to millions of South Africans. The hope and pride that the
World Cup will bring to many South Africans can’t be measured as easily as
financial gains.
Any sportsperson, regardless of their race or background, dreams of taking
part and competing at the highest level against the very best in the world.
This dream can become a reality for many young men and boys who will now
aspire to be part of our national football team that will compete for the
World Cup at home. South Africa is a sport-loving nation. When our national
teams won the Rugby World Cup in 1995 and the African Cup of Nations in
1996, the whole country was overcome with joy and pride. Even the few
people who weren’t normally great followers of these sports felt a sense of
national unity. The 2010 World Cup can play even an bigger role in this
regard.

The performance of our national team is therefore of utmost importance as
they are carrying the hopes and dreams of our entire nation. The players
and the team will also have a huge impact as role models for many young
people in our country. They must therefore conduct themselves accordingly.
If this World Cup is to make a positive impact on our youth and promote the
national identity, it is imperative that we make this a truly African
event.  I have mentioned previously and I still maintain that we can and
must learn from previous tournament hosts, but it is vitally important that
we do not try to produce a carbon copy of their events.

We are African, and as such we must host an African event that will
showcase our unique cultures and styles and instil a sense of pride in our
people. This will, however, only be possible if all South Africans are part
of these events. The people of South Africa and Africa are not as
financially rich as their counterparts in other countries around the world.
If we charge the same or similar ticket prices as charged in tournaments
held in other parts of the world, we will effectively be excluding the
majority of the people from enjoying the games, as well as from being part
of the World Cup and supporting their national teams. We must therefore
make it a priority to find ways of ensuring that the games involving all
African countries are affordable to supporters from their respective
countries.

Soccer brings much joy to millions of people in Africa and helps them to
forget their problems and hardships - even if it is just for a short while.
It would therefore be sad and unfair if they were excluded from these
events. Although we acknowledge that it will take more than a sporting
event to overcome the many problems and hardships facing South Africans,
the 2010 Fifa World Cup can play a major role in the lives of many people
and at least contribute to overcoming some of the problems. It can play an
especially important part in the lives of our youth and contribute towards
uniting all South Africans. Let us make this World Cup a truly South
African and African affair. We must try our utmost to get the whole nation
behind this tournament and to be part of it.
There are, however, many pessimists out there who continue to predict that
we will fail and not be ready to hold our tournament in 2010. We challenge
them, as well as the rest of South Africa, to focus on the positive aspects
and all work together in our attempts to stage a successful event. The
people of South Africa have great strength and character. We in the IFP
believe that if we display the same determination and dedication in staging
the World Cup as we did in changing the political situation in our country,
then there is no doubt that we will host the best events yet. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Deputy Chairperson, we wish to
reiterate what we have been saying about 2010, and that is that when Fifa
decided in 2001 that the 2010 World Cup should be held on African soil for
the first time, the continent of Africa rejoiced, not only for the love of
the game but also in knowing that it will help make this a century of
African growth and development.

Our government saw in the opportunity to host the 2010 Fifa Football World
Cup a whole range of benefits for South Africa and the African continent.
In anticipation of such positive spin-offs, President Mbeki dubbed the 2010
World Cup an African World Cup. The notion of the African World Cup
captured the imagination of Fifa, the African countries and our fellow
Africans in the diaspora. The notion of an African World Cup has been well
received by most South Africans, especially the youth.

The hosting of the 2010 Fifa World Cup also brings a unique opportunity to
ensure that the world learns more about the strengths and the opportunities
of a country and continent undergoing far-reaching reconstructions and
development.

We believe that hosting the 2010 Fifa World Cup affords us the biggest
opportunity to banish Afropessimism. Hosting the biggest event in the world
will go a long way in strengthening our bond as one nation. It will also
boost our image among the nations of the world. Although we do not intend
to replicate Germany 2006 or to compete with the Germans, we firmly believe
that the same spirit of national pride we saw and experienced in Germany
can be achieved and will be achieved in South Africa. That is, if we work
together with a unity of purpose.

In 1996 President Mbeki captured Parliament and the world when he delivered
the speech in which he declared: “I am an African”. That speech is simply
indelible on the mind. ``I am an African’’, the African Renaissance, Nepad
and African World Cup 2010 seem to fit into one another. They give us as
Africans a rare opportunity to look into the President’s logical,
systematic and brilliant mindset.

This characteristic of being an African engenders caring, compassion and
sharing. It gives birth to the moral order of empathy, helping others and
having feeling for them. The joys of others become the joys of the
individual. The shame of the individual becomes the shame of others in that
community. In a nutshell, this is ubuntu, a philosophy of the collective;
of the community as opposed to individualism.

The 2010 Fifa World Cup in South Africa has been marketed to be intended as
an African World Cup. So, the preparations for this tournament, its hosting
and events thereafter must bequeath to our nation a legacy we all can be
proud of.

Hosting the 2010 Fifa World Cup, we believe, provides our government with a
golden opportunity to boost our tourism and our sport tourism industries.
It will push our economic development to a higher notch. The tournament
assists us to address the infrastructure backlogs we have in our roads,
transport, sport facilities, telecommunications and broadcasting networks.
Our electricity and water needs will be upgraded and receive a great boost.
In a nutshell, hosting the 2010 World Cup will fast-track the attainment of
some elements of the 2014 Millennium Development Goals and of Asgisa.

In 2010, 31 countries will converge in South Africa. In terms of languages,
followers of the national team will exceed the 32 competitors - South
Africa as the 32nd nation. This obviously affords immense opportunity for
our young people to learn foreign languages. This, together with the skills
they must be trained in, will improve the skills base of our young people.
It will also expose them to other cultures and teach them to respect
diversity even more. In fact, 2010 will help us fight xenophobia and to
unite us as South African people.

Social services like disaster management, public health services, safety
and security are already advanced in their plans for 2010. These services
will be accessible to our people before and long after 2010.

I am articulating some of these issues that our government took into
account when we supported Safa’s bid to host the 2010 Fifa World Cup. We
were actually aware, as government, of what the preparations would
contribute to our broad plans for transformation and development. We are
also alert to the contribution that this programme will make towards social
cohesion and towards nation-building and the fostering of national pride.

The challenge for us as South Africans is to make the best of the
opportunities offered by hosting the 2010 Fifa World Cup.

On Friday 21 August 2006, the 2010 Fifa World Cup South African Special
Measures Bill was unanimously adopted by Parliament. On 24 October 2006, a
couple of days ago, President Mbeki opened the kick-off workshop for the
2010 World Cup in Cape Town. Addressing representatives from the South
African government, stadium operators, commercial partners, the South
African Local Organising Committee and Fifa, President Thabo Mbeki stated:


  May the fairest Cape inspire all of us to bring hope in 2010 to millions
  across the world, utilising the fairest game of them all, football, so
  that Fifa, Africa and the entire global football family do indeed win in
  Africa with Africa. 2010 provides South Africa with a golden opportunity.
  It is kick-off time for real hard work to make the 2010 Fifa World Cup a
  success.

The plenary session of that kick-off workshop included a presentation by
the Minister of Transport, the Minister of Safety and Security and the
Deputy Minister of Finance who combined to comprehensively demonstrate the
South African government’s unflinching commitment to delivering a
magnificent and memorable Fifa Word Cup in 2010.

The Minister of Safety and Security assured and reassured the delegation
that “we have the capacity and ability to protect the 2010 World Cup and to
create the necessary conditions for safety and security of the entire Fifa
family”.

Speaking in representation of the Fifa President, Joseph Blatter, Dr Armos
Adamu, who is a member of the Fifa executive committee, was also convinced
that the rainbow nation will be up to the task. He said:

   Come 2010, the world will salute South Africa for having made the most
   important single sport event a success.

The final day of the workshop was complemented by the mid-term budget
speech which includes R15 billion towards the Fifa World Cup in South
Africa. The money is earmarked for projects related to hosting the event,
including R8,4 billion on stadium construction and upgrades. The remaining
R6,6 billion will be spent on improving our infrastructure.


Let me say to those prophets of doom who thought that we are dragging our
feet, that we are not ready and that we will miss out on 2010, I am sorry
to disappoint you! We are ready to deliver the best Fifa World Cup ever in
2010.


Let me just turn to the prospects of business in South Africa. Government,
the Local Organising Committee and Fifa are sensitive to the notion that
2010 must contribute to Asgisa. What we are doing at this early stage
comprises the following: the 2010 event will have 32 teams competing, 64
matches, 200 viewing hours to 40 billion television audiences in 207
countries around the world; three million tickets will be sold in South
Africa, and there will be 10 stadia for the tournament and 32 practice
venues.

The estimated economic impact of 2010 is direct expenditure of  R12,7
billion, and a R21,3 billion contribution to the GDP; it will generate
129 000 jobs, with an additional R7,2 billion to be paid in government
taxes and we expect the spectators to spent more that R9,8 billion in that
month.

The contribution by Fifa already is R130 million and Safa’s Local
Organising Committee received a grant of R3,2 billion and the African
Legacy Programme of Fifa amounts to R1,2 billion.

The LOC has agreed that one third of procurement for 2010 will be from
SMMEs. The host cities and the DTI are also committed to this agreement.

The obvious areas where the activities are scaling up and where there are
lots of opportunities are those that relate to match venues, training
venues, the transport infrastructure, the municipal service upgrades, the
beautification of our cities’ environments, the preparation of public
viewing areas and telecommunications and broadcasting industry.


The LOC will also create opportunities when they procure for the 2010
tournament as a related event. It is obvious that hospitality, catering,
human resource recruitment and training and security will be areas where
they will use SMMEs. This in fact is agreed upon.


One of the measures undertaken by our government in the past two years was
to closely study international best practice on extending the benefits of
hosting mega sports events. We had fact-finding missions and observer teams
to share experiences with Portugal, Euro 2004, Korea Fifa 2002 and
obviously Germany 2006.


As recently as 15 August 2006, we had speakers from Germany and Spain
sharing with the cross-section of government, business, media and community
stakeholders how best to generate sustainable business benefits from
hosting mega events. Germany, for example, undertook a country branding and
promotion campaign called ``Land of Ideas’’ and later on they added ``A
time to make friends’’. From this basis they marketed their country’s arts
and culture, their industrial research and business opportunities. Today
the Germans say that they are surprised at the success they have achieved
in their 15-month campaign.

South Africa set up a similar initiative more than four years ahead of our
own hosting opportunity. Our aim is to leverage all milestones towards
2010. We want worldwide exposure in the preliminary 2010 draw, which takes
place in 2007. The next event will be during the 2008 inspection visits and
the 2010 qualifying tournament. The 2009 Confederations Cup, which is the
effective test run of 2010, is the next opportunity, and then 2010 itself
sees the Fifa Congress, the opening ceremony, the opening game and the play-
offs and the closing ceremony.

All these create the atmosphere for us to market ourselves, to attract more
investment, to network and to actively market our campaign: ``South Africa
Alive with Possibility’’.

The 2010 Fifa World Cup must leave behind a South Africa that is much
better than the one we have now. Both the Millennium Development Goals and
the National Development Plans must guide what we do, United in our
diversity.

Hosting the Fifa World Cup will never again be afforded to South Africa in
our lifetime. Let us, as partners, shoulder together to unlock the true
potential of ``South Africa Alive with Possibilities’’.

Let us do as our President says: ``Win in Africa with Africa’’.

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Chairperson and hon members, the 2010 Soccer World Cup
indeed presents many opportunities for South Africa’s social and economic
development. To this end, we have spoken a great deal about the
macroeconomic benefits in terms of infrastructure development and large-
scale tourism. Yet, we must not lose sight of the longer-term opportunities
that present themselves. Allow me to name but two: Firstly, we can now,
like never before, encourage South Africans to take ownership of their
urban environments. Specific initiatives regarding littering are urgently
required, because the current state of our cities is an embarrassment. Now
is the time to start teaching South Africans that these public spaces do,
indeed, belong to all of us, and that it is up to all of us to keep them
neat and clean. Such action would also respond to the so-called broken-
window principle, which is based on the argument that crime is often
followed by crime.

Secondly, the 2010 event provides us with an opportunity to improve access
for all communities regarding sports and recreation facilities. Across our
country, youth from many communities do not have sports facilities and this
deprives many talented youth of the opportunity to reach their sporting
potential. The lack of sports facilities in disadvantaged communities also
deprives young people of productive and safe recreation, and
extracurricular activities. These are the types of objectives that may not
appear flashy and impressive at first glance, but that will deliver real
benefits and rewards for the entire country long after people have
forgotten the 2010 event.

Sihlalo, ekugqibeleni mandikucebise, Mhlekazi: abantu boMzantsi bambonile
uTrevor ekhupha izigidi zezigidi zokuzimasa lo mnyhadala. Kusekho iindawo
ke ezisahleleleke kakhulu, endicinga ukuba bekufanele ukuba ngoku xa
ubunokufaka umoya kwezinye iiKomiti zeMicimbi yamaSebe, nizame ukuba
nincedise ekwenzeni izinto ebeziza kwenziwa ngowama-2014.

Makusetyenziswe owama-2010 njengonyaka oza kubangela ukuba ngoku
kukhawuleziswe ezaa zinto ze-Asgisa, nezaa nkqubo zika-2014 ukuze abantu
bangathi emva kowama-2010 babukele amabala emidlalo kuphela, kodwa babe
beqonda ukuba, tyhini, njengokuba behlala eSoweto nje okanye eKhayelitsha,
iidolophu zabo ziyadibana nezixeko ezikhulu!”

Siza kuhlazeka apha ngowama-2010 abantu besathi, “Hayi, ukuba ufuna ukuya
kubona iSoweto, uza kuhamba umgama.” Ubone nawe ukuba kusekho lo msantsa
wabantu abaphakamileyo, nabahleli kamnandi, kanti aba babehleli kwezaa
ndawo zihlelelekileyo basathi, ‘tshaketshe’ oko kwakudala.  Kukho abasathi,
“Nyakenye.” Ngoko ke ndicinga ukuba ziyafuna ukuba zidityaniswe ezi nkqubo.


ISebe lezeMisebenzi kaRhulumente, lona kuyafuneka ukuba kudityanwe nalo.
Asikho isizathu esibangela ukuba bahambe, begrumba iindlela apha, besithi
benza  izisetyenziswa zoluntu, batsho bengashiyi nebala lemidlalo kwiindawo
zoluntu. Kanti ezi nkampani zokwakha, zinikwe iithenda bekufanele ukuba xa
zithe zazifumana kuthiwe, “Uza kwakha ibala lemidlalo ke phaya.”

Abantu baza kuqala bayixabise ke ngoku le nto yokuba ngenene owama-2010 uze
nento ebaphilisayo. Bendiya kwenza njalo ukuba beniya kukhe nindinike ukuba
ndiniphathe nje nokuba ngunyaka omnye, ndinilawule makwedini, ngoba
ndiyabona anilawuleki. [Kwahlekwa.][Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, in conclusion, let me give you some advice: The people of
South Africa have seen Trevor Manuel dishing out millions and millions of
rands to support this festival. There are places that are still in an
appallingly poor condition and with regard to which, in my opinion, if you
had been able to convince other portfolio committees, you should be trying
to assist in doing those things that were going to be done in 2014.

Let 2010 be used as a year that will speed up the Asgisa projects together
with 2014 events in order that people must not, after 2010, say that they
have only watched the sporting activities, but they should acknowledge that
as they live in Soweto or in Khayelitsha, there is developmental parity
between towns and cities.

We will get embarrassed here in 2010 when people say, “If you want to visit
Soweto you will have to travel long distances.” You will also see for
yourself that there is still some disparity between the haves who have been
living in good conditions, and the have-nots who have been living in poor
conditions from time immemorial. I therefore believe that these programmes
should be combined.

There is a need for consultation with the Department of Public Works,
because there is absolutely no reason whatsoever for it to dig roads,
claiming that they are developing infrastructure without building any
sports fields in the community. Because these construction companies have
won tenders, they need to be instructed that there is a spot for the
construction of a sports field.

People will start respecting 2010 for the better lives that it shall have
brought to the people. I would do the same if you were to afford me the
opportunity to rule you even if it were for a year because I can see that
you are ungovernable. [Laughter.] [Applause.]]

Ms M W MAKGATE: Chairperson, hon members, the hosting of the 2010 World Cup
provides the opportunity for South Africa to showcase that it can host
international events as we did with the two World Cups, and those were for
both rugby and cricket. We have shown the world that we are more than
capable, and have organisational skills to host a wonderful event. I will
be failing in my duty if I do not also mention the wonderful people of
South Africa. Of course, we will be representing the African continent, as
a continent, and not only South Africa. Most of all it will provide a
lasting legacy for the citizens of South Africa long after 2010, as we did
in the previous events, as mentioned above.

Puo ya me e tla ikaega thata ka loeto lo Komiti ya Metshameko le
Boitapoloso e neng e le tsere go ya kwa KwaZulu-Natal, kwa kgaolong ya
eThekwini, nngwe ya metse e go tla tshwarelwang metshameko ya 2010 teng.
Maitlhomomagolo a loeto lo, e ne e le go lebelela dipaakanyo. (Translation
of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[My speech will focus largely on the trip undertaken by the Portfolio
Committee on Sport and Recreation to KwaZulu-Natal in Durban, one of the
cities to host the 2010 Soccer World Cup. The main objective of the trip
was to assess the preparations.]

I will be failing the women of this country if I do not indicate that at
eThekwini Municipality the driving force behind this massive project is a
woman. EThekwini Municipality has already started with the construction of
the stadium. This is a positive move that shows that women can lead if
given a chance to prove themselves. In the following hosting cities, namely
Cape Town, eThekwini, and Nelson Mandela Bay, women are the leading project
managers.

It is clear that these project managers are doing a very good job, which
also shows capabilities. We need to do more to make sure that the
government policy on women’s empowerment does not only exist in theory but
also in practice, which means we need more women in construction phases. We
then call upon other hosting cities to follow the example of the mentioned
cities not only as leading project managers, but also in other areas of
need.

When it comes to the building of the stadiums, the eThekwini Municipality
has already begun preliminary work on construction of the King
Senzangakhona stadium, which will have a capacity of 70 000 seats and
parking for 1 000 cars. This stadium has the capability of being extended
to accommodate future international events. This shows that as South
Africans we are serious about the 2010 event. It is clear that when bidding
to host the said event, we were already prepared to move on with the work
that we were then given.

I must indicate that in all nine hosting cities expertise, material and
labour will be used to create job opportunities for local people. According
to a socioeconomic analysis, the development of the Senzangakhona stadium
will generate R4,3 billion in growth and development programmes over a
period of 14 years. Whereas there are many ways of promoting national
identity, pride and social cohesion, ultimately it is concrete action in
pursuit of common objectives that will strengthen the national sense of
belonging. It is clear that these events are a building block of national
unity irrespective of race, gender and so on, as we have seen what happened
with the German World Cup. All nations were one irrespective of which
country they were coming from. In this regard, efforts to build united
action around common goals should be pursued around Asgisa.

With regard to safety and security, as different government departments
have sent guarantees to Fifa, the Department of Safety and Security will
ensure that general safety and personal protection at airports, hotels,
training grounds and media centres is guaranteed. Experience learnt from
Germany is that disaster management centres should be in place and
operating accordingly. There should also be operation centres, additional
policing and the installation of CCTV cameras to increase surveillance and
safety.

In Germany they had a slogan, “A time to make friends’, which brought
nations together, and as South Africa we can have our own slogan that can
bring us together as a nation and welcome visitors to our country.

Mo bojanaleng, sengwe se re tshwanetseng go se lebelela ka kelotlhoko ke
tlhokomelo ya tlhago. Go tla nna le mananeo a go ruta batho botlhokwa jwa
tlhago. Se se tla fa Aforika Borwa tšhono ya go oketsa dipalo tsa bajanala
mo nageng. E tla gogela babeeletsi le go tlhabolola loago la naga ya rona.
(Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[One thing that we need to pay attention to regarding tourism, is nature
conservation. There should be programmes to teach people about the
importance of nature conservation. This will give South Africa a chance to
increase the number of tourists visiting the country. This will also
attract investment opportunities which may result in socioeconomic
development in our country.]

Regarding volunteers, there will be two types of volunteer groups, namely
Fifa volunteers inside the stadiums and volunteers from municipalities. We
should also appeal to the loving South Africans to come and volunteer as we
have seen in Germany. We, as South Africans, should be patriotic towards
our country, and not only look for money, as we can see in some other areas
of our country. We must show the world that we really love our country.

We may as well open our hearts to SADC countries and citizens also to
volunteer, as it is an African event. This will also assist us to deal with
xenophobia in our country. United we stand, and divided we fall. We are
calling on all groups across the nation to volunteer their time and
services to benefit the country. Be ambassadors of our country and make
this country proud of you, and the continent will be proud of you. You will
have made a mark on the world that you will never forget.

In conclusion, I am calling all South Africans to rise to the occasion,
build unity for action of all nations, and enable South Africa to host a
successful event. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson, South Africa has to date been the proud host of
various international and continental sports events to which colleagues
referred in this debate.

With these great events, the citizens of our country revealed unto each
other and the world that South Africans are positive, generous, loving,
forgiving and wonderful people. If we think back, we will recall the
dancing in the streets and the noise of car hooters as South Africa took
the World Cup in 1995. The beauty of it all is that even if South Africa
had not won, the country would still have celebrated along with the winner.

If World Cup rugby could have aroused such excitement and attention in a
country where the majority of the inhabitants have been playing soccer in
their backyards, in the streets, and, in fact, on any available space
almost from the time they could walk, how much more will South Africa’s
hosting of the Fifa Soccer World Cup not make its mark as a symbol of
unity?

The first African World Cup in 2010 will prove, once again, that
international sporting events can unite those who have lived in conflict
with each other, and that sport can serve as a catalyst to break down
social and racial barriers in our country. Thank you.

Mr M M DIKGACWI: Madam Chair, hon Deputy Minister and hon Members of
Parliament ...

...uyabona Njengele, ukuba ufuna ukuba ukhe ubolekwe kuza kufuneka ulinde
side sibuye; sisaya phambili. [... you see, General, if you want to be
given a chance, you will have to wait until we come back because we are
still moving forward.]

During the entire short period of our liberation, we have emphasised the
message of a better life for all. This was not accidental. This is a
central objective that we will continue to pursue during the years ahead.

We have gone on further to call for the building of a people’s contract to
advance this goal, to ensure that all our people act in unity to achieve
the reconstruction and development of our country so that it becomes the
people-centred society we all want it to be.

We have to persist in the struggle to ensure that all our people live
decent, dignified lives in a humane and caring society. Obviously, it is
easy to write and utter words such as this; the challenge is to do all the
things that are necessary and possible to give them practical meaning.

Among other things, this means that we must, together, defeat poverty and
underdevelopment in our country, and the 2010 Soccer World Cup is, amongst
others, a catalyst in the attainment of this objective. It means that we
must together ensure that all our people lead lives characterised by human
dignity. We have to end the scourges of racism and sexism that continue to
afflict millions of our people. Whether as perpetrators or victims, we must
give practical meaning to a people-centred society.

However, we cannot afford to have fellow South Africans, when they present
their papers abroad, speaking negatively about South Africa, and even
doubting the capability of South Africa to host a successful World Cup.

You see, the hon Tony Leon was speaking at Oxford University over the
weekend, as reported in The Argus. He said, and I quote:


  The rich people are good for the environment. They have fewer children.
  They can afford cleaner, efficient technologies, and use resources more
  efficiently. They don’t cut down trees for firewood; they don’t kill one
  animal for food, and they have the time and the money to enjoy and
  protect nature.

According to him, the poor disadvantaged people do the opposite, and that
is what he said at Oxford University.

What we have done and will do must give us sufficient cause to stand proud
among the community of nations as a contributor to the common global
struggle to build a better life for the ordinary people of our country, and
the rest of the world, who constitute the majority of humanity.

We will host a successful World Cup: rest assured, hon members. This must
also say to the international community that it was not wrong to choose our
country as the venue for the 2010 Soccer World Cup that will meet here to
contend for the prestigious trophy, which will directly impact on the
inhuman conditions of the poor and on the improvement of human conditions.

The SA Football Association should note that we have not performed as well
as we think we should have. When we perform badly, it affects the national
morale in ways that many of us can neither hide nor deny. The R60 million
given by Fifa for the development of Bafana Bafana should accordingly be
utilised, or else ...

...baza kuva ngathi. [... we are going to give them directions.]

Whatever else we may say, we must as South Africans admit that, like
everybody in this world, we are passionate about our sport, and soccer in
particular, especially the majority of South Africans.

It is also clear that sport serves as an important factor in terms of
building social cohesion in our country, and reinforcing the process
towards the consolidation of shared patriotism. It would seem clear that in
the period since our liberation we have not paid as much attention to the
development of sport, particularly soccer, in our country as we should
have.

It is true that because of the many urgent tasks we have faced to address
the legacy of colonialism and apartheid, we did not have time to properly
focus on the challenge of the development of soccer in our country. This
surely has to be one of the tasks to which we must dedicate our efforts in
building a proud soccer team that will make us all proud during the 2010
World Cup.

Our government has taken new steps to respond to these problems. Safa
should do the same.

Bayeke ukungqendeva, bazixakekise ngezopolitiko. Sithi oosopolitiko abaza
kupolitika, hayi bona. [They should not relax and engage themselves in
politics. We politicians will do politics, not them.]
We must also deal with the reality that Bafana Bafana’s development
consists of more than its direct preparation for productive work. It also
involves the development of our youth, as well-rounded human beings
enjoying the necessary spiritual and physical environment.

The 2010 Soccer World Cup in South Africa can and must play an important
part in this regard. We have, in the past, spoken about the need for us to
do everything we can to encourage the world to come to us.

Fortunately, the national and provincial governments have responded to
this, and progress is impressive, except for the confused local government
leadership of the Western Cape on the issue of Green Point Stadium.

We will continue the development after all. We are the majority, but it is
also true that we have not yet succeeded in building national patriotism,
especially in those that benefited in the past ...

... amagusha amhlophe, oohlohlesakhe. [... white people, the capitalists.]

We should continuously raise the matter in the context of rebuilding a
sense of national identity among the black people which three and a half
centuries of colonialism and apartheid had sought to destroy to turn the
masses into an instrument in the hands of the dominant minority.

Engagement with all those standing at the wheel will be by intervention
with regard to efforts to destroy the negative stereotype of black people
that the white minority domination has sought to cultivate so as to deny
these black people their history, culture, identity and self-worth.

The 2010 World Cup will mend the dented fabric of our society and assist
with the appalling infrastructure among our historically disadvantaged
communities, as well as with the amount of infrastructure for all South
Africans. It is also in this way that we will be able to meet the challenge
of building a truly South African society. This is also the only option
available to us to field the winning teams that contribute to the
cultivation of a new patriotism.

The international sportsmen and sportswomen who have visited our country
during the last 11 years have done much, directly and indirectly, to
inspire the love of sport among our youth. The outstanding sportsmen that
will be participating in the 2010 Soccer World Cup will do the same to
demonstrate that we truly value the fact that they came to be among us and
in a bad situation with a devastating history, as others involved in other
fields of human activity have done.

We must respond in a serious and sustained manner to the important
challenge of the 2010 Soccer World Cup in South Africa. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, with the great event just four years away,
tensions are up to get South Africa ready to host the best Fifa event ever.

However, South Africa has greater concerns on its agenda. Its nation
remains hindered by the conditions inherited from the apartheid regime.
While we certainly have achieved transformation in legislation, and broken
down many of the barriers erected by that era, traces are still found in
the fibre of many South Africans.

How do we address that? Transformation shall not only be a governmental
process, endorsed by the private sector, but should involve all of South
Africa.

The Fifa World Cup is indeed an opportunity to do so. We have the
opportunity to earn the title of a rainbow nation beyond the variety of
people, and also to represent the unity of a variety of people.

Our efforts and spending for the Fifa World Cup shouldn’t have room for
criticism. All departments and all spheres of government need to boost
efforts to transform South Africa to eradicate poverty, and to develop,
grow and unite.
The event, indeed, is to be taken to our municipalities and to our
communities who should participate in getting South Africa all up and
ready. The Fifa World Cup is not about having the best stadiums and hosting
a grand affair. Fifa is about the opportunity to strengthen our nation.

This morning’s news reports that the South African Institute for Race
Relations’s latest statistics indicate that South Africa’s murder rate
might have dropped by 40%, but remains 15 times more than the USA and 46
times more than the UK. It is a serious issue like this that we need to
seriously address before 2010.

We have so many programmes in place to assist small and medium enterprises,
but how many success stories do we have? We need to move beyond policy and
programme development, and we need to get into the mechanics to ensure that
the result we want to achieve depends on the mechanics of co-operative
governance, public-private relationships and community endorsement.

When we look at a country like India, we find that most impoverished areas
have technology, even if it is battery operated. How, when we look at rural
areas among our underprivileged communities with regard to development, is
it that traces of development, using IT as an example, remain alien?

The Fifa event is our opportunity to transform this by turning alien to
development and creating accessibility, in the comfort of homes, even if it
is in the informal settlements. The MF strongly believes that progress is
defined by what developments are made in these areas.

We need to celebrate and realise the value sport and recreation holds for
South Africa, and the value the event has brought to South Africa. [Time
expired.]

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Chairperson, hon members, thank you to all who contributed
to today’s debate. Hon Masango knows  that when this discussion took place
it was important that we had to have this kind of debate. It was important
for us to communicate a message to the people of this country, as
Parliament and as members of the committee. Even if a ruler is straight,
our people out there are saying: Where is this information that would come
from that National Assembly to tell us how we are progressing and are we
still going to meet the targets? That is why this kind of debate was
discussed at the committee level and we requested to have this kind of
debate. [Interjections.]

Hon Masango, abantu basemakhaya. [Hon Masango, people in rural areas.]

The Minister, the Deputy Minister and all other Ministers that are  involved
in the Local Organising Committee have committed themselves that this  World
Cup must be enjoyed by even somebody who stays in Mqanduli  and  also  in  a
place which we call “Matlapa a nkwalet[s]e”

For the people in that place there will be fun parks, there will be places
that are going to be identified by all sectors of the departments to make
sure that those people are able to go and have fun and enjoy this
international festival of football in this country. I am sure the
commitment that has been demonstrated so far has left us with no doubt that
there will be those kinds of things where our people are going to enjoy
themselves and benefit from this world-class football competition in our
country.

You are right to raise a concern around the team that has to be built. We
are happy and you know, as well as we do, that R70 million has been
appropriated by Fifa to Safa to build a team that is going to raise our
hopes and be able to take us closer as a country so that we can be united
and be supporting this country. The most important element of this World
Cup is social cohesion, is nation-building, is uniting our people around
something like sports, so that at any other time we feel that we can be
united on such a matter.

I’d like to really say thank you to everybody. Committees and members of
the different political parties that are in Sport and Recreation
demonstrated once more that we have robust discussions, but the Soccer
World Cup is something that all of us are united about; we cannot fail and
we dare not fail. We are going to make it a successful World Cup and that
is the message that comes from all political parties across the spectrum,
who will carry that up until 2010. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 18:40.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly in
     respect of Bills passed by Council and transmitted to Assembly


      1) Bills, subject to proposed amendments, passed by National Council
         of Provinces on 15 November 2006 and transmitted for consideration
         of Council’s proposed amendments:


          a) South African Drug-Free Sport Amendment Bill [B 7B – 2006]
             (National Assembly – sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see
             Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 9 November 2006,
             p 2593).


             The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Sport
             and Recreation of the National Assembly for a report on the
             amendments proposed by the Council.

          b) Firearms Control Amendment Bill [B 12B – 2006] (National
             Assembly – sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see Announcements,
             Tablings and Committee Reports, 14 November 2006, p 2718).


             The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Safety
             and Security of the National Assembly for a report on the
             amendments proposed by the Council.

2.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    This referral replaces item 2 under “Referral to Committees of papers
    tabled” on page 2635 of the Announcements, Tablings and Committee
    Reports of 14 November 2006:

    1.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Water Affairs and Forestry for consideration and report:

          a) Agreement between the Republic of Botswana, the Republic of
             Mozambique, the Republic of South Africa and the Republic of
             Zimbabwe on the Establishment of the Limpopo Watercourse
             Commission, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
             Constitution, 1996.

          b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Republic of
             Botswana, the Republic of Mozambique, the Republic of South
             Africa and the Republic of Zimbabwe on the Establishment of the
             Limpopo.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     a) Report of the Youth Parliament held on 28 – 29 June 2006, Old
        Assembly Chamber, Parliament;


     b) Report of the Women’s Parliament held on 03 – 04 August 2006, Old
        Assembly Chamber, Parliament; and


     c) Report of the People’s Assembly held on 14 – 15 September 2006,
        Oudtshoorn.


        Copies of the reports are available from office of Clerk of the
        Papers and on Parliament’s website www.parliament.gov.za

2.    The Minister of Finance


     a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
        and the Government of the People’s Republic of China on Mutual
        Administrative Assistance in Customs Matters, tabled in terms of
        section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government of
        the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the People’s
        Republic of China on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Customs
        Matters.


3.    The Minister of Transport

     a) Airlift Strategy 2006.


     b) Draft strategy to Accelerate Public Transport Implementation via a
        WIN-WIN-WIN partnership between Government, Existing Operators and
        Labour.


     c) National Road Safety Strategy 2006 Onwards.


     d) Transport Action Plan for 2010.


     e) Road Infrastructure Strategic Framework for South Africa (RISFSA).

4.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration

     a) Memorandum of Understanding between the Republic of Rwanda through
        its Ministry of Public Service and Labour and the Republic of South
        Africa through its Ministry for the Public Service and
        Administration on Co-operation in the Field of Civil Service and
        Public Administration (1 November 2002).


     b) Memorandum of Understanding between the United Nations and the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa through its Centre for
        Public Service Innovations relating to Co-operation in the United
        Nations On-line Network of Regional Institution for Capacity
        Building in Public Administration and Finance (20 July 2004).


     c) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
        Democratic Republic of the Congo through its Ministry of Public
        Service and the Government of the Republic of South Africa through
        its Ministry for the Public Service and Administration on Co-
        operation in the Field of Public Administration (31 August 2004).


     d) Agreement between Sweden through the Swedish International
        Development Co-operation Agency and the Government of the Republic
        of South Africa on Development Co-operation concerning Public
        Service Support in the Democratic Republic of Congo (12 April
        2005).


     e) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
        Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Government of Sweden and
        the Government of the Republic of South Africa on Co-operation in
        the Area of Public Service and Administration (29 April 2005); and


     f) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the Republic
        of India and the Government of the Republic of South Africa on Co-
        operation in the Field of Governance, Administration and other
        Related Areas (12 June 2006).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology on the
      Annual Reports and Financial Statements 2005 / 2006 of the Department
      of Science and Technology and Entities, dated 14 November 2006:

           The Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology, having
           considered and examined the Annual Reports of the Department of
           Science and Technology (DST), the National Research Foundation
           (NRF), the Africa Institute of South Africa (AISA), the South
           African Council for Natural Scientific Professions (SACNASP),
           TSHUMISANO, the Academy of Science of South Africa (ASSAf), the
           Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), the Human
           Science Research Council  (HSRC) and the National Advisory
           Council of Innovation (NACI) accountable to it, reports that it
           has concluded its deliberations thereon.


2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security on the
      Firearms Control Amendment Bill [B 12B - 2006] (National Assembly- sec
      75), dated 15 November 2006:

           The Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security, having
           considered the Firearms Control Amendment Bill [B 12B - 2006]
           (National Assembly - sec 75) and proposed amendments of the
           National Council of Provinces (Announcements, Tablings and
           Committee Reports, 14 November 2006, p 2718), referred to the
           Committee, reports the Bill with amendments [B 12C - 2006].


Report to be considered.

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation on the
      South African Drug-Free Sport Amendment Bill [B 7B - 2006] (National
      Assembly- sec 75), dated 15 November 2006:

           The Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation, having
           considered the South African Drug-Free Sport Amendment Bill [B
           7B - 2006] (National Assembly - sec 75) and proposed amendments
           of the National Council of Provinces (Announcements, Tablings
           and Committee Reports, 9 November 2006, p 2593), referred to the
           Committee, reports the Bill with amendments [B 7C - 2006].


Report to be considered.

4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry on
      the Agreement between the Republic of Botswana, the Republic of
      Mozambique, the Republic of Zimbabwe and the Republic of South Africa
      for the establishment of the Limpopo Watercourse Commission, dated 15
      November 2006:

           The Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry, having
           considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
           Agreement between the Republic of Botswana, the Republic of
           Mozambique, the Republic of Zimbabwe and the Republic of South
           Africa for the establishment of the Limpopo Watercourse
           Commission, referred to it, recommends that the House, in terms
           of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said
           Agreement.


Request to be considered.

5.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the progress report
      from the Special Pensions Board on the implementation of the Special
      Pensions Amendment Act, No 28, 2005 (Act No 69 of 1996, as amended),
      dated 15 November 2006.



           The Portfolio Committee on Finance exercises oversight over the
           National Treasury in line with the constitutional mandate set
           out in section 55(2) of the Constitution. In line with its
           oversight responsibility the Portfolio Committee requested the
           Special Pensions Board to provide a progress report to it on
           Friday, 10 November 2006, with respect to the implementation of
           the Special Pension Amendments Act 28, 2005 (Act No 69 of 1996,
           as amended).



        1. The object of the Act is to amend the Special Pensions Act No 69
           of 1996, to provide for the following:


              a. The lapsing  of  the  rights  to  pensions  and  survivor’s
                 benefits on 31 December 2006;
              b. The  introduction  of  a  surviving  spouse’s  pension,  an
                 orphan’s pension, and a funeral benefit;
   c. To regulate benefit payments to spouses and dependants;
   d. To regulate the reconsideration of determined cases;
              e. To provide for the repayment  of  any  benefit  paid  to  a
                 person that was not entitled to that benefit;
   f. To further regulate the dissolution of the Board and the Review Board;
      and
   g. To amend Schedule 3 of the Act, to include Schedule 4 in the Act.


        2. The  Special  Pensions  Board  provided  the  Committee  with  a
           progress report on the implementation of  the  Special  Pensions
           Amendment Act, No 28, 2005 (Act No 69 of 1996, as amended), that
           highlighted the following:


              a. The national awareness campaign undertakes to ensure that
                 all who qualify should benefit;
     b. The number of beneficiaries reached during this process;
     c. The number of applications received and approved;
   d. Dissatisfaction with the fact that the qualification criteria were not
      changed; and
              e. Enquiries as to the progress with respect to the
                 implementation of the under 35 resolution.
      3.    The Special Pensions Board also highlighted the following
           challenges faced by the Board relating to implementation of the
           Act as amended:

   a. Obtaining applications before the closing date of 31 December 2006;
              b. Increased applications that highlighted the capacity
                 constraints to screen and process applications;
   c. False claims received that required investigations that is still
      ongoing;
   d. Backlog in reviewing applications; and
   e. Human resource constraints with high staff turnover.

Conclusion

Arising from the progress report received from the  Special  Pensions  Board
with respect to the implementation of the Act as  amended  it  has  emerged,
that among others, the issue of the under  35’s  still  remains  unresolved,
despite the adoption of the Committee  Report  by  the  House  (see  ATC,  8
November 2005, p 2567 and Minutes of proceeding, 11 November 2005).

Recommendations:

a. That the Board within 30 days after  the  closing  date  for  application
   furnish the Committee with a comprehensive report on the outcome of  this
   process as set out in paragraphs 1, 2, and 3.
b. That the House request the  Leader  of  Government  Business  to  provide
   feedback on the adoption of Resolution (see ATC, 8 November 2005, p  2567
   and Minutes of proceedings, 11 November 2005) with  particular  reference
   to co-ordinating the implementation  of  programmes  which  will  provide
   education, skills and other measures with  regard  to  integrating  these
   individuals back into society.
Report to be considered.


