---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 13 June 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2006-06-13
---

TUESDAY, 13 JUNE 2006
                                    ____




              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 10:04.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M A MZIZI: Deputy Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House, I shall move:

   That the Council–


   (1)      notes that 13 people had to be rushed to the hospital in
        Alberton on Sunday, 11 June 2006, after falling victim to a teargas
        attack;


   (2)      further notes that according to the Ekhurhuleni emergency
        services the teargas canister was released near a rubber factory and
        due to the wind direction, 23 people were exposed to the gas while
        13 had to be taken to hospital;


   (3)      acknowledges that this type of behaviour is unacceptable and
        should be dealt with accordingly; and

   (4)      calls upon the relevant authorities to do their utmost to bring
        the perpetrators to book so that they can be dealt with by the law.

Mr O M ROBERTSON: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I will move on the
next sitting day of the House:

   That the Council–


   (1)      notes with concern the racist and defamatory remarks made by the
        leader of the DA in the Western Province, Mr Theuns Botha, against
        Mrs Lorna Scott, Deputy Mayor of the Hessequa Municipality;


   (2)      believes that racial and inflammatory remarks like these are
        still endemic in the DA and should be rejected with the contempt
        they deserve since they in no way lead to nation-building; and
   (3)      that this Council urges Mr Theuns Botha to apologise publicly to
        Mrs Lorna Scott and that we as the ANC-led government will give her
        our full support.

Mr S SHICEKA: Deputy Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House, I shall move:

   That the Council –

   (1)      notes with sadness the increase in the death of prisoners in our
        prisons;


   (2)      further notes that the death rate in our prisons has escalated
        from 1,65 per 1 000 prisoners in 1995 to 9,2 per 1 000 prisoners
        this year, and that with a total of 1 554 deaths in prisons in 2005,
        South Africa’s prisons have a mortality rate 17 times higher than
        the most recently recorded death rate in Nigeria’s prisons, which
        are notorious for overcrowding;


   (3)      also notes that, while the American army has identified 27
        detainee deaths between 2002 and 2005 as suspected or confirmed
        murders, in South Africa during 2005 alone, 46 prisoners died due to
        unnatural causes;


   (4)      therefore resolves that this death rate, under the care of our
        correctional officials, is unacceptably high and that the Select
        Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs should urgently
        call the Department of Correctional Services and the Judicial
        Inspectorate of Prisons, under its new head Judge Nathan Erasmus, to
        -


        (a) present a report on this matter and take measures to turn this
            situation around;

        (b) table the report in this House based on the deliberations that
            have taken place, and inform the South African public about the
            outcome; and

        (c) take disciplinary measures against those involved in cases of
            human omission or commission.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 9 - Public Enterprises:

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Deputy Chairperson, it is a pleasure
to be back in this House, and I really quite like this new podium. Deputy
Chairperson, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, today marks the first
occasion since the onset of democracy that the Department of Public
Enterprises presents its budget in the National Council of Provinces.

Our presence in this Chamber is an indication that state-owned enterprises
are increasingly being recognised as vital players in advancing the
objectives of the developmental state and obtaining the goals and targets
set out in the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa.
It is also recognition of the importance of interaction with all spheres of
government in the planning and implementation of economic and logistics
infrastructure. Better communication contributes to increased
synchronisation of programmes, resources and capacity, thereby enhancing
the impact of infrastructure investment on economic growth and development
at a local level.

The Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises, under the leadership
of the hon Priscilla Themba, has been a key driver in ensuring that my
department and our aligned state-owned enterprises, SOEs, remain
accountable to provinces. Over the past few weeks they have been robustly
engaging us on fundamental issues of transformation and assisting us with
assessing whether we are indeed contributing to the structural changes
within the economy. I believe that we are making such a contribution.

The SOEs are contributing to economic development and job creation both
indirectly and directly at a number of levels. However, I wish only to
speak to three of them. Firstly, by operating efficiently, effectively and
economically, SOEs improve the overall competitiveness of the economy and
increase South Africa’s attractiveness as a preferred investment
destination. A study by the Human Sciences Research Council indicates that
improving telecommunications and logistics inefficiency could save as much
as 4% of GDP. Significant resources are being ploughed into ensuring that
SOEs reconfigure to provide world-class, affordable products that meet the
demand arising from our growing economy. The majority of these resources
are being directed at core input sectors such as energy and transport.

As demonstration of our dedication to provide a secure supply of energy,
Eskom has committed R97 billion to improving generation, transmission and
distribution of electricity. The electricity building programme includes
the refurbishment of existing power stations, the building of new
generation capacity and the generation of alternative, cleaner sources of
energy.

A number of programmes are already under way. These include the
refurbishment of mothballed stations at Camden – two of the 380 megawatt
plants are already on, with a further 760 megawatts by 2008; Grootvlei,
also in Mpumalanga, where 1 130 megawatts between 2007 and 2009 will be
brought on stream; and Komati, also in Mpumalanga, where 900 megawatts
between 2008 and 2011 will be brought on stream.

The construction of two new peaking stations – these are gas-fired open-
cycle turbine plants - at Atlantis and Mossel Bay are well on the way in
the construction process. In addition, we recently announced a new base-
load plant in the form of a coal-fired station, the so-called Project
Alpha; and a second major project for base-load was announced.

In the area of logistics, efficiency in the port and freight systems is a
key ambition, as a delay in this area would form a fundamental impediment
to growth. A priority of Transnet is thus to accelerate the building of new
ports, expanding capacity in the overcrowded ports and modernising freight
facilities. The new Port of Ngqura is being developed and there will be
expansion in Saldanha Bay. A pre-feasibility study for the container
terminal in the Port of Ngqura has been completed, and a full feasibility
study and costing exercise for the terminal is being conducted.

In respect of addressing overcrowding in Durban harbour and Cape Town, the
Pier 1 terminal in Durban is being expanded and redesigned to provide an
additional container terminal with a 600 000 TEU capacity by 2007. Further
work to meet the environmental impact assessment requirements for the
expansion of the Cape Town container terminal is under way.

Other key interventions by Transnet include the refurbishment of Spoornet
locomotives and wagons, and the purchasing of 102 new locomotives, as well
as the construction of a multipurpose pipeline from Durban to Gauteng.

The second area I would like to focus on is the capital expenditure
programme, which is being driven by the SOEs. These will leverage the
growth of the local supplier industry, thereby catalysing the creation of
new economic activity and re-establishing related industries. Transnet and
Eskom’s capex spend is estimated to contribute 1,5% of the 2004 GDP per
annum over the next five years.

Spending in key areas of manufacturing will be significant. Based on our
modelling, which we did together with the Industrial Development
Corporation, it is estimated that R27 billion will be going towards
construction, particularly the civil engineering sector; R11 billion for
metal products excluding machinery; R9 billion for electrical machinery;
R8 billion for nonelectrical machinery; and R11 billion for transport
equipment. Those figures, I think, give you an indication of the impact
that could occur in many of these industries. These are very, very large
figures.

In product terms, Eskom’s demand for steel and cement per annum in the next
few years is estimated to be 60 000 tons of steel and 1 million tonnes of
cement. The construction of the pipeline from KwaZulu-Natal to Gauteng will
require anywhere between 75 000 and 90 000 tons of steel. The positive
impact that the investment spend will have on the economy cannot be
understated.
The development of the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor will also give rise to a
new industrial sector in the form of the supply and maintenance of these
reactors. It is also foreseeable that new engineering techniques to deal
with the heat by-product of the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor will open many
new industrial and chemical opportunities.

To maximise local benefits from SOE activity, the department is developing
a local content procurement framework to be completed by the end of July
this year. This framework will focus on the development of local suppliers,
particularly in the area where we have a competitive advantage. It will not
only seek to strengthen local industries so that they may optimally benefit
from the capex spend, but it will also serve to move them up in the value
chain.

A model of leverage of Eskom’s procurement spend has already been completed
and is outlined in a brochure, which has been distributed to members along
with copies of the speech. There is a small booklet that you should have in
the little packet you were given. I would encourage members to have a look
at that and speak to their business communities in the provinces. This
booklet gives some idea of how small and medium enterprises, black-owned
enterprises and women-owned enterprises can prepare now to enter the Eskom
supplier chain. This is not easy; you can’t just come in. This gives some
idea of how this can be done and there are proposals for support to do it.

Let me deal with the disposal of noncore properties as part of the process
of making SOE more focused and streamlined. This is an additional enabler
of black economic empowerment and local economic development. The noncore
properties have been classified according to various disposable options,
namely sale of the property or its use for housing, or its transfer to
local government for development purposes.

Properties for sale have been identified based on their relative location,
size, market demand, topography and potential. Sales, as with the Victoria
and Alfred Waterfront, will be done through open and competitive tender
processes.

Broad-based black economic empowerment guidelines have been developed to
ensure that the disposal process contributes to transforming the property
sector. For smaller property holdings, the guidelines include stratified
preference for people who reside in the area in which the property is
located to allow for a more equitable geographic spread of economic
ownership. I would just like to stress that point. As we begin this
process, there will be significant pockets of property where we will give
preference, also on a BEE basis, to people in the town where the property
is being disposed of.

The department will further play a catalytic role in negotiating with
relevant departments to fast-track the transfer or development of SOE
properties, which can contribute to government’s broader socioeconomic
objectives in respect of social, residential and industrial development.

Information-sharing sessions between the Department of Public Enterprises
and the Department of Housing have already begun, and the department is
also working closely with affected municipalities to ensure the optimal
utilisation of targeted property.

In order to make the necessary impact on the economy, the SOEs have to be
financially and commercially viable entities with sound corporate
governance practices. They have to display operational efficiency and
maintain healthy, independent balance sheets. This requires stable,
institutionalised governance systems that are able to maximise shareholder
value. The department is currently developing a shareholder management
framework to be concluded next year. We are also developing shareholder
compacts with reporting SOEs based on clear performance targets that
capture both strategic intent and the economic return.

Internally, the department established processes to improve our risk
management capacity, financial indicators informed by the Holt valuation
system were introduced, and a benchmarking exercise was conducted using a
cash-flow-return-on-investment framework. The tools are further supported
by a risk-management questionnaire to measure SOE compliance with the
Public Finance Management Act, and performance risk-analysis reviews are
conducted quarterly.

Our primary obligation, however, remains to ensure that state-owned
enterprises play a strategic role in advancing the objectives of the
developmental state. Activities of SOEs are critical for the economic
integration of the second economy, and hence their outputs have to be
carefully monitored. A project to model infrastructure impact on the
economy, social equity and the natural environment is under way to align
capex planning with macroeconomic and industrial policy targets.
Furthermore, an investment dashboard is being introduced to track the
outputs of capex-related projects, thereby increasing transparency,
accountability and effective implementation.

Because of its significance, I would like to repeat my message to the
National Assembly. The electricity problems we have, and may experience in
the Cape, have driven home some lessons. A key one is that of communication
and reliable information. There are a number of aspects to this matter.

The first is a consistent message on growth and the investment required to
meet and facilitate that growth. What the last two or three years have
shown us is that this economy is indeed capable of higher growth and that
this is a very robust and competitive economy. It is now time for both the
public and private sectors to internalise this reality and adjust their
decision-making accordingly.

In the public sector, from the local level through to the national level,
full attention has to be paid to every aspect of infrastructure, and to
efficient and continual maintenance of that infrastructure. In the private
sector, where investment lead times are longer for the supplier industries,
business leaders must have confidence and the foresight to invest now.
Hesitancy and timidity are obstacles to the growth that we can achieve.
This is not an incitement to reckless planning, but it is a call to
courage. The leaders of both the public and private sectors must now take
personal responsibility for the training of our talented and capable
people. They are the bedrock assets of this economy.

From the side of the Department of Public Enterprises and the state-owned
enterprises, we will attempt to improve our communication with the
stakeholders so that more information is available for decision-making.
Interaction with potential suppliers in the investment programme is
important both to facilitate such a large programme and to open
opportunities for the largest and the smallest of enterprises. We will
ensure that opportunities arising both from the investment programme and
the property disposal process are advertised broadly and well in advance to
enable broad participation.

We have redesigned our website to increase its accessibility and we are
already achieving a higher amount of hits. For those interested in a more
detailed account of what is happening in each of the state-owned
enterprises, I would urge you to go onto the site and get access to the
budget speech, which deals with the state-owned enterprises individually in
more detail.

Let me take this opportunity, in the context of communication, to thank the
people of Cape Town and the surrounding areas for their co-operation in the
saving of energy. I would also like to thank the business community in
particular for their detailed co-operation. Without this, a difficult
situation would have been even worse. We will have to continue our efforts
to save on energy over the next two months until we have the second unit
back in operation. I sincerely thank all who are co-operating in this task.

The priority areas for the department for the coming year are to implement
an effective shareholder management system; to ensure the implementation of
the infrastructure investment programme; to support state-owned enterprises
in maintaining healthy balance sheets; to facilitate partnerships with the
private sector where required; and to maximise the impact of the capex
programme in the economy. For this our department is requesting a modest
sum of R683,4 million.

In conclusion, allow me to thank the select committee chairperson the hon
Priscilla Themba, and the select committee members for their open and
vigorous engagement. Thank you also to the chief executive officers and
board chairpersons of the state-owned enterprises for the co-operative
relationship that we have been able to establish. Lastly, I would like to
thank the Director-General, Portia Molefe, and the staff of the department
– some of my senior managers are present with us today - for their
commitment and enthusiasm.

It has been a great honour to address this House. It’s always a pleasure,
and I look forward to a lively and robust debate. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): We thank the hon A
Erwin for his contribution to the debate. I now call the hon M P Themba,
the chairperson of the Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises.

Ms M P THEMBA: Hon Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, comrades
and friends, we are entering our Age of Hope, we are also celebrating the
youth uprising’s 30th anniversary and we are also approaching the 50th
anniversary of the women’s march. We are therefore committed to making sure
that all our people share in this age of hope. As a result we charge
ourselves as leaders of the government to use the instruments of government
to make sure that our people share in the wealth of our great country as
stipulated in the Freedom Charter.

State enterprises, better known as state-owned enterprises, constitute an
important part of the organs of state, broadly defined. They occupy a
strategic position in contributing to economic production, wealth creation,
employment creation and the national revenue. Since ours is an economy
dominated by private enterprise, the strategic role of this enterprise in
counterbalancing the power of private co-operation over society cannot be
underestimated.

South Africa’s developmental state, as led by the ruling party, the ANC,
requires that we nurture and strengthen the strategic role of the state-
owned enterprises. To do so is to be faithful to the Freedom Charter.

Our commitment to the spirit and letter of the ideals of our Constitution
and the Reconstruction and Development Programme remains as strong as ever.
The Department of Public Enterprises has oversight responsibility over
these SOEs and is thus directly charged with making sure that the SOEs play
their role in a developmental state and we, as the ANC in the select
committee, will strongly assert our responsibilities on behalf of our
people to ensure that the mandate of the department and SOEs are fulfilled.

When the ANC says developmental state, we mean a state that on the one hand
is able to promote sustained development, understanding by development the
steady, high rates of economic growth and structural change in the
productive system both domestically and in its relationship to the
international economy; and on the other hand, we mean a state that has the
capacity to implement economic policies wisely and effectively whilst
remaining mindful of and attentive to our social obligations. This thus
requires a strong state.

Let us now turn our attention to the Department of Public Enterprises and
measure it against the requirements of a developmental state. In South
Africa our economic goals are premised on accelerating economic growth and
sharing the gains of such growth amongst all our people. This is all
succinctly captured in the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for
South Africa, Asgisa. Where does the DPE locate itself in terms of Asgisa?

The department says that it is partly responsible for ensuring that SOE
pricing is consistent with the objective of efficient service delivery that
will enable accelerated economic growth in South Africa.

In real terms, this should translate into an effort to make sure that SOEs
pack their prices at levels that ensure they are able to thrive in today’s
economy and, crucially, that the prices allow the SOEs to deliver services
to South Africans at an affordable price. In this regard some SOEs, for
example, Eskom, are doing better than others and it is encouraging to know
that the DPE says it will promote a pricing policy that supports economic
growth and development.

The department is involved, as shareholder management, at both enterprise
and industry level. This translates into the department having both to
focus on ensuring that the enterprise is sustainable and that the SOEs
contribute to the structural efficiency of the industries within which they
operate. This relates to ensuring that SOEs are run in an efficient manner
that adheres to principles of co-operative governance, set and meet
performance targets and are reviewed against critical-performance
indicators to ensure that the organisation is efficiently managed and
customers receive a competitive service. Of course, the Department of
Public Enterprises has to achieve all these without micromanaging the SOEs.

We can all appreciate the magnitude of the above task, especially if we
consider the amount of mismanagement that has taken place in some of our
SOEs in the recent past. We are also sure that the DPE is assisting SOEs in
putting in place risk management frameworks that will alert them to
potential financial and other risks, which will allow SOEs to better manage
these risks.

One of the department’s objectives is to use SOEs as a catalyst for
economic development in South Africa and the rest of Africa. This ties in
with the ANC-led government’s stated goals of spreading the Age of Hope
throughout our continent.

No country in Africa can grow and be prosperous without placing the whole
continent on a path of sustainable growth and development and enabling
everyone to participate actively as Africans in the world economy and body
politics. Our commitment is, and should be focused on, the determination
that we collectively can remove ourselves and the continent from the
dissatisfaction of underdevelopment and the exclusion from a globalising
world. In this regard we applaud what Eskom in particular has done and will
be doing to electrify our continent.

One of the most important aspects of Asgisa is to ensure a more equitable
spread of economic activities and opportunities. To achieve these goals, it
is important that SOEs use their capital infrastructure programme to
stimulate economic activities in rural and underdeveloped areas. We all
know that if more of these areas had access to electricity and transport
infrastructure they are likely to increase their economic activities.

In conclusion, it gives me great pleasure to state that the Department of
Public Enterprises is indeed adding to our developmental agenda; however,
as is the case with all star performers, we must urge them to do better.
The Select Committee on Public Enterprises would like to thank the
Minister, the DG and the officials. We support the Budget Vote. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr D D GAMEDE: Chairperson, we have this debate today when we are in the
age of hope. Equally, I’m sure this department is the department of hope,
hope that it will address the imbalances of the past, hope that it will
implement all the policies of the government led by the ANC, hope that it
will meet most, if not all, the challenges facing young people today as we
commemorate June 16.

State-owned enterprises have a specific role in achieving strategic
objectives in those areas of the economy in which the private sector alone
would compromise government’s objectives, given that private enterprises
focus on achieving market-related returns on capital. In this regard, I
will concentrate on analysis and risk management.

The aim of this programme is to conduct insightful analysis, give advice on
the commercial and developmental performance of state-owned enterprises and
manage key risks flowing from the activities of state-owned enterprises.

It is appreciated that the department has listed the following output
priorities: one, to report on financial performances of SOEs against agreed
targets; two, the management and reduction of risks through the activities
of SOEs; and, three, the implementation and monitoring of SOE compliance
with the risk-management framework.

The department has set itself the task of reviewing these outputs on a
quarterly basis, and this is highly appreciated. In terms of its recent
outputs, the department reported that it carried out a high-level
assessment of the status of the risk management framework, scheduled to be
implemented this year.

The department also reported that it has established the state-owned
enterprise risk forum in which the department and its SOEs meet to discuss
issues related to risk and compliance with the Public Finance Management
Act. The department needs to do more about the level of compliance by SOEs
with the Public Finance Management Act.

SOEs have a strategic role to fulfil in the fight against poverty and
unemployment and, as such, it is important that they are run or managed in
a way that minimises their exposure to financial and other types of risks.

The department’s analysis and risk programme sets itself the goal of
analysing and monitoring the financial, operational and socioeconomic
performance of the SOEs to ensure compliance with corporate plans and
shareholder compacts, and to actively mitigate key risks flowing from SOE
activities. Now, we are all aware that there have been less than stellar
performances in the management of our SOEs.

This programme’s budget has increased from R7,09 million in 2005-06 to
R16,72 million in 2006-07. This is partly to fill vacancies in the
financial risk analysis section. A sum of R2,5 million has been allocated
to consultants, contractors and special services whilst R2,8 million has
been allocated to the computer service.

The increased allocation for consultants is necessary for capacity-building
in risk management projects at Alexkor and the internal control review and
exploration programme of SOE risk assessments. The increase in the
allocation for computer services is for the setting up of risk management,
benchmarking and integrated financial systems.

It was reported last year that there were instances of significant
differences between levels of technical know-how and expertise in the DPE
and in the management of SOEs. This had an inhibiting effect on the DPE’s
ability to exercise oversight over the SOEs.

Now the department aims to finalise its risk management framework by August
2006. We are very glad to hear this, as this framework will be an important
tool in helping to anticipate financial and other risks. With proper risk
management, it should be possible to take measures to avoid certain risks.

Of course, proper risk management needs to be backed up by, amongst other
things, good governance principles, and Mr Ngcawane dealt with this
important aspect of ensuring that SOEs contribute to the NDR. We therefore
look forward to hearing more about the department’s practical plans for
implementing the risk management framework this year.

The ANC urges all members and parties to support this Budget Vote. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Hon Minister, Deputy Chairperson, earlier this year
Cabinet announced that government intended selling off noncore properties
owned by parastatals in order to boost development and free up land for
those economic sectors targeted by the Accelerated and Shared Growth
Initiative for South Africa, Asgisa. This is a welcome development.

The DA has for a long time advocated that parastatals sell off their
noncore assets, but we need more than this. We need a wholesale programme
of privatisation. Minister Erwin’s commitment to the privatisation of state-
owned assets seems to have faltered. His policy focuses instead on the
disposal of noncore assets and the introduction of private-sector partners
to the major state-owned enterprises, so-called SOEs.

This is a pity because a bolder programme of privatisation is a sure-fire
way to increase efficiency, attract foreign investment and drive BEE.
Privatisation is not only important in its own right, it is looked upon by
potential investors as an important indicator of a government’s mindset
with regard to private enterprise and a market-orientated economy.
Privatisation and other forms of restructuring state assets are not
ideological imperatives, but they do hold enormous benefits for South
Africa if implemented judiciously.

Among other things, they generally move assets from less productive owners
to more productive ones and can increase competition. Public-private
partnerships of various sorts and outsourcing can also play significant
roles in improving efficiency and service delivery. South Africa’s
privatisation programme has been a disaster. Unnecessary delays, continual
ambivalence, infighting within the tripartite alliance and excessive
conditionality have cost South Africa dearly.

South Africa has lost out badly because of the slow and inappropriate
process. Billions of rands have been lost as a result of government’s
failure to implement a workable privatisation plan timeously. If the
Minister is prepared to embark on a workable plan of privatisation, he
needs to look no further than Denel. The state-owned arms manufacturer
lurches from one crisis to another. It is a cash burner and a sinkhole and
an embarrassment to South Africa’s good standing in the international
community.

Last year the government of India cancelled a lucrative contract with Denel
for 400 antimaterial rifles amidst allegations of irregularity and third-
party payments in the awarding of the contract. Not only did this damage
the commercial prospects of Denel itself, but unfortunately it does cast a
long shadow over the Minister.

There is something else I want to address here that was also addressed by
my colleague in the National Assembly and it is of great importance. During
the past year that same colleague, Karel Minnie, received several letters
from dissatisfied members of the Transnet Second Defined Benefit Fund.

Hierdie pensioenfonds se 100 000 lede en hul afhanklikes ondervind tans dat
hulle skynbaar geen seggenskap meer het oor die volhoubaarheid van hul
hoofinkomstebron in die handhawing van hul lewenstandaarde nie. Terwyl
ander openbare entiteite se pensioenfondslede in die afgelope jare
verhogings van tot 8% geniet het, het die lede van die Transnet Tweede
Vastevoordeelfonds oor die afgelope vyf jaar geen verhogings in hul
maandelikse pensioen ontvang nie, buiten die statutêre 2% waarop hulle
geregtig is.

Tussen 2002 en 2004 het die befondsingsvlak van die Transnet Tweede
Vastevoordeelfonds gedaal van 103% tot 72,1% as gevolg van ’n
aandeleruiltransaksie wat deur die fonds se Transnet aangestelde trustees
goedgekeur is, oënskynlik met die doel om die toe wankelende entiteit se
finansiële posisie beter te laat voorkom.

Klaarblyklike botsende belange aan die kant van die vastevoordeelfonds se
trusteeraad het die DA diep bekommerd oor die toekomstige welsyn van
hierdie pensioentrekkers. Een van die hooftrustees wat die besluit
goedgekeur het, is selfs ’n afgetredene van Transnet, en was by Transnet as
’n finansiële bestuurder werksaam ten tyde van die besluit oor die
aandeleruiling. Hy het ook die maatskappy in verskeie ander rade
verteenwoordig.

Die vastevoordeelfonds besit tans ’n 43,6%-aandeel in die Waterkant in
Kaapstad. Noudat hierdie eersteklasbate moontlik verkoop gaan word, eis ons
die versekering van die Minister dat die lede van die vastevoordeelfonds se
belange onafhanklik van die balansstaat van die groot konglomeraat beskerm
word.

Laat my toe om die Huis te herinner aan die volgende feite: hierdie
pensioentrekkers het hulle jare lank afgesloof vir karige salarisse omdat
hulle geglo het dat die belofte van goeie aftreepakkette gestand gedoen sou
word. As die trustees van die vastevoordeelfonds is beide die regering en
Transnet geheel en al verantwoordelik vir die voortgesette welsyn van
hierdie fonds se lede. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The 100 000 members of this pension fund and their dependants now find
that they apparently no longer have any authority over the sustainability
of their main source of income in maintaining their standard of living.
Whereas the pension fund members of other public entities have in the past
years enjoyed increases of up to 8%, the members of the Transnet Second
Defined Benefit Fund have seen no increase in their monthly pensions over
the past five years, except the statutory 2% to which they are entitled.

From 2002 to 2004, the funding level of the Transnet Second Defined Benefit
Fund dropped from 103% to 72,1% as a result of a share-exchange
transaction, which the fund’s Transnet-appointed trustees approved,
apparently with the aim of embellishing the then shaky entity’s financial
position.

Apparently conflicting interests on the part of the defined benefit fund’s
board of trustees has the DA deeply worried about the future wellbeing of
these pensioners. One of the principal trustees who had approved the
decision is a retired Transnet employee himself and was at the time of the
share-exchange decision working as a financial manager for Transnet. He
also represented the company on various other councils.

The defined benefit fund currently holds a 43,6% share in the Cape Town
Waterfront. Since this first-class asset is probably soon to be sold, we
demand of the Minister to give us the assurance that the interests of the
defined benefit fund members will be protected independently from the
balance sheet of the large conglomerate.

Allow me to remind the House of the following facts: For years these
pensioners worked themselves to the bone for a meagre salary, in the belief
that the promise of generous retirement packages would be kept. As the
trustees of the defined benefit fund, both the government and Transnet are
entirely responsible for the continued welfare of the members of this
Fund.]

Many of these pensioners and their representatives, like the SA Association
of Retired Pensioners, and my colleague, Mr Minnie, have written to
Transnet’s CFO, Chris Wells, Transnet CEO Maria Ramos and the Minister. At
most, our efforts have been met with a promise to look into the matter.
Often, not even an acknowledgement of receipt has been forthcoming.

The time has come for the Minister to heed the calls of thousands of
pensioners and their dependants struggling to make ends meet and to ensure
that the members of the Transnet Second Defined Benefit Fund are
retrospectively compensated for not having received inflation-aligned
increases over the past five years; the members of the Transnet Second
Defined Benefit Fund are given the right to nominate their own trustees to
ensure that no movement of the assets of the fund take place without their
prior knowledge and consent of the fund members; the government and
Transnet publicly commit themselves to Transnet Second Defined Benefit Fund
members receiving annual increases at least aligned with the increases
received by other public entity pension funds.

Die DA gaan die verbeterde welsyn van hierdie Transnet-pensioentrekkers
meedoënloos oor die komende maande propageer. Dankie. [The DA is going to
propagate the improved welfare of these Transnet pensioners relentlessly
over the coming months. Thank you.]

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members present in this
House, the debate on Public Enterprises has come at a time when the
government and communities are sharing sad experiences arising from Public
Enterprises. These sad experiences need heart-to-heart talks and eyeball-to-
eyeball communication to facilitate an emergency rescue with all
stakeholders.

The Department of Public Enterprises has a vision of providing an effective
state-owned enterprise shareholders management system to promote economic
growth, effective management of the economy and accrual of profit. Profits
gained should, in a way, filter down to the poor people. Our Public
Enterprises comprise Eskom, Denel, Transnet and SA Airways.

Eskom produces 95% of South African electricity and the group profit in
2005 was R5,2 billion. Transnet’s revenue was R24,2 billion in 2005 with a
profit of R3,1 billion. Denel had a net loss of R1,6 billion in 2005, and
the government had to rescue Denel with R2,13 billion. The Pebble Bed
Modular Reactor received R600 million from the government in 2005 and R580
million in 2006, that is from the South African yearbook. This picture is
not enviable.

The total budget allocation for 2006-07 is R608 million as the
R2 billion that was provided for the recapitalisation of Denel was not
repeated this year, that is from the Estimates of National Expenditure,
2006.

We are at war with the human immunodeficiency virus, HIV. In war combat, a
soldier can track the enemy, but the HI virus cannot be tracked because it
changes its form, that is it mutates. HIV plays deadly games and that is
why no cure has been found yet. Denel, working with the CSIR, has
innovative ways of processing soya, which is rich in proteins. The HIV eats
away all the cells in the body. Therefore one needs a double supply of
proteins to maintain flesh on the bones.

Infected people should not be reduced to bones that drive family members to
madness when they die. Suicide cases among infected people arise from the
refusal to see oneself as a walking skeleton. That is the cruelty of the HI
virus. Among other activities, Denel has gone around showing the good work
it can do with soya beans. Hospitals, pharmacists, clinics and surgeries
store soya for the products that we use, which are very helpful to our
HIV/Aids cases. Denel and other private enterprises can help Africa in
fighting the HIV/Aids pandemic.

Denel can also provide good BEE turnaround strategies by telling all
provinces and helping them to grow soya in a favourable climate and sending
it to Denel in Potchefstroom, where it can be processed. In this way, the
poorest of the poor will make a living out of soya planting and processing.
Remote rural communities may also be assisted through this soya project
with “soya cows” to produce their own milk at local level. Denel would help
a lot.

Protein foods that are rich quickly expire, and so it is with soya products
if not properly stored. Expired soya products are not thrown away either. I
have gathered that these feed growing mushrooms. The great soya bean is our
yellow gold of the 21st century and that I have learnt through Denel
activities.

The R2 billion injected into Denel may then be recovered through rural
communities who may be actively involved in planting soya on a large scale.
This is a good social outreach programme that is fighting our worst enemy,
HIV/Aids. The premature deaths caused by HIV/Aids top the list of 20 causes
in the year 2000, that was 4 665 410. The figures are provided by the CSIR.
The IFP supports the budget and feels that help must be given to the
communities. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Hon Chair, hon Minister, comrades and members, let me
start by saying we have learnt something today. We have learnt that when
it’s about Health, Trade and Industry or Public Enterprises, we will,
debate about soya. [Laughter.] Thank you, Mam ‘uMchunu. [Laughter.]

I also want to correct something, which is known to all of us in the House.
I do not remember, at any stage, the department or government speaking on
privatisation. I am aware of the word “restructuring” and in restructuring
you do not compromise the workers; trade unions are also involved.

Let me also say to Ms Terblanche that it is about time you mind your own.
There is no disaster in the ANC or its alliance partners. What individuals
say is their business. Let me also tell you that we have a programme that
we are working on. Therefore there cannot be a disaster when there is a
programme.

You must also understand that the only organisations that could have
disasters or that have disasters are small organisations like yours. Let me
also say something else to Ms Terblanche. Ms Terblanche, it is a pity. We
know why you could not attend, but it is such a pity that you were not
there to get the briefing from Denel. What the press says is not what is
happening and, you see, once you get your information from the media, you
will forever be confused. You’d better get briefed by the responsible
people.

Let me come back to what we are here for, though. I will concentrate on one
thing, and that is the corporate strategy and structure of the department.
The objective of this programme is to optimise the contribution of state-
owned enterprises to economic growth through delivery of core SOE mandates,
projects, ensuring industrial efficiency and leveraging SOEs to catalyse
broader development.

With regard to the President’s announcement on an enabling environment to
accelerate economic growth in South Africa and the rest of Africa, the
department will work with the Department of Trade and Industry, the DTI, in
ensuring that mechanisms are incorporated into a sector-development
strategy.

The President also mentioned quite clearly that the government would also
work with the SOEs, especially on projects concerning large infrastructural
investment and electricity, water and telecommunications. The department’s
budget has been increased; I do not have to mention figures.

Like Mam ‘uMchunu has said, you also need to make sure that you budget for
the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor and, excluding that, the budget for this
programme is expected to rise at an average annual rate of 38,6%.

The allocation to the Joint Project Facility is expected to increase by R10
million per year for the next three years. This programme is tasked with
making sure that the SOEs operate in a way that gives effect to the ANC
objectives of creating jobs and fighting poverty. It assists the SOEs by
devising strategies around the Ngqura Terminal, and by the introduction of
operators or partners in container-handling operations.

The restructuring will also see the National Ports Authority disposing of
the Waterfront, and not in the manner Ms Terblanche was saying, but in a
good way if it were offered to empowerment companies. Also, it would help
if we could be told what else will be disposed of, so that when we go to
our constituencies we are able to explain these things to our
constituencies.

The programme also provides critical assistance in managing the separation
of SA Airways from Transnet. This will make sure that as a stand-alone
entity, SAA will have to fulfil its mandate and bring in more revenue.

Another critical service that this programme provides is ongoing assistance
with the restructuring and turnaround strategy of Denel. I hope you are
listening very well now, Ms Terblanche. We are all aware that Denel had to
be recapitalised by R2 billion, and we will need further recapitalisation
in the future.

It is thus heartening to know that the DPE is working with the Department
of Defence and Armscor to increase local market access for Denel and the
local defence-related industry by aligning the defence acquisition policy
and the publication of a 10-year defence capex plan by 2007.

This programme also houses the very important Joint Project Facility, or
JPF, which is responsible for developing projects that improve industrial
efficiency and effectiveness through leveraging the assets and capabilities
of the SOEs.

In plainer terms, the project will run a range of projects that stretch
across all the SOEs, and will be used to develop projects to the point at
which these projects become viable business or development opportunities.
Once the projects have reached that stage, investment cases will be made to
relevant operational companies and, where appropriate, financial investors.

There are currently six projects under this plan. I do not have to go
through all of them. I will just mention them. They are continental
investments, energy and pipelines, human resource and capacity-building,
information and communication, and property to lock economic value through
SOEs and, of course, investment optimisation.

It is clear that the JPF is a very important project and one wonders
whether a budget of R10 million is adequate to achieve all the goals it has
set for itself.

In conclusion, it remains only to be said that the DPE is one of our
government’s best performing departments. On behalf of the ANC, we support
the Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Mnr die Voorsitter, Eskom is ’n goeie voorbeeld van ’n
maatskappy wat die afgelope jaar nie na wense gepresteer het nie. Eers was
die maatskappy in die nuus oor herhaalde kragonderbrekings in die Wes-Kaap
en die probleme by Koeberg, en die agb Minister het dié probleme toegeskryf
aan sabotasie.

Ons is gewoond aan meer deurdagte uitsprake van die Minister. Ek glo dit
was miskien nie weldeurdag nie. Eskom se onvermoë om strategies te beplan
is klaarblyklik die enigste rede vir die probleme wat by Eskom in die Wes-
Kaap ontstaan het.

Dit het vanjaar aan die lig gekom dat Eskom waarskynlik nie ’n aangename
werksomgewing vir kundige werknemers is nie. Vyftien persent van sy kundige
tegnici en ingenieurs het die maatskappy onlangs verlaat, en die maatskappy
sukkel om hulle te vervang.

Dan het Eskom ook sy beskeie bydrae gelewer om rasseverhoudings in die Wes-
Kaap verder te versuur met sy regspan se sinnelose argumente in die berugte
Christiaans-arbitrasie, te dien effekte dat bruinmense nie op dieselfde
behandeling as swartmense geregtig is nie, omdat hulle in die
apartheidsjare glo nie passe gedra het nie.

Vir seker sal enige topmaatskappy wat die afgelope jaar soveel skade en
verleentheid veroorsaak het se topbestuur tot orde geroep word, maar wat
gebeur by Eskom? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Mr Chairperson, Eskom is a good example of a company
that has not performed as one would have expected in the past year.
Firstly, the company made news regarding the recurring power failures in
the Western Cape and the problems at Koeberg, and the hon Minister
attributed these problems to sabotage.

We are accustomed to more well-considered statements by the Minister. I
believe that perhaps this was not well-thought-out. Eskom’s inability to
plan strategically is evidently the only reason for the problems that
occurred at Eskom in the Western Cape.

It was revealed this year that the working environment at Eskom is most
likely not a pleasant one for skilled employees. Recently 15% of its
skilled technicians and engineers left the company, and the company is
struggling to replace them.

Additionally, Eskom has also made a modest contribution to souring race
relations in the Western Cape even further with its legal team’s senseless
arguments in the notorious Christiaans arbitration to the effect that
coloured people are not entitled to the same treatment as blacks, because
they did not have to carry passes during the apartheid years.

Undoubtedly the top management of any top company that has caused so much
damage and embarrassment in the past year would be called to order, but
what is happening at Eskom?]

Eskom’s chief executive earned R13 million last year; this is five times
more than that earned by Reserve Bank Governor Tito Mboweni and Transnet
CEO Maria Ramos.

But this is not all. Were it not for the fact that the national energy
regulator disallowed the performance bonuses of top management, even more
would have been paid to them. Is it correct that the mediocre performance
of Eskom during the past financial year should be rewarded in this way? The
FF Plus does not think so and we call upon the Minister to ensure and set
up an independent body to investigate the salaries of parastatal executives
and to ensure that top management’s benefits match their actual value to
the country.

The perception unfortunately is that the poorer the top management
performs, the better their remuneration, and we call on the Minister to
make an investigation into the salaries of parastatal executives.

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Hon Chair, hon Minister, hon members, there is a need
for more shareholder activism in SOEs to ensure stricter corporate
governance arrangements and accounting reporting standards that are aligned
with international best practice. The right mix of private-sector
participation in SOEs needs to be found to ensure appropriate skills input
via intellectual capital.

Having said the above, I would like to focus on the following key issues.
Firstly, I would like to congratulate the Minister, Director-General Miss
Molefe and the management team on their professionalism and transparency
around the problems facing Denel. I believe the turnaround strategy will
achieve the desired results and Denel could become the jewel in the crown
of the SOEs portfolio.

Denel has embarked on a cost-cutting exercise, which affects staff, by
selling off noncore assets. It has recapitalised to the tune of R2 billion.
The challenge now is to secure sustainable contracts for the future,
especially in the sales of Rooivalk projects.

The need for nuclear energy and the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor is a step in
the right direction given South Africa’s pressing energy consumption
requirements, which are consistent with a dynamic, growing economy and
manufacturing base.

The worrying feature of this pebble bed is an escalating cost base and how
financially stable this could be. There is a need to source or develop
alternative energy options for smaller towns. This could be solar, wind or
biofuel energy, for example.

Residents living near the Koeberg power station have often raised safety
and health concerns regarding breakdowns and leakages. Something must be
done to address these valid concerns.

We need to look into investing in infrastructure especially upgrading our
transport and rail infrastructure, which will lead to improved transport
times for various categories of goods. Case studies in some Karoo towns
have stopped because of a lack of rail activity.

The change of fortune of Transnet under the leadership of Maria Ramos must
be applauded. However, SAA remains a thorn in the side: the high turnover
of executive staff due to the maverick style of the new CEO is worrying
especially if replacements have little or no airline industry experience.
Anticompetitive practices resulting in fines further raise questions about
SAA.

I want to wish the Minister, the DG and the team the best in the very
challenging situation they are in, and we support the budget.

Ms B L MATLHOAHELA: The hon Minister and the House, and hon colleagues, I
need to start my speech on the Department of Public Enterprises by saying
that in its report it was stated that municipalities are responsible for
implementing the national government policy of providing free basic
electricity to poor households.

The ID relates to the ANC in the sense that it supports the pro-poor
principle. Hence, letters received by the poorest of the poor regarding
electricity cuts for nonpayment show there is no correspondence, and with
this statement I do not blame the ruling party. It puts the poorest of the
poor in a frenzy. Hence, the ID would like to have the government make a
complete, transparent announcement on this. I thank you.

Mr J M SIBIYA: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, government officials,
comrades, ladies and gentlemen, that son of Africa – the leader, the
teacher and the late President of Angola, Dr Agostino Neto - when
addressing the youth of his country in 1976, said in part: “Our liberation
struggle will be meaningless unless we take control of the economy of our
country.”

The ANC-led government in this country fully understands the meaning of
that statement. It is in part for that reason that it will never go in for
wholesale privatisation, because it knows that we would widen the gap
between the rich and the poor, and that would deprive the government of the
means and wherewithal to address the legacy of apartheid.

Actually, those who call for wholesale privatisation are doing so because
they are used to living on unearned income. The ANC will not promote that.
On the other hand, the alleged infighting within the ANC is the language of
those political nonentities who are faced with imminent political oblivion.
The ANC cannot be carried along with that. [Laughter.]

I want to talk about some of the state-owned enterprises, their role and
how they are expected to advise our national democratic revolution. I will
start with Eskom.

As a state-owned utility, Eskom has social obligations such as the
expansion of the rural electrification process. We agree that the utility
has done much to address some of the problems we inherited from apartheid.
We need, however, to acknowledge that more still needs to be done. There is
one specific area to which we would like Eskom to pay more attention, and
that is that, when there is to be the shedding of the loads that you find
usually immediately affects the rural masses, let some means be made so
that even the urban population should be part and parcel of the undertaking
in that regard.

We also need to indicate that Eskom has undertaken a very admirable
campaign to make consumers aware of ways in which to save power. At the
same time, we should urge and let the utility increase its capacity so as
to be able to cope with the demands made on electricity by our economy and
the country in general. However, it would be unfair of us not to recognise
the positive aspects which Eskom has brought about. In the first place, it
has improved itself and we are in the know that there are two power
stations that are to be constructed – one at Atlantis and the other at
Mossel Bay. These are the things we have to recognise.

We will remember that some time back, when we had some problems of outages,
they indicated to us that the nuclear reactor number one was not in
operation and we were informed about that. As I am talking, and you are
listening, it is back in operation. [Laughter.]

Eskom also supplies electricity to the Southern African Development
Community, SADC, countries. That is not only creating jobs for our own
people, but also for people in the countries concerned and it is thereby
uplifting the continent of Africa.

There is something very interesting. Arivia.kom is being set up on the
eastern coast of Africa. It is not only creating jobs, as we have said, but
is also making it possible for the continent to be interconnected and to be
connected with the rest of the world. We have never had that before. For
that purpose, I personally would like to say the following to the Minister
in relation to Eskom: Don’t join me, I’ll read it alone! Go forward Eskom,
go forward! Don’t reply! [Laughter.]

On the other hand, Arivia.com will support Eskom’s business with strategic
information technology services and thus become a direct subsidiary
thereof. It also means that Arivia.com will provide support for Eskom’s
projects on our continent and contribute to the upliftment of Africa, as
I’ve said.

Transnet is another utility in the hands of the state. It is in the middle
of a process of transforming itself into a freight-operating and transport
company. We accept that such restructuring may mean that some jobs may be
lost, but this process should be carefully managed and in such a way that
people do not suffer the wholesale consequences – not wholesale
privatisation. They have successfully moved the SARCC, which I understand
to mean the SA Rail Commuter Corporation Limited, to the Department of
Transport. We hope that this will lead to an improved, safer and more
affordable public transport system.

The National Ports Authority is busy expanding our ports as the rapid
growth of container traffic makes our current handling capacity grossly
inadequate. The expansion and redesign of Pier 1, the widening of the
entrance at Durban Harbour and the construction of the container terminal
at Ngqura are on track. Obviously, this expansion will create jobs during
the construction phase and, upon completion, through the increased volumes
of freight to be processed through the enlarged ports.

As far as Denel is concerned, we know it had some problems before both in
terms of efficiency and other things, but we are glad that we now know that
there have been positive developments regarding its turnaround strategy
after the initial recapitalisation. We will be monitoring the developments
with regard to the implementation of this strategy and we also urge Denel
to do everything possible to have a captive domestic market for it to
successfully implement this strategy.

We are also heartened by the indications of collaboration between the
Department of Public Enterprises, the Department of Trade and Industry and
the SA National Defence Force in order to assist Denel in securing at least
70% of the local defence spend. We trust that this will enhance Denel’s
capacity to speed up its transformation process.

I am not going to say much on Alexkor. We know - and the hon Minister
briefed our committee - that an agreement is about to be reached and we
appreciate and wish that it comes about as soon as a minute after this. We
hope that some of the land that may be ceded will encourage and enable our
people to engage in agriculture and increase their state of food security,
and if it is not arable enough, that it may be part and parcel of that
which is used to help the habitation problems.

With regard to the SA Forestry Company Limited, we are aware that there are
developments there as the state is busy assessing the role the forestry
industry can play in contributing to Asgisa in terms of job creation and
skills development.

The ANC unreservedly supports the Vote and we would like to urge this House
to do the same unreservedly. Thank you, Comrade Chairperson. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Chairperson, thank you to the hon
members who, I think, in the majority have supported the budget. Thank you
for the kind words about the department and also the comments about how we
could improve, and what we should do to improve.

Let me try to respond to some of the very interesting points that have been
raised by the hon members as part of this debate. Firstly, as the hon
Themba said, the state-owned enterprises can play a role in Africa, and
this is a project, as was reported, in the Joint Project Facility. How we
play that role and how we do it well is a challenge. Since we have such
major tasks here in South Africa, we do need to make certain that our
strategy for investments in Africa helps Africa and maintains the strength
of our own enterprises here. We hope that we develop or table before you
more detailed plans on this, probably before the end of this year.

The hon Gamede made a very important point – that compliance with the
Public Finance Management Act is very important. I must say that I am
pleased with the progress we have made in all of the SOEs. He is correct in
that we do need to do more, and our compliance should be perfect. This is
our target.
Let me address the point made by the hon Terblanche. I heard a whisper that
it was her maiden speech, but I am sure that it’s not. [Interjections.]
Okay, thank you. That means I can attack harder. I was a little bit nervous
that it was your maiden speech.

If the ANC, as you say, is divided, you are equally so, because the speaker
from the DA in the National Assembly took a very different position. I
think we must get away from these really simplified debates between
privatisation or not. I would submit that the hon member is out of touch
with current commentary on economic affairs in the world today. The notion
that privatisation is the key indicator of investment or for investors is
long past. That is not the case any more.

I think any examination of the current situation in virtually every single
economy will show that the balance between the state and the private sector
has been very carefully reassessed. There are certain sectors in which the
private sector just does not function effectively.

What we have done is that we do not have in the ANC a dogmatic position of
“we are for privatisation or against it”. We have a very economically
pragmatic position. If you read our founding policy documents for this
administration, The RDP: Ready to govern, we make it very clear that all
actions should be taken on the balance of evidence. So you assess the
situation. You assess the economic role that an institution can play. You
assess the strengths and weaknesses in the market and the private sector,
and you make sensible decisions. So, in each case, we have explained in my
budget speeches, and the President has explained, why we have taken
decisions.

For example, with regard to Eskom, it is quite clear – and your member in
the National Assembly supported this – that it is much wiser for this
economy and for us to keep Eskom in state hands. That doesn’t preclude
private-sector involvement in energy generation. We use it through the
independent power producers. So, you get a combination of public and
private sectors.

But without Eskom fulfilling the anchor role, we would have a chaotic
energy system. If you want to see chaotic systems, there are many countries
in the world that reflect this. America is one, where systems were
privatised and they failed. So, you have to look at each and every
situation. You have got to look at why we keep certain things. The ports as
such are a national asset; we keep them in state hands. But the port
terminals are where we have private operators, as well as state ones.

So, really, we must move towards a pragmatic and sensible and correct
assessment of these issues. For the state not to play a role in the
developmental process is a fatal mistake, and you can see it everywhere.
You need a strong state, but you need strong state-owned enterprises,
remembering how we define a state-owned enterprise. They have to be
efficient. They have to raise capital in the capital market. These are
important issues.

With regard to Denel, I will come back to it in a moment. This is an
important asset. It is not a choice that we can make lightly. If you were
to just privatise it, it would break up, and we would lose that capacity.
Keeping it, equally, is not easy, and that is why I am very pleased that
members have been focusing on the turnaround strategy. This is something
that will take us two or three years.

If we fail, we will not just keep Denel going forever, but we must have a
turnaround attempt. I believe we will turn it around. I believe it will
contribute massively to the South African manufacturing economy, because
this is highly advanced manufacturing.

We must also remember that there are many hundreds of engineers and
scientists involved in Denel; many, many hundreds of skilled workers -
thousands of skilled workers - so it really is worth us doing everything we
can to turn the enterprise around. I believe that we will.

I just want to correct you. In India’s case, it’s got nothing to do with
the Minister. The Minister is not involved in this in any way whatsoever.
This relates to a time before I was there, and it relates to allegations
which have not yet been proven. So, I would not make rash comments about
what is happening in this case.

With regard to the second defined pension fund, we inherited a very
inadequate structure. I believe that it is difficult for the pensioners in
that fund, but I also believe that correcting it cannot be done overnight.
It is exceptionally expensive. We have to change it; and all I can say is
that we are doing whatever we can to take ourselves from a very badly
designed and constructed fund to a better situation. But it’s not going to
be done overnight, and it can’t be done by making rash promises to people,
I’m afraid. We will do the very best that we can.

Very briefly, to the hon Mchunu, I see you are very passionate about
special products and soya, but I am sorry to tell you that Denel is selling
that company. I believe that is a good move, because Denel is a defence
company. It is building rockets and aeroplanes; it’s not so good at soya.
[Laughter.] In fact, the product that was developed is good, and we believe
– this is a good example of our pragmatism – that it would be far better
managed in the private sector, and that’s why we are selling it.

So, where it makes sense to put things in the private sector, we do so. We
have got no dogmatic position that we are opposed to or we are not opposed
to privatisation. We do things for the right reasons.
Very briefly, here’s some information on some of the points that were
raised with regard, for example, to the V&A Waterfront. This is an
important sale. Because it relates to pension funds, I must indicate very
clearly that the top priority for the V&A sale is realising maximum value.
This is pension fund money; we cannot jeopardise the interests of
pensioners. We will introduce BEE criteria into it, but definitely, our
priority in that is value for money. In other property, our priority is
BBE, so we are mixing and matching these issues, depending on the asset.

I am pleased to say that the progress with dividing SA Airways and Transnet
is excellent. We have just gone through a very important stage. We are now
entering more detailed discussions with various parties, including the
unions, and we hope to complete - finally - the absolute separation within
a period of six months, maybe even in a shorter space of time. We are
making excellent progress.

Let me make some brief comments, because they were raised, on the question
of the second national operator. As you know, Transnet and Eskom do have a
30% holding in the second national operator, which we have agreed to
continue holding and, of course, the important broadband infrastructure
that will underpin the second national operator is the asset supply with
Transnet and Eskom.

I am pleased to say we have made excellent progress in this regard. We are
confident the SNO will be up and running before the end of this year, and
we are also confident that some of the programmes we have between us and
the Department of Communications will make a very, very significant impact
on the availability and affordability of broadband in South Africa.

Let me deal with the hon Van Heerden’s comments about Koeberg, and some
really misleading comments he made, which were quite disappointing, about
Eskom’s conduct. Anyone who reads documents, and I am not going to go back
to this, will see how we have explained the incident at Koeberg. I will
make a statement to Parliament when the investigation is finished. That is
what I will do. I am hoping that we will do that early during the course of
next week or the week thereafter. It has to be next week, I think. No, I
think we can do it the week after. We will make a statement on this matter,
and deal with it fully.

I believe that the issue has been handled by everyone concerned,
particularly the people at Koeberg, really very, very well. As I have said
publicly before, we thank the staff at Koeberg very much for dealing with
an exceptionally difficult position. The notion that there is a shortage of
skills and loss of skills is not correct. It is just not correct. We have
answered this time and time again.

The nuclear industry around the world – and this is something we have got
to start realising – is an industry that is growing. There is a tremendous
demand for anybody with nuclear skills. So, everywhere in the world, people
are getting high turnover of their engineers, because of this. It has
nothing to do with us in particular. We are training. Our people there are
well-trained, and we are confident that this is something that we can
manage.

I want to state very categorically, Chair, if you will give me a moment or
two, that we must stop this absolutely wrong statement, which I believe is
irresponsible in the extreme, that is made now by the FF, and it has been
made by DA spokespersons, that Eskom discriminated against coloured
persons. Please go and read the arbitration award. It has nothing
whatsoever to do with that.

The facts of the matter are that the person concerned, having been one of
those interviewed, subsequently alleged that he had been promised the job.
That was his case: I am applying to get that job, because I was promised
the job. He was unable to prove that he had been promised the job. There
was no evidence. The arbitrator ruled against him, and said that he had not
been promised the job. The person who got the job had qualifications far in
excess of the person who did not get the job. So, please go and look at the
facts. It has nothing to do with discrimination.

What you are conflating – and this is irresponsible – is an opinion the
arbitrator provided, a correct opinion, which said that in any event, in
terms of the Employment Equity Act, an employer can look at the balance of
employment between African persons, coloured persons and Indian persons.
So, we have to look at the facts. If you keep pumping this line that there
was discrimination, it is irresponsible. You must not do that. You are
accusing Eskom of being racially biased, and you are fuelling
misinformation in the public domain, and that will create racial tensions.
You must stop doing it. It is wrong. What you are saying is inaccurate.

On the salary benefits, you are also inaccurate. If you look at the
details, you will see precisely what that package was about, and you will
see that the salary packages of the Eskom management, of the Transnet
management and the SAA management are well-aligned and not exorbitant, if
you consider that these are some of the biggest companies in South Africa.
They do not stand at the top of the remuneration package, compared to the
private sector. I believe the packages are reasonable and fair.

Very briefly, on some last quick points, the hon Hendrickse made some
comments about the Pebble bed modular reactor and Denel, and I support
that. I think the PBMR is an exceptionally important project for South
Africa. It is very interesting that South Africa plays such an important
role in an industry that is going to be one of the key providers of energy
in the future. It is a big project. It is. It is expensive, but if we
succeed in this project, the future benefits to the South African energy
sector and economy are very large indeed. There is no question about that.
Finally, a few quick points about what the hon Sibiya raised. Let me just
say that it is correct in terms of Arivia.com that the bulk of it will be
reversed into a subsidiary of Eskom, because of the very close links
between the mainframe systems that Eskom and Arivia.com use. If there are
parts of Arivia.com that we feel could be hived off, ring-fenced and sold,
we are looking at that at the present. We are in the process of changing
the shareholding structure of Arrivia.com. It plays an important role in
many countries in Africa. You are quite correct.

You mentioned the SA Rail Commuter Corporation Limited. It was actually
Metrorail that we moved across into the SARCC. I am pleased that that
process has been completed. We’ve now got Metrorail under the Department of
Transport, and they face the important and interesting challenge of
improving commuter rail services. There is no question about that.

I would also agree with you on reaching a settlement with the community of
Alexkor and I am really hopeful. It has been one of the great legal battles
that any community has fought in this country, and I am quite confident, in
my mind, that the settlement that we are proposing is very beneficial to
that community.

You are correct. It could lead to improved agricultural production. I am
pleased to say that already we have started a project with the community to
train young people from the Richtersveld in agricultural practices and
management. We owe it to that community. I believe we will make a
difference once we get through the very difficult legal implications of
what we are trying to settle.

Chairperson, thanks go to the House for listening to me. Thanks for the
little bit of extra time. I bought it from saving time when I opened my
introductory speech. Thank you very much, and thank you for the support for
the department.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Thank you, hon Minister. Maybe I
should take this opportunity, hon members, to acknowledge, on the occasion
of this debate, which is taking place three days before the 30th
anniversary of our Youth Day, the presence of the scholars from the Summer
Primary School. Our scholars up there, you are more than welcome.
[Applause.] Thanks for being part of this important debate today.

Debate concluded.

Business suspended at 11:34 and resumed at 14:05.

          Age of Hope: Deepening youth participation in development

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Mr D D GAMEDE: Chairperson, this is the Age of Hope and we are talking
about the deepening of youth participation in development. Today we meet 94
years after the ANC was formed. We also meet today 50 years after the
women’s march to the Union Buildings. Today we meet 30 years after the
Soweto uprisings known as June 16. Today we meet 12 years after obtaining
our freedom. We meet in a free, democratic, nonsexist and nonracial
country, under the leadership of the ANC. Today we live in the age of hope
and we hope that the lives of all citizens, especially of the youth, will
be better. We hope that the youth will participate fully in the development
of our economy.

The incidents of 16 June 1976 were not an isolated confrontation. To put
the incidents into context, it is correct to say the uprisings of June 16
were the culmination of all the wars that were taking place. What happened
on June 16 was part of the programme of action of the ANC. One of the
greatest leaders that Africa ever produced, the late Oliver Tambo, in the
book Beyond the Engeli Mountains, says: “A new generation of young
revolutionaries, embracing all races, is beginning to take to the political
battlefield. Those were the words of the late Comrade O R Tambo in 1975.

One of the greatest leaders, a son of the soil, former President Mandela,
said in 1961:


  If the government reaction is to crush by naked force our nonviolent
  struggle, we will have to reconsider our tactics. In my mind we are
  closing a chapter on this question of a nonviolent policy.

This then proves that the uprisings of June 16 were long foreseen by the
leaders of this country and by the leaders of the ANC. It is important to
note that in 1975 the state was spending R42 per year on a black child at
school, and at the same time the state was spending R591 per year on a
white learner. These were the imbalances that actually moved young people
to take the actions that they took.

A leader who served in this Parliament and in other legislatures, Comrade
Ngoako Ramathlodi, was a student in 1976. When he was interviewed he said:

  We are talking of the mid-70s, a period of very high repression: the
  regime was in total control, organisations were banned, but what had
  become the most popular form of political expression in townships was
  drama and poetry, just before 1976.

Now, this tells us why people like the late Gibson Kente wrote drama and
plays such as How Long, because these were the modes and expressions people
used to show that they did not accept what was happening.

For many years the youth in South Africa experienced very challenging
conditions, such as a lack of opportunities and they had Afrikaans as the
medium of instruction. You will remember, hon Chairperson, that we had a
type of inferior education that was endorsed by the then leader of
government, Verwoerd, who said, let us create a system of government of
education that would make a black person more inferior than he is.

So, through the forceful use of Afrikaans as the medium of instruction, the
youth of 1976 said: “Enough is enough.” So, prior to 1976, quite a number
of actions were taken and a number of meetings were held. Actually it was
said this morning that if you read a book written on the life of Winnie
Mandela, by Annemarie du Preez, it reads thus:

  The spark that lit the 1976 uprising was an incident at Naledi High
  School, during school hours. Two security policemen arrived to arrest one
  of the student leaders, Enos Ngutshana.  The principal asked the police
  to leave the premises and wait until the end of the school day to detain
  him, but they refused. When they tried to carry out the arrest, enraged
  pupils set the police car alight and beat up the two officers. Soon
  afterwards, under the banner of the Soweto Students Representative
  Council, SSRC, the students organised a mass demonstration against the
  use of Afrikaans in the classrooms. On the morning of June 16, thousands
  of children took to the streets of Soweto carrying banners, singing
  freedom songs and clenching their fists in the familiar black power
  salute.

This then shows that when students said, “Enough is enough” they took to
the streets and sang songs, such as Siyaya ePitoli, songs like Senzeni na?
Senzeni na e-Afrika? Now, among those leaders were some of our leaders like
Comrades Murphy Morobe and Popo Molefe who were student leaders then.

What actually happened in those days was that when the young people took to
the streets they even destroyed structures that they felt were not
contributing to the struggle. Such structures were beer halls. Comrade
Faith would call them emabhara [beer halls]. Those were symptoms of what
was happening.

Each time the white regime built townships they built bottle stores or
these beer halls, but before June 16 all those structures were destroyed
because young people were sending a message that our elderly parents were
busy sitting there while the struggle was going on.

Of note is that when young people took to the streets and stopped trucks
from making deliveries and so on, they did not eat that food, whether it
was yoghurt from Clover or bread, they simply destroyed it as a sign of
anger that they did not want what was coming from the regime. So, the
period of June 16 needs to be recognised in a manner befitting June 16 and
the young people.

You will remember, Chairperson, that every subject that students learnt was
either informal or upgraded. It was informal English, upgraded English,
informal Afrikaans, upgraded arithmetic, and so on. All that students
wanted was an education system that would make them the true leaders of
tomorrow.

May I also pay homage to all the young people who contributed to the
struggle, and some of them are in this Parliament while others are in other
structures. I also pay homage to all those young people that even left the
country to wage the armed struggle. Of note is that we also have Comrades
Sibiya and Tolo sitting in this House. They are some of the people who were
in exile.

Today we sit together in one House where one is never asked whether one is
white, black, green or yellow; whether one is ANC, IFP or DA. We all sit in
one House, under the leadership of the ANC, and it’s because of the
struggle that young people waged.

In closing, some of my colleagues and comrades will cover some of the
aspects in commemoration of June 16. Let me close this discussion with a
quotation from Comrade Ahmed Kathrada who was at that time on Robben
Island. He said:

  Of course we were shocked at the brutality unleashed against the children
  by the security forces, but strangely heartened too by their courage in
  the face of bullets and batons. We realised almost at once that a new
  chapter in the struggle had been opened.

That then concludes the discussion in that the uprisings of June 16 are
only one other chapter in the struggles that were waged by the people of
this country for a free, democratic, nonsexist and nonracial South Africa.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms D ROBINSON: Hon Chairperson, hon members, two weeks ago I addressed this
House on Children’s Day and mentioned that we, as legislators, need to
focus on creating a better and safer world for the future of our children.

Today the focus is on our youth, the leaders of tomorrow, and we once again
remember the tragic events of June 16, 1976. We remind ourselves that man’s
inhumanity to man, and especially to our youth, must never again be
repeated.

We remember the frustration, sacrifice and pain suffered by many in the
struggle to liberate society from discrimination, and it is up to us to
make sure that discrimination of any kind is removed from our society so
that, in the words of the American Declaration of Independence, the
forerunner of many other such declarations:

  we hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men and women are
  created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with inherent and
  inalienable rights, that among these are life, liberty and the pursuit of
  happiness, that to secure these rights, governments are instituted amongst
  men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed.

As we look at our South African society and compare it with that of 1976,
we can indeed say that there has been progress; that our youth are in a far
better position today to pursue happiness; that they have many more
opportunities, much more freedom, political and economic, than they had
then; that they are living in an age in which there is hope and that there
has been development and progress in many spheres.

However, I want to focus on inalienable rights, the words “life, liberty
and the pursuit of happiness” and examine what they mean in our South
African context. What is a better life? A life of political freedom? Yes. A
life of good opportunities to improve one’s status, financial, educational
and social? Yes, but a life in which rights go hand in hand with
responsibility to one’s fellow citizens and to the state. However, today a
new oppression, the oppression of drugs, the slavery of addiction and the
scourge of HIV/Aids beset us.

As legislators we need to focus on providing a framework of legislation and
infrastructure that will assist in providing quality of life. Rape,
gangsterism and violence are rife. Innocent men, women and children are
traumatised and killed daily. Druglords and criminals prey on the innocent.

Recently, 66 child protection units were closed down. The criminal justice
system seems to be paralysed. Our Ministers need to take strong action and
root out the corruption and inefficiency that prevent proper service
delivery.

Perpetrators of crime must not be given more rights than the victims.
Murderers, who have served time and then been pardoned, should not be
treated like heroes and be fêted and applauded in Parliament. Yes, they may
have paid their debts to society, but it sends out the wrong signals to
bring them to this House and treat them like celebrities.

The rights of the perpetrators should never be greater than those of the
victims, those who have lost their loved ones, those who will never have
the opportunity to be reunited with their families again.

As a victim remarked to me about her children: “My kinders sal nooit weer
hul “deddie” sien nie.” [My children will never see their daddy again.]

As responsible politicians we should be uniting civil society against
crime, encouraging all citizens, especially the youth, to become involved
in community police forums, to volunteer as reservists and to help the
police apprehend the criminals.

If people cry out in horror against the unacceptable levels of crime, they
should not be labelled as whingers and told to leave the country. Why
should they suffer discrimination? South Africa is a democratic state with
freedom of speech and all deserve the protection of the state, the first
duty of government.

South Africa is the home of all its sons and daughters, without prejudice
to any group, and we should all have the right to remain, to point out the
problems but also to be part of the solution. Let us encourage the youth to
be instruments of change and participate in enforcing law and order.

The right to education in an acceptable learning environment, in which
learners feels safe and secure, is vital for progress and development; and
yet in recent years there have been many reports of murders, rapes, thefts
and other crimes on school property.

Human Rights Watch has noted that South African female learners are
particularly vulnerable to sexual attacks. One hundred and fifty-one rapes
are reported daily, but we know that many more are not reported.
We need to ask ourselves whether the Education department is doing enough
to educate learners about HIV/Aids and how to manage the impact of the
pandemic on learners’ lives and on schooling generally. Many of our youth
are grappling with challenges and temptations.

Are we as politicians serving as good role models, promoting wholesome,
responsible lifestyles? What messages are being sent out by our leaders?
Just consider the ABC of Aids prevention: abstain, be faithful and
condomise. I leave you to make up your own minds about that one.

A thousand people a day are dying of Aids. One third of pregnant women in
this country are HIV-positive, but only 15% of them receive antiretrovirals
which can prevent their children from being infected. HIV/Aids should be a
national emergency. The flower of our youth is being decimated, not by an
unjust political system as in 1976, but by a predator that can be subdued
by ARVs, abstinence and information.

We are losing too many people who could make a positive contribution to
development. We cannot allow this to continue. We cannot bury our heads in
the sand like ostriches. As politicians we need to unite, in the interests
of our youth, and resolve to make the fight against Aids and drug abuse the
number one priority. This is when we will truly be in an age of hope.
May the youth of today have the courage to take a stand, not through
violence, but through democratic processes, against the discriminatory way
in which ARVs are distributed, so that they are not denied the opportunity
of a longer life, with hope beckoning to a brighter future. Thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, just before the hon Faith
Mazibuko speaks and whilst she is taking the podium, I just want to notify
you that I have been informed that the Chief Whip of the Council was
involved in an accident on Saturday and that he is in hospital. On behalf
of the Council, I wish him a speedy recovery. We have had too many people
sick this term. I see Mr Watson is back. Welcome back to the House, those
who were also sick. Welcome in the House. Who was sick again? I am not too
sure as to who was sick again. I can’t recall the count or the list, but I
am happy to see a lot of you are back at work again. Thank you very much.

Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Thank you, Chairperson. Ngibingelela amalungu. [I greet
you, hon members.]

Thank you for this opportunity to participate in this debate today, as we
mark the 30th anniversary of the Soweto student uprising in which the youth
said that enough was enough. Although a lot of young people lost their
lives due to apartheid and its oppression, this year we are celebrating
with the theme: Age of Hope: Deepening Youth Participation in Development.
As we celebrate, we need also to reflect on what brought us all here today
as public representatives and what brought about this democracy that all of
us seem to be enjoying. We need also to reflect on what brought about this
democratic dispensation.

The young people of 1976 showed courage and treaded where no one had ever
treaded before. Even our parents were afraid of the wrath of apartheid. It
was the day the youth rose up. The events of the day of 16 June 1976 took a
lot of planning, which is why it was a success. I was only 11 years old at
that time and a learner at St Matthews Catholic School in Rockville. I did
not even know what was happening when the helicopters were busy making a
noise over our heads as we were coming out of school. But from what we hear
– and I hope this will be documented for future generations and I’m quoting
leaders like ...

... uqabane u-Dan Montsisi, uqabane u-Matthew Morobe, uqabane u-David
Kutumela, u-Zwelinzima Sizani, u-Seth Mazibuko owayenguthisha kanye
noFanyana Mazibuko kodwa asihlobene njalo – ningathi ngithenga isikelemu
... (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[... Comrade Dan Motsitsi, Comrade Matthew Morobe, Comrades David
Kutumela,Zwelinzima Sizani and Seth Mazibuko, who was a teacher together
with Fanyana Mazibuko but we are not related as such – not buying into
something ...]

... who were also teachers at Morris Isaacson. They said it all began when
the students refused to be taught in Afrikaans. Imagine studying all your
subjects in Afrikaans. Even though it is difficult to study maths in
English, and that is why ...

... thina siwuhulumeni we-ANC ... [... we are the government of the ANC
...]

... we are making, actually making, policies for learners to learn in their
mother tongue. A meeting of the SA Students Movement executive was held at
which plans were made on how to make the country ungovernable and for
students to boycott writing their exams. As usual, there would be those
that would defy. The boycott was successful at the Morris Isaacson High
School and the Naledi High School. A solidarity demonstration, which
initially had been proposed by the late Comrade Tsietsi Mashinini for those
schools who were being taught in Afrikaans, was implemented at which all
the junior and high schools would participate in a peaceful demonstration.

Of course, on 16 June many young people lost their lives. As they were
marching, they were also carrying placards that said:

... uzongixolela ngeminye imibhalo, Sihlalo, izwakala sengathi iyinhlamba
... babethi, “Voster, jou gat”, “Release Mandela”. Eminye imibhalo yayithi,
“Black power”. Eminye yayithi, “No SBs”. Eminye yayithi, “Away with
Afrikaans”. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[... you will forgive me the other quote, Chairperson, it sounds like an
insult, but ... they went:``Vorster, jou gat and “Release Mandela.” Some
quotes  went: ``Black Power!” Some went: ``No SBs!” and ``Away with
Afrikaans!”]

They gathered and marched towards Orlando where they were going to host a
rally and where a memorandum would be drawn up, but things turned ugly as
they were provoked. Bashaya ngamatshe. [Stone them.]

The first victim of that day was the late Hastings Ndlovu, later followed
by Hector Petersen, who at that time was only 13 years old. Many other
young people also lost their lives. We salute the many unsung heroes and
heroines and we want to pay tribute to them for losing their lives in order
to make this democracy actually work. Years thereafter the commemorations
of the day were also marred by violence.

Thina ebesihlala eduze kwase-Regina Mundi Church ... [Those of us who
stayed close to the Regina Mundi Church ...]

... we knew that ...

... uma kushaya isisi esikhalisa izinyembezi, sasiqala lapha ezindlini.
[... when they threw the teargas, it had already started in the houses.]

The police would gather at the gate and give the mourners only five minutes
to disperse. If they did not disperse after five minutes, they would walk
in and throw the teargas canisters into the church. There would be
pandemonium ...

... inkukhu nenkukhu ibalekela ehokweni layo. [... everyone would run to
his or her house.]

The struggle also intensified in the 80s as many comrades were killed. Some
were detained, while others left the country to go into exile. Those in
detention would go on hunger strikes demanding their release.

Njalo ebusuku sasivulela umsakazo, i-Radio Freedom. Kulapho esasithola
khona umlayezo ovela kubaholi bethu zisitshela ukuthi asiketule lombuso
wamaBhunu. [Every evening we listened to the radio, Radio Freedom. That is
where we got our message from our leaders telling us to overthrow this
Afrikaner government.]

There were stayaways, consumer boycotts and black Christmases. The
apartheid government declared states of emergency in which people would be
detained without trial ... [Inaudible.] You were not able to walk around at
night without having special permission.

Wawuchaza ukuthi uvelaphi nanokuthi uyaphi. Ebusuku wawuzwa ngama-hippo
namakhwela khwela enyonyoba kanye nama-“yellow mellow.” [You explained your
comings and goings. At night you would hear the hippos and the army
vehicles moving stealthily, as well as the police vans.]

Houses were raided ...

... ngamaphoyisa. Kwakukubi ngempela. Ngaleyo minyaka ayebhokile amaBhunu e-
Civic Co-operation Bureau, CCB, i-South African Defence Force, SADF, kanye
noklova bebulala futhi bebopha wonke umuntu. [... by the police. It was
really terrible. During those years the Afrikaners were unstoppable in the
Civil Co-operation Bureau, the CCB, the South African Defence Force, the
SADF, as well as the warlords; they were killing and arresting everybody.]

Many comrades were tortured. Those who were lucky survived, while others
died in detention.

Umhlaba wonke jikelele wase wazi ukuthi kwenzakalani eNingizimu Afrika.
Abantu babebulawa. [The whole world knew what was happening in South
Africa. People were being killed.]

The 80s saw the formation of the Congress of SA Students in which the
struggle continued for equal education for the people. It was during this
era when leaders such as Sicelo Dlomo and others were actually killed.

EDuduza amaqabane acushwa ngeziqhumane, abanye abathathu ababedume ngegama
elalithi Pepco Three nabo babulawa ngamaBhunu, abanye babebulawa ngokugaxwa
amathaya kuthiwa yizimpimpi, njalo njalo. [In Duduza comrades were trapped
carrying explosives; three members of the famous group called the Pepco
Three were also killed by the Afrikaners, while others were killed by being
choked with burning tyres because it was rumoured they were spies, and so
on and so forth.]

The formation of the SA Youth Congress also mobilised a lot of young
people. The “Release Mandela” campaign also intensified. Structures like
the United Democratic Front were formed, and the civic movement was
actually strengthened.

O-Robert McBride babeshaya bengadlali kanye nabanye-ke siyabazi. [Robert
McBride and others never missed their targets, or the others we know of.]

Owing to the pressure, the boers agreed to the talks that saw the release
of many of our leaders from detention, such as Comrade Mandela, the late
Comrade Walter Sisulu, Govan Mbeki, Raymond Mhlaba and others. Negotiations
in terms of the Convention for a Democratic South Africa were started and
resulted in the signing of the declaration of intent, which saw the first
democratic elections taking place on 27 April 1994, marking the beginning
of a new era.

In conclusion, let us not forget, all of us, that on 16 June we will be at
the FNB stadium where the President of the country, Mr Thabo Mbeki, will be
delivering the keynote address. You are all invited, even if you are a
member of the DA. It is not an ANC event but a government event.

Ngethemba ukuthi nonke nizoya. Siyabonga. [Ihlombe.] [I hope that all of
you will go. We thank you. [Applause.]]

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Chairperson, youth unemployment is a worldwide crisis.
About 76% of jobless people in South Africa are youths. The large-scale
exodus of highly skilled South Africans to other parts of the globe should
be discounted in terms of the South African unemployment problem.

There is currently an increase of 100% in the number of black students who
entered tertiary institutions and a decrease of 20% in white students. This
decrease could be attributed to large-scale emigration, alternatively
changing demographics; and, furthermore, quota systems in respect of
admission to specialised courses.

White youths are being subjected to affirmative action at a tertiary level
when they apply for admission to universities for particular courses, and
again when they enter the job market. This means the deprivation of equal
opportunities twice over.

The youth under 18 know no other government than the present one. The
President has repeatedly said that South Africa belongs to all who live in
it. A recent survey regarding affirmative action found that 50% of blacks
and 75% of whites, coloureds and Indians agree that the youth should be
exempted from affirmative action.

Expenditure on education is a capital investment by the state that, after a
number of years, should start paying dividends by way of added value to the
economy. It is estimated that over a 10-year period R113 billion would be
invested in white students. If the aims of affirmative action are reached
in terms of the percentages, 76% of whites – a waste of R85,3 billion -
will be trained and then, de facto, sent into exile in different parts of
the world.

The FF Plus has certain proposals. Affirmative action must not be
applicable to those born after February 1990, or the definition of
designated groups in the Employment Equity Act must be broadened to include
all youths; and new business enterprises created by young people,
irrespective of race, should be allowed to compete for government tenders.
In such a way, all youths can participate in the development of South
Africa and then at least, according to what my colleague the hon Mr Gamede
said, we will reach a nonracial South Africa. I thank you.

Prof J MAPHALALA (KwaZulu-Natal): Ngiyabonga sihlalo, amalunga
ahloniphekile. Inselelo esibhekene nayo njengoba sikhumbula iminyaka
yokuphela kweminyaka engamashumi amathathu kwabheduka impi abafundi
ababesekhaleni eliphambili kuyo, eyokuthi akukabibikho neyodwa incwadi
ebhalwe ngabafundi ababelapho ngolimi lomdabu engaphakanyiswa, noma kwafa
abantu abaningi njengoba amalunga ahloniphekile kade asho. Ingozi enkulu
leyo, okuyinselelo okufanele siyimele ngezinyawo ukuthi emitatsheni
yezincwadi ekhona kube khona incwadi engafundwa, hhayi ngabazi isingisi
kuphela kodwa nabanye abazi izilimi zethu.

Kudingeka futhi okwesibili sibheke inselelo yokuthi silungise iphutha
ukuthi intsha iyodwa ingaletha izinguquko ezinhlakeni zentuthuko. Intsha
iyozimbandakanya entuthukweni kuphela ibambisene nawo wonke umphakathi
hhayi izimele yodwa. Isizathu salokhu ukuthi into enjalo ayikaze yenzeke
emlandweni wase Africa. Ingqondo iye ibuze ukuthi lokhu engikwenzayo
kusukela kuphi. Akukaze kwenzeke ukuthi ihambe yodwa bese yenza
izimangaliso. IsiZulu sithi indlela ibuzwa kwabaphambili okuchaza ukuthi
ulwazi lutholakala kwabadala bese beludlulisela kubaholi bakusasa. Yingakho
sithi inkunzi isematholeni, sisho ukuthi entsheni kuvela abaholi bakusasa.

Inkinga edalekile ngenkoleloze, ukuthi intsha iyodwa zwi ingenza izimanga.
Lokhu kuyiphutha, kwavela nangawo unyaka wenkulungwane namakhulu
ayisishiyagalolunye namashumi aysiskhombisa nesithupha. Mina ngabe
sengifundisa eNyuvesi yakwaZulu ukubheduka kwalento. Yasha iNyuvesi yaphela
ngenyanga ka Agasti 1976. O Pennuel Maduna babehamba phambili nabanye
besanda kufika eNyuvesi, babekhona kunye nabanye abaningi kakhulu kabi
ababeseNyuvesi yaso Ngoye.
Umphumela onamagalelo angujuqu wawuyokwenzeka kuphela ukuba  intsha ngo
1976 yayingagxilile emaNyuvesi kuphela. Kwacutshungulwa ukuthi iphutha
ngabe likuphi. Bathi sisemaNyuvesi noma ema High School  sizolwa kanjani
ngoba abantu lapha phansi bathi izingane zilwa kangaka ngabe kwenzenjani.
Kwaqala lapho ukuphuma kuyokwenziwa izinhlangano ngaphandle, ukuthi abantu
bakwazi ukubamba iqhaza kubonakale ukuthi hhayi zizodwa izitshudeni.
Kulapho ke kwavela khona O BPC kanye nezinye izinhlangano. Kwalungiswa
ngaso sona leso sikhathi. Inselelo le okufanele siyiqhube siyibonise
njengoba sibonile naku Youth Commission nayo ithi iyazama yahluleka iyodwa
ngoba abantu abadala bathi intsha njengoba nakhu siyazama ngapha pho yona
iqhuba luphi uhlelo. Kuhanjwa ndawonye, ngaphandle kophiko lwabesifazane
nalolu ngoba vele kwakukhona lokho. U Cheikh Anta Diop ukubiza ngokuthi I
“African Bicameralism”, lowomqondo onjalo. Lokhu kusho phecelezi ukuthi
complementary roles kodwa lapho kushiwo kuphela kwabesifazane nalaba abanye
abantu abawuquqaba hhayi entsheni ngoba kufanele yona ihambe ibanjwe
ngesandla abadala futhi ikujwayele lokho.

Unyaka wethemba ekuzimbandakanyeni kwentsha entuthukweni uzokwenzeka uma
imfundo ezikoleni inikezwa ngazozonke izilimi eziyishumi nanye
ezikumthethosikelo wezwe. Lelizwe lifake imali edlula wonke amazwe ase
Africa kodwa umphumela awubonakali ukuthi uphi ngoba awukwazi ukulolozela
ngengqondo ingunaphakade. Ingane zithi “good morning teacher, how are you.
I am alright”. Leyonto izosibeka kuphi? I Tanzania kuphela izwe lapho
abantu bakhona befunde bagogoda, kufundwa ngesiSwahili kulandele I
Cameroon. Kuzofika ke nalapha futhi ngijabula kabi ukuthi uNgqongqoshe u
Pandor useke wakusho wathi kodwa inkinga enkulu ukuthi ukwenza lokho
kungabiza izigidigidi, wathi kuzokwenziwa ukuhlolwa kwaloluhlelo kwaZulu
Natal nase Eastern Cape. Indlela eya phambili ekhanyisayo leyo kodwa
abaphambukile balahleka yilaba abathi, kungasa abantu bengamangisi noma
akusetshenzelwe ukuthi sonke siphenduke amangisi. Nabo abantu abafanele
ukulungiswa nje, bacangcathwe ngempela labobantu labo njengoba kucangcathwa
izimoto ezilimele. [Kwaphela isikhathi.] [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu
speech follows.)

[Prof J MAPHALALA (KwaZulu Natal): Thank you, Chairperson and hon members.
The challenge we are facing as we celebrate the 30th anniversary of the
students’ uprising is that there is not even a single book that was written
in an indigenous language about the students who took part in that
uprising. This is the case despite the many people who died there, as hon
members have said. This poses a big danger. The challenge that we have to
overcome is that in our libraries there must at least be a book that can be
read, not only by those who understand English, but also by those who are
only familiar with our indigenous languages.

We also need to rectify the mistake of thinking that the youth can bring
about changes in development programmes. The youth can only take part in
the development programmes if they are working hand in hand with the
public, not alone. The reason is that such things have never happened yet
in our African history. I am sure some of you might be asking yourselves
where all this comes from. It has never yet happened in history that the
youth worked on their own and succeeded. There is an isiZulu saying which
literally means “in order to know the route to a certain place, you ask the
people who come from there”. This means the knowledge comes from the elders
and goes to the future generation. That is why we say the leadership is
amongst the youth.

The problem caused by the propaganda is the message that the youth on their
own can do wonders. That is not true; it was even shown in 1976. At the
time of this incident, I was already teaching at the University of
Zululand. In August 1976 the University was burnt down. Penuel Maduna and
the others were at the forefront and they were newcomers at the University
of Ngoye.

The solution would have been found if the youth of 1976 had not focused on
the universities only. They sat down and planned yet another strategy.
People were not too sure what exactly was happening at the universities or
in the high schools. That is when they started organisations outside, so
that people would be able to take part and show that students were not
alone. That is the challenge we have to carry forward as we have seen the
National Youth Commission try to do but fail in doing because they were
alone and the elders asked what the programmes of the youth were. We did
things together, except the women’s organisation and this one, because it
was like that. Sheikh Anta Diop calls this kind of idea “African
bicameralism”. This means complementary roles when it is imparted to women
and other ordinary people, but not the youth, because they still need to be
led by the elders and they have to get used to that.

The age of hope, with the youth taking part in developmental programmes,
will only succeed if education takes place in all eleven official
languages, as stated in the country’s Constitution. This country has
generated more money than any other African country, but we cannot see the
result because we cannot memorise forever. Children at school still say,
“Good morning, teacher. How are you? I am all right”. Where is all this
going to lead us? It’s only Tanzania where people are mostly educated to
higher levels of education through their mother tongue, Swahili, and
Cameroon is number two. I am also happy that Minister Pandor has said that
it will happen here, but the problem with doing all this is that it will
cost us millions and millions of rands; she said the testing of these
programmes will be done in KwaZulu-Natal and the Eastern Cape. That is the
way forward but those who are mistaken are the ones who say people should
be English or that we should strive to be purely English. Those are the
people who need to be corrected, panel beaten as thoroughly as we panel
beat the broken cars. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Hon Chair, hon members, we salute the youth who
sacrificed their lives so that we can enjoy democracy today, democracy that
was bought with blood and tears. This is not an easy thing for us just to
accept. We need to reflect very seriously on how we got here - where we are
today.

I want to salute those who went out of the country and fought. I want to
salute those students and I was fortunate, with hindsight now, to know
those involved on a daily basis - being a chairperson of a progressive high
school – and to have seen how resolute the students were in ’76, ’80 and
’85.

This whole thing came about because of the hopelessness of the situation
with the Vorsters of the day. People felt hopeless; their leaders were
jailed; others were put under house arrest. We saw this from the early
’40s, and the ’50s – we have named it all here – and from the ’60s with the
pass laws, and then came 1976. After 1976 let’s not forget 1985 when right
here in Cape Town young people like Kriel and the other young man Frans
were shot in cold blood by the security forces at close range. So, those
are the memories that we need to keep at the forefront. Those are the
memories that the people who repressed us and suppressed us need to value
at this time - that leaders like Madiba and others stretched out their
hands and said, “Let’s build this country together.” I and others might
have said, “No, let’s jail them for life.”

So, today, this is a very important day for us as we look back. It is a day
with emotion. That is the way I see it, and I would like us to see it like
that in that these young people made sacrifices. Some sacrificed their
education. They had to leave the universities. They had to leave the high
schools; they couldn’t ever get back in because the government decree had
their names and would not allow them back into these institutions. So today
we pay them homage and we salute them. Thank you, Sir. [Applause.]

Ms B L MATLHOAHELA: Hon Chair, hon members, I listened to hon members of
the House and would like to say that we have forgiven. But when you go back
to this time, you relive what happened and it touches the heart, especially
when you look at the photo of Hector Petersen being carried limply and you
look at the expression on the face of the boy carrying him. It is like a
needle going through the heart. So, we have to commemorate such children
and people.

I have to refer to the remark by the DA in the National Assembly in that
there can be no difference in the new age between the white youth and the
nonwhite youth relating to being advantaged and disadvantaged. Certainly,
there is a difference.

The white youth still enjoy the benefits from the investments of the
previous regime of inequality, invested by their parents, whereas the
nonwhite youth only started to invest a few years ago with the end of
apartheid. I, however, would encourage the black youth to continue the
current financial struggle with the same courage that was shown in the
struggle against apartheid. Today some youth still lose their lives by
using drugs because of disillusionment. Also, there are still too many
youths in prison. This needs attention, despite the progress reports by the
Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons. But I believe that the youth will
overcome. I salute the youth with respect. I thank you, hon Chair.
[Applause.]

Mr S W MCOYI (KwaZulu-Natal): Mr Chairperson, I am pleased to be in this
House. I think there has been quite a lot of input. When I listened
especially to the hon Hendrickse, when he was trying to explain how painful
it was - what happened during the early years - I think that this would be
the best time for him to say: “I did stand in the line of fire to stop the
fire from hitting people like Petersen”.

All the same, I usually watch TV sorrowfully and helplessly when I see
fellow Africans running and queuing for cereal that is brought in by trucks
or dropped by planes mostly by the USA. They come running in their frail,
half-clad bodies. They come without containers and some use their skirts
and hands, trying to grab as much as they can.

At the end of that struggle a person finds that he or she has not been able
to grab enough to even last a week. However, hope is written all over their
faces. This brings me to this point: I wonder if our youth are well placed
or well prepared for the various glamorous enterprises we hear of today.
Are they skilled enough to meet the high-class demands? We need to ask
ourselves if our youth are not going to be seen rushing forward with hope
only to find that what they get will not even be enough to grant them
decent lives in their world of hope.

Let us question ourselves as to who the people are that will be advantaged
by these enterprises that we talk of today that are already financially
well positioned and skilled. Those are the main questions we must ask
ourselves. A person who is a Christian and a person who loves socialising
with Christians are two different people, and I doubt if they will receive
the same status in heaven.

Lastly, monopoly and suppression of the weak are both unacceptable, whether
they are done by the people of the Dark Ages or by people of times of hope.
This present time of hope is signified by various incidents, by
contributions made by various people of the soil in various places. Today
we have a government formed by various parties with the ANC in the
majority.

We should guard against obliterating other leaders’ contributions because
we will be defacing our own history. The forces of darkness did deface our
history for reasons best known to them. If today we feel that we need to
further deface our history, let us all be aware of the reasons.

I must say that the struggle is not yet over, but that it is still on. We
need to get our youth to fight a different war, the war against laziness,
the war against illiteracy, the war against careless living or behaviour,
and the war against drug dependency. Those are the wars they must fight
today to liberate themselves and to have more hope. The war against liquor
abuse and many other wars they fight stand in the way of our uhuru
[freedom] of the day.

I wish to remind the ANC that uneasy lies the head that wears the crown.
There is no way to rest on your laurels. Bickering, posturing and many
other things of that sort are not what this county needs today. The country
is hungry for unity, solidarity, inclusivity, development, jobs for all,
and freedom from crime. I thank you, Chairperson.

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Modulasetulo, makhomreiti, le basebitsi mmoho.
[Chairperson, comrades and colleagues ...]

I would love to make reference to the role of the youth in the
international context as well. The United Nations made an assessment of the
situation of the world’s young people in 2005. Two resolutions of the
United Nations General Assembly designated 1985 as International Youth
Year, under the theme “Participation, Development, Peace”.

The resolutions motivated for this designation are based on the recognition
of the need to

   ... harness the energies, enthusiasm, and creative abilities of youth to
   the task of nation-building, the struggle for self-determination and
   national independence ...

Similarly, during the height of repression in the 1970s and 1980s in South
Africa, the International Year of the Youth provided a legal platform for
the youth and student movement to unite around their issues as a sector,
when many other legal forms of expression were being closed down.

It provided an umbrella for co-ordinated efforts in the struggle to make
apartheid unworkable and it helped to situate the youth struggles in South
Africa in an international context. The 1985 International Youth Year
activities, and the unity in action they inspired, provided cover and gave
new impetus to the process of forming a national youth organisation,
culminating in the launch of the SA Youth Congress in 1987.

Hence, one would want to quote Comrade Oliver Tambo, then president of the
ANC, when he was addressing a conference:

  Our glorious youth and students have continued to hold high the banner of
  struggle. Because they have dared to fight for and bring our emancipation
  so near, our youth have been eminent targets of the enemy forces of
  oppression.

The reason I quote this is because some people had the opportunity to come
and stand here and mislead this august House; wanting to tell the ANC how
it is supposed to address issues that affect young people, wanting to teach
the ANC, which they could not do in the past. They had the opportunity to
do that but they couldn’t.

You see this morning there was a debate at which even the Minister
struggled to understand what it was the DA wanted to bring forward, to tell
this august House. We could not make any sense of it because they do not
understand that one should ... lore lo kojwa lo sale metsi. [Strike while
the iron is still hot.]

The person who was supposed to have debated now was the hon Terblanche, who
is not even in this House because - I want to believe - she is very young.
Instead what they did is they brought the hon Robinson to debate around
youth issues. Now the ANC has youth structures. They have the Youth League
in order to be able to be taught how you are supposed to raise issues at a
youth level.

They don’t even have a programme about awareness of HIV/Aids awareness.
But, always, when they come here, they come and cry about HIV/Aids
awareness. The only thing that they can do is to move around hanging up
panties. [Laughter.]
Another thing is that I have never heard them talking about a youth
structure within the DA. They don’t have it, because they don’t understand
that young people are there in order to be developed so that tomorrow they
are able to raise the issues correctly, and not to mislead the House like
the hon Terblanche did this morning.

The DA had the opportunity to lead the Western Cape province. All provinces
had youth commissions but they didn’t, because they don’t understand the
issues of young people, and it is very important that there are youth
structures. So how can they even have a youth structure within their own
organisation? [Interjections.]

They are talking about education; they are now experts on education. That
clearly tells you that they were part of government, and some of them were
even flying around here killing our people. But they could not really raise
the issue of the importance of education, now all of a sudden ...
[Interjections.]

Mr A WATSON: The member has just said that some of our members in the DA
were flying around killing their people. Could he withdraw that or
substantiate it please?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: He didn’t say some of the DA members. He said
some of the people were flying around killing people, but he did not say
the DA. That is not correct. [Interjections.] Continue, hon member.
[Interjections.]

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Chairperson, in Setswana there is a saying “Ga le nke le
ingwaya le sa babe.” [Where there is smoke there is fire.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mr Goeieman, I have ruled. Continue with your
speech.

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Thank you, Chair. When young people are politically
conscious about what is right for them in schools and universities, they
always have a problem in that these young people are a lost generation.
They are not, they are politically conscious because they know what is
right for them and they know how to raise it at a very tender age.

That does not mean they are lost whatsoever. Just the other day a number of
political parties were invited to a youth convention in Johannesburg. They
could not attend because they don’t know the importance of young people
coming together to discuss issues central to improving this government.
They could not attend. They did not attend. They always come and use this
platform to cry.

The other issue regarding the FF Plus’s hon Van Heerden is that he comes
here and talks about affirmative action, about exclusion and whatever. But
why don’t those young people go up and stand up and raise the issues of
exclusion? We will only see Sasco standing up or Cosas standing up and
raising issues that affect their lives.

I have never seen them. How will you know that they are affected and
excluded? Because you only raise an issue when it affects you. This clearly
tells me that they have not been affected by all these issues that the hon
member is ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]
Debate concluded.
                             OLDER PERSONS BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Ms J M MASILO: Modulasetulo, maloko a Ntlo a a tlotlegang le Motlatsa-
Modulasetulo, mme Hollander ... [Chairperson, hon members and Deputy
Chairperson, Ms Hollander ...]

Deputy Chairperson, this House will remember that the Older Persons Bill
was introduced in this House after its consideration by our committee, and
this House resolved to pass it. Therefore the Bill was referred to the
National Assembly. The National Assembly portfolio committee, having held
public hearings on the Bill, agreed to pass it with amendments.

The amending Bill was referred back to the National Council of Provinces
either to pass or reject it. In the process of considering the amending
Bill from the National Assembly, it was found, however, that some of the
important amendments proposed by the Portfolio Committee on Social
Development in the National Assembly were not incorporated in version 68D
of the Bill of 2003.

Our considered view, after consultation with the provinces, is that we
cannot recommend the passing of this Bill to the House while the
substantive issues identified are not part of the Bill. Therefore we as the
committee recommend that this House reject the Bill before it, and that the
Bill be referred to the mediation committee in accordance with section
76(2) and 76(2)(d) of our Constitution. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon
Masilo. I shall now put the question. The question is that the Bill be
rejected. As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are
present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes. Are all delegation
heads present? [Interjections.] Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. We shall now proceed to
the voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per
province. Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they
vote in favour of, against, or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Mr M O ROBERTSON: Eastern Cape rejects.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Rejects.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Gauteng reserves its vote. [Interjections.] Oh, abstains,
Deputy Chairperson.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal is in favour of rejection.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Limpopo reluctantly supports. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Does Limpopo reject,
sir?

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Supports. The official mandate from my province,
Chairperson, is that we reluctantly support the Bill. Reluctantly.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga rejects.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?
Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Noord-Kaap staan teen. [Northern Cape opposes.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West e a e raga. [North West rejects.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Supports reluctantly.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): We have many
rejections here. The number of provinces that rejects is six.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSN (Mr T S Setona): Chairperson, I am not sure but maybe
it would be advisable, before we adopt the final motion on this matter,
that we get procedural clarity on the Limpopo position because this is a
record. I am raising this because of the recent spate of technicalities in
which certain Bills and positions were adopted by the House, only to find
out later that they were challenged on technical and administrative bases.
I wouldn’t be comfortable with that reluctant support and if it could be
clarified we would be more comfortable.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon Setona, I have a
mandate, a conferral of voting mandate, on the Older Persons Bill from
Limpopo. Please be informed that the Limpopo legislature, at its sitting on
Tuesday, 6 June 2006, adopted the Report of the Portfolio Committee on
Health and Social Development on the Older Persons Bill, Bill 68D of 2003,
and conferred a mandate on the NCOP permanent delegates to support the
amendments in full and to vote in favour of the Bill. Thank you, sir.

Mr T S SETONA: It does not appear on what ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon Setona, you are
out of order. Thank you. Most provinces voted against, and I therefore
declare the Bill rejected in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.

Bill accordingly rejected in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND RECREATION -
   UNITED NATIONS EDUCATION, SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANISATION (UNESCO)
                     CONVENTION AGAINST DOPING IN SPORT

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Deputy Chair, this convention against doping in sport is
quite an important convention that we have here before us today. Doping is
not only a South African problem; it’s also an international problem. We
see in the print and electronic media nowadays reports of athletes involved
in substance abuse, abuse of certain medications, of drugs and so forth.
It’s increasingly becoming a problem for all of us.

I just want to say that this particular convention is long overdue. I am
also aware of the fact that we will soon have legislation dealing with
doping in sport. Once this convention has been ratified, Sport and
Recreation SA will liaise closely with the SA Institute for Drug-Free Sport
to ensure that the objectives of the convention are achieved in South
Africa and that all sport federations comply accordingly.

Furthermore, Sport and Recreation SA will sensitise other government
departments on their responsibilities in so far as the convention impacts
on their domain to ensure that the set objectives of the convention are
met. State parties shall, where appropriate, adopt measures to restrict the
availability of prohibited substances and methods in order to restrict
their use in sport by athletes, unless the use is based upon a therapeutic
use exemption. These include measures against trafficking to athletes and,
to this end, measures to control production, movement, importation,
distribution and sale.

The fight against doping in sport can only be effective when athletes can
be tested with no advance notice and samples can be transported in a timely
manner to laboratories for analysis.

State parties shall, where appropriate and in accordance with domestic law
and procedures, firstly, facilitate the task of the world antidoping
organisations operating in compliance with the code, subject to relevant
host countries’ regulations, of conducting in- or out-of-competition doping
controls on their athletes, whether on their territory or elsewhere;
secondly, facilitate the timely movement of duly authorised doping control
teams across borders when conducting doping control activities; and,
thirdly, co-operate to expedite the timely shipping or carrying across
borders by various antidoping organisations of samples, and co-operate to
this end with the World Anti-Doping Agency.

It is also important to note that state parties must also implement
education and training programmes on antidoping measures. Regarding the
sporting community in general, these programmes should aim to provide
updated and accurate information on the harm of doping to the ethical
values of sport, the health consequences of doping, doping control
procedures, and the list of prohibited substances and methods. These are
just but a few.

It gives me great pleasure to present to this august House, in terms of
section 231 of Act 108 of 1996, the request to ratify the said convention.
I thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I shall now put the
question. The question is that the report be adopted. As the decision is
dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first
ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast
their provinces’ votes. Are all delegation heads present? [Interjections.]
Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. We shall now proceed to
voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per province.
Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in
favour of, against, or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Mr O M ROBERTSON: Eastern Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: I Gauteng iyayixhasa. [Gauteng supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Limpopo ra e thekga. [Limpopo supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Noord-Kaap steun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West ke a rona. [North West supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Nine provinces voted
in favour. I therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of
the Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT MONITORING COMMITTEE ON IMPROVEMENT OF
         QUALITY OF LIFE AND STATUS OF WOMEN – 2006 QUARTERLY REPORT

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I now call upon the
hon E S Mabe, co-chairperson of the Joint Monitoring Committee on
Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women to continue the debate.

Mrs E S MABE: Deputy Chair, hon members, the Joint Monitoring Committee on
Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women, having considered the
Appropriation Bill and associated Budget Votes, reports that it has
concluded its deliberations. Over the years the committee has consistently
focused its attention on three issues, which are poverty, gender-based
violence, and HIV and Aids.

In 2003 the Expanded Public Works Programme was introduced as an expansion
of activities previously funded through poverty alleviation. The Expanded
Public Works Programme is a flagship programme for South Africa in terms of
directly addressing poverty. One of the changes announced in 2003 was that
the scope of activities covered by Public Works would be expanded, in
particular that it would include the social-sector activities of home-based
and community-based care and early childhood development, alongside the
physical infrastructure activities on which Public Works traditionally
focuses.

The expansion of Public Works is an extremely innovative idea. It is an
idea that is welcomed from a gender perspective. It is innovative because
home- and community-based care and early childhood development are areas of
work in which women traditionally predominate, unlike the building of
physical infrastructure.

These are types of work that are often done for no pay, but their inclusion
in the Public Works programme affords some recognition in that these
activities constitute real productive work. Our concern is that even though
this was introduced early in 2003, it is now three years later and the
implementation of this social sector is a challenge as it is still in the
planning stages as we speak.

Another poverty-related issue revolves around maintenance and divorce. The
committee is pleased to see in the department’s annual report for 2004-05
that child maintenance is regarded as one of the department’s flagship
projects. The committee is pleased to see in this year’s estimates on
national expenditure in terms of the Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development that the Legal Aid Board has named women
involved in divorces, maintenance and domestic violence as a priority
group.

The committee, however, is concerned that this year’s budget does not seem
to say anything about investigators and prosecutors. Last year’s budget
reported that the appointment of 82 investigators and 100 clerks for
maintenance and domestic violence courts had helped to improve the system,
though we are still aware that, despite these improvements, there are still
women who face major obstacles when approaching some of the courts.

On violence against women, the Department of Justice and Constitutional
Development has a major role to play in respect of gender-based violence.
Unfortunately, Kgoshi, the departmental Vote in the Estimates of National
Expenditure says almost nothing on this topic.

This year’s Estimates on National Expenditure states that 70 sexual
offences courts had been established by August 2005, and that another 30
will have been established by May 2006. This is welcomed. However, we need
more information, and hope that relevant select committees, such as the
Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, will look into
this matter.

Last year’s budget book says that 52 sexual offences courts were
established, and we also learnt that 52 of the total number of courts met
minimum requirements. So, the question now becomes: What is the status of
the first 70 we talked about which were established in August 2005? Did
they meet the requirements? We hope the select committee will assist us on
this matter.

On HIV and Aids, our third ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon
member. I would like this communication to stop between you and the hon
Kgoshi. Please speak through the Chair. Thank you.

Mrs E S MABE: Thank you, Chairperson. I was referring to the select
committee. I’m sorry about maybe naming the hon Kgoshi.

Our third special area of interest is HIV and Aids. This issue is
particularly burdensome for women for a number of reasons. Firstly, because
of both biological and sociological reasons, women are more vulnerable than
men to infection and are likely to be infected at a young age.

Secondly, women and girls tend to predominate among those who care for
others in the households and community who are ill. Women are thus both
more infected and more affected by HIV and Aids than men. In terms of HIV
and Aids, the committee must, again, refer to the issue of home- and
community-based care.

Until now there has been a national conditional grant that has provided
money to provinces in respect of home and community-based care. That grant
has now come to an end, and provinces are expected to provide for these
services from their own budgets. The committee is not confident that this
will happen across all provinces. We have had bad experiences twice in the
past regarding conditional grants in respect of early childhood
development, which, when they come to an end, were not adequately replaced
by funding from the provinces.

The committee fears that this will happen again in respect of home and
community-based care. The committee would therefore like information on
what the national government is planning to do to ensure that the carers
and those for whom they provide care will not suffer. Our concern is
especially acute given the lack of progress in implementing the Expanded
Public Works Programme in the social sectors mentioned above.

There are many other issues that the committee could raise in respect of
the three issues, namely poverty, gender-based violence and HIV and Aids.
The committee offers these examples in the hope that they will assist
government departments in understanding what is required by Parliament. If
these and similar improvements can be effected, they will also assist
Parliament in better fulfilling its mandate of oversight. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I shall now put the
question. The question is that the report be adopted. As the decision is
dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first
ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast
their provinces’ votes. Are all delegation heads present? Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. We shall now proceed to
the voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per
province. Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they
vote in favour of, or against, or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Mr O M ROBERTSON: Eastern Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Steun. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal ithi elethu. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Limpopo ya seketela mhani. [Limpopo supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga is in favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Noord-Kaap steun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West is in favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Steun. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): All nine provinces
voted in favour. I therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section
65 of the Constitution.
Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 15:26.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                            TUESDAY, 9 JUNE 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Translations of Bills submitted


     (1)    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


          a) Wysigingswetsontwerp op Registrasie van Aktes [W 5 – 2006]
             (National Assembly – sec 75)


         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Deeds
         Registries Amendment Bill [B 5 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec
         75)


          b) Wysigingswetsontwerp op Deeltitels [W 8 – 2006] (National
             Assembly – sec 75)
      This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Sectional
        Titles Amendment Bill [B 5 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75).




TABLINGS


National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson


CREDA PLEASE INSERT PAGES 1289-1312 - Insert T060609e-insert1


2.    The Chairperson

CREDA PLEASE INSERT PAGES 1313-1339 - Insert T060609e-insert2


                            MONDAY, 12 JUNE 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Withdrawal of Bills

      The Minister of Housing withdrew the following Bill on 7 June 2006:

      (a)   Prevention of Illegal Eviction from and Unlawful Occupation of
        Land Amendment Bill [B11 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      a) Government Notice No 416 published in Government Gazette No 28795
         dated 12 May 2006: Setting out particulars of the area demarcated
         by the Municipality of Emalahleni which shall constitute as an
         urban development zone, in terms of section 13 quat of the Income
         Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


      b) Government Notice No 357 published in Government Gazette No 28742
         dated 19 April 2006: The dimension of, design for, and compilation
         of, the year 2006 Natura pure gold coin series, in terms of the
         South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).


      c)  Government Notice No 358 published in Government Gazette No 28742
         dated 19 April 2006: The dimension of, design for, and compilation
         of the year 2006 Protea coin series, in terms of the South African
         Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).


      d) Government Notice No 359 published in Government Gazette No 28742
         dated 19 April 2006: The dimension of, design for, and compilation
         of the year 2006 R1 and R2 pure gold coin series, in terms of the
         South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).



      e) Government Notice No 360 published in Government Gazette No 28742
         dated 19 April 2006: The dimension of, design for, and compilation
         of the year 2006 Crown size 2½ ct sterling silver coin series, in
         terms of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of
         1989).


      f) Government Notice No 361 published in Government Gazette No 28742
         dated 19 April 2006: The dimension of, design for, and compilation
         of the year 2006 sterling silver coin series, in terms of the South
         African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).


      g) Government Notice No 602 published in Government Gazette No 28798
         dated 12 May 2006: Listing and classification of public entities,
         in terms of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
         1999).


      h) Government Notice No 403 published in Government Gazette No 28771
         dated 26 April 2006: Notice to be issued in terms of section 18A to
         determine public benefit activities for purposes of deductible
         donations to certain public benefit organisations, in terms of the
         Income Tax Act, 1962 (58 of 1962).


2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

      a) General Notice No 657 published in Government Gazette No 28854
         dated 19 May 2006: Proposed guidelines as part of the
         implementation of Environmental Impact Assessment Regulations in
         terms of section 24(5) the National Environmental Management Act,
         1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).


      b) Government Notice No R494 published in Government Gazette No 28869
         dated 2 June 2006: Regulations: Qualification criteria, training
         and identification of and forms to be used by environmental
         management inspectors, in terms of the National Environmental
         Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).


                            TUESDAY, 13 JUNE 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister of Finance


          a) Small Business Tax Amnesty and Amendment of Taxation Laws Bill
             [B 14 – 2006].


         Introduction in the National Assembly (proposed sec 77) and
         referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of the National
         Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 13 June 2006.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.


          b) Second Small Business Tax Amnesty and Amendment of Taxation
             Laws Amendment Bill [B 15 – 2006] [Explanatory memorandum of
             Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
             Government Gazette No 8932 of 9 June 2006].


         Introduction in the National Assembly (proposed sec 75) and
         referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of the National
         Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 13 June 2006.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.


2.    Draft Bill submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)     Second Small Business Tax Amnesty and Amendment of Taxation
         Laws Amendment Bill, 2006, submitted by the Minister of Finance on
         13 June 2006.


3.    Bill to be referred to Mediation Committee

    (1)     Bill, as amended by National Assembly, and rejected by National
        Council of Provinces on 13 June 2006, to be referred to Mediation
        Committee in terms of Joint Rule 186(2)(b):


         (a)      Older Persons Bill [B 68D – 2003] (National Council of
             Provinces – sec 76).



National Council of Provinces


The Chairperson

1.    Messages from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


     (1)    Appropriation Bill [B 2 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 77)


         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on  Finance of
         the National Council of Provinces.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     (1)    Convention on the Conservation and Management of Fishery
           Resources in the South East Atlantic Ocean (SEAFO), tabled in
           terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

National Council of Provinces


1.    The Chairperson

      (1)   Draft Report on “Taking Parliament to the People”: Northern
      Cape, 27 – 31 March 2006.

CREDA PLEASE INSERT PAGES 1360-1412Insert: T060613E-insert



COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on
      the Deeds Registries Amendment Bill [B 5 - 2006] (National Assembly -
      sec 75), dated 13 June 2006:

        The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having
        considered the subject of the Deed Registries Amendment Bill [B 5 -
        2006] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified
        by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the
        Bill without amendment.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on
      the Sectional Titles Amendment Bill [B 8 - 2006] (National Assembly -
      sec 75), dated 13 June 2006:

        The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having
        considered the subject of the Sectional Titles Amendment Bill [B 8
        - 2006] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified
        by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the
        Bill without amendment.


