---
title: 'Joint Sitting - 25 May 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: Joint Sitting
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/joint-sitting/parliamentary-debates-JS-2006-05-25
---

THURSDAY, 25 MAY 2006

                                    ____





                      PROCEEDINGS AT THE JOINT SITTING

                                    ____

Members of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces
assembled in the Chamber of the National Assembly at 11:07.

The Chairperson of the NCOP took the Chair and requested members to observe
a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.


          RECOGNITION OF AFRICA DAY: PERSPECTIVES ON AND OF AFRICA


                           (Debate on Africa Day)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, and guests in the gallery, happy Africa Day.
Today the whole continent is celebrating Africa Day. It is a day when we
celebrate our liberation as a continent from especially the political
subjugation that we went through for decades under colonial forces.

It is, of course, the date on which the OAU was born in 1963, and as we
know it has since transformed into the AU. It has become a rallying day for
all countries that were not liberated to use it to push for liberation. As
we know, we were the last-born in that respect. Indeed, the struggle is
still continuing and that is the struggle against poverty.

As we celebrate this day 43 years later, it is important that we look at
the road we have traversed as a continent in order to meet the objectives
put forward by the continent. It is against this background that we have
called this Joint Sitting to mark and celebrate the day. But we do so not
just by having fun, but also by taking stock and looking at the numerous
challenges that we are still faced with.

Therefore, we have to do this under the topic “Perspectives on and of
Africa” which as you know is the theme of the Parliamentary Millennium
Project. In terms of that project we have a lecture series as one of the
elements. In his inaugural speech, the President of South Africa started
what we believe is a very important debate.

We appeal to hon members to make sure that they read the speech delivered
by the President on 1 April on this very important topic. We hope the
Opposition will take the floor and make its own points on this matter, hon
Leader of the Opposition.

We are aware that the inaugural speech has been very uncomfortable to some
in our society, because of the important perspectives that it highlights
about the information, the history and understanding of this continent,
where it comes from, its worth and where it is going.

What is important to me is to engage, rather than merely saying we must not
talk about things that are uncomfortable to some of us. What I think is
important, particularly for this society, is to tell the history that we
were not taught in school about Africa and about ourselves. The history
that we have learnt does not tell us that there is something good that came
out of Africa. We think this information cannot be overemphasised. It’s so
important to teach our children this. Because, even as we recognise the
weaknesses of Africa, we recognise the bad that has been done by ourselves
as Africans, it also important to know that it’s not all bad that came out
of Africa.

I would like to quote first from the speech of the President a series of
questions, which I think are very important, and he said:


   What past and present information is available on Africa? Who gathers and
   disseminates such information? Who interprets events and processes in
   Africa? From what point of view are these interpretations made? Whose
   views dominate the daily discourse in our country and in the rest of the
   continent?


   In other words, what is the world outlook of those who present news to
   us, those who analyse events and those who interpret processes taking
   place on the continent, whose ideas drive our societies? Because indeed
   those who have ownership, who have the power, who take the centre stage
   and make the biggest noises about ideas turn out to be the ones that
   influence thinking in society. But the question is: Who are they? Is it
   the majority of the people of Africa? I think we as leaders need to ask
   ourselves these questions, because we might find that we have a lot more
   work that needs to be done.

Much later in the speech he deals with the area of history that we do not
know even as we talk about economic debates and where Africa is, the
background that we need to factor in as part of the information that
informs us about the present and the future.

There is also a part where he deals with how Europe was developed by the
resources coming from Africa. I want to quote where he deals with how even
in the world wars that happened Africa was plundered and its resources
taken to develop what we now call the developed world.

He deals in particular with the country we now know as the DRC. He quotes a
colonial secretary of a the exiled Belgian government who explained how
they paid their expenses during the time of the Second World War while they
were based in London. I quote:
During the war the Congo was able to finance all the expenditure of the
Belgian government in London, including the diplomatic services, as well as
the cost of our armed forces in Europe and Africa and a total of some £40
million was paid from the resources of the Congo.


In fact, thanks to the Congo, he said –


   The Belgian government in London had not borrowed a shilling or a dollar
   and the Belgian reserves could be left intact while the DRC, as we know
   it now, was plundered.


He went on and said –

   Today the GDP of Belgium is about $302 billion, with a population of only
   10 million.

In the meantime, the GDP of the DRC is estimated at $10 billion, with a
population of 60 million.


The combined GDP of France and Britain, two countries that achieved the
largest colonial presence in Africa, is about $3,5 trillion, while Africa
has a combined GDP of about $600 billion. We can’t, when we debate these
matters, turn a blind eye to that historical background.

Therefore this speech is saying to us as African leaders we’ve got to take
stock of who we are, where we have come from, the history we have to
contend with, including our own mistakes as Africans, because it’s not to
say we are totally innocent of having blundered; we have in fact made
certain very grave mistakes in our leadership roles. And at the end he says
–

  I have no doubt that the leadership represented here – and I say this to
  us here – as well as others across the continent have the necessary
  capacity to assist the African masses correctly to analyse our collective
  strengths and weaknesses and on the basis of an objective appraisal plot
  our way to a better tomorrow.

These are things which, when said, some will say: Let’s leave that, that’s
all in the past and let’s look at tomorrow. We always need to remember, a
people that do not know their past will not understand the present let
alone see their way to the future. So, we must not listen to those who say
we must not come to terms with this history.

In fact, I believe that our responsibility is to make sure that our
children understand some of what is in this speech that I have not touched
on because it actually shows the contribution of Africa to world
civilisation itself. It’s not the other way round. It’s not as if when
colonisers came to Africa, they came and civilised Africans; in fact,
Africa did contribute to world civilisation and that’s a issue which our
children must know. [Applause.]
I now want to use a bit of what is left of my time just to share with you a
recent exercise in which this Parliament made its own contribution to
Africa and that was through a conference that was convened for 4-7 May
where, in terms of the women of the continent, we invited parliamentarians
from each of the 53 parliaments of Africa to start to look at our role in
promoting Nepad and what Nepad does for women.

We actually called upon the Nepad secretariat to come and make a
presentation to us and we found that a very valuable exercise about which
we will still circulate a full report – we hope in the next two weeks – to
members of this House, including the members who come from the provinces.

This conference, particularly when it comes to the content of the
conference, was kicked off by a presentation by the hon Deputy President,
when she dealt with the issue of influencing policy in the interest of poor
women.

We then had a very good presentation from a woman economist from Senegal,
Prof Yassine Fall, who looked at the macroeconomic policy from analysis to
action. She was able to talk in a language understood by ordinary women in
terms of relating those economic issues to their daily lives, so that it’s
not just something that is being debated by professors, and so on. They
could look at what affects them in their daily lives.
As I say, these are issues on which we will give you a detailed report. The
dialogue that was presented by the economist was about the value of women’s
contributions to the economy and how that is being undermined and
contradicted, sometimes in policy-making and implementation.

We then had a presentation by the CEO of the Nepad secretariat, Prof
Firmino Mucavele, who dealt with the philosophy and strategy of Nepad,
followed by the gender adviser of Nepad, who talked about engendering Nepad
and mobilising stakeholders.

After that we broke into commissions dealing with five very important
areas: agriculture, land and water; education and skills development;
poverty, employment and trade; combating trafficking of women and children
and women’s health.

Hon members, I don’t have enough time to go through the outcomes of this
very valuable exercise, but I just want to note the four things that came
out of that conference: the first one was that it renewed old and forged
new partnerships in order to rally round ongoing work for transformation of
Africa to improve the lives of poor people, but especially women.

Secondly, the delegates engaged with information on Nepad and gained a
deeper understanding on how it benefits women on the continent. Thirdly,
delegates identified tasks that can best be taken up by international
partners in the ongoing challenge to help push a women’s agenda within the
context of the AU’s programme for Africa’s economic recovery, Nepad.

Fourthly, the conference deliberations provided better clarity on issues of
economic recovery, and with great enthusiasm, many participants committed
to using the power they have back home, to rally round a developmental
agenda for economic recovery to advance the position of poor women on the
continent.

One of the most important issues that came out was the need for the women
of Africa to have one voice. Because, among other things we have learnt
lessons, for instance, when South African women went to the Forum on
Beijing Plus 10, where we were faced with a block of Western women with a
Western agenda and we found that the women from Africa were not speaking
with one voice.

And we believe that probably one of the biggest challenges is that very
soon South Africa has to come to terms with helping the women of the
continent in this respect. Chairperson, thank you very much. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

  WELCOMING TO PARLIAMENT GIRL CHILDREN PARTICIPATING IN BRING A GIRL CHILD
                                   TO WORK

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, before I call the next speaker,
it has been brought to my attention, as hon members are aware, that as this
week is Bringing a Girl Child to Work week, there are girl children in the
gallery, whom I want to welcome in Parliament. If they can stand up …
[Applause.] There they are, all of them. Thank you very much. I now call
upon the hon Hajaig.

HON MEMBERS: Malibongwe! [Praise!]

Ms F HAJAIG: Thank you, Chairperson of the NCOP. Comrade Chairperson of the
NCOP, comrades and colleagues, it is indeed a privilege to participate in
this Africa Day debate. Africa Day is one of the important dates on the
political calendar of Africa. It reminds us that Africa is the cradle of
humankind. It symbolises African unity and entrenches the view that the
only alternative for the people of Africa is to unite in order to deal with
all the challenges facing the continent.

The Africa Day debate in our Parliament takes place within the context of
the theme entitled “Perspectives on and of Africa”. On 1 April 2006
President Thabo Mbeki gave an inaugural lecture at the Pan-African
Parliament. The message contained in his address was simply that no one
should be allowed to do for Africa what we must do for ourselves. It is a
message of hope, which says the peoples of Africa have the means at their
disposal to move themselves away from the abyss of destruction, poverty and
conflict. It is a message that reminds us as Africans of our rich history,
that we have to reclaim and preserve.

A debate of this nature is significant for a number of reasons. Firstly, it
should serve to remind the leadership and the ordinary people of Africa of
the difficult and harsh realities of the past. Secondly, the debate is
important because it should allow the political leaders of Africa to take
stock of the challenges that confront Africa. Thirdly, and most
importantly, it should force African leaders to reconfirm their commitment
to rebuilding their countries and providing a better life for their people.

The drive to redefine what Africa should become necessitates the creation
of a space to reflect on the past and thereby finding a different but true
history of Africa and a better way of explaining the African condition. I
think our Speaker has begun to touch on it in her speech. In looking at
Africa’s past, it might be important to take a different angle. Instead of
looking at how Africa was undermined, underdeveloped and looted by the
West, it might be helpful to look at how Africa contributed to the
development of the West. In this context the views of scholars such as Ali
Mazrui and Walter Rodney are important.

Ali Mazrui argues that the labour of Africa’s sons and daughters was what
the West needed for its industrial take-off. The slave ships that helped to
export millions of Africans to the Americas helped in the agrarian
revolution and the industrial revolution in Europe simultaneously. On the
other hand, in his seminal work, How Europe Underdeveloped Africa, Walter
Rodney states:


   The African contribution to European capitalist growth extended over such
   vital sectors as shipping, insurance, the formation of companies,
   capitalist agriculture, technology and the manufacturing of machinery.

“The efforts were so wide-ranging that many are seldom brought to the
notice of the reading public,” says Rodney.

The necessity to refer to such historical facts is important today, because
it serves as a reminder of the forced contributions of resources, both
human and mineral, that Africans made in the development of Europe and
America. It also assists us to reflect on what Africa could have become if
its own development and evolution was not interrupted by foreign domination
and colonialism.

In its history of exploitation that contributed to Africa’s long period of
economic stagnation and political instability, what steps are we taking to
revitalise and change the African condition and ensure that the continent
develops? In this regard President Mbeki says:


  As Africans our struggle is to engage in both the total emancipation of
  our continent from the sociopolitical and economic legacy of colonialism
  and apartheid, as well as to reclaim our history, identity and traditions,
  and on the foundation that our ancestors built for all humanity rebuild
  our societies to ensure that they are developed and prosperous.


The decision to transform the Organisation of African Unity into the
African Union stands out as one of the most important decisions that were
made in contemporary Africa. They AU organs with its different mandates
were created in order to deal with different and new challenges facing the
continent. The African Union has already taken successful initiatives in
the continent’s peace efforts, for example the deployment of the first-ever
peacekeeping force in Burundi, peacekeeping forces in Dafur, Sudan, the
creation of the post-conflict reconstruction committee in Sudan, our
presence in finding a solution in Cote d’Ivoire and our assistance to the
DRC in finding a solution and assisting them in having their first
elections.

Ordinary Africans have also been able to witness the increasing political
will of the AU and African heads of state to ensure that they abide by and
implement their own agreements. A case in point relates to the decision
taken that no regime in Africa would be recognised if it came to power
through unconstitutional means and the decision to implement it when the AU
refused to recognise the regimes in Togo and Mauritania, respectively,
after they assumed control of state power without being elected by the
people.

The programme of the AU, namely the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development, or Nepad, was unveiled a few years ago and is evolving into a
mechanism that would define what it is that Africans want to see occurring
for the development of Africa. Nepad has undertaken a number of
initiatives. The aim is to form partnerships with the rest of the world,
but these must remain African-owned and African-driven. Some of the
initiatives include, among others, the following: Firstly, the private
sector has responded through the formation of Nepad business groups, which
have been formed in countries such as South Africa, Nigeria and Kenya. The
African Bursaries Round Table has launched a continent-wide Nepad business
group. The Commonwealth Business Council and the World Economic Forum have
all become partners in the promotion of Nepad around the world.

Secondly, Africans in the diaspora have assisted by establishing the Nepad
council of leading African scientists working in the USA and Europe.

Thirdly, during the period between 2002 and 2005 the African Development
Bank provided financial resources to 16 Nepad projects in areas of
infrastructure development.

Fourthly, in the area of ICT Nepad has facilitated the creation of the East-
African submarine cable system, which is a cable system that connects
Mtunzi in South Africa to Port Sudan, covering a distance of 9 900 km.

Fifthly, in the area of agriculture and food security, Nepad launched a
comprehensive African agriculture development programme initiative, which
seeks to realign and develop Africa’s capacity to produce enough food to
feed itself and export agricultural products. And so it goes on.

All the above initiatives are indicative of the strides being made by
Africa, especially the political leadership, to advance the course of
Africa’s development. Underpinning the development goals of Nepad is the
need for effective and good political and economic governance. Thus the
African Peer Review Mechanism continues to serve as a vehicle through which
Africans are able to participate and evaluate their own governance. Twenty-
four countries have voluntarily joined the African Peer Review initiative.
We are at this point in time in the process of being peer-reviewed.

It is important that we strengthen all the different organs and structures
of the African Union, so that it is able to fulfil its functions. In this
respect the inauguration of the Pan-African Parliament is an important step
forward. For the first time the voice of the African people is being heard.
The Pan-African Parliament is a forum where African members of parliament
can debate the challenges facing the continent.

It also has an important oversight role to play. It has already started its
work in earnest. For example, the Pan-African Parliament has sent fact-
finding missions to Darfur and Mauritania. It has also begun to interact
with other structures of the AU. Through this interaction it has become
clear that the Pan-African Parliament has to interact on a continuous basis
with Nepad and other structures of the AU so that we can find joint
solutions to the challenges facing us.

In conclusion, I would like to quote two great sons of Africa, the former
president of Tanzania, the late Mwalimu Julius Nyerere wrote:


   Africans all over the continent, without a word being spoken either by
   one individual to another, or by one African country to another, they
   were one. Africa today needs to see the same thing, that they are one.


In his address as the first democratically elected president of South
Africa, former President Nelson Mandela stated:


   In the distant days of antiquity the Romans sentenced an African city to
   death: Carthage must be destroyed and Carthage was destroyed. Today we
   wander among its ruins. Only our imagination and historical record enable
   us to experience its magnificence, only our African being makes it
   possible for us to hear the piteous cries of the victims of the vengeance
   of the Roman Empire. And yet we can say this that all human civilisation
   rests on foundations such as the ruins of the African city of Carthage.
   These architectural remains, like the pyramids of Egypt, the sculptures
   of the ancient kingdom of Ghana and Benin, the manuscripts of Mali, like
   the temples of Ethiopia, the ruins of Zimbabwe, the rock paintings of the
   Kgalagadi people and the Namib desert all speak of Africa’s contribution
   to the formation of the condition of civilisation.


He continues:


   We are certain that you Africans will prevail over the currents that
   originate from the past and ensure that the interregnum of humiliation
   symbolised amongst others the destruction of Carthage is indeed consigned
   to the past, never to return.


When the civilisation of Egypt was teaching the great scholars about
mathematics, medicine and complex surgery, and not the other way around,
most of Europe was in the age of darkness. The Malian civilisation reached
its pinnacle when Timbuktu became the intellectual and trading centre
between the fourteenth and sixteenth centuries. Much of European society at
this time was characterised by high levels of illiteracy, acute poverty and
violence. Africa had a glorious past that we can all be proud of. With hard
work and commitment, Africa can once again rejuvenate itself. It has the
resources, which must be used for Africa. The efforts of the government of
South Africa have focused on ensuring that Carthage is rebuilt. Let us
today celebrate Africa and its people. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Chairperson, hon members, without taking anything away
from the heading of the debate, I have captioned my contribution this way:
Africa, move forward, not back. It is not too much to say that today as we
celebrate Africa Day, we join the world in recognising our continent’s
recent advances. This year the 53 countries of Africa are set to achieve an
average economic growth rate of almost 6%, which is well above the world
average.

African institutions like the African Union, the Pan-African Parliament and
Nepad have begun to have a meaningful impact on the lives of all Africans.
Liberia recently elected Africa’s first female head of state, Ellen Sirleaf-
Johnson. That country’s despotic ex-president, Charles Taylor, has been
handed over to the international authorities to be tried for crimes against
humanity. Peace has broken out in troubled spots in Africa such as Burundi
and the DRC and they are moving forward, however tentatively, towards a non-
violent resolution of their conflicts, with the assistance of other African
states. The once war-ravaged nations like Angola and Mozambique are
successfully restructuring their economies and societies.

These examples show that Africa is indeed moving forward and in many areas
and this momentum must be maintained and enhanced. We must also, however,
intensify our opposition to forces that threaten to take us backwards. The
three-year-old conflict in Sudan is blight on our continent and must be
resolved without delay. The peace agreement signed earlier this month is a
step in the right direction, as the UN Security Council decision to replace
the African Union forces currently in the country with a UN peacekeeping
mission. We must now join the AU in putting pressure on the President of
Sudan, Omar Hassan El-Bashir, to allow the UN troops free access to the
country. This will help to stem the rape and slaughter in Western Sudan and
allow the Darfuri people to begin to move to a point where they can join us
in a wholehearted celebration of Africa today.

Much closer to home, the situation in Zimbabwe continues to worsen by the
day, while our government remains largely silent. Citizens of that country
now have the lowest life expectancy in the world, with an average
Zimbabwean woman expected to live to 34 years. After years of refusing to
deal with the root causes of economic, political and social collapse, that
is Robert Mugabe, President Mbeki now claims to be awaiting the outcome of
an intervention by the UN Secretary General Kofi Annan. While we approve of
the UN’s efforts, why, we ask, do we need to wait for the honourable Kofi
Annan to deal with the crisis in our neighbouring country? President Mbeki
has had the moral authority to help Zimbabweans to work towards peaceful
change for years, yet the country has been in such decline for so many
years that unemployment has now reached 80% and inflation has reached 1
000%. South Africa shoulders many of the costs of this collapse. The influx
of political and economic refugees poses an unnecessary threat to our
country and broader African relations, as it stirs up xenophobic tendencies
and tensions between locals and the asylum-seekers.

Our government’s diplomatic efforts in Swaziland have been just as muted,
while the basic individual freedoms of Swazi citizens are still denied
under the reign of King Mswati III. Sovereignty of states and plain
fraternal sentiments are not and never should be excuses for gross
violations of human rights and suppression of the rule of law by any
government. [Applause.] In Setswana, we say, and rightly so: “Matlo go ša
mabapi.” [Each of us is and should be our sister’s or brother’s keeper.]

We say so, because each of us is and should be our sister or brother’s
keeper. But we must work harder. [Interjections.] Thanks, tribalist. We
must work harder to end conflict, fight poverty and disease and defeat
mercenaries, African warlords and despots, including rag-tag bandits
masquerading as freedom fighters in the trouble spots.
Moreover, we must work together to spread democracy and ensure that daily
tragedies in places such as Sudan, Zimbabwe and Swaziland do not begin to
move our entire continent backwards. And let me say this about history. I
totally agree that we need to revisit the history of the continent, because
it is the dominant forces, the rulers who distort history in their
selective ways. We also run the risk of seeing current dominant forces that
are in power selectively distorting the history of this country. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr M SULLIMAN: On a point of order, Chairperson: The speaker referred to
one of the hon members here as a tribalist. Is that parliamentary?
[Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I didn’t hear that. [Interjections.] What did
he say? Can you repeat it? [Interjections.] Tribalist. Mr Seremane, could
you withdraw that word? It is unparliamentary.

Mr W J SEREMANE: I can prove that he is a tribalist, Chairperson, from the
remarks he made.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Did you say that?

Mr W J SEREMANE: Yes, I did say that because of the remarks he made.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: That’s unparliamentary. Can you withdraw it?
Mr W J SEREMANE: Chairperson, I really want to say: I have heard him and I
have reacted to what he said. To say “tribalist” does not necessarily mean
that I am taking anything away from him, when he is one.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Can you withdraw that, Mr Seremane?

Mr W J SEREMANE: I withdraw that, as you please.

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Hon Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces,
Your Excellency our Deputy President, Madam Speaker, hon members, our
beautiful African continent is one that overflows with beauty, hope and
promise for all her children. As we gather under the looming shadow of
Table Mountain, in one of Africa’s fairest cities, to celebrate Africa Day,
one senses that the mighty African giant is indeed moving forward.

There is much to celebrate. The African Union is taking root in member
states. The institutions are being bedded down. The Pan-African Parliament
is starting to voice the aspirations and needs of the peoples of Africa.
The realisation of a self-reliant and prosperous Africa no longer seems
like an elusive phantom.

Yet much work still has to be done. The HIV/Aids pandemic continues to
blight the lives of millions of Africans, leaving a trail of destruction in
its wake, tearing asunder the social and cultural fabric of affected
societies. We remember today our former colleague, Mrs Ruth Bhengu, whose
daughter will be buried this coming weekend. We pray with her, knowing, as
some of us do, what she is going through at this moment.

The persistence of violent conflict in various regions of Africa such as
Darfur and Côte d’Ivoire continues to hold back development. The question
is: How do we rise to the great challenges posed by Africa? I, for one,
believe a successful and prosperous African Union can only be made from
successful and prosperous members states.

At present, the African Union, understandably, appears to be more of a
political enterprise than an economic one. By not setting universal
criteria for membership, the new organisation gained an impressive array of
member states but also forfeited a reliable yardstick to detect and act on
transgressions against the democratic deficit or economic inefficiency.
Nepad and particularly its offshoot, the Peer Review Mechanism, are
alternative ways of achieving this objective. Well, we have yet, in all
candour, to see conclusive results.

I also believe that the AU member states need to foster and realise greater
economic integration through greater market efficiency and free trade
before even contemplating closer political union. In many ways the creation
of a plethora of AU political organs is to put the proverbial horse before
the cart. It is concerning, in view of the problems that the Organisation
of African Unity had and the problems of subscriptions by African nations
which are being dramatised for us here in the Pan-African Parliament.

We owe Africa a big debt for standing by us during the liberation struggle
against apartheid. There is no doubt that, apart from the fact that we have
more resources than most of our sister states, it is pay-up time for us.

We need to, however, balance what we do for our continent with what we do
to deal with the grinding poverty in our country. It was heartrending to
see our people in Port Elizabeth’s squatter camps, flooded after heavy
rains two days ago. At the same time, we watched on television screens our
people sleeping in Durban’s streets during one of the coldest nights of
winter.

We realise that not many African countries can afford to pay their dues,
nor can any of us chide them for failing to do so because of the same gut-
wrenching poverty, which is a common feature of the whole continent.
Furthermore, I believe that the AU project must not be elite-driven by the
governments of member states. Ordinary Africans must see clear benefits of
African integration, such as rising prosperity and unlimited movement of
goods, services and labour.

The drive for African integration must be from the bottom up, which is
something my party and I have always advocated at any level of government.
But, in order to benefit even more, the developing markets must, in future,
embrace us as partners in its model free trade area. I appeal to the
European Union again today to remove all hindrances to trade and commerce
with the African Union that so many of the benefits Europeans enjoy today
can tomorrow be shared by Africans in Africa.

The objective of the African Union must therefore be to become integrated
into a free trade area and customs union that extends from the Cape to
Cairo, and that enjoys free access to the markets along the way and beyond.
This, I believe, would be the foundation of a world-class market, larger
and more interlinked than the world has seen before.

In simple terms, we would envisage a privileged partnership, with one large
free trade area, with the African continent effectively being the southern
leg. This would be the most effective way of promoting the vision to
promote the socioeconomic integration of the continent, which will lead to
greater unity and solidarity between African countries and peoples.

Such an arrangement would go much further than the African Commission and
the promises of the G8 at this year’s Gleneagles meeting - which I also
wholeheartedly support – to truly making this an African century. Africa
need not be, I quote, “a scar on the conscience of the world”, as Prime
Minister Blair so memorably put it.

On this day, Africa Day, let us rededicate ourselves to building a strong
and prosperous Africa. Re a leboga. [Thank you.] [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Mr Chairman, Deputy President, long live Africa!

HON MEMBERS: Long live!

Dr S E M PHEKO: On the occasion of Africa Liberation Day, the PAC is making
the economic resurgence of the African people our chief preoccupation. We
believe Africa needs a 50-year plan to achieve this.

Africa, with all her rights to dignity and liberty should assert her
personality and become a continent that will be able to project into the
international scene her own reality. Africa must participate in full
consciousness and determination in her historic responsibility to recreate
a world open to humanity and a new era of greater economic, social and
political justice.

The proposed plan must interpret Africa from a true understanding of
Africa’s problems, not misconceptions made by so-called experts. If the
problems faced by Africa are to be understood, analysed and solved, we
should take into consideration the historical, economical, social, moral
and cultural conditions that shape Africa’s identity in the world. We must
rebuild an Africa whose riches will be enjoyed by future generations. To
win and proclaim a nation’s freedom but keep its old structures is to
plough a field but not sow it with new grain for a harvest.

The 50-year plan for Africa should not just be a programme for a list of
aims. It should be the expression of Africa’s potential over a given
period. It will require all the African peoples’ energy and courageous
work.

The time has come for Africa to develop think-tanks, where the most
committed and best African brains will gather together to plan a 50-year
strategy for Africa’s economic liberation, power and technological
advancement and self-reliance.

Africa’s plan must include an Africa that does not export its raw materials
and import them back as processed materials at inflated prices. The plan
must enable Africa to avoid foreign aid, which is just an attempt to
recolonise her.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon member, your speaking time has expired.

Dr S E M PHEKO: On this Africa Liberation day, the PAC summons all Pan-
Africanists to renew their vows that the glory of Africa and its people
shall not be buried forever; that, indeed, as in the days Julius Caesar,
once again, the world shall say: Africa, Africa semper aliquid novi! [Out
of Africa there is always something new!] [Applause.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, Ministers and hon
members, on 25 May 1963 the Organisation of African Unity was established
with the core objective of promoting and encouraging the independence and
freedom of the African continent.

Since that historic day 43 years ago much has changed. Apartheid and
colonialism have been defeated. Indeed, the OAU itself has been reborn as
the African Union. Although, perhaps, we can still say that the core
objective remains the promotion of African freedom and independence.

Perspectives and perceptions are the subtle foundations upon which entire
thought processes are built. The first lesson of history is that the victor
determines which perspective and perceptions of the vanquished will be
perpetrated. When we speak of perspectives of and on Africa, we know that
the history of colonialism can rightly be described as centuries of
colonial perceptions and perspectives about the colonised being put into
brutal practice.

Although we have indeed seen the end of the practice of colonialisation,
the centuries of ingrained perceptions and perspectives still hold many
people, even many Africans themselves, prisoner. As Steve Biko, said, the
strongest weapon that the oppressor has is the mind of the oppressed. This
perception’s legacy is no less of an obstacle than the physical, political
and economic legacies of colonialism.

Perspectives and perception is about identity. It is a powerful force that
is still being exerted over Africans through the perpetual insinuation or
outright claim that we are inherently less, be it less civilised, less
educated, less prosperous, less capable or indeed less competent.

For many people centuries of such perceptions continue to have a greater
say about identity and inherent qualities than we do ourselves. Inevitably,
the only real path into the future is the one that Africans determine for
themselves. Only by doing things in our own way, on our own terms and for
our own motives will we begin to take ownership, not only of our political,
social and economic destinies, but also of our own identity. We have begun
to do this in numerous and significant ways.

The AU and Nepad are but some of the ways in which Africans are beginning
to express themselves collectively. We are demonstrating to each other and
to the world what it means to be an African. In the Pan-African Parliament
we meet and debate without anybody but ourselves setting the agenda. We
trade and co-operate with each other in peace. Where conflicts arise,
Africans are leading the way in African peacekeeping. Thank you. [Time
expired.]

Prof B TUROK: Chairperson, Deputy President, some 50 years ago in February
1960, the British Prime Minister, Harold Macmillan, came to this Parliament
and he made a speech which became famous. It was called the “Winds of
Change Speech”, and in it he signalled that Africa was about to achieve its
independence and it was a warning to the South African government that the
winds of change would come here as well.

Independence did indeed come to most of Africa, followed by many successes
as national governments of African people took power and control of their
situations and their resources, but after a decade or so it was followed by
some decades of stagnation. Fortunately that stagnation has now come to an
end and we see that the winds of change are blowing once again across
Africa.

There are two kinds of winds of change. Firstly, there are winds of change
within the continent, but there’s also a wind of change in Africa’s
international relations, and I want to talk about both of those. Firstly,
within Africa the continent is now seeing tremendous efforts at achieving
good governance, peace and social justice. This is made possible because of
something which the continent lacked before - a sense of African
solidarity.

Let me also say that this House should be grateful that this country is led
by the ANC, which understands what African solidarity is all about.
[Applause.]

The emergence of the African Union has been referred to. The question of
peacekeeping has also been referred to and I don’t want to repeat it. So
have Nepad and the Peer Review Mechanism, but what has not also been
referred to is that Africa now has common positions on the question of
external debt, international trade and mutual accountability on ODA, or
overseas development assistance. These are very important practical matters
around which Africa has now developed a common agenda in its interface with
the international community.

So I refer to the question of Africa’s external relations. The situation
has changed substantially. The G8 has produced an action plan that has
numerous elements of support for Africa and new relationships with Africa.
Europe is changing its attitudes from the previous colonial approach to new
approaches that refer to partnerships.

I have here a document which is called the “EU Strategy for Africa: Towards
a Euro-African pact to accelerate Africa’s development”. This document has
been launched this morning at a conference in Cape Town organised by the
presidency of Europe, the Association of European Parliamentarians for
Africa, Awepa, and the North-South Centre of the Council of Europe, and it
is being unpacked as we speak here. I come from that conference. I made a
speech there this morning and I bring you greetings from that meeting of
130 parliamentarians, half of whom come from Europe and half of whom come
from Africa. [Applause.]

We were assured by the representative of the European Union that there’s a
new approach to this Euro-Africa pact - and it will be unpacked this
morning. I also refer to the Blair commission, which, with all its faults,
certainly sent new signals about a new attitude to Europe. What is
happening is that the language from Europe is becoming more and more
friendly.

This document that I referred to uses the phrases “equality”,
“partnership”, and “ownership”. Well, it’s big language! Big rhetoric! We
shall see. It also says that equality implies mutual recognition, mutual
respect and the definition of mutual collective interests. Well, that’s a
big agenda and we shall have to monitor and assess the degree of
seriousness with which Europe actually performs, and I shall have one or
two things to say about that in a moment.

The problem is that the political concerns of Europe, as expressed in all
these documents, and indeed of the G8 and the Blair commission and so on,
are not matched by economic actions. This document admits that the prices
of basic commodities of African export, which are agricultural crops such
as sugar, coffee, cocoa and cotton, have fallen by 70% in the past 20
years.

Imagine, if the price of American export commodities fell by 70% in 20
years, what would happen to the United States! Europe is a major exporter
internationally. Imagine, if their export prices over a period of 20 years
collapsed to the degree of 70%, what would happen within those countries.
Africa has had to face, over the past 20 years, this collapse of prices
which affects, above all, the women who produce those commodities.

I say again: Who in Africa produces the sugar, the cocoa, the coffee and
the cotton? It is women producers in the rural areas. And it is they who
bear the brunt of this collapse of international commodity prices, and the
meeting that is taking place in Cape Town today and tomorrow will have to
address that. The European Union and the parliamentarians from Europe will
be asked serious questions about what they propose to do about that.

A critical question to Africa as posed by the international community is
the question of good governance. And we all agree that Africa needs good
governance, but how, I ask you, can you have good governance when you don’t
have enough money to pay good judges, when you don’t have enough money to
pay good professors, when you don’t have enough to pay good accountants,
lawyers, engineers and the rest, as a result of which those very same
professions migrate to the United States and Europe and so on.

I have said this morning to that gathering when they in Europe ask us in
Africa to have good governance, they should make sure that we have the
resources to do that. You cannot impose good governance as though it was
based on wishful thinking. It requires resources, implementation and so on.

Our committee, the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, had a
briefing yesterday by the Department of Trade and Industry. Our
representative at the WTO negotiations told us that Europe was being very
hard-nosed and that the positions of Europe in those negotiations were
based primarily on the commercial interests, which dominate the debates in
the WTO.

So, we are faced with the situation that we as Parliament have to examine.
On the one hand we have enormous amounts of political rhetoric coming from
the G8, Europe and so on, as well as a great deal of goodwill. Let me say
immediately that this conference taking place in Cape Town some 50 European
parliamentarians from right across Europe, including Eastern Europe – I was
sitting next to somebody from Latvia today – and so on, and these are
people who’ve come to Cape Town to discuss with African parliamentarians
and with us on the basis of goodwill. But it’s their responsibility to go
home and to say to their own governments and leaders and the people who
their countries send to the WTO and all these international negotiations
that the economic processes must match the political rhetoric. We’re
examining that and we’re looking forward to a better situation.

But fortunately our fate is not limited to the EU and the United States,
because the international environment is changing. We now see major
emerging powers on the world scene - China, India, Latin America - and I
believe that this continent of Africa must now see itself located in a new
international environment in which there are other forces than the US and
Europe, which are our major trading partners and for which we have to
exercise great care.

But there’s a new world around, and Africa will find a new place in the new
balance of forces internationally which will enable us to exercise a
greater freedom of choice, which will enable us to exercise that history
for which the African people fought against colonialism.

The reason why there is a change of rhetoric from the North, from the US
and Europe is that there is now an understanding that Africa’s material
resources are very important. There’s an international rivalry for Africa’s
oil, for Africa’s minerals, for Africa’s political influence, including in
the United Nations, and soon within the Security Council. And so we are
living in a new situation where there are new possibilities that we have to
examine carefully on the basis of our self-interests as South Africa and as
the continent of Africa.

We need to understand that we have to exercise great maturity in the way we
handle international contradictions, because the contradictions are now
massive. For example, next month a conference will take place in Cape Town,
led by the premier of China and our own Deputy President, which will
discuss China-South Africa business co-operation. Well, that is an enormous
opportunity for South Africa to diversify its business interests and for
Africa as a whole to diversify their linkages internationally, because we
are no longer the poor child of US interests and European domination. So
there’s a new situation.

Fortunately we are led by a President who understands these issues very
well. Our President has played an enormous role in trying to finesse a
position for South Africa within this new global environment in which our
place in history and our place in the global economy is recognised and
understood. We understand that the anticolonial history of which Africa is
so proud, in which we as the ANC and our President in particular played a
major role, and is some kind of a platform upon which we can build our
relations with our external partners.

They are using the language of partnership. This document talks about
partnerships, equality, etc. Well, let’s make that real by using our
intelligence and our creative ability to reconstruct our external relations
with the world as South Africa, but also as Africa, on the basis of mutual
benefits.

Let us say to our external partners that when they take the mineral
resources of Africa they are benefiting and therefore their overseas
development assistance is an investment in a mutual partnership in which
there are two sides, not one. The days of patronage for Africa and for
South Africa are over. We have resources that matter. We have vast
quantities of oil. We have minerals. That is the basis of our negotiations
and relations with Europe.

Fortunately there are people of goodwill in Europe. For example, the
churches in the UK are engaging in a huge campaign called Fairtrade. What
they’re doing, through the churches, is to sell commodities which come from
the Third World at a low price to the people of the UK, which constitutes,
in effect, a transfer of cash to the people of Africa. Also, they’re buying
commodities that the commercial enterprises don’t want to buy.

There’s a huge amount of goodwill in the churches of the UK and a huge
amount of goodwill in the NGOs of Europe. We as Parliament and as leaders
of our country must maximise those opportunities, make friends with those
people and create pressure on their governments so that the language of
partnership and equality is made real in this world of ours. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr M V NGEMA: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, hon members of this
honourable House, today all Africa is free, and we give thanks to the
Organisation of African Unity, which was inaugurated on this day 43 years
ago. We also thank great African leaders for their leadership and the
sacrifices they made to liberate Africa.

Africa has been raped by colonial powers, as well as by many African
leaders themselves. It has been and still is troubled by famine, diseases
and wars. Maybe at last our prayers are being heard, specifically our
prayer “Nkosi Sikelel’ iAfrika”.

We have indisputably moved into a new and promising era, which we must all
involve ourselves and make sure that the welcome impetus is not lost. There
are fewer wars today in Africa than in previous decades, and there is the
highest level of economic growth on record.

A political type of globalisation, or should I say continentalisation, has
been taking place here, with African countries talking more to each other
and demonstrating interest in and care for one another in a way never seen
before.

Issues such as good governance and the damage resulting from corruption are
on the continent’s agenda, and support by the developed world for these
developments is apparent.
Multiparty democracies have now been established in the majority of African
countries, and these are generally taking root, with appropriate
institutions and necessary practices being enacted. We are pleased to see a
desire and willingness within the organs of the AU to build on the
traditions of the Pan-African Movement and the OAU to develop closer ties
with the diaspora.

In these ways we are giving expression to our hard-won freedom. This all
amounts to reason for hope that the pain of the past will subside and that
stability, and at least a modest prosperity, will be experienced in the
years ahead. It is up to us.

Even more hopeful is the turn of events in Southern Africa. With the
exception of Zimbabwe, there is a new calm over the subregion, with
economic and political prospects improving every day. As Africans in the
subregion and with the support of the continent, we must find ways to
support a resolution of the crisis in Zimbabwe and assist Zimbabweans in
the reconstruction of their democracy.

The pending visit by the UN’s Secretary-General to Zimbabwe must be seen as
adding international support to the efforts of Africa to help Zimbabwe.
Africa is not leaving this African challenge in the hands of Mr Kofi Annan
and the international community. All in all, we find good reason to
celebrate this Africa day. Today we celebrate Africa. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms N MOKONYANE: Hon Speaker, hon Deputy President, hon members,
distinguished guests, today is the 43rd anniversary of our Africa Day
celebrations. There’s genuine cause for celebrating because Africa, once
referred to as “the dark continent”, has made tremendous strides towards
freeing herself from the vices of negative stereotypes.

Africa, once the hotbed of the imperial scramble, has risen and liberated
herself from her whimsical colonial masters’ greed. As a continent we have
just emerged from a past that was once characterised by famine,
dictatorship, military juntas, economic depression, civil strife,
corruption and abuse of human rights.

This day, May 25, is a strong reminder to all the children of the soil that
Africa shall never again slide back to the clutches of bondage. It is a day
that should serve to remind all of us to double our efforts in building and
sustaining the socioeconomic infrastructure of the continent so that it can
become a significant player in global affairs.

This sense of determination and conviction has been eloquently enunciated
by many of our current progressive African leaders in various world fora.
In its presentation to mark Africa Day last year the Nigerian President and
the current Chairperson of the African Union, Olusegun Obasanjo, stressed
that Africa had not only made some achievements, but also that its current
leaders have a sense of direction, a sense of mission and the determination
to engage our problems directly.

Within a short period since its inception, the African Union has, to a
certain extent, been able to influence the international community to
favourably view Africa as a rising phoenix with an abundance of investment
opportunities.

Moreover, the African Union has managed to persuade most African states to
embrace the fundamental principles of democracy, peace and stability.
Furthermore, it is through the efforts of the African Union leadership that
institutional frameworks aimed at promoting and safeguarding stability,
human rights and economic growth are in place.

For the first time today, Africa has a Pan-African Parliament, hosted by
our own country, South Africa, and headed by a woman. Above all, Africa,
through the African Union, has once more demonstrated her commitment to
these matters by setting up a peer review mechanism, a process that has
never been embarked upon by any other continent.

I now come to the Peace and Security Council and Nepad. So, as we celebrate
today, we should be conscious of the fact that there remain serious
challenges that we have to contend with as a continent. We have to tighten
people-to-people relationships; we have to instil the dignity of being
African; we have to give one another support, pledge solidarity to and care
for one another.

The divide between West and South, the developed and the underdeveloped,
the First and the Third World still confront us. This divide perpetuates
inequality in areas of trade and industry. Africa finds herself still
dependent on grants and aid from the West, resulting in furtherance of
economic subjugation.

It is, therefore, necessary that we use this day of celebration to also
reflect and take stock of what needs to be done to promote our continent’s
interests.

We still have to deal with persistent civil wars as witnessed in other
parts of Africa. HIV and Aids also remain a pandemic, with the sub-Saharan
region the hardest hit. The threat of famine is forever hovering above
nations such as Malawi, Zimbabwe, Ethopia, etc. These are some of the
issues that we have to grapple with. It is, therefore, critical that we
keep them in our radar.

Whilst Africa has taken a giant leap, all of the above factors still impede
Africa’s economic growth and prosperity. We should not become despondent,
but should speak with one voice, act in unison as a people of this glorious
continent and say: “Mayibuye iAfrika.” I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, I believe we often forget
that we belong to this much larger entity, Mother Africa. Africa is home to
a majority of poverty-stricken, starving people. A continent largely
haunted by the rape of colonialism, followed often, as in our case, by
autocratic rule such as the apartheid regime that thereafter continued the
abuse, extortion and rape of our people and nation.

As we stand here today, many countries on our continent of Africa continue
to be a victim of warfare and poverty. The realities of HIV and Aids on the
continent are horrific and while many countries abroad attempt to better
our situation the change for a better Africa depends on us as Africans.

The MF finds this dependency to rest on the shoulders of Nedlac, the PAP
and the united Africa. While we can blame our predicament on our past, our
future depends on our present. However, the huge foreign debt that hangs
over Africa hinders our progress and ability to overcome our challenges.
The writing off of Africa’s foreign debt is what we need. We need to urge
our debtors to allow us the leverage to progress by writing off our old
debts that have been circumstanced by history.

The G7 needs to be reminded of its promised intention in Africa. Our
growth, development and pursuit of globalisation depend upon it. Poverty
alleviation and escape from terrible diseases such as HIV and Aids requires
the freeing of this country from foreign debt. Billions may then be
reinvested in domestic development and needs, making available funding to
sustain the need.

In the light of this, the MF calls for the release of Africa from foreign
debt. Furthermore, we feel that the production of African goods must
receive priority over imported goods to be marketed on the continent. The
support to sustain domestic product shall benefit growth and allow for
cheaper and more accessible supply. In this way we shall serve to address
and assist each other economically.

The nations of Africa need experience and how to absorb the benefit of
values that democracy holds, especially in a united front to achieve
upliftment, growth, development and, most of all, liberation. The respect
and preservation of human rights shall be our forerunner to this.

Africa stands as Africa’s biggest enemy, and lest our orthodox downfall is
crippling ourselves is abundant for the new way to accommodate nation-
building to a democratic and people-centred means. [Applause.]

Mr M DIKO: Madam Speaker, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, it is
encouraging that we celebrate Africa today to acknowledge the progress that
the African continent has made so far in the pivotal role played by South
Africa through its great leaders like the former President, Mr Nelson
Mandela.

South Africa’s involvement in a number of African countries with its
peacekeeping force bears testimony to our commitment towards the attainment
of peace and democracy on our continent. It will therefore be a travesty of
justice if I fail to convey a word of gratitude to President Mbeki for the
leadership role he has played in Africa’s rise.

Today, as we commemorate 43 years since the adoption of the Charter of the
Organisation of African Unity on 25 May 1963 in Addis Ababa, it is
important to put away the past and concentrate on the future of our
motherland. We must forget the well-documented blunders committed by
buffoons such as Idi Amin and Mobuto Seseko and their Western backers. We
must strive to overcome the challenges such as poverty, diseases, ethnic
divisions and corrupt governance that Africa is still facing.

Now there is a strong appreciation that Africa is on the move and the
continent’s leadership is committed to leading a strong developmental
agenda for Africa’s renaissance. South Africa must do more to spearhead the
development effort through homegrown national poverty reduction strategies
and assist institutions such as the African Union and the Nepad
secretariat.

The convergence of these institutions will provide a unique opportunity
that could help propel Africa into unprecedented progress towards
eradicating poverty and creating a path of prosperity. The question now is:
How well positioned is Africa and its development partners to utilise these
institutions and resources for a partnership framework? The proposal by the
G8 of a 100% cancellation of debt to qualifying countries means that at
least Africa has additional resources. Therefore, it is a propitious moment
for Africa.

As we assemble here today, we all know that Africa has been defined as a
place that lacks law and order and is without political solutions,
particularly by those that are of Africa. But, fortunately for us Africans,
we also know that they are the same people that perpetuate this lawless
environment only to dent our image and loot our resources. In the past year
we had arrested the member of a European royal family, Mark Thatcher, who
had used our African brothers as mercenaries. Obviously we disagree with
the suggestion that Africa lacks law and order and that the most effective
means is the use of mercenaries.

In recognition of this important day in the history of our continent, South
Africa must reaffirm its commitment to peace and democracy. A clarion call
must also be made to all those countries on this continent where conflict
still prevails to settle their differences and join the rest of the African
countries on the road to peace and economic democracy. Let us make all
Africans feel proud of being African, irrespective of race, colour or
creed. [Applause.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Madam Speaker, on this Africa Day, allow me to add my
voice to the many voices that have spoken about Africa, its origin, as well
as its many years under colonialism. At the same time, allow me to remember
all the leaders and scholars of Africa who were brave enough to resist the
temptation of allowing themselves to think of Africa in terms of all the
negatives and racist descriptions that colonialists had intended.

To me a perspective on and of Africa should be of such a nature that we
begin to negate the untruths that Africans have been subjected to for
centuries. Indeed, as we present Africa, past and present, we should begin
to map out a clear vision for our continent as defined by us and not as
defined by others. The positive image of Africa and its people should be
paramount. We should write more and consistently describe ourselves in a
positive light. We should love Africa more than any other continent.
Indeed, we should re-engineer the African creativity that was stifled by
slavery and eradicate all negative perceptions and inferiority that accrued
as a result of living under colonialism and apartheid in South Africa.

Today, as we deliberate on this matter, we are confronted by a colonial
past that manifest itself through conflicts, poverty, division and economic
dependence. At the same time, our former colonial masters have the audacity
to tell us what we should or should not do.

Colonialism and apartheid have made us make false assumptions about
ourselves as well as about our origin and our capacity to determine our own
destiny. Colonialists plundered the wealth of our continent and after their
defeat manipulated economic relations to such an extent that Africa depends
on aid and loans from institutions colonialists built using African
resources.

Azapo remains firmly of the view that there is an urgent need to act
together to at least get our people in Africa the minimum benefits they
deserve. At the same time, we should validate our claim to the greatest
heritage from our ancestors. Schools should teach our children about us,
our origin and about the slave trade that remains in our mind an action of
human brutality. We need to theorise and debate the constructions of state
post liberation. We need to study Pan-Africanism and relate it to the
agenda of unity and reconnection with our people.

Mr M THETJENG: Madam Speaker, as I speak on perspectives on and of Africa,
I will concentrate on the strengthening of parliamentary democracy in
Africa.

Every now and then something happens that demonstrates how good governance,
democracy and the rule of law are spreading in Africa. Last week one such
an event occurred when the Nigerian Senate rejected a constitutional
amendment that would have opened the way for President Olusegan Obasanjo to
run for a third term in office.

AN HON MEMBER: That is democracy!

Mr O M THETJENG: The supporters of the third term bid spent days trying to
lobby members of parliament to vote in favour of the amendment in an effort
to get the required two thirds majority. Despite the fact that the pressure
on individual members was intense, with some allegedly offered more than R2
million to vote in favour of the amendment, the Nigerian Senate did the
right thing by rejecting it. One hopes that the South African Parliament
will show the same commitment to consider democracy if faced with a similar
test. [Interjections.]

Next year’s elections in Nigeria will now mark the first time that a
civilian president will hand over power to a successor elected in a
democratic election in that country – a great milestone in that country’s
democracy development. And there are lessons to be learnt here for other
African countries, because, as hard as it may be for the remaining big men
of Africa to believe that there are people who can replace them, it is for
the benefit of democracy and good governance.

But this month, while parliamentary democracy was being strengthened in the
West of our continent, public representatives in East Africa were busy
upgrading the dining cart on the gravy train. Newspapers reported that MPs
in Kenya’s Parliament have now approved a 40% increase in their fuel
allowances, bringing their allowance to the equivalent of a shocking R30
000 per month for travelling. And this while the Kenyan parliament passed
only 7 out of 25 Bills submitted last year, mainly because of infighting
and the fact that they seldom had a quorum of 30 MPs in the House. A Kenyan
civil society group comments:

  Parliament has distinguished itself in passing in record time any Bill
  whose effect is to fill the pockets, handbags and bank accounts of its
  members and taking as many days off duty as possible.


These examples highlight the best and the worst of parliamentary democracy
in Africa.

Our challenge is to ensure that we continue to strengthen democracy across
the continent and show zero tolerance for despotic regimes that work to
undermine freedom and have no regard for human rights. Democracy is growing
in Africa, but South Africa must take the lead in further promoting
democracy and helping to reform the regimes of countries like Swaziland,
Zimbabwe and the Sudan. Only then will we be able to join all other
Africans in celebrating Africa Day as the free citizens of African
parliamentary democracies.

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Madam Speaker, Chairperson of the NCOP, Ministers and
Deputy Ministers present, and of course hon members and comrades, let me
start by saying: No one knew that one day South Africa would be what it is
today thanks to all the African states that assisted us and harboured our
comrades.

Somlomo, xa sibhiyozela iminyaka elishumi elinambini yenkululeko nelishumi
yoMgaqo-siseko, asikwazi ukuwalibala amazwe awayegcine abantu bethu kwa
nokuba amangcwaba abantwana babantu alapho. Sithi kuwo: Maz’ enethole
ngokugcina nokunceda amaqabane awayebhacile. [Kwaqhwatywa.]

Kulo nyaka, thina makhosikazi sibhiyozela iminyaka engamashumi amahlanu
omngcelele wamakhosikazi, esele ixhanyulwa nguyo wonke umntu ngoku, phofu.
Xa sikhumbula olu suku sijonga nezinye iintsuku eziphawulwa yiAfrika yonke
njengolusuku lwanamhlanje. Ngomhla wama-30 kuJulayi ka-1962 amakhosikazi
eAfrika amisela umbutho owaziwa ngokuba yiPan-African Women’s Organisation.
Iinjongo zawo yayikukukhulula amakhosikazi engcinezelweni yasemakhaya,
emisebenzini nangokwesini. Siyayazi into yetriple oppression ke thina.
Ngenxa yongenelelo lwamakhosikazi, neemfazwe ziyancipha eAfrika. Siyazi
kananjalo ukuba abona bantu baba ngamaxhoba ngamakhosikazi nabantwana.
Bayadlwengulwa okanye basetyenziswe gadalala. Enye yeenjongo zikaPawo
yayikukunqanda into yokwenziwa kwabantwana amajoni okanye amasoldati.

Kwiiveki ezimbini ezidlulileyo bekukho inkomfa yamakhosikazi alapha eAfrika
ebonisana ngendima anokuyidlala ekukhuliseni uqoqosho emazweni awo. IPawo
yayisekelwe kanye iinjongo ezinjengezi. Siyabulela kuSomlomo nakubantu
abeququzelele le nkomfa. Yeyona mvuselelo siyifunayo le, ukushumayela
inyani emsulwa ebantwini.

Asiyompazamo ukubona iPalamente yeAfrika ikhokelwe yinkosikazi.
Kangangendlela anesakhono ngayo amakhosikazi, sinaye nomongameli
oyinkosikazi apha eMzantsi Afrika nosekela-mongameli oyinkosikazi
kummelwane wethu iZimbabwe. Yinto leyo ebonisa ukuba iinkokeli ziyavuma
ukuba indawo yenkosikazi isekukhulisweni koqoqosho nentlalontle kwiAfrika
iphela. [Kwaqhwatywa.]

Kulo nyaka, thina makhosikazi eAfrican National Congress sinenjongo
yokumanya amanye amakhosikazi achaseneyo nobuhlwempu, indlala, angacaluliyo
nabona ukuba intatho-nxaxheba kawonke-wonke yeyona ndlela isa phambili.
Siyibona ibalulekile into yokuvuselela iPawo ukuze ijongane nemiba
esichaphazelayo nokusebenza neAfrican Union ukuphelisa iimfazwe nendlala.
Njengokuba wayetshilo uMongameli emi kweli qonga okokuba ngenye imini ziya
kosulwa iinyembezi yaye siya kuncuma, sekuqalile oko apha eAfrika.
Sincumile ngoku. Njengabantu abanethemba, iseza kuphela indlala kwiAfrika
iphela. Ubuncwane beAfrika buza kuxhanyulwa ngabantwana baseAfrika.
Kananjalo njengekholwa ndifuna ukuthi: nemilambo yeli lizwekazi lethu iza
kuzaliswa luthando nenkathalelwano.

Mandize apha kuwe ke, tat’ uSeremane. Xa simi apha kweli qonga asithethi
naba bantu balapha eNdlwini kuphela, kodwa neli lizwe ngokubanzi. Kufuneka
ukuba athi umntu xa emi kweli qonga athethe inyani. Asiyonyani into yokuba
uMzantsi Afrika okanye uMongameli uthule yaye uyayazi into yokuba akakhethi
cala likabani, uthetha namaqela omabini aseZimbabwe. Mhlawumbi kufuneka
ukuba ngenye imini akumeme ukuze uyibone loo nto. Ayikho into enjengale
uyithethayo. [Uwelewele.] Xa silwa indlala, siyilwa apha ekhaya
nakubamelwane bethu. Asiyonyani into yokuba uMzantsi Afrika awuncedisi
ekulweni indlala yaseZimbabwe. Ngaphezulu, uthe kufuneka ukuba abantwana
bafundiswe inyani. Kuyathandabuzeka ke ukuba ufundisa inyani eNdlwini.
[Kwahlekwa.]

Tat’ uButhelezi, ndifuna ukuthi kuwe: ngesiXhosa sithi ilishwa liyakwazi
kowalo. Ngelishwa abantua abahlala ematyotyombeni isesithi. Kufuneka
siqiniseke ke ukuba xa sisebenza sisebenzela abantu bethu. Izolo
uMphathiswa wezeZindlu, uyiqinisekisile into yokuba amatyotyombe aza
kuphela apha eMzantsi Afrika noxa ayengenziwanga ngulo rhulumente. Injongo
yakhe kukuwalwa aphele tu. Wonke ubani ufanele ukuba ahlale endlwini eyiyo.
Xa ndigqibezela ...

USOMLOMO: Uxolo, mama, uzimisele ukuthatha umbuzo kutata?

Nksz N D NTWANAMBI: Ndakube ndigqibezele, Somlomo, ndingawuthatha umbuzo.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Madam Speaker, as we celebrate 12 years of freedom and 10 years of the
South African Constitution, we cannot forget the countries that harboured
our people during the struggle for liberation, as well as that many of our
country’s patriots’ graves are in those countries.
To them we would like to say: Thank you for assisting comrades who were in
exile. [Applause.]

Women are celebrating 50 years of the Women’s March that is now enjoyed by
everybody. When remembering this day, we also acknowledge the other days
that Africa celebrates on this day. On 30 July 1962 the women of Africa
launched the Pan-African Women’s Organisation. The objectives were to free
women from triple oppression, at home, at work and gender-related
oppression. To women, triple oppression is very well known. Even wars are
reduced through interventions that are made by women and we know that most
of the casualties are women and children. They become victims of rape and
abuse too. Pawo’s other objective was to stop conscription of children in
armed conflict.

In the last couple of weeks women held an International Women’s Conference
to deliberate on their role in the economic recovery of their countries. It
is issues such as that that had led to the establishment of Pawo in the
first place. We would like to express our gratitude to Madam Speaker and
other people who worked with her and organised the event and made it the
success that it was. That is the kind of revival we want – the preaching of
truth.

It is not a mistake that the Pan-African Parliament has a woman as its
president. South Africa and Zimbabwe have female deputy presidents and that
too is not a mistake. That actually indicates that women are welcome and
are considered to have a role in developing Africa’s economy and its well-
being.

The ANC Women’s League aims to unite all women who are against hunger,
poverty and racialism, and who view that public participation is the best
method to achieve a better future. We view it necessary to revive Pawo in
order that women could debate matters that concern them in the context of
the African Union. The President stated in one of his addresses that Africa
has entered the Age of Hope. We certainly have and we can now smile. As
people who have hope, we are certain that hunger will no more be one of
Africa’s woes. Africa’s wealth will be enjoyed by the children of Africa.
As a Christian too I would like to say: Even the rivers of the continent
will be filled with love and there shall be caring for one another.

May I now address you directly, hon Seremane. When somebody decides to
speak from the podium, it is important that they tell the truth. It is not
true that South Africa or the President is quiet and taking sides in the
matter of Zimbabwe and you know it. He engages with both sides that are
involved. Perhaps the hon President should invite you to one of the
meetings he would hold with the parties concerned. What you said is not
true. [Interjections.] It is true that our fight against hunger and poverty
is not waged here at home only but in the neighbouring states as well. It
is not true that South Africa does not participate in fighting hunger in
Zimbabwe. Furthermore, you said that the youth should to be told the truth.
It is, however, doubtful that that is what you are doing in this House.
[Laughter.]

I would like to say to you, hon Buthelezi: In isiXhosa we say that one’s
fate belongs to one. Unfortunately we are the people who still live in
informal settlements. It is imperative for us, therefore, to work hard to
ensure a better life for the people. Yesterday, the Minister of Housing
assured us that the time is coming when no informal settlements shall exist
as an alternative to formal housing in South Africa, although they are not
of our making but a legacy of the apartheid government. She is determined
to fight them. Everyone deserves quality housing. In conclusion ...

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Excuse me hon member, can you take a question?

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Only after I have concluded my speech, Madam Speaker.]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: I would just want to know whether my colleague
understood my raising the issue of the squatter camps as a point of
criticism of government. I was just talking about facts regarding poverty
and I spoke about people in Durban who are sleeping on the streets. The
comprehension was that I was criticising government.

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Mandikuphendule, tata. Ndingqinelana nawe xa ndisithi
ilishwa liyakwazi kowalo. Ngathi kungakho umntu onokukunceda akutolikele
esi siXhosa sam. Mhlawumbi ndingakutolikela sakuphuma apha. [Kwahlekwa.]
[Kwaqhwatywa.] [Let me respond to you, hon member. I agree with you when I
say that ... I wish that somebody could translate for you. Perhaps I could
too but only after adjournment. [Laughter.] [Applause.]]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: That is very clever, by half, anyway. [Laughter.]

USOMLOMO: Uthi uvumelana nawe, baba.

Nksz N D NTWANAMBI: Mandiye phaya kutat’ uPheko. Andazi nokuba akahlali
apha eMzantsi Afrika na, akalolungu lale Palamente na. Zonke ezi zinto athi
mazenzeke, zezi zenzekayo kodwa mhlawumbi akakaqondi kakuhle. Enye
yeenjongo yokuba sibe ngamalungu emibutho epolitikayo kukufundisana
ngokwenzekayo apha ekhaya. Akakhange eve nge-APRM? Akayazi neNepad?

AMALUNGU ABEKEKILEYO: Hayi! [Kwahlekwa.]

Nksz N D NTWANAMBI: Akazazi ezi nkqubo? Ufun’ enye? Asizi kukwazi ukuba
sithi singekagqibi le, siye kuqala enye phaya. Asingabo oophembeshiya.
Andithi ebekhona ngoNovemba/Disemba kulo nyaka uphelileyo ngeliya xesha
bekupasiswa imithetho engeedayimani isithi makupolishwe aph’ ekhaya,
kurhwetyw’ aph’ ekhaya, siweze ke ngoku.

Ndilusizi ngoMnu Tetjeng. Xa ubhalelwa, ungathethi nto iphuma kuwe,
akukwazi kuthetha ngoba uyafunda. [Kwahlekwa.] Ngaphezulu, sisonke thina
Bantu balapha eMzantsi Afrika sikhatshwa nguMgaqo-siseko ekwakuvunyelwene
ngawo kule Palamente ngo-1996.

Enye yeengxaki zabo kukuba umntu abe nexhala lenkukhu kammelwane engazi
kuwafumana amathumbu ayo xa ixheliwe. Mabeme, aba zi kuwafumana amathumbu.
Aukho mntu uza kujonga iingxaki zethu. Ukuba abantu bacinga ukuba kukho
iingxaki kwi-ANC, azikho. Siyayiphinda loo nto. Eyokuba ngubani oza
kukhokela, ixhomekeke kumalungu namasebe eAfrican National Congress, hayi
kubantu abamamela unomathotholo. [Uwelewele.] [Kwaqhwatywa.] Asixelelwa
ngamajelo eendaba thina ukuba masihambe njani. Siyayazi indlela yethu.
Siyazazi ukuba siya phi sisazi nokuba siza kuthini sakufika apho siya
khona. Ukuba ngaba bekungekho kwiAfrican National Congress ngoku ukulawula,
ngelinjani eli lizwe? Kutheni ningenambulelo wokuba noko abantu behlangene
ngoku, akukho zigebenga? Ndiyabulela, Somlomo. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation
of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The SPEAKER: She says that she agrees with what you say, sir.]

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Let me answer hon Pheko. I am not sure whether he is or
is not a South African citizen as well as a member of this Parliament. All
the things he suggests should happen are in place as we speak. Educating
one another is another reason for our membership to political
organisations. Has he never heard about APRM? Does he not know about Nepad?

HON MEMBERS: No! [Laughter.]

Ms N D MTWANAMBI: Does he not know about these programmes? Does he want
another one? We cannot start another while we have not concluded the first
one. We are determined to finish what we have started off. The Diamonds
Amendment Bill was passed in November/December last year and it states that
diamond beneficiation should be done in South Africa and only the final
product should be exported.

It is always regretful when somebody writes a speech for somebody else, hon
Tetjeng, because you only read that which has been prepared for you,
thereby displaying no insight into the matter under discussion. [Laughter.]
The Constitution of South Africa, which was adopted by all South Africans
in 1996, guides us in all the decisions we take as the citizens of the
country.

Their other problem is that they concern themselves too much about the
neighbour’s issues while they know that they are not going to benefit at
all from that. Kindly keep away, for no one will take care of our business.
If people think the ANC has problems, then they are wrong, for it has none.
We have repeatedly said that. The question of succession is dependent on
the ANC members and branches and not on those who only depend on the radio
for information.  [Interjections.] [Applause.] The media does not dictate
to us. We have our way of doing things. We are well aware of our programme
of action, that is, where we are and what the next step shall be. What do
you think this country would be like if the ANC had not taken the reign of
power? Why are you not grateful that people are now united and no more
hostility exists among them? Thank you, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]]

Debate concluded.

The Speaker of the National Assembly adjourned the Joint Sitting at 12:49.


