---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 15 November 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2006-11-15
---

WEDNESDAY, 15 NOVEMBER 2006
                                    ____




              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:05.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): We are sorry for the
delay. We have to wait until the system is working. The system is
completely off. The system is working now. You may continue, sir.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mnr J W LE ROUX: Dankie Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag sal voorstel:

  Dat die Raad kennis neem -

        1) dat die swendelaar Tony Yengeni voorkeurbehandeling in die
           gevangenis ontvang;


     2) dat Suid-Afrika se beeld as regstaat deur die modder gesleep word;


     3) dat wetsgehoorsame burgers van die land die gebeure met minagting
        ervaar en dat regverdigheid voor die reg nie in Suid-Afrika bestaan
        nie; en


     4) dat die Regering onmiddellik hierdie skandalige gebeure moet
        veroordeel en regstel.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr J W LE ROUX: Thank you Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall
move on the next sitting day:

  That the Council notes -


  (1) that the fraudster Tony Yengeni is receiving preferential treatment in
        prison;


  (2) that South Africa’s image as a constitutional state is being dragged
        through the mire;


  (3) that law-abiding citizens of the country are perceiving these events
        with disdain and that equality before the law does not exist in
        South Africa; and


  (4) that the Government should immediately condemn and rectify these
        outrageous events.]


Mr M A MZIZI: Madam Deputy Chairperson, on the next sitting day of the
House, I shall move:

  That the Council –

  (1) expresses its shock that a boy, aged 14, was robbed and sodomised
        while walking home in Germiston on Saturday, 11 November;


  (2) especially notes that the incident occurred in an open field; and


  (3) urges the authorities to monitor such open spaces and fields on an
        ongoing basis to protect the public and to discourage undesirable
        elements from using such spaces as their base of operations.



                       FIREARMS CONTROL AMENDMENT BILL


                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I wish to welcome
the hon S Shabangu, Deputy Minister of Safety and Security, and I therefore
call upon the hon Deputy Minister to open the debate.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Deputy Chair, hon members,
chairperson of the Select Committee on Safety and Security and
Constitutional Affairs, I must say that the select committee made history
by having its final deliberations on this Bill in Parys, in the Free State.

One must congratulate the committee for the thorough manner in which they
have dealt with this Bill, by revisiting the submissions made to the
Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security during its public hearings on
the Bill, and by way of in-depth discussion of the Bill itself.

One of the touching submissions to the portfolio committee was that of the
Red Cross Hospital, which pointed out the tragic consequences of the
illegal use of firearms when children land in the crossfire. We all will
recall also the recent incident in which a small child was killed in an
armed robbery in Johannesburg where an illegal firearm was used.

The cornerstone of the Firearms Control Act of 2000 is responsible
ownership, which is directly linked to the competency to possess firearms.
One of the sources of illegal firearms is legal firearms that are obtained
by means of robberies, housebreakings and theft. I would like to emphasise
the need for the safekeeping of firearms by owners because that would
reduce the number of illegal firearms we find in our communities.

The amendment to the Act, in the Bill before this House, provides for new
categories of competency certificates in respect of muzzle-loaders,
professional hunters and collectors. Furthermore, the Bill provides that
the validity period of competency certificates will in future coincide with
the validity period of the particular licence.

The Bill furthermore provides for a renewal process for competency
certificates, which will be simplified but will still ensure that field
investigations are done when there is any indication in the application in
respect of a person’s unfitness to own a gun.

We realise how important the hunting industry is to the country in respect
of income generated through hunting by overseas hunters. On behalf of the
professional hunters a good case was made for creating a separate category
of licence for professional hunters.

At present professional hunters own their firearms as dedicated hunters.
They are employed for specific hunts by the hunter outfitters who organise
the hunt. In terms of the law, these hunters must be accompanied by a
professional hunter.

These outfitters expect the professional hunters in many cases to provide
the appropriate firearms. By registering firearms for professional hunting
purposes, the professional hunters will be empowered with regard to the
Firearms Control Act of 2000. This will now link up with the requirements
of provincial laws regulating firearms.

In respect of muzzle-loaders it needs to be pointed out that the provision
in the original Act that antique firearms, as well as replicas thereof,
were excluded from any regulation in terms of the Act, led to abuse, where
muzzle-loading firearms were sold at all sorts of shops, even gift shops,
and even children were allowed to buy these muzzle-loaders. The Bill now
provides that only a person in possession of a competency certificate will
be allowed to possess a muzzle-loading firearm, and that such firearms may
only be manufactured, imported, exported and traded in by licensed
manufacturers or dealers.

In respect of silencers, it was clear, even from the submissions of various
organisations, that there are thousands of silencers being used for hunting
purposes. Currently a silencer which can be used for assassination may be
manufactured, traded or possessed without any form of control. It is common
knowledge in many countries that silencers may only be possessed by a
licensed firearm owner.

The Bill now includes a silencer or sound moderator as a firearm part. This
will ensure that only a person who is a licensed firearm owner may possess
a silencer for that firearm. It may only be manufactured by licensed
manufacturers and may only be sold by a dealer.

In addition, it opens the avenue for the Minister of Safety and Security to
prohibit or restrict, by notice in the Gazette, the acquisition, disposal,
possession or use of silencers, if it is in the interests of public safety
or the maintenance of order.

We honestly cannot think of lawful reasons to possess a silencer for a
handgun. However, we do recognise that especially game farmers have a need
to use silencers in culling operations in order not to scare and traumatise
the animals unnecessarily. In terms of the Act, any notice in the Gazette
to further regulate silencers would require the approval of both Houses of
Parliament.

During the deliberations on the Bill a number of organisations were
concerned that orders made under the Domestic Violence Act are not taken
into account in respect of pending applications for firearm licences. The
Domestic Violence Act does provide that such an order must be sent by the
court to a police station of the complainant’s choice. However, the
committee undertook to strengthen the firearms control regulations in this
respect by ensuring that any such order would be related to pending
applications for firearm licences, to ensure that a licence is not issued
in any circumstances where there is a danger of it being abused.

The Bill is important in that it will simplify the administration and
further the implementation of the Firearms Control Act of 2000. The Bill
extends the validity period and therefore the sequence of renewal of
certain licences, such as firearms for business purposes and gunsmith
licences.

An aspect which complicated and slowed down the relicensing of firearms
licensed under the repealed Act, as well as the issuing of new licenses,
was the requirement of SA Safety and Security Education and Training
Authority certificates, which are issued by Sasseta, whilst the service
provider is accredited and registered as such.

The SAPS has already undertaken to allow applicants to lodge their
applications on the basis of the certificate by the service provider, in
anticipation of the Sasseta certificate, to allow the processing of the
licences without delay. The SAPS has also commenced accepting applications
for licences together with applications for competency certificates, in
order that these processes run concurrently. Steps are taken to ensure that
applicants are informed at the time of the application that they may follow
this route.

In respect of collectors, the Bill provides that prohibited and restricted
firearms - in other words, fully automatic and semi-automatic firearms -
must be made inoperable in order to be kept in a collection. This process
of making a firearm inoperable will mean that it will not be able to fire
ammunition. The process will be prescribed by regulations and will be
drafted through consultation with the relevant role-players in order that
it might be a reversible process not affecting the collectors’ value of the
firearm in question.

Chairperson, the SAPS is doing its utmost to locate and destroy illegal
firearms in South Africa through police operations. A series such as
Operation Rachel took place over a period of 12 years between Mozambique
and the South African police. During the last operation more than 5 tons of
weapons were destroyed by blowing them to pieces with explosives. Similar
operations were held in Lesotho and the Democratic Republic of Congo.

Deputy Chair, I move that this House adopt this report, and that the Bill
be adopted by the National Council of Provinces. I thank you. [Applause.]

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, my hon Deputy Minister, colleagues and
committee members, there are people who believe that there are always
plenty of reasons not to take a decision. They have plenty of reasons to
wait for more information or to wait for more options or even to wait for
more opinions.

Fortunately, the majority of us, as leaders, display a consistent bias for
action because of the call that was made by many of our South Africans that
there are many licensed and even unlicensed firearms in the country. We had
to take action. It is on this basis that, as a committee, we deemed it fit
and proper that, even when we were somewhere down there in the Free State,
we had to meet and discuss this Bill in the best interests of all South
Africans.

Having said this, I must thank the departments represented by Dr Jacobs. I
must thank Dr Jacobs for being such a humble person, dedicated and ready to
serve all South Africans. If we can have many Dr Jacobses in this country,
we will go very far. That is the reason this Bill is here before this
House. As the Deputy Minister has already stated, when Parliament passed
the principal Act - that is the Firearms Control Act of 2000 - we omitted
to include the muzzle-loader and even the silencer.

In this Bill we also define professional hunters, dispossessions, fit and
proper persons, etc. This is done to make sure that there is consistency
between this Bill and the principal Act. In that clause, we are just doing
what we call “a cleaning exercise.”

Allow me to quote one of my committee members on what he said during our
deliberations on this Bill down there in the Free State:


  The very licensed firearms that are possessed by many of us ... there is
  a possibility that one day they’ll end up being unlicensed firearms
  because they land in wrong hands.

None other than the hon Chris Ntuli said this when he was trying to bring
the message home to those who had not seen the light as yet. And I’m happy
that it really made sense because once he made that statement, the debate
subsided.

There are those who are saying that we are disarming law-abiding citizens
through this Bill. It is not true. What we are doing is to make sure that a
person owns one firearm for self-protection and the other one either for
professional hunting or sports purposes. Why do you need so many firearms
to protect yourself? It doesn’t make sense. If you want to own many
firearms as well, the law allows you to do that but you have to apply. And
if you are a fit and proper person, you’ll be licensed. But you have to
state reasons why you want many firearms rather than one.

There are those who want to have many firearms because they are private
hunters or collectors, etc. This is allowed by this Bill. There are those
who need these firearms for other reasons. As government, we would be
abdicating our duties to allow those kinds of things.

There are those who attach such sentiment to their firearms that they can’t
part with them. In this Bill, what we are saying is that you must follow
the normal process of making sure that your firearm is deactivated or
dismantled. You still own it because you are not going to use it to shoot
anything but you just want it for its sentimental value. That’s it. And
this Bill says, “Yes, you can do that.” There is no fuss about it. Who can
oppose those kinds of arrangements concerning this Bill?

Go nale bao ba rego mmušo wo ga o tšee magato go leka go fediša boganka le
bo kebekwa mo nageng. Bare go na le dibetša tše ntšhi tšeo e lego gore
mmušo ga o di hlokomele.Ke leka go fetiša gore ge batho ba lla bare go nale
dibetša tše ntšhi mo nageng, bjale ka mmušo re tšere magato a gore dibetša
tšeo di tloge matsogong a batho bao di fedišwe.Ka Moloakakanywa wo ke seo
se diregago. Sa go makatša ke gore ba lla gore dibetša ke tše ntši kua
matsogong a sego a swenela. Ge mmušo o di tšea ba a lla gape bare o seke wa
di tšea. Nare ba nyakang batho ba? (Translation of Sepedi paragraph
follows.)

[There are people who complain that the government is not taking any
measures against fraud and corruption in this country. They say that there
are a lot of illegal weapons that the government is not even doing anything
about. I am trying to ignore the fact that people are complaining about the
many illegal weapons, while the government has appealed to the people to
hand them over so that they can be destroyed as proposed by this Bill. What
is surprising is that people complain about the many illegal weapons and
they complain again when the government takes them away from them. What is
it exactly that these people want?]

As the ANC-led government, we can’t be like those bad managers who work
very long hours thinking that that is a brand of heroism, not realising
that their action is just a hallmark of incompetence. It is high time for
all of us to walk the talk. Those who live in glass houses must dress
properly.

A re tlogeleng dilo tša go se sepele ka tsela gore molao wo o phase ka gore
batho ba a o nyaka. Ga re ganetše motho go ba le sebetša, feela go nyakega
gore se be molaong, ke moka.

Mohlomphegi Motlatšatona o šetše a boletše taba tše ntšhi mo, nkase
boeletše.

Bjale wena ka bo wena, ke kabelo efe yeo o tlago go e raloka gore o thuše
setšhaba gore molao wo o phase naa? Batho ba le lebeletše. Ge o gana gore
molao wo o phase gora gore o nyaka gore dikebeka di tšwele pele ka go
šomiša dibetša tšeo di sego molaong. (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs
follows.)

[Let us abstain from unbecoming behaviour so that this Bill can be passed,
because it is what the people want. We do not have a problem with someone
owning a weapon as long as it is legal and that’s it.

The hon Deputy Minister has already mentioned a couple of things here and
there is no need for me to repeat them.
Now the question is: What role are you going to play to help get the Bill
passed? People are watching you. If you are against this Bill being passed,
it means you want the criminals to carry on using illegal weapons.]

Colleagues, once more, we have done it. I know it was not easy but we
managed. It is worth it. And I’m proud to say that, with this kind of team,
we can move mountains. Let me thank you for your contributions,
motivations, deliberations and dedication. We are what we are and where we
are because we first imagined it.

While it is good enough to leave footprints in the sands of time, it is
even more important to make sure that they are pointing in a commendable
direction.

With these words ...
... ke re Molaokakanywa wo ke wa rena. Ao phase, batho ba o emetše – ba a o
nyaka. Morena. [... I say that this is our Bill. It has to be passed. The
people are desperately waiting for it – they want it, sir.]

Mr D A WORTH: Deputy Chairperson, Deputy Minister and hon members, the
Firearms Control Amendment Bill makes some adjustments to the original
Firearms Control Act, which was introduced on 1 July 2004. The DA believes
that the control and responsible management of firearms is important in any
society. Legislation is, of course, necessary to control the use and
possession of firearms.

However, this Act targets legal firearm owners and does not address the
millions of illegal firearms that remain in the hands of the criminals. The
purpose of such legislation should be to control and manage legal firearms
and not to disarm law-abiding citizens. The weapons most commonly used in
robberies and cash heists are AK-47s, R4 and R5 assault rifles, which
ordinary members of the public do not possess or own. Meanwhile, the
robberies, rapes, murders and mayhem continue unabated.

According to the latest annual report of the South African Police Service
for 2005-06, 33 823 illegal firearms were surrendered in the extended
amnesty period. Some 42 095 legal firearms were handed in voluntarily to
the SAPS.

This, in effect, means that more legal firearms than illegal firearms were
recovered; most as a result of owners, especially pensioners, who could not
afford the cost of training and licensing that made keeping a firearm
unaffordable. Many applications for a licence are rejected with the
flimsiest of excuses, such as a lack of motivation. No compensation
whatsoever is paid in respect of guns handed in. The SAPS states that legal
firearms are often stolen from the public and then become illegal firearms,
used in murders and robberies.

However, the Auditor-General states on page 131 of the annual report of the
SAPS that some 2 297 firearms were either lost, stolen or robbed from the
police themselves during the year 2005-06 compared with 735 the previous
year – a 312% increase. The Auditor-General further states, and I quote:

  Firearm registers were not properly maintained and weapon inspections were
  not performed at least twice a year.

A gun-free South Africa would be ideal, but until we can deal effectively
with crime, our citizens must be able to protect themselves, their families
and their property. On the TV programme Special Assignment, a team with
hidden cameras were shown freely buying firearms, including a rapid firing
gun capable of firing shotgun cartridges, for a nominal price.

Whilst the rapists and murderers obtain weapons illegally, the average law-
abiding citizen is being systematically disarmed. Whilst there are
purportedly some 2,5 million firearm owners in South Africa, who together
own 3,6 million firearms, only 8 000 licences have been issued so far, with
1 000 applications being rejected. A further 20 000 licences are in the
process of being issued. It would appear that only a small proportion of
the original estimate of legal firearms in South Africa will eventually be
registered.

A credible alternative to the existing Act could have been an extensive
audit of all existing firearms, firearm licences and owners, instead of a
costly mass renewal process.

The Firearms Control Act in its original form has met with heavy criticism,
hence the ongoing amendments and tinkering with the Act to try and make it
implementable. Paranoia has instead taken hold in the government. First,
the commando units are disbanded and nothing effective is put in their
place. [Interjections.] Then law-abiding citizens are systematically
disarmed. Even old ... [Interjections.] ... firearms in museums are checked
to ensure whether they are disabled. Now the large security business in
South Africa is to be brought under the so-called “control by the state”,
and all of that because police are unable to do or incapable of doing their
duty.

While this Bill focuses on things like silencers and muzzle-loading
firearms, the robberies, rapes, murders and mayhem continue. The DA wishes
to thank all the police who are on duty during this festive season and
trust that it will be peaceful and that the rule of law and order will
prevail. However, the DA can neither support this legislation, nor the
amendment. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A T MANYOSI: Deputy Chairperson and hon members, last night one
interviewee on the fourth television channel, that is e.tv news, stated
that owning a firearm does not necessarily translate into having security.

In support of this critical Bill at this stage of the development of our
country, it is appropriate to borrow from the words of someone who once
said that courage is doing what you are scared to do. And one African-
American, the well-known Bill Cosby, confessed that he did not know the key
to success, but that the key to failure was to try to please everyone.
These were indeed encouraging statements.

On the other hand, one imperialist, Lord Randolph Churchill, Sir Winston
Churchill’s father, once declared unashamedly that the duty of an
opposition is to oppose and nothing else but to oppose. This, in our case,
presupposes that the opposition should adopt a policy that says, “Forward
never, backwards ever.”

The introduction and adoption of the Firearms Control Amendment Bill will
demonstrate that we are committed to achieving the demands of our people in
Kliptown, when they cried out in 1955 for a South Africa that would be at
peace with itself and contribute to a peaceful world order.

Today we are not only complying with what is required of us in section
12(1) of the Bill of Rights enshrined in our Constitution, which talks of
the “freedom and security of the person”, but we are also demonstrating, in
practical terms, our commitment to the international peace agreements and
protocols we have signed as a country in relation to international efforts
so as to rid the world of violence.

The timing has never been as appropriate as it is today, where again in
practical terms we set in motion actions to respond to the campaign for
activism against women and child abuse - precisely because most of the
incidents of abuse involve the use of firearms and include homicides where
families are maimed at times by their own fathers or mothers owning
licensed firearms.

But, it is equally our duty and responsibility to seek to allay the fears
of those doubting Thomases who have consciously or unconsciously formed an
opinion that the Bill will rather disadvantage than benefit the society,
without losing sight of the principle that the interests of the majority of
society override those of the minority.

Together with those who have concerns about the Bill, we share an
abhorrence of the violent past experience of gruesome murders and armed
robberies where uncontrolled and lethal firearms were used. Together we are
definitely committed to achieving peace and eliminating the fear and
insecurity engendered by the proliferation of unlicensed firearms and
therefore eliminating the need for unwarranted ownership of firearms in our
country.

What is of interest and importance in the Bill is that, inter alia, it does
not bar citizens from owning firearms for useful purposes. All amendments
are well thought through and any logistical hiccups that are experienced by
applicants for firearms licences today are far outweighed by the
substantial benefits that come with the Bill. One can mention but a few in
this regard, namely: firstly, the burden that has been borne by prosecution
with regard to the issuing of admission of guilt fines in respect of minor
offences that had a bearing on the licensed firearm owner’s fitness to
possess a firearm - that is in the current Act.

Secondly, the Bill proposes that where such an admission of guilt fine has
been issued and paid, a disqualification does not automatically follow
without due administrative procedure to the effect that the owner of the
firearm is deemed to be unfit to possess a licence for a firearm.
Therefore, there will be no wholesale disarming of people willy-nilly.

Thirdly, the Bill also proposes, to the relief of gun sports persons, to
remove the restriction on the number of shots that the semi-automatic
shotgun may fire in succession in respect of dedicated gun sports persons.

The period provided for this transitional process recognises the need to
allow everybody concerned to be on board and gives time for the department
to fasten its screws in terms of an effective and efficient delivery of
services regarding the applications and the auditing of firearms.

The Bill is a framework to further reinforce, as hon Worth has said, the
firearms amnesty strategy of the hon Minister that sought to induce those
who would be willing to surrender their unlicensed firearms and those who
aligned themselves with the notion, very much cherished by the ANC, of a
gun-free South Africa.

In terms of section 12(2), the court has the discretion to declare any
person who has been convicted of an offence contained in schedule 2 of the
Arms and Ammunition Act, Act 75 of 1969. Under the schedule, there are
contained offences for which convicted persons should be declared
automatically unfit to own firearms. These include the following:
terrorism, murder, rape, robbery, kidnapping and child stealing.

In conclusion, for the reasons above, we are all aware that, globally,
South Africa is recognised as having an extraordinary level of gun
violence. Police statistics tell us that between 1994 and 2003 we saw over
104 000 gun-related homicides and incidents where families have been maimed
by husbands at their own homes with firearms that were licensed, and almost
one million aggravated robberies reported to the police have been reflected
in our statistics.

It is therefore incumbent upon all of us to go to the ends of the earth to
ensure that we bring about an end to gun-related crime in South Africa.
This can never be pursued and achieved by an increase in firearms in the
possession of our citizens, but through fighting for peace and stability
where there will be no need to own a firearm. This is the route that the
majority of our people want us to take. The ANC supports the Bill. I thank
you.

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I also wish to recognise the Deputy Minister of
Safety and Security as well as the Deputy Minister of Sport and Recreation.

This Bill seeks to address the issue of firearm-free zones. The IFP is
concerned whether the SAPS will be in a position to implement this idea
speedily and successfully so that the Minister is able to prioritise the
declaration of all schools as firearm-free zones, as well as other
important places.
The other aspect that the Minister needs to clarify deals with the
regulations on competency certificates. When an applicant is declared
incompetent to possess a firearm by a police officer, that person may
appeal, but the question is: To whom does the applicant appeal? Does the
applicant appeal to the person who already declared him or her incompetent?
My opinion is that a court of law is the only body that may rule on such an
appeal and pronounce in the final instance regarding a person’s competence.


The IFP sincerely hopes that this Bill is not going to victimise law-
abiding citizens while allowing criminals a free hand. We hope that the
police will intensify their efforts to track down unlicensed firearms in
order to ensure that the number of illegal weapons in circulation is
curtailed.

Phini likaNgqongqoshe, ukusho kwethu kanjalo asisho ukuthi phela amaphoyisa
awanalo ikhono lokuwenza lo msebenzi. Sihlaba nje umkhosi ukuthi
akubonakale phela ukuthi amaphoyisa ayayithatha impi ayibhekise khona
impela kubashokobezi laba abahleli nezikhali bengaziwa. Sithi ofeleba laba
mababoshwe khona zizobuya nganeno izibhamu, ukuze sithi noma-ke
sesivuselela amalayisense ezethu izibhamu sazi ukuthi azikho izinduku
abazithukuse emqubeni ngoba phela ingase ikhohlisane ihlomile, sithi
izibhamu azisekho emuva kanti ziningi zingaphezu kwalezi esiziphethe.

Phini likaNgqongoqshe, ngo-2000 sayibuka le ngane ikhasa manje sekuhambe
kwaze kwafika namhlanje, sesiyayibona iyacathula. Ngakho-ke ithi i-IFP ake
siyiyeke le ngane, siyibone ikhula. Sithi lo mthetho asiwemukele ngoba
abaningi bazohlomula kuwo, ngakho siyawuxhasa. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Deputy Minister, by saying that, we don’t mean that the police  don’t  have
the skills to do this job. We  are  making  a  call  that  the  police  must
declare war against terrorists who are in possession of illegal arms.  We’re
saying that these people should  be  arrested  in  order  to  recover  those
firearms, so that when we renew our firearm licences we know that  they  are
not hiding anything because we may fool each other and think that there  are
no more illegal firearms and yet  there  are  so  many  of  them  that  they
outnumber the ones we have.

Deputy Minister, in 2000 we saw the start of this process and now it is
beginning to take shape. Therefore, the IFP feels that it must be observed
and we must see where it is heading. We accept this Bill because a lot of
people are going to benefit. We therefore support it.]

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Mevrou die Voorsitter, hierdie wetsontwerp is ’n
moedige poging van die departement om werklikwaar iets te bereik, maar dit
bereik egter nie die doel nie. Wat was die doel? Die doel is seer sekerlik
om onwettige wapens wat in sirkulasie is, te beperk. Maar wie word nou
geteiken? Dit is die wettige wapeneienaar en die gelisensieerde persoon wat
nou geteiken word. Volgens die oorspronklike voorstelle sou alle
vuurwapenlisensies geldig bly. Dit is nou verander. Dit beteken nou dat
bestaande lisensies teen Junie 2009 totaal en al hernieu word. Die teiken
is nou die wetsgehoorsame, gelisensieerde wapeneienaar en dit terwyl die
misdadiger steeds vrykom.

Die doel om die onwettige wapens te beperk kan mos nie bereik word deur die
wettige wapeneienaar sy eiendomsreg by wyse van onteiening te ontneem nie.
Artikel 25 van die Grondwet, wat eiendomsreg beskerm, kom nou heeltemal in
gedrang. Die vergoeding wat aan ’n eienaar betaal sal word, is nie goed
genoeg nie. As ek ‘n bepaalde sentimentele waarde het aan ’n vuurwapen of
bepaalde besitting, wat die rede ookal mag wees, moet ek dit nou ter wille
van die wetgewing tot niet maak? Of moet ek nou daarvan ontslae raak? Of
moet ek dit onaktief maak? Steeds kom ons nie uit by die doel nie, naamlik
om die misdadige element wat onwettige wapens het, te beperk.

Dit kom weer daarop neer: waarom moet ek my eiendomsreg opgee om onwettige
en misdadige elemente te probeer beperk, en wel deur die wettige eienaar se
eiendomsreg wat gewaarborg word deur die Grondwet, te beperk? Die VF-Plus
sal nie die wetgewing ondersteun nie. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans
speech follows.)

[Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Madam Chairperson, this Bill is a bold attempt by the
department to really achieve something, but it fails to achieve its
objective. What was the objective? The objective is surely to curb the
number of illegal firearms that are currently in circulation. But who is
now being targeted? It is the legal owner of firearms and the person with a
licence who are now being targeted. In the original representations, all
firearm licences were to remain valid. That has now changed. That means
that existing licences will now have to be renewed completely by June 2009.
The target now is the law-abiding, licensed firearm owner and that whilst
the criminal still gets off the hook.

The objective to curb illegal firearms can surely not be achieved by
stripping the legal gun owner of his right of ownership by dispossessing
him of it. Section 25 of the Constitution, which protects right of
ownership, is now being pushed aside. The compensation that will be paid to
the owner is not good enough. If a firearm or specific item is of special
sentimental value to me, for whatever reason, do I now have to destroy it
for the sake of the law? Or should I now get rid of it? Or should I disable
it? Still we have not achieved the objective, namely to curb the criminal
element that possesses illegal weapons.

Once again it amounts to the following: Why should I surrender my right of
ownership, in an effect to control illegal and criminal elements, and in
fact by curtailing the legal owner’s right to ownership, which is
guaranteed by the Constitution? The FF Plus will not support this
legislation. I thank you.]
Mnu Z C NTULI: Sihlalo, Phini likaNgqongqoshe Wezokuphepha Nezokuvikeleka,
Phini likaNgqongqoshe Wezemidlalo, bahlonishwa, bahlonishwakazi kanye
nezithunywa zoMnyango, ngizothanda ukuthi lokhu engikushoyo ngikubhekise
kuDarryl Worth. Kufanele azi ukuthi ukuba nesibhamu akusho ukuthi uma
isifikile i-AK ngeke ikuthinte. Kulokhu kwesibili kokuthi aqedelweni
amabutho amakhomando, ngithi, cha, sisezweni elikhululekile elinombutho
wezempi owodwa, okuyiwona ofanele uvikele leli lizwe. Futhi-ke sinombutho
wamaphoyisa owodwa, ngeke kulunge ukuthi sibe nemibutho eminingi
eyehlukene, esingayazi ukuthi iphethwe ubani.

Baba uMzizi, maqondana nendaba yakho yokuthi isitifiketi esibizwa nge-
competency certificate kufanele sitholakale ezinkantolo, phela Mzizi
siwenza lo mthetho ngenhloso yokuthi amaphoyisa ababambe ngawo umthetho
ukuze baye kovela enkantolo. Ngeke nje imantshi ihambe ithi iyobheka lezo
zitifiketi. Kufanele umuntu aze alethwe enkantolo kuqala ngaphambi kokuba
imantshi isho-ke ukuthi ngabe leyo competency certificate iyiyona yini noma
ibuze ukuthi iphi.

Maqondana nelungu elimele i-FF Plus, elithe libona ukuthi kuliwa nabantu
abanezibhamu ezisemthethweni, phela yikhona lapha okufanele siqale khona.
Njengoba siqala lapha nje sinciphisa izibhamu, kufuneka khona ukuthi siqale
kulezi ezisemthethweni, njengoba kade ngilokhu ngisho ukuthi isibhamu
siqala sisemthethweni kodwa sigcine sesingekho emthethweni.

Lapha eNingizimu Afrika ama-80% obugebengu kuthiwa benzeka phakathi
kwabantu abazanayo, ngokwalokho okuthiwa yi-recidivism. Kusho ukuthi
empeleni kulukhuni ukuthi amaphoyisa akwazi ukungena phakathi kwemizi
yethu, njengoba sithi kwenzeka phakathi kwabantu abazanayo nje, phakathi
kwabantu abathandanayo, phakathi kwabantu abayizihlobo zegazi kuphinde
kwenzeke naphakathi kwabantu abangomakhelwane.

Okunzima kakhulu-ke lapha eNingizimu Afrika ukuthi abantu abaphethe
izibhamu baningi ngaphezu kwamaphoyisa asemthethweni agada isizwe
saseNingizimu Afrika. Siyazi ukuthi kukhona abantu abayi-800 000 abasebenza
ezinkampanini zonogada ezizimele. Kulezi zi-800 000, onogada abayi-300 000
bahlomile, baphethe izibhamu. Kubuye kube khona lezi ezingekho emthethweni,
kubuye kube nezinkampani ezingama-977 ezinezimvume zokuphatha izibhamu.

Uyabona-ke lapha Sihlalo ukuthi uma laba bengase behlangane, amaphoyisa
awalutho lapho; bangavele bawamboze nje. Uma ungase uthathe zonke lezi
zibhamu ezisemthethweni uzihlanganise, uyabona ukuthi isimo sibi kanjani?
Ngakho-ke ngithi lesi simo kufanele sisifakele izibuko ngoba kusobala
ukuthi sisadlala ngegeja kuziliwe.

Yingakho-ke thina njengohulumeni oholwa uKhongolose sithi makube nemigomo
yokulawula ukuphathwa kwezibhamu. Siyazi ukuthi kunezinhlangano eziningi
ezenze izethulo ngaphambi kwekomidi lasePhalamende. Indlela lezi zethulo
ebezihlukene ngayo ubungathi impumalanga nentshonalanga. Abanye babethi
nje, cha, izibhamu aziphele nya; abanye bethi, hhayi, izibhamu siyazifuna,
njengoba besho nje abe-DA nabe-FF Plus bethi kufuneka bathole izibhamu zibe
ziningi. Kodwa-ke thina njengohulumeni oholwa uKhongolose sibone kungcono
ukuthi sibahlangabeze, sibasingathe nhlangothi zonke.

Esikuqaphelayo ukuthi ziningi izigameko ezenzekayo emiphakathini yakithi
bese kutholakala ukuthi kusetshenziswe izibhamu. Umphakathi uhlale wethuka
izanya ngenxa yalezi zibhamu ezixhaphake kuhle kwamakhowe kade kuduma
izulu. Ngakho-ke, Phini likaNgqongqoshe, sizishayela izandla lesi senzo
sokuchibiyela lo Mthetho wokuphathwa kwezibhamu, ngoba ngaphandle kwawo,
kungaba ikwampunzi edla emini, kwenziwe noma ikanjani.

Phela kufanele sikhumbule ukuthi kungani i-DA ne-FF Plus bekhihla
esikaNandi ngokuchitshiyelwa kwalo Mthetho. Phela onkabi basadla ngoludala.
Emiqondweni yabo, babona abamhlophe bephucwa umbuso wabo wokuba nezibhamu
eziningi ngokuthanda kwabo. Ababoni ukuthi sizama ukusiza bona uqobo lwabo.
Siyazi ukuthi kuyilungelo lomuntu ukuthi azivikele. Kepha kunomehluko uma
umuntu uma esekwenza lokho ngobugwala, ngenxa yokuthi kukhona abantu
abagcina sebezilimaza ngoba bethi bayazivikela.

Sihlalo, kunendaba engayixoxelwa ubaba ukuthi kwakunomuntu owayenovalo
kakhulu, owayehlale njalo esaba. Kuthiwa wayethi uma elala abeke ucelemba
lapha eduze kwakhe. Sekuthi-ke ngelinye ilanga elele aphuphe sengathi
sekungene isigebengu. Ngayo leyo nkathi wabe emise amadolo. Usethi uma
ephaphama abone sengathi kumi umuntu phambi kwakhe. Wavele wadonsa ucelemba
ngesandla washaya kwakanye edolweni. [Ubuwelewele.]

Ngizothanda futhi ukuyazisa i-DA ne-FF Plus ukuthi umthetho awubhekisiwe
kubona kodwa ubhekiswe kubantu baseNingizimu Afrika. Ake ucabange nje
ukuthi kungaba njani uma kungase kube uthelawayeka kithi sonke, kuthiwe nje
sonke asiziphathe izibhamu, akukho mthetho okhona. Kunganjani-ke lapho
ukuthi sibonakale sonke sesifika lapha emsebenzini, wonke umuntu esekhipha
isibhamu sakhe kuthiwe asibekwe laphaya? Singaba nayo indawo yokuzibeka?
Ake sicabange nje ukuthi singaba nayo yini indawo yokuzibeka izibhamu uma
kuthiwa sonke sifike sihlomile. Kungaba yinkinga.

Kodwa-ke sengiya ngasekugcineni, ngithi izigebengu uma zike zakubona
uphethe isibhamu, ikakhulukazi isibhamu sohlobo oluthile okubonakalayo
ukuthi sinamandla, azilali ngoba zihlale zicabanga ukuthi zizosithola
kanjani. Thina nje esaziyo futhi esihlala emalokishini, siyazi ukuthi uma
beke basibona nje abafana ukuthi, “Hheyi uphethe uhlobo olunje!” abalali
bebonisana ngokuthi “Sizosithola kanjani isibhamu sikasibanibani?” Uma-ke
sebesithatha, abasithathi kahle. Baqala ngokudubula ngoba basuke bazi
ukuthi unaso. Siphenduka kanjalo isibhamu leso okuthiwa sisemthethweni bese
siba ngesingekho emthethweni.

Omunye umyalelo engingawusho lapha ukuthi, njengabantu baseNingizimu
Afrika, ake siyekeni ukuthengela izingane amathoyisi ayizibhamu, ngoba
kusho ukuthi izingane zethu sizifundisa zincane ukuthi zifike lapha nje
zifikele udlame. Zikhula nje zihlale zicabanga ukuthi: Siyothengwa nini
isibhamu? Lokho kudalwa yile ndaba yethu yokujabulela ukuthi sinezibhamu
ezithile zohlobo oluthile esihlale sinazo emakhaya. Sizokhulisa izingane
zethu ngendlela enjani? Ngakho-ke siyanicela ukuthi masehleleni ngenzansi.

Sengigcina-ke, ngithi-ke mina uSomqulu Wenkululeko  uthi,  “There  shall  be
peace   and   comfort.”   Ngakho-ke,   thina   siyi-ANC,   sizowesekela   lo
Mthethosivivinywa. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Mr Z C NTULI: Chairperson, Deputy Minister of Safety and  Security,  Deputy
Minister of Sport and Recreation, honourable members and delegates from  the
department, I would like to direct my comments  to  Darryl  Worth.  He  must
know that having a firearm does not mean that  an  AK-47  won’t  shoot  you.
With regard to why  the  commandos  were  disbanded,  I  say  we  are  in  a
democratic country with one Defence Force, whose duty it is to protect  this
country. We also have one Police Service. We can’t have  different  security
forces, and not even know who is in charge of them.

Mr Mzizi, as far as your issue of the competency certificate  is  concerned,
it should be issued in court. We are making this legislation, Mr  Mzizi,  so
that the police will use it to arrest criminals and bring them to  court.  A
magistrate won’t go there to check those  certificates.  A  person  must  be
brought to court before the  magistrate  can  say  whether  that  competency
certificate is real, or ask for its whereabouts.

Regarding the member representing the FF Plus who said that we are  fighting
people who have legal firearms, I believe that is where we should start.  As
we are starting by reducing the number of guns owned,  we  must  start  with
those that are legal. I have repeatedly said that firearms start  out  being
legal and end up being illegal.

With regard to recidivism, in South Africa 80% of crime takes place  between
people who know each other. That means that it is  very  difficult  for  the
police to enter our homes as we are saying that crimes  take  place  between
people who know each other: between lovers,  between  blood  relatives,  and
also between neighbours.

What is difficult here in South Africa is that  the  people  who  have  guns
outnumber the police who are safeguarding the nation  of  South  Africa.  We
know that there are 800 000 people working for private  security  companies.
Of this 800 000, 300 000  are  armed  security  guards.  They  are  carrying
firearms. There are also  those  that  are  not  legal  and  there  are  977
companies that have licences for carrying firearms.

You see, Chairperson, if these people could come together, the police  would
be nowhere. They could just finish off the police. If you combine all  these
legal firearms, you will understand how bad  the  situation  is.  Therefore,
this situation needs to be addressed because it’s clear that we are  playing
with fire.

That is why, as the ANC-led government, we say that there must  be  policies
which will control firearms. We know that there are many organisations  that
made submissions before the portfolio committee. Some of  these  submissions
were as different from each other as the east is from the  west.  Some  were
saying that firearms must be totally abolished and others were  saying  they
want them, as the DA and FF Plus, for  example,  say  that  they  need  more
guns. But we, as the ANC-led government, deemed it fit to meet them  halfway
and accommodate them.

What we have noticed is that there  are  many  incidents  happening  in  our
communities in which firearms are used. The community is  always  frightened
because of  these  firearms  that  are  abundant,  like  mushrooms  after  a
thunderstorm. Therefore, Deputy Minister, we commend this amendment of  this
Bill, because without it they will do as they wish.

We must remember why the DA and FF Plus are wailing about the  amendment  of
this Bill. They are living in the past. In their minds they  see  whites  as
being deprived of their freedom to have as many  guns  as  they  like.  They
don’t understand that we are trying to help them. We know  that  it  is  the
right of any individual to protect himself. But there  is  a  difference  if
that person is doing that out of fear, because there  are  some  people  who
end up injuring themselves, claiming that they are defending themselves.

Chairperson, I was told a story by my  father  about  a  man  who  was  very
nervous and always afraid. They say that when he went  to  sleep,  he  would
always put a bush knife next to him. One day, he dreamt  that  there  was  a
criminal inside his house. At that moment, he was  sleeping  and  his  knees
were up. When he woke up he saw a man standing in front  of  him.   He  took
the bush knife and cut himself on the knee. [Interjections.]

I would also like to inform the  DA  and  FF  Plus  that  this  Act  is  not
directed at them but to all citizens of South Africa. Just  imagine  how  it
would be if it could be an open thing for anyone to carry a firearm  without
any law. How would it be if everyone came to work with  their  gun  and  was
instructed to take it out and put it there? Would we have a  place  to  keep
them? Let us think about whether we would have a place to keep our  firearms
if we were allowed to come here armed. That would be a problem.

In conclusion, if criminals see  you  carrying  a  firearm,  particularly  a
certain type of firearm that is  regarded  as  powerful,  they  don’t  sleep
because they are contemplating how they are going to steal it. We  who  stay
in the townships know that if the boys see that you are carrying  this  type
of firearm, they do not sleep because they are  trying  to  figure  out  how
they are going to get it. When they take it,  they  don’t  take  it  nicely.
They start by shooting you because they know that you have  it.  That  legal
firearm then becomes an illegal firearm.

The other message that I would like to pass on is that, as people  of  South
Africa, let us stop  buying  toy  guns  for  our  children  because  we  are
teaching them violence while they are still young.  They  grow  up  thinking
about when they are going to buy guns. This is as a  result  of  praising  a
certain type of a gun that we have at home. How are we going  to  raise  our
children? We therefore request you to stop it. Finally,  I  am  saying  that
the Freedom Charter  proclaims  that  there  shall  be  comfort  and  peace.
Therefore we, as the ANC, support this Bill. ]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Deputy Chairperson, may I take
this opportunity to thank the select committee and the members who have
supported this Bill and ensured that it comes through to this House. I
would also like to thank Kgoshi Mokoena for the stewardship he has shown as
he drove the process in ensuring that the difficulties and the various
submissions which came to the committee were handled in a way that is
responsible and takes this country forward.

I just want to say that we are miles ahead in creating a free and peaceful
South Africa through the Firearms Control Amendment Bill today.

In response to hon Worth, may I indicate to you with regard to commandos
that we cannot continue living in the past. We have to move on. We are
living in a time when we are transforming this country and the majority of
commandos have accepted the process of being reintegrated into reservist
units. So, you have to bear in mind that you might be the only one who is
left behind. So, be careful and be cautioned that as we write our history
you are not left behind. But, you can also say to yourself and your future
generation that you contributed to the transformation of this country. This
is an opportunity. So, don’t lose this opportunity given to you at this
moment.

The Auditor-General has indicated the number of firearms which went missing
from SAPS. But that’s precisely what this Bill intends to do because the
past dispensation never ever made an effort to follow up on what happened
to those firearms. That’s exactly what we are doing. We want to take stock
and ensure that if any individual possesses a firearm which doesn’t belong
to him or her, we take necessary measures. So, that’s the purpose of this
Bill and therefore the issue of firearms lost by our members is part of the
process of retrieving them in a way that ensures that we are responsible.
I must also say that with regard to one of the issues you are talking about
- that we are trying to promote illegal firearms – I don’t know how you can
regulate illegal firearms. If you can indicate a way we can retrieve
illegal firearms, then you might be having a clue how many illegal firearms
we have in this country. We will welcome that submission. We would really
appreciate your contribution and input in making sure that we retrieve any
other arms, including AK-47s and firearms lost to responsible citizens. If
you can tell us where to get them, we would appreciate that information.

So, help us in making sure that we can find any illegal firearms in this
country because the purpose of making sure that we legalise and request
responsible South African citizens to come forward and declare that they’ve
got firearms is precisely to ensure that we take stock as a country and we
know who has a firearm and who doesn’t. But not only that – we don’t end
there. We also say that we want to know whether those individuals are still
fit to possess firearms. We lose our minds and focus because of various
reasons in the processes of our lives. On that basis, this legislation says
that we must come back and prove to the law that we are not only
responsible citizens still, but that we are also fit to carry firearm
licences, hon Worth. That’s the reason we want every responsible South
African to have his or her licensed firearm reviewed in a particular
period.

I must also indicate the issue of us dealing with silencers and muzzlers.
This is precisely to ensure that the kinds of people who have those
instruments are going to utilise them responsibly. But you can’t exercise
responsibility when you don’t know who has what and who doesn’t have what
and where to find what. So, the process intends to formalise and regulate
an environment of firearms for a better South Africa.

To the hon Van Heerden, may I say that the intention of this Bill is to
regulate and ensure that there is no proliferation of arms in our country.
I think peace-loving South Africans would prefer an ideal South Africa
where we would talk of a gun-free South Africa – that’s what we should be
striving for and not individuals who sleep with guns under their pillows
because they don’t understand what’s going on in this country. We all wish
to sleep with our windows open because we want to sleep peacefully at night
without fear. That’s the intention of this Bill.

Baba uMzizi, indeed we are talking to the Department of Education with
regard to an Act by which they have declared gun-free or weapon-free zones,
or drug-free zones, precisely to ensure that our schools are able to have
free learning and that our kids are not to be intimidated by any individual
who brings any form of arms or weapon into the schools. But as Safety and
Security, currently we are continuously engaging in finding a way of
addressing the violence which has engulfed our schools in such a way that
our kids can learn in a better environment. It’s one of the issues we are
dealing with. We hope we will continuously address that until we are
successful.

May I take this opportunity to say that this Bill calls upon all
responsible South Africans to be responsible owners of guns. With regard to
those who are unfit, as the hon Ntuli indicated, it’s not for the Minister
to appeal for a person who has been arrested and declared by the court not
to be free to be given a gun again. We know the implications of that. If
any individual wants to go through the legal processes of this country,
they will have to deal with that particular aspect in a way that will
ensure that the Department of Safety and Security, as is happening
currently, is not going to be litigated against because they acted
irresponsibly.

I agree with you that our police will have to make sure that the
implementation of this Bill becomes a success. That’s part of the process
of making sure that we improve our capacity and that we also recruit more
police officers to join the force because we believe that it’s very
important for our members to be disciplined. We also need to make sure that
the current situation is such that they are able to execute their
responsibilities in a way that meets the demands and the needs of our
communities.

Lastly, may I take this opportunity again to thank the select committee
through the leadership, as I’ve indicated, of Kgoshi Mokoena for the
humbleness and tolerance they’ve shown to the departmental team led by
Commissioner Jacobs. We hope that this kind of relationship, the guidance
and sharing of experiences and making sure that we improve whatever areas
are not very strong, continues between the team and our department because
this is the only way which will take South Africa forward and make sure
that we have a better South Africa and a country which can be loved by
every South African. Through such efforts, we will also continue to make
sure that South Africa remains a tourist destination, as it is right now.

We are proud of the work done by the committee and the members who have
supported us throughout in this particular fashion. This will make our
democracy much stronger and mature in a way that is acceptable globally.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I shall now put the
question. The question is that the Bill, subject to the proposed
amendments, be agreed to. In accordance with Rule 63, I shall first allow
political parties the opportunity to make their declarations of vote if
they so wish. There is none. We shall now proceed to the voting on the
question. Those in favour will say ``Aye’’.

HON MEMBERS: Aye

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Those against will
say ``No’’.

HON MEMBERS: No.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I think the ayes
have it. The majority of members have voted in favour. I therefore declare
the Bill, subject to the proposed amendments, agreed to in terms on section
75 of the Constitution.

Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.


         SOUTH AFRICAN INSTITUTE FOR DRUG-FREE SPORT AMENDMENT BILL


                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, I am informed that the
Deputy Minister of Sport and Recreation, the hon Gert Oosthuizen is with us
this afternoon. He was originally not scheduled to speak but, after
consultation, we felt that before hon Tlhagale presents a statement on
behalf of the committee, the Deputy Minister must be given an opportunity
to speak on the thrust of the Bill. I now hand over to you, Deputy
Minister.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, hon members of
the House, thank you so much. This is due to some miscommunication on the
part of my parliamentary officer. We prepared a speech because the South
African Institute for Drug-Free Sport Amendment Bill comes at a very
important time, and this why we would like to make an input in this regard.
It is a time in which there is a global fight against doping in sport, a
fight aimed at promoting the values of fair play and honesty in sport. Let
me say these are values we as government fully subscribe to.

About four months ago, this House passed a resolution for our country to
ratify the International Convention Against Doping in Sport. This Unesco-
driven initiative is based on the World Anti-Doping Code, which was drafted
by the World Anti-Doping Agency, called Wada.

One of the principal functions of the Bill before the House is to align the
existing Act with the provisions of the World Anti-Doping Code and the
international standards. Let me point out that noncompliance would result
in South Africa being refused participation in international sport,
including the Olympic and Paralympic Games.

I know of no South African who would like this to happen, yet we read and
hear on a regular basis how some of the top sportspeople in the world, some
of them world record holders, are tested positive for using performance-
enhancing substances.

Recently, we heard of two top cricket bowlers from Pakistan, Mr Akhtar and
Mr Asif, who tested positive. This is sad, because doping undermines the
spirit of fair play and discipline in sport.

Our own country has not escaped the scourge of doping. We read of our own
heroes, like Ezekiel Sepeng, who have fallen foul of doping offences. A few
weeks ago the leading article on the front page of the Rapport newspaper on
Sunday morning read: “Skolesportskande”, referring to doping amongst
schoolboy rugby players.

The article described how parents buy the banned substances for their
children so that they can be selected for the provincial schools teams with
the hope of getting a contract with one of the senior provincial unions.
Carte Blanche did an exposé on their programme on 24 September this year in
which young people, many of them still at school, admitted to using
steroids and revealed that the practice was widespread in some of our
schools.

One does not need to be a rocket scientist to determine the reason why top
sportspeople resort to doping, which is nothing but cheating to achieve
success – and that is the greed for money that drives them! What is
shocking is that this greed for money leads people to totally disregard the
long-term consequences of such behaviour.
We all have a responsibility to ensure that the true values and virtues of
sport are protected and preserved. I am sure I do not have to stand here
today to expound on the good of sport. Unfortunately, there is also the
ugly side of sport and this Bill aims to reinforce our commitment to clean
up sport and to ensure fair play.

The SA Institute for Drug-Free Sport, Saids, a public entity associated
with the Department of Sport and Recreation of South Africa, will have to
be - and I say this with the full knowledge that it is us that will have to
find the money - sufficiently funded to redouble their efforts aimed at
counteracting this unwelcome tendency of doping in our sport. The testing
programme of Saids, and their anti-doping advocacy and education campaigns
will have to be intensified to achieve the required success.

It is, furthermore, our opinion that doping in sport is not dissimilar to
recreational substance abuse. Our campaigns in sport to fight the scourge
of doping can also serve to address drug abuse in our society. In this
campaign, we should use our sports heroes and heroines as role models. They
must not only be vocal on the topic of anti-doping and drug abuse, they
should be the heroes, the champions who set the example. I know that we in
South Africa can rely on them to assist us in this drive against doping and
any drug abuse.

If and when we identify the real culprits of doping in sport, it is upon us
to act decisively against them. It is here where we call on the federations
to comply with the Act, because, regarding the failure of the federations
to comply with the Act, section 17A of Act 14 of 1997 makes provision for
investigation and dealing with national sport federations that do not
comply.

The section is very clear, and I will mention the actions that can be taken
by the Department of Sport and Recreation. They are: withdrawal of
government funding; banning of such federations from administrating sport;
and the recommendation that Sascoc withholds the awarding of national
colours to members of the federation.

While the Act provides for this, I am convinced that it will never be
necessary to use it because our federations have always supported measures
aimed at promoting the values of fair play. We therefore thank the
federations in advance for their unqualified support in this regard.

South Africa continues to play a central role in the fight against doping
in sport internationally and on the African continent. We represent Africa
on both the executive and foundation boards of the World Anti-Doping
Agency, of which Minister Stofile, the Minister of Sport and Recreation, is
a member. In fact, the Minister is not here today precisely because he is
busy with a meeting in Canada, in Montreal. We also host the African
regional office of the World Anti-Doping Agency in Cape Town. Let me say
that that is something we are very proud of.

While it is important to be vigilant about doping practices in sport, it is
equally important that we, on the other hand, increase our support to
athletes to enable them to perform to the best of their ability without
using drugs. Many of our athletes are currently in the national academy
programme funded by government and co-ordinated by the SA Sports
Confederation and Olympic Committee, where they attend camps in preparation
for the All-Africa Games in 2007 and the Beijing Olympic Games in 2008.

At these camps the athletes and coaches receive the necessary scientific
and medical support that will help them achieve their optimum potential.
Our ultimate objective is to place our athletes and teams in residential
long-term athlete development programmes in cycles of four years.

To this end, we hope and trust that it will be within our means as
government to shortly announce an athletes’ assistance programme where our
top athletes as well as those with the best potential will be financially
supported on a monthly basis.

Chairperson, the intention of government by introducing this Bill is clear:
we want our athletes to excel in a doping-free environment. We therefore
ask the support of this august House in achieving this objective. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr O J TLHAGALE: Hon Chairperson, hon members of the House, this Bill seeks
to amend the South African Institute for Drug-Free Sport Act of 1997 by
deleting certain definitions, and inserting, amending and substituting
others. It also makes provision for the appointment of staff of the
institute by the Minister and aligns the Act with the Public Finance
Management Act.

The Bill also establishes a centralised doping control programme, which may
subject an athlete to testing with or without advance notice and both in or
out of competition.

Provision is also made for the entry of the name of an athlete found guilty
of an anti-doping violation in the doping register as well as the
disclosure of certain information to sports administration bodies, the
public, the SA Police Service and the South African customs services.

The Bill also makes provision for the establishment of an independent
board, which shall be known as the anti-doping appeal board. It shall
consist of a panel of nine persons possessing special knowledge and
expertise relevant to doping from which at least three members shall be
appointed by the Minister on the recommendation of the institute and the SA
Sports Confederation and Olympic Committee to constitute an appeal tribunal
to hear and decide upon appeals against decisions made in terms of Article
13 of the code, where appropriate. It also provides for punitive measures
against national sports federations that do not comply with regulations
contained in this Act.

In addition, by means of this Bill, our athletes will be alerted beforehand
so that they are not caught with their pants down in some of the plots
involving the use of drugs by unscrupulous persons who are in competition
with them.

In conclusion, I wish to thank the committee, and the chairperson in
particular, for their co-operation and friendly disposition during the
deliberations. I move that the House accepts this Bill. Thank you.

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Order! That concludes the debate. I
shall now put the question. The question is that the Bill, subject to
proposed amendments, be agreed to.

In accordance with Rule 63, I shall first allow political parties the
opportunity to make their declarations of vote if they so wish. We shall
now proceed to the voting. Those in favour say “Aye.”

HON MEMBERS: Aye!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Those against say “No.” [Inaudible.]

I think the ayes have it. The majority of the members have voted in favour.
I therefore declare the Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in
terms of section 75 of the Constitution. [Applause.]

Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.

                       POSTAL SERVICES AMENDMENT BILL

                 (Consideration of Bill and Report thereon)

Ms M P THEMBA: House Chairperson, hon members, this Bill seeks to amend the
Postal Services Act of 1998, in order to bring it in line with the
Electronic Communications Act of 2005 and the Independent Communications
Authority Act of 2000. In doing this, it inserts new definitions, amends
certain definitions and provides for ministerial powers in the issuing of
policy directives and the issuing of licences.

There has emerged some discomfort from some quarters about clause 3 of the
Bill, which seeks to provide ministerial powers to make policies for the
information and communications technology sector in which the postal
industry is now located. It is, however, the view of the committee that the
postal industry is located within the ICT sector, for which the Minister
makes policies in any case.

I must point out that, during the passage of the Electronic Communications
Act last year, no one opposed the integration of the postal sector into the
ICT sector. Everyone agreed that, with the fast pace of technological
development, a large part of the Post Office business has become electronic
and this move is unavoidable.

Clause 4 of the Bill aligns the provisions of postal services with the rest
of the information and communication technology sector. It further provides
for the inclusion of and access to other nonpostal but essential services,
under the definition of universal postal services.

Clause 5 provides for the Independent Communications Authority of South
Africa, Icasa, to accept and consider applications for new licences in the
reserved area in accordance with policy directives issued by the Minister.
The clause also empowers the Minister with the authority to extend the
exclusivity period of the SA Post Office, Sapo, to ensure universal access
to postal services, especially in the underresourced areas.

Clause 6 provides for Icasa to determine the fees and charges payable in
respect of the provision of postal services by Sapo, whilst simultaneously
ensuring that it is subject to approval by the Minister.

It is worth mentioning that the opposition that has been raised against the
provisions of this amending Bill are ideological. They are premised on the
notion of less government intervention and bigger market control, which we
reject with contempt.

It will be a dereliction of duty on the part of the elected democratic
government to subsume the interests and aspirations of our people to
profiteering in the mix of huge disparities between the developed and
underdeveloped sections of our communities.

I therefore recommend the passage of this Bill without any amendments. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): That concludes the debate. I shall
now put the question. The question is that the Bill be agreed to. In
accordance with Rule 63 I shall first allow political parties the
opportunity to make their declarations of vote if they so wish.

Declaration of vote:

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Chair, only last year the regulation of postal services
was given to the electronic communications regulator, Icasa, on the
argument that it will increasingly operate electronically.

This year, however, the Minister decided to take back the power to decide
when the reserved nonelectronic services will be opened up to competition.
She may also now review the Post Office’s exclusivity every five years,
instead of every three years.

It is clear that no lessons have been learned from Telkom’s exclusivity
period. The DA opposes the Bill.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): The declaration is noted, hon
members. Is there any further declaration of vote? None. In the absence of
further declarations, we shall then proceed to the voting. Those in favour
say “Aye”.

HON MEMBERS: Aye.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Those against say “No”. I think the
ayes have it. The majority of members have voted in favour. I therefore
declare the Bill agreed to in terms of section 75 of the Constitution.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.




              MEASUREMENT UNITS AND MEASUREMENT STANDARDS BILL


                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

  ACCREDITATION FOR CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT, CALIBRATION AND GOOD LABORATORY
                                PRACTICE BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr D D GAMEDE: Chairperson, as read, there are two Bills. So they are twins
and we’ll deal with them in that fashion.

The first one, as introduced in 2006, aims to provide for the use of
measuring units of the International System of Units and certain other
measuring units. It seeks to provide for the designation of national
measurement units and standards and to provide for the keeping and
maintenance of national measurement standards and units.

In addition to that, it provides for the establishment and functions of the
Metrology Institute, regulates the repeal of certain laws, and provides for
matters connected therewith.

The second Bill, which is the Accreditation for Conformity Assessment,
Calibration and Good Laboratory Practice Bill, focuses on providing for an
internationally recognised and effective accreditation and monitoring
system for South Africa by establishing the South African National
Accreditation System, Sanas, as a juristic person; and recognising Sanas as
the only accreditation body for the Republic of South Africa.

The Bill promotes accreditation as a means of facilitating international
trade and enhancing South Africa’s economic performance and transformation.
It also promotes the competence and equivalence of accredited bodies and of
facilities which comply with good laboratory practice.

As a committee, we therefore move that these Bills be supported. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): That concludes the debate. I shall
now put the question in respect of the fourth order. The question is that
the Bill be agreed to.

In accordance with Rule 63, I shall first allow political parties the
opportunity to make their declarations of vote if they so wish. We shall
now proceed to the voting. Those in favour will say “Aye”.

HON MEMBERS: Aye.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Those against will say “No”. The
Bill has been agreed to unanimously by the whole House. I therefore declare
it, in terms of section 75 of the Constitution, agreed to. [Applause.]

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I shall now put the question in
respect of the fifth order. The question is that the Bill be agreed to. In
accordance with Rule 63, I shall first allow political parties the
opportunity to make their declarations of vote if they so wish. Any
declarations of vote? None. In the absence of any, we shall now proceed to
the voting.

Those in favour say “Aye”.

HON MEMBERS: Aye.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Those against say “No”. The ayes
have it and the majority of members have voted in favour. I therefore
declare the Bill agreed to in terms of section 75 of the Constitution.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS
 - FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE EUROPEAN FREE TRADE ASSOCIATION AND THE
                    SOUTHERN AFRICAN CUSTOMS UNION (SACU)

Ms M P THEMBA: House Chairperson, hon members, it is a source of pride that
I’m able to stand here today to witness the final step in the South African
process of the parliamentary ratification of the negotiated free trade
agreement between the Southern African Customs Union, Sacu - including
South Africa - and the European Free Trade Association, Efta.

It is a source of pride because it marks an important milestone for South
Africa and the immediate region in our evolving trade policy. This is an
achievement that has several important dimensions. It is historic because
it is the first full free trade agreement that the Sacu region has
negotiated as a single entity, drawing together South Africa with Botswana,
Lesotho, Namibia and Swaziland.

We’ve made an advance in importing a Sacu common trade policy as is
envisaged in the Sacu agreement we concluded in 2004. It is testimony to
the ability of the Sacu member states who are able to co-ordinate their
negotiating positions, overcome differences and pursue a common set of
negotiating objectives.

The Sacu-Efta agreement will establish a legal and institutional framework
to conduct and manage trade relations between the parties. A joint
committee is established to oversee the implementation of the agreement and
address any trade problems that may arise.

The agreement contains a dispute settlement procedure to resolve any
difficulty that cannot be solved under the joint committee. The agreement
has a review clause through which we will endeavour in three to five years
to explore ways to extend and deepen the arrangement.

Let me outline the overall process of the negotiations. Efta members
informally approached South Africa in 1999 on the margins of the WTO
ministerial meeting in Seattle, to propose the idea of launching
negotiations. This was followed by an approach in November 2000 where the
Efta secretary-general, during a visit to the Minister of Trade and
Industry, proposed that South Africa formally enter into free trade
negotiations with Efta.

Following a series of technical exchanges, negotiations were launched
directly in May 2003. Part of the delay for the launch was that Efta needed
to revise its original mandate to negotiate with South Africa to conclude
with all Sacu countries, following the conclusion of the new Sacu agreement
in 2004. Seven negotiating sessions were held and negotiations concluded in
August 2005.

In conclusion, I should indicate that the agreement has been reviewed and
endorsed by our business and labour stakeholders in Nedlac. Cabinet
recommended that the agreement be forwarded to Parliament on 24 October
2006. We all aim to have the agreement entered into force in January 2007.

We therefore humbly request support from this House for the ratification of
the Sacu-Efta agreement. I thank you.

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I shall now put the question. The
question is that the Report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all delegation heads are present in the Chamber. Are all delegation heads
present?

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declarations of vote if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. The delegation heads must please indicate
to the Chair whether they vote in favour of or against or abstain from
voting. Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: Eastern Cape supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natali siyawuvuma. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Can somebody work on our sound
system in the meantime? I don’t want the sound system to disrupt our
proceedings. Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports it.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Northern Cape supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West ke a rona. [North West supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap ondersteun. [Western Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): All nine provinces voted in favour.
I therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES -  OVERSIGHT
                VISIT TO WESTERN CAPE, 31 JULY–4 AUGUST 2006

Ms J M MASILO: Chairperson, this is a report on the oversight visit to the
Western Cape for three departments, namely Health, Social Development and
Home Affairs. The Select Committee on Social Services undertook the study
tour to the Western Cape province from the 31 July to 4 August 2006. The
purpose of the study tour was for the committee to exercise its oversight
function as mandated by the Constitution.

The primary objectives of the provincial visit included conducting
oversight over the management and quality of services rendered in respect
of Social Development, Health and Home Affairs; inspecting various health,
social development and home affairs facilities in order to determine the
state of physical infrastructure and equipment; and identifying progress
made and challenges that are being experienced by all the stakeholders.

Regarding social development, one of the facilities which the committee
visited was the Sarepta old age home in Kuils River and the following was
observed and found at the home: The facility has a staff component of 52,
consisting of 33 nursing staff, 16 general workers, one administrative
officer, one secretary and one manager.

The facility manager stated that all the grant payments of residents are
paid to the facility. This translates to an amount of R840 by 146
residents, which equals R122 640 per month. Other sources of financial
income are obtained from donations and fund-raising events. The state
subsidy is the largest financial support to the facility. The total subsidy
transfer to the facility for the period from April 2005 to March 2006
amounted to R1,9 million.

The delegation raised concerns regarding the conditions under which these
residents are living in the facility, the reason being that as the
delegation toured the facility they found that the blankets under which the
residents were sleeping were tattered and ragged, and that there was a lack
of monitoring and evaluation by the Department of Social Services.

With regard to the SA Social Security Agency, Sassa, service delivery
improvement initiatives were embarked upon by Sassa, which included their
application turnaround time. With regard to the visit to the local Sassa
offices, the committee was pleased to see that the turnaround time in the
Bellville local office has been minimised, and that it is expected to be
rolled out to the Worcester and Atlantis local offices, and is envisaged to
be implemented at 13 other local offices.

At the Worcester local office the delegation found that Sassa staff and the
staff of the provincial department of social development were sharing
office space, which was insufficient. Another issue which raised concern
was the fact that the files of beneficiaries were lying on the floor where
they are kept because of the lack of space in the offices. The Western Cape
has identified and prioritised the Worcester local office to be relocated
to another building.

Achievements in the office include the implementation of the turnaround
time for applications. The increased accessibility of services includes the
extension of service points, especially in Montagu, and the extension of
home visits, for example to old age homes and institutions, the disabled
and elderly, as well as bedridden people. The office is open for longer
hours and on Saturdays to accommodate beneficiaries from rural farming
areas. An awareness programme in the area with regard to money lenders,
misuse of grants, etc, has been launched.

Regarding the Department of Health, the delegation met with the MEC of
Health Mr Pierre Uys, who informed the delegation that a budget of
R230 million has been set aside for emergency medical services in the
province, and he further noted that the assistance of volunteers in the
emergency medical services alleviates some of the constraints.

The delegation visited the Gugulethu KTC Day Hospital, Langa Washington
Clinic and the Michael Maphongwana Community Health Centre in Khayelitsha.

At the Langa Washington Clinic the facility manager informed the delegation
that the availability of space is a major concern at the clinic and that
there was a shortage of staff. When the delegation arrived at Michael
Maphongwana Community Health Centre at 12:30 in the afternoon the waiting
room was full to capacity – approximately 150 people were waiting to be
assisted.

The delegation also visited the Eben Dönges Hospital in Worcester, and the
hospital is currently undergoing a revitalisation phase, which will be
completed in 2008. It will be bigger, with new equipment. In the new
outpatient clinic, patients will be able to access doctors, therapists,
social workers and counsellors, and the trauma centre will be open 24 hours
a day. The delegation was assured that no patient needing emergency medical
attention will be turned away. The delegation was informed that a casualty
wing, a new outpatients department and a new training centre will be added
to the main hospital.

The delegation also visited the George Hospital. A major revitalisation
process has been completed at the George Regional Hospital recently. The
major medical facility serves as a regional hospital for the Southern Cape
and Karoo region, as well as a district hospital for the George area.

The project focused on the improvement of the hospital’s infrastructure and
technology. The hospital superintendent informed the delegation that the
hospital would like to have a private ward, but owing to bed pressure it
would be impossible to do so. She further noted that the hospital did
attract private patients and patients who had medical aid, who shared the
wards with state patients and she noted that the facilities were so good
that they could not actually complain.

With regard to Home Affairs, the delegation visited the Worcester local
offices and challenges in the region included the following: to keep
rendering the service at mobile points; to expedite the processing of
enabling document applications; to provide the relevant training to
officials; to secure suitable additional accommodation for the current and
new additional staff, and to get uniformity in the application of the
Immigration Amendment Act and the Births and Deaths Registration Act.

Achievements include the establishment of permanent service points and
mobile venues in the regions, capacitation of offices in the regions, and
rendering services to the poorest of the poor in remote areas with the two
mobile trucks.

Before coming to recommendations, there are challenges in terms of where
Home Affairs keeps illegal foreigners prior to their deportation. All
illegal foreigners are kept temporarily in police stations in the Southern
Cape for 48 hours. They are transferred to the Prince Albert Correctional
Service Centre within 48 hours. Prince Albert is our detention facility
where illegal foreigners await their deportation. Prince Albert is about
150 km from George. The centre is 140 km from the George office. The centre
is specifically assigned to accommodate illegal foreigners only.
Before they could be moved to the centre, they were being accommodated at
the George Correctional Centre, which was not a suitable place. Cases of
assault against the foreigners were registered. The detained are deported
out of the Southern Cape twice a month in a joint operation with the
Immigration Inspectorate of Cape Town. I thank you.

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I shall now put the question. The
question is that the report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’
votes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make declarations of vote if they so wish. Any province that wants to do
that? None.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour of or against, or abstain from
voting. Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: Eastern Cape supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Vrystaat ondersteun. [Free State supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Gauteng?

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Gauteng supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal votes in favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo votes in favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Die Noord-Kaap ondersteun. [The Northern Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke ya rona. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Die Wes-Kaap ondersteun. [The Western Cape supports.]

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 15:49.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     a) Report of the Youth Parliament held on 28 – 29 June 2006, Old
        Assembly Chamber, Parliament;


     b) Report of the Women’s Parliament held on 03 – 04 August 2006, Old
        Assembly Chamber, Parliament; and


     c) Report of the People’s Assembly held on 14 – 15 September 2006,
        Oudtshoorn.


        Copies of the reports are available from office of Clerk of the
        Papers and on Parliament’s website www.parliament.gov.za

2.    The Minister of Finance

     a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
        and the Government of the People’s Republic of China on Mutual
        Administrative Assistance in Customs Matters, tabled in terms of
        section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government of
        the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the People’s
        Republic of China on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Customs
        Matters.


3.    The Minister of Transport

     a) Airlift Strategy 2006.


     b) Draft strategy to Accelerate Public Transport Implementation via a
        WIN-WIN-WIN partnership between Government, Existing Operators and
        Labour.


     c) National Road Safety Strategy 2006 Onwards.


     d) Transport Action Plan for 2010.


     e) Road Infrastructure Strategic Framework for South Africa (RISFSA).

4.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration

     a) Memorandum of Understanding between the Republic of Rwanda through
        its Ministry of Public Service and Labour and the Republic of South
        Africa through its Ministry for the Public Service and
        Administration on Co-operation in the Field of Civil Service and
        Public Administration (1 November 2002).


     b) Memorandum of Understanding between the United Nations and the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa through its Centre for
        Public Service Innovations relating to Co-operation in the United
        Nations On-line Network of Regional Institution for Capacity
        Building in Public Administration and Finance (20 July 2004).


     c) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
        Democratic Republic of the Congo through its Ministry of Public
        Service and the Government of the Republic of South Africa through
        its Ministry for the Public Service and Administration on Co-
        operation in the Field of Public Administration (31 August 2004).
     d) Agreement between Sweden through the Swedish International
        Development Co-operation Agency and the Government of the Republic
        of South Africa on Development Co-operation concerning Public
        Service Support in the Democratic Republic of Congo (12 April
        2005).


     e) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
        Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Government of Sweden and
        the Government of the Republic of South Africa on Co-operation in
        the Area of Public Service and Administration (29 April 2005); and


     f) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the Republic
        of India and the Government of the Republic of South Africa on Co-
        operation in the Field of Governance, Administration and other
        Related Areas (12 June 2006).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces
CREDA INSERT REPORT - Insert T061115E-insert2 – PAGES 2729-2759


