---
title: 'National Assembly - 14 November 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-11-14
---

TUESDAY, 14 NOVEMBER 2006
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                           TRAIN ACCIDENT AT FAURE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, we move
without notice:

   That the House-


   (1)      notes that -


         (a)     yesterday, 13 November 2006, nineteen people lost their
              lives in an accident involving a truck and a train at Faure
              near Cape Town; and


        (b)      many road accidents are a result of human error and
              failure to comply with traffic regulations;


   (2)      commends the efforts of the Western Cape provincial government
        in setting up a relief fund to alleviate the plight of the families
        of the deceased;


   (3)      wishes all those who were injured in the accident speedy
        recovery; and


   (4)      conveys its condolences to the families and friends of the
        deceased.

Agreed to.

        21ST PLENARY ASSEMBLY OF SADC PARLIAMENTARY FORUM IN GAUTENG

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C NKUNA (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the ANC would like to extend a warm
welcome to all the members of the SADC PF on the occasion of its 21st
plenary assembly in Mogale City, Gauteng.
Our region is characterised by uneven social and economic development with
high poverty levels. Furthermore the region depends on primary commodity
exports that leave it vulnerable to the unfair global trade environment.
The ANC acknowledges that since the establishment of the SADC PF
significant progress has been made in integrating our efforts as member
countries in dealing with the challenges.

Through the forum we have also been able to mobilise international interest
and recognition. We wish the 21st plenary assembly fruitful deliberations
and hope that their efforts will contribute to the creation of a better
life for all our people. I thank you, Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

                       VIOLATION OF PAROLE CONDITIONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J SELFE (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, recent media reports and photographs
of Mr Tony Yengeni’s weekend parole do nothing to create confidence in
either the criminal justice system or in the ANC’s reported commitment to
combat corruption.

Mr Yengeni was originally sentenced to eight years. This was later reduced
to four years on appeal, but he is by all accounts going to serve less than
four months. On his weekend parole he was pictured with a beer in his hand.
He reported back to prison late. Section 44, read with section 117 of the
Correctional Services Act, provides that a prisoner who fails to return to
prison at the specified time can be sentenced to a fine or to imprisonment
of not more than 10 years. These provisions must now be applied.

Mr Yengeni has effectively shown the department and his parole board the
finger. He clearly believes that he is above the law. Both the effective
sentence that he will serve and the clear contempt of his parole conditions
send a message to South Africa. That message is that there’s one law for
the politically connected and another, harsher law for the ordinary man and
woman in the street. [Applause.]

                        16 DAYS OF ACTIVISM CAMPAIGN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M M MDLALOSE (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the importance of the 16 Days
of Activism against Gender Violence campaign, which was recently debated in
this House, cannot be overstated.

Although we must work diligently throughout the year to find ways of
helping vulnerable women and children and shielding them from abuse, this
particular campaign must be used as a vehicle to highlight and draw
interest and attention to their plight, as well as to expose the cowardly
perpetrators of these cruel crimes.

There are simply too many incidents of abuse against women and children in
South Africa. We are failing miserably in providing them with the
protection they need. We read or hear with great regularity about children,
even infants, being abused and murdered. The most concerning feature is
that many of these children are abused by people whom they know and trust,
such as family members.

A recent example is the case of a three-year-old child, Mikah Bramely
Patterson, who died of multiple injuries, including a fractured skull and
brain haemorrhage. Mika’s biological mother and stepfather have been
charged with child abuse and/or the alternative count of murder.

This is simply cruel and inhuman ... [Time expired.]


                  WORK OF PALLIATIVE CARE CENTRES COMMENDED


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M L MATSEMELA (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the mental, physical and social
wellbeing of all South Africans constitute central elements of our
strategic objective to bring about a better life for all. The ANC commends
the work done by all the palliative care centres. Palliative care is mainly
directed at providing relief to a terminally ill person through symptom
management and pain management. The goal is to provide comfort and maintain
the highest possible quality of life for as long as life remains.

Specialised palliative care programmes exist for common conditions such as
cancer and HIV and Aids. The need for pain relief for the dying - that is,
for the young and the old - so as to ensure dignity and humanity in death,
was seen to be imperative. The ANC is committed to working with all the
role-players in advocacy programmes that will create awareness of
humanitarian aspects. We hope to see a standardised programme for the
training of all health care workers on palliative care. I thank you.
[Applause.]

               PROPOSED ACDP CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT REJECTED

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S N SWART (ACDP): Madam Deputy Speaker, at lunch time today members
rejected the 16th constitutional amendment proposed by the ACDP in the
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals and Special
Petitions. Whilst we are grateful to the chairperson that this matter was
prioritised, we regret that our recommendation was not accepted.

The ACDP rejects prior arguments that we would be going back to pre-1996
days should we amend the Constitution as proposed. This argument flies in
the face of this government’s approach to 12 other constitutional
amendments and, in particular, to that relating to floor-crossing. It is
well known that the Constitutional Court, in the certification judgment,
found floor-crossing undesirable. In the UDM case, which we participated
in, the court again rejected floor-crossing legislation for not having been
passed in time.

The ANC was quick to pass the constitutional amendment then to allow floor-
crossing. We are now considering a further proposal to amend the
Constitution again to disallow floor-crossing.

The ACDP proposed that section 39 of the Constitution be amended to read,
“the Constitution shall be interpreted to mean that a marriage is a
voluntary union of a man and a woman”.

Our view is supported by many millions of South Africans represented by the
Marriage Alliance, the National House of Traditional Leaders, the Congress
of Traditional Leaders of SA and numerous others. Internationally, many
states have passed similar amendments to their constitutions. The
Californian High Court, for example, upheld a constitutional amendment
banning same-sex marriage, and noted that the people – and not the court –
through legal fiat, should make the law.

More pertinently, African countries such as Uganda and Nigeria have adopted
legislation to protect traditional marriages, with Uganda amending its
constitution. Thank you.


                            HOME AFFAIRS PROBLEMS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs P DE LILLE (ID): Deputy Speaker, Kabelo Thibedi, who was sentenced to
five years in jail after he took a Home Affairs official hostage, could
have bought an ID book on the street for R200. The young man would probably
not have been arrested. Instead, he kept going back to Home Affairs for two
and a half years.

The ID in no way condones Thibedi’s actions, but he played the role of an
MP when he exposed the maddening levels of frustration ordinary South
Africans feel when they go to Home Affairs.

The hon Minister - and also the Deputy Minister last night on TV2 – has
admitted to MPs in this House that there are problems. I want to make a
call today on all Members of Parliament to take our oversight role more
seriously and work together with the Department of Home Affairs to fix the
problems.

To Minister Balfour, I say this: Please ensure that Thabedi does not become
a hardened criminal. Instead, give him the same privileges and rights you
would have given a criminal member of the ANC. Send him to a VIP prison,
give him a one-man cell, and make sure he knows about his weekend parole
rights. Thank you.


                         VIOLENCE AGAINST PALESTINE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A J NYAMBI (ANC): Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker, last Wednesday the
Israeli forces killed 27 Palestinians in the Gaza Strip and on the West
Bank, including seven children and 5 women in the shelling of the northern
Gaza town of Beit-Hannon. The shelling of the areas has left scores of
people injured and homes and infrastructure destroyed. These atrocities are
in violation of international law and the Geneva Convention. Significant
damage has been done to infrastructure, roads and houses, destroyed phone
and electricity lines and has led to a shortage of food and water. The ANC
condemns the continuous use of disproportionate violence and the policy of
collective punishment by the Israeli government against the people of
Palestine. Israel’s actions constitute a threat to international peace and
security. We urge the international community to take steps to stabilise
the situation and revive the Middle East peace process. I thank you.


                         MEETING WITH THE PRESIDENT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S SIMMONS (UPSA): Chair, after a recent experience I had, I too have to
add my voice to that of hon Koos van der Merwe with regard to setting up a
meeting with the honourable President. It is true that there are various
instruments to address issues. There are matters that we as public
representatives at this highest public forum have of national concern, and
then surely the hon President should avail himself. No member of this House
would approach the Presidency for an audience with the President for
trivial matters.

The tantrum of this past week is a direct result of ill-informed officials
making important decisions as to whom the President should see. It seems
that there is a list in the Presidency of people, groups and issues that
these officials will not allow the President to attend to. I have also,
like the hon Koos van der Merwe, requested a meeting with the President in
writing, after which I was told to see hon Jeffery, who then told me to
write again to the President’s office. I am convinced that the issue that I
wanted to address with the President does not enjoy the regard it should
from people in the Presidency. Therefore I am now exploring other means to
address and remedy my concerns. I thank you. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members! Hon members, may we please allow other
members to participate in the statements and to be heard. Very soon you
will be rising on a point of order and I am struggling to follow what the
members are saying.


              ACCUSATIONS AGAINST CHIEF WHIP OF MAJORITY PARTY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S V KALYAN (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, the DA calls on the ANC Chief
Whip, the hon Mbulelo Goniwe to immediately come clean about allegations
that he used his position of authority to improperly proposition a female
parliamentary employee. This allegation is only the latest in a number of
scandals to afflict the hon Goniwe, who also recently attempted to use
parliamentary privilege to avoid paying maintenance for his children. In
light of these scandals, the hon Goniwe needs to make an unambiguous
personal and political commitment to gender equality in order to prove that
his party’s commitment to this cause is not just hollow rhetoric. The
battle for the rights of women in South Africa to be treated with respect
and as equal citizens has been long and difficult and in many respects it
has still not been won. Therefore, it is completely unacceptable for any
South African, more particularly one who holds a position of high
authority, to act in a manner that undermines this right.

The hon Goniwe needs to act decisively before any more damage is done to
either the reputation of the institution he represents or the cause of
gender equality. [Applause.]
The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, on a point of
order: Recently it was ruled in this House in relation to remarks made by,
I think, Mr Gaum, in relation to the hon Coetzee, that we should not
reflect on the integrity of members of this House, other than by way of a
substantive motion. It seems to me very much as if what has been said here,
does exactly that. We request your ruling.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think ... I thought I was the Deputy Speaker.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I said Madam Deputy Speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought there was only one Deputy Speaker and until
such time that she says could somebody please help me answer the question,
she will be the only Deputy Speaker.

Mr M J ELLIS: May I speak, Madam Deputy Speaker? There is so much noise in
the House so I can’t actually hear what you’re saying.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, there is no noise in the House.

Mr M J ELLIS: I beg to differ, Madam Deputy Speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Ellis, there is a point of order that has been
addressed to me. I think I am able to deal with that matter. Until such
time that I ask any member of the House to please help me exercise my
duties, you are not recognised. Please sit down.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise on a point of order to say that
I disagree with what the hon Nel is saying. That is perfectly within my
rights.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me deal with the point of order, Mr Ellis. You may
bring any other matters that you want. For now there is a point of order
that was raised. It takes precedence. I think we should all be aware of
that, especially those of us who are long serving members of the House. Mr
Nel, the point that you raised reflecting on the integrity of an hon
member, is a valid point. All of us have to be protected by the Chair. I
allowed the statement to go on so as to find out whether indeed it is
attacking the integrity of the hon member. I think it is. It is reflecting
on speculations, on things that people have read in the newspapers and I
think it is unfortunate for us to base anything, especially in this House,
on things that have not been proven anywhere else. On that basis, I think,
the Deputy Chief Whip does have a point. That statement won’t be allowed.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: I think that we
would urge you to make sure that you study the entire Hansard first of all,
before you make such a ruling. There have been many opportunities and many
occasions in this House when we have reflected on such matters, which have
not been ruled on in such a way.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Were you allowed to reflect on members’ integrity?

Mr M J ELLIS: I would certainly say so, Madam Deputy Speaker, and I would
urge you to consider Hansard before you make your final ruling.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I base this ruling on what should happen and what
should happen is that no one has to reflect on the integrity of an hon
member. And if that was allowed in the past, it was wrong. Let me study the
Hansard and come back to you. Are you satisfied? More than satisfied? Thank
you.


                LAUNCH OF A WOMEN-OWNED CONSTRUCTION COMPANY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N D NGCENGWANE (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the recent launch of a woman-owned
construction company known as Mamela Construction Suppliers is a major
boost in our effort to better the lives of our people. The company is a
joint venture between SA Women in Construction holding 50% shares,
Somerset Sand and Stone holding 40% and the Arête group, which holds 10%
stake.

Ms Mamela Magoda, who is the director of the company, says:


  Our motivation was the need to accelerate women’s entry and develop in a
  male dominated industry. The limited participation of black people in
  general and women in particular in the economy limits our ability to
  expand the productive base, sustain economic development, eradicate
  poverty and contribute to a better life for all.

The ANC urges all women to seize the opportunities created by the
conditions of democracy, peace and social progress so as to advance the
cause of women. I thank you. [Applause.]


                               GLOBAL WARMING


                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr R RABINOWITZ (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, in view of the immense and
damaging impact that global warming will have on life on earth, and in
particular on the poorest of the poor in Africa and the other continents,
this House should heed the overwhelming concerns of world’s scientists that
human actions are largely responsible for the phenomenon of global warming
and are also needed urgently to impact positively on it.

Consideration must be given to developing measures such as establishing an
interparliamentary action team involving Members of Parliament from
Minerals and Energy, Environmental Affairs, Water Affairs and Forestry,
Finance, Trade and Industry and Health to pool resources and in all ways
recommend a path of action that allows South Africa to take a lead in
fostering research and development partnerships with the developed world
that will incentivise our citizens to constructively and positively action
against the looming earth crisis. Thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon member. I am told that there is some
warming in the House and people are requesting that we should also try and
attend to that. That is not global warming, but we are talking about the
warming inside the House itself, because it seems the air conditioners are
not working properly, but we will fix that.


                     STATEMENT ON PAN-AFRICAN PARLIAMENT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M E MBILI (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, I have a statement on the Pan-
African Parliament. Yesterday, Monday 13     November 2006, the Pan-African
Parliament convened for the 6th session in Midrand in Gauteng. The first
President of the democratic Republic of South Africa, former President
Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela, opened the current session.

Amongst the issues he raised was the issue of good governance and the
respect for human rights. The future and the deepening of peace on our
continent rests firmly on the pillars of democracy, good governance,
transparency and social progress. He further alluded to the fact that
poverty, unemployment and the legacy of colonialism are the root causes of
many of the challenges the continent is facing.

It is for that reason that the ANC will continue to work with the
progressive forces on the continent to build and strengthen the institution
of the African Union and Nepad, aimed at dealing with the challenges of the
continent. I thank you.


                   OVERSPENDING ON FOOD AND ACCOMMODATION





                            (Member’s Statement)


Mr I O DAVIDSON (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, responses to DA parliamentary
questions indicate that 17 national departments have spent a combined total
of R898 million on accommodation, restaurant and transport expenses in the
2005-06 financial year.

This represents a 30% increase from the previous financial year for those
17 departments, despite the fact that there has been no significant
increase in the number of people employed by the state. For example, Home
Affairs increased its expenditure by R110 million or 167%, R95 million of
which was on travel. Yet its staff increased by only 322 people over the
same period - 322 people cannot possibly be responsible for a R110 million
increase. Out of the 17 departments surveyed, nine registered increases
above the average of 30%, with only three showing a decline in expenditure.

Apart from Home Affairs, other notable big expenders are Sport and
Recreation, which increased its transport, accommodation and restaurant
expenditure by 106%, and Public Service and Administration by 72%. None of
these departments have registered service delivery improvements anywhere
near the level at which they have increased their expenditure on what
basically amounts to food, drinks, plane trips and hotels.

Seen against an overall background of poor service delivery, the relevant
Ministers owe the taxpayers of South Africa an explanation. I thank you.
[Applause.]


                              HIGH BANK CHARGES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr Y S BHAMJEE (ANC): Deputy Speaker, South Africa is acknowledged to have
some of the highest bank charges in the world. This has a
disproportionately high impact on poor people who cannot afford high bank
charges.

The ANC and government have instituted many attempts to address this issue
– most notably by introducing the Mzansi Account. The high take-up rate of
this account proves that there is an even greater need to make financial
services more accessible to the poor.

The ANC applauds the work of the Competition Commission, which is currently
holding public hearings on this issue. We are heartened by the fact that
banks themselves have acknowledged that their charges are excessive and
that this prevents many people from accessing their services.

The ANC awaits the results of the Competition Commission’s enquiry into
high bank charges. The ANC urges all banks to institute measures that will
address the excessively high costs of banking and allow poor people
affordable access to banking services. I thank you. [Applause.]


            MINISTER’S PARTICIPATION IN BUILDING HOUSES IN DELFT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs Z A KOTA (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the ANC congratulates the Minister of
Housing, Dr Lindiwe Sisulu, on building six houses in five days in Delft,
from 6 to 12 November 2006.

This proves beyond a doubt that the Ministry is committed to working hand
in hand with all those who want to provide shelter to the poorest of the
poor. Your partnership with Cape Talk and Habitat for Humanity is indeed
growing from strength to strength every single year. We thank all those
volunteers who gave their time for this important task. I thank you.
[Applause.]


                       IMPRISONMENT OF KABELO THIBEDI

                       VIOLATION OF PAROLE CONDITIONS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Deputy Chairperson, let me start
with the hon De Lille. I can assure you, Madam De Lille, that there are no
VIP prisons in this country. This country has 243 prisons, and a prison is
a prison is a prison and nothing else but a prison.

We will try our best with the youngster you are talking about, Thibedi. We
will try our best as we do with everybody who comes into our centres and
try to rehabilitate him and correct offending behaviour. We will do the
same with him; he will not be treated differently from anybody who comes
into our centres. I can assure you of those two things that we will do.

Let me address myself to the hon Selfe. Hon Selfe, I’ve taken serious note
of the allegations that appeared over this weekend about the violation of
parole by offender Toni Yengeni. I’ve already said that the area
commissioner and the head of centre there must quickly give me the report.
But Mr Selfe, you must understand, I’ve got 167 000 prisoners in the
country. I cannot be concentrating on one particular offender. There are
quite a number of offenders in this country. I view the allegations that
have been made of breaking parole conditions in a serious light; that is
why I’ve ordered that this thing be done quickly.

There is one law for all offenders in this country, so neither I nor my
members may treat offenders according to who they are or whatever they
belong to. There is one rule and one law for offenders.

If offender Yengeni is then found to have violated his weekend parole
regulations, the necessary steps that are built into the system of
corrections in our country will be activated and we will deal with those
issues properly.

If any offenders for that matter – over this weekend there were 80 to 90
offenders that were out on weekend parole – if any of them have breached
the rules, we will deal with them. But please let’s stop the screaming and
throwing your toys out of the cot – it’s not going to help anybody. Let’s
just stick to basics and do things correctly. Thank you. [Applause.]


                        16 DAYS OF ACTIVISM CAMPAIGN

                         MEETING WITH THE PRESIDENT
                   OVERSPENDING ON FOOD AND ACCOMMODATION

                           (Minister’s Responses)

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Thank you very
much, Deputy Speaker. I would like to respond to three of the statements.

The first one that I would like to respond to is the one from the hon
member from the IFP, I believe, who spoke about the 16 Days of Activism,
and say that indeed I believe in a national consensus around our need to
ensure that we get involved in actions that will take forward a national
response dealing with violence against women and children. The theme this
year is one that says: “Action against abuse.” And it has clearly come to
the fore that in many instances the issues of domestic violence and
violence against women and children are identified as social crimes.
Judging from the work that has been done by the police and the criminal
justice system, it’s very clear that the victims have had crimes committed
against them by people whom they know and, in many instances we assume,
people whom they trust.

This means that the intervention is only an intervention from the side of
the state, but it also has to be an intervention that involves all role-
players in society. Very clearly, at the core of this are community and
families. So, we would envisage that in this instance and for these 16 days
and into the future, there would be a consolidated response by all players
in society to engage in common action around the 16 Days of Activism and
beyond as a combined action against abuse.

The second matter that I want to deal with is the allegation in the
statement by Mr Simmons, where he would like to align himself with hon Koek
van der Merwe – I mean Koos van der Merwe - who has raised various
allegations about the President not meeting with them as required. I think
we very clearly need to move away from a situation of trying to
overdramatise the situation.

I think, much to the President’s regret, he clearly cannot meet everyone
who would like to meet him. But I think the hon Simmons is aware that he
has had a meeting with a Presidential Councillor where there was an
agreement that he would meet the President on providing certain details on
the matter under discussion, namely certain issues around Afrikaans-
speaking Coloured people. The view was that we could not have one party
engaging with the President around that. Every party in this House would
argue that they have a common constituency. And as a result, hon Simmons
was expected to refer back to the councillor with more details and that has
not happened. I believe that the presidency is awaiting the follow-up and
we trust that that will happen.

On the third matter which the hon Davidson brought to the attention of the
House, namely the issue of expenditure in relation to accommodation,
transport, and what he calls “food and drinks”. In terms of the response in
relation to my own portfolio, we have very clearly indicated that on the
issue of food and drinks it was not easy to make that extrapolation and
reflect on that. But in relation to transport and accommodation, I want to
assure the hon members and this House that there has been a significant
increase in our work in Africa.  There has been an increase in our work in
the DRC and the fact that we have teams working there. And in view of the
circumstances under which they work we value that they are in appropriate
accommodation and that they come home regularly to be with their families.
Secondly, we are doing work in the Sudan as well, and we have appropriately
looked at their transport and accommodation.

Furthermore, looking locally, in KwaZulu-Natal there is a specific
intervention that we are engaged in. A team has gone down and is located in
KwaZulu-Natal where we cover their accommodation and their periodical
transport home. So, I will be quite willing to share that with the House
and elaborate on how we are involved in conscious interventions where staff
will go either to different provinces or to particular areas on the
continent. We regard this as part of our re-engineering of government work,
as well as restructuring and rebuilding the state. And I think that it’s
appropriate to invest appropriately.

A second department mentioned was Sport and Recreation, and I want to
remind hon members about the amalgamation of the Sports Commission into the
department, which has brought personnel as well as responsibilities and
tasks with it. Obviously that would show quite an increase, which doesn’t
necessarily reflect in the manner as may have been inferred by the hon
Davidson. But I’m sure the inference was unintended. Thank you very much.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Minister, thank you very much for correcting that
slip in the tongue, namely that despite the fact that we had a lot of “koek
drama” last week the name still remains hon Koos van der Merwe.


                            HOME AFFAIRS PROBLEMS


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker and
thanks to hon De Lille. Yes, hon De Lille, I think we will all accept that
the issue of Thibedi is a very sad story. It is very unfortunate indeed
because he is now taking flak, probably for something which could have been
avoided.

But I want to respond by saying that of course there is a manifestation of
the problems in the department. We have acknowledged those problems - not
only have we acknowledged them but we are also doing something about them.
I think hon members are aware that there is an intervention support task
team, which is currently working in the department, looking not only at
issues of human resources, but also at systems within the Department of
Home Affairs. By the way, these are chronic problems. We have now taken
responsibility for some of the things which ought to have happened ages ago
and unfortunately did not happen and we are doing something about them. And
I think our strength is our ability to accept and acknowledge that there is
a problem and that we can move forward by resolving those problems.

It’s unfortunate that Thibedi finds himself in a situation where he has
been given a prison sentence of five years. However, it does also send a
message to all of us and to the public that we do not resort to those kinds
of acts in order to resolve problems. I really want to reiterate that I’m
very sad about what has happened to the young man. It is unfortunate that
none of us was approached in mitigation of circumstances in his case. Thank
you very much.


            MINISTER’S PARTICIPATION IN BUILDING HOUSES IN DELFT


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker. I want to
indicate that the hon member Zoe Kota forgot a very important part of what
made the building of six houses in Bluedowns a success. This is the fact
that Members of Parliament gave up the whole of Thursday to come and help
the poor community of Bluedowns with their building. [Applause.]

Thank you. I want to take this opportunity to thank Members of Parliament
for this very significant input into showing the people of this country
that we do indeed care about their plight. Significantly, those who are
loudest in this House about their concerns regarding housing were
conspicuously absent on that particular occasion.

An HON MEMBER: Who are they?

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: This is the DA. I want to say to the hon Tony Leon
that I would like to invite him to come and help us build houses, because
this is your opportunity to show South Africa that their perception about
you and your attitude towards the poor is ill placed. I give you the
opportunity to come and build houses and show that you do care about the
poor. [Applause.]
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members! Hon members! Hon members! Hon Ministers!
Order! I am asking you for the last time to please add value to the debates
in the House. Thank you.


                              CIVIL UNION BILL


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, we move
the motion in the name of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party as printed
on the Order Paper.

  That Rule 253(1), which provides inter alia that the debate on the Second
  Reading of a Bill may not commence before at least three working days have
  elapsed since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended for the
  purposes of conducting the Second Reading debate on the Civil Union Bill
  [B 26B – 2006] today.

Agreed to.

                              CIVIL UNION BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Minister, just before you address the House, while
we welcome the public to the gallery, it must be remembered that this
Chamber is a forum for debate by Members of Parliament only. We are not
going to allow participation of the members of the public by clapping.
Thank you very much, and be good guests to the Assembly.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.

Hon members, colleagues and friends, today we present for the consideration
of this House the Civil Union Bill of 2006 after an elaborate process of
public consultation and debate in this country.

The process of debate on this Bill has been rigorous. The extensive media
coverage on the debate on the Bill has resulted in the debate continuing in
our homes, workplaces and communities throughout our country. One thing
that came out of the debate has been an indication that people in all
sections of our society feel very strongly about the issues being dealt
with in this Bill.

This dialogue is by no means over, and we continue to engage each other on
these matters in a constructive way in order to lead South Africans towards
the kind of society that we all fought for, as embodied in our
Constitution.

For this reason, we are expecting robust debate even during this Second
Reading debate here in the House. I must also indicate that we have already
noted the changes made by the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs to the
original Bill. Understanding the difficulties they were faced with, we have
decided to support those changes.

The challenge that we shall continue to face has to do with the fact that
when we attained our democracy, we sought to distinguish ourselves from an
unjust painful past by declaring that:


  Never again shall it be that any South African will be discriminated
  against on the basis of colour, creed, culture and sex.


This House, in passing the Constitution in 1996, recognised the fact that
our nation’s commitment to this noble principle of equality should be the
cornerstone of the society we want to build. In breaking with our past,
therefore, we need to fight and resist all forms of discrimination and
prejudice, including homophobia.

Mr M WATERS: Why have two Bills?

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: We should also condemn violence. Why don’t
you wait for me to finish? Then you can raise your issues. [Interjections.]
Just be quiet, man!

We also condemn violence against same-sex couples, fuelled by hatred, as
recently observed here at home and in other countries. This commitment to
our Constitution and in particular the principles of human dignity,
equality and freedom of religion informed the drafting and refinement of
this Bill.

The opening clause of the Bill of Rights reaffirms this view for us, and I
will quote again here:


  This Bill of Rights is a cornerstone of democracy in South Africa. It
  enshrines the rights of all people in our country and affirms the
  democratic values of human dignity, equality and freedom. The state must
  respect, protect, promote and fulfil the rights in the Bill of Rights.


As far back as 1996, government itself recognised that the legal regime
that regulates marriage in our country needs to be realigned with
constitutional principles. It is for this reason that the Law Reform
Commission started work on the review of the marriage legislation in the
country. However, during that process, the definition of marriage in our
current law faced a challenge within our courts. The Constitutional Court,
in the matter of Minister of Home Affairs v Fourie, and Lesbian and Gay
Equality Project and Others v Minister of Home Affairs, 2006, declared that
the definition of marriage under common law and the marriage formula as set
out in section 30(1) of the Marriage Act of 1961 were inconsistent with the
Constitution, and invalid to the extent that they failed to provide the
means whereby same-sex couples could enjoy the status and the benefits,
coupled with the responsibilities, that marriage accorded to heterosexual
couples.

The court ordered Parliament to correct these defects in the law by 1
December 2006, failing which section 30(1) of the Marriage Act will be read
as including the words ``or spouse’’ after the words ``or husband’’. This
current Bill was drafted in response to the court’s judgment in the Fourie
case.

The court, while noting that ``equal’’ does not mean ``identical’’, ruled
that while it could not pronounce on the constitutionality of it, it would
be helpful to point to certain guiding constitutional principles.

In terms of the first principle, the objectives of the new measure must be
to promote, one, human dignity, the achievement of equality, and the
advancement of human rights and freedoms. The second guiding principle
states that, and I quote:


  Parliament must be sensitive to the need to avoid a remedy that, on the
  face of it, would provide equal protection, but would do so in a manner
  that is calculated to reproduce new forms of marginalisation.


  Whatever legislative remedy is chosen must be as generous and accepting
  towards same-sex couples as it is to heterosexual couples, both in terms
  of intangibles as well as tangibles involved.


The Civil Union Bill presently before this House indeed provides such a
remedy. The objects of the Civil Union Bill are to provide for the public
solemnation and registration of civil union by way of either a marriage or
civil partnership, and to provide for the legal consequences thereof.

As noted in the memorandum on the objects of the Bill, the Bill makes
provision for opposite and same-sex couples of 18 years or older to
solemnise and register a voluntary union by way of either a marriage or a
civil partnership. Care has been taken to ensure that a distinction is
drawn between the responsibilities of the state and the church, as section
15(3) of the Constitution is indicative of sensitivity in favour of
acknowledging diversity in matters of marriage. The Bill provides for same-
sex couples to be married by civil marriage officers and such religious
marriage officers who consider such marriages not to fall outside the
tenets of their religion.

In order to give effect to the Constitutional Court ruling, same-sex
couples have to be allowed to marry so that they can enjoy the status,
obligations and entitlements enjoyed at the moment by opposite-sex couples.

The Bill allows for both same-sex and opposite-sex couples to choose the
option of having their unions solemnised and registered as a civil
partnership by a state-employed marriage officer.

We’ve decided to reject the calls to amend the Constitution. Whilst we
understand that the Constitution can be amended from time to time to deal
with practical arrangements, we are cautious of an amendment to the Bill of
Rights, as it is the bedrock on which our Constitution and our democracy is
based.

We also do not share the current view amongst others in our society that in
order to recognise one of the rights in our Constitution, you need to take
away another. Our Constitution clearly makes room for the right of people
to be treated equally without a hierarchy including, as it is in this case,
a situation where those rights are for a minority in our country.

The consultation process in the public has been extensive, with the
Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs conducting public hearings in all nine
provinces and in Parliament. The Constitutional Court itself also noted
that the process of the Law Reform Commission has also ensured extensive
consultation.

This process of law reform, particularly with regard to the changing
concept of family law in our society, remains an issue for further
engagement. We will be considering the recognition of religious marriages,
revision of the Marriage Act of 1961, and of course, the regulation of
domestic partnerships.

I must thank all members of the portfolio committee, its chairperson,
Comrade Hlomane Chauke and the different study groups of the different
parties represented in the committee for all the hard work they put in
finalising this Bill.

I am aware that you have spent a lot of time away from your families as a
result of this work. You’ve engaged extensively with the public. You’ve
listened carefully to many, many divergent views, and you’ve presented this
House with a Bill that is consistent with the principles of our
Constitution, and the guidelines set out by the Constitutional Court almost
a year ago. If you did not engage as robustly as you did in representing
these views, you would have failed in your duties as public
representatives.

It is very important for members to appreciate that within the three
spheres of government, Parliament should continue to be the one bearing the
responsibility to pass legislation and not have the consequences of the
judiciary performing this function on behalf of the legislature.

The principle of separation of powers therefore needs to be protected, and
it is for this reason that we have chosen to adhere to the directive of the
Constitutional Court, and not allow the Court itself to amend a piece of
legislation.

The dynamic interface and respect for the different roles of the three
spheres of governance will be a reflection of a healthy democracy.

Hon members, I present to you for your consideration the Civil Union Bill
of 2006. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr H P CHAUKE: Madam Deputy Speaker, it has really been a task and a half.
On behalf of the portfolio committee, I think there is nothing much to be
said today because we have managed to listen and to engage with the public
on the Bill that has been tabled before Parliament.

Let me start by taking this opportunity to outline the manner in which we
have handled this Bill and that is that, when the Bill was tabled before
Parliament, there were problems already around the constitutionality of the
Bill. As we all know, the state law advisor found that there are problems
within the Bill on which he could not give a clear report to Parliament on
the constitutionality of the Bill with a number of recommendations that he
made.

By the time the Bill was tabled before the committee jointly by our
Minister and the Deputy Minister of Justice, the portfolio committee did
its own assessment of the work and the challenge before the committee. We
then decided, after listening to the presentation, that it would be
necessary, since this matter is one of the most sensitive matters - because
even the court itself found that this matter needs to be handled in a
sensitive manner - and we made sure that we moved along with the people in
dealing with the matter.

We then decided as a committee that we should embark on a programme of
public hearings. It’s normal procedure that on any Bill that is before
Parliament we have to have public hearings, but we then extended the
hearings to go around the country because of our understanding of the
nature and the sensitivity of the matter that was before the committee.

The first hearings were held in Soweto where we invited the residents and
people generally of Gauteng, who came in their numbers to participate and
to engage robustly with Parliament. They raised their concerns around the
issues that we were placing before them, and those hearings continued in
all the provinces, to cut matters short.

What I want to raise is that during public participation at the public
hearings, there were a number of issues that were raised that came out of
the public hearings. One of the issues that came out was the issue of
amending the Constitution. There was this general call that rejected what
we wanted to do as Parliament, especially looking at the Bill itself as
something that the public would not accept - that we should solemnise
marriages of same-sex couples. Then there was this call to protect the
marriage and amend the Constitution so as not to allow these marriages to
take place.

The second view that came out of the public hearing was that of holding a
referendum. This was simply to say that there is a need to test the will of
the majority of the people on what we want to do as government, because
this was informed by the notion that says we reject, we don’t agree, we
don’t support what government wants to do, and let us call for a referendum
to test the will of the people. That was the view that was coming generally
from the public.

The third thing that came out very strongly was that the Bill itself had in
it a component that dealt with the issue of a civil union and the issue of
domestic partnership. The majority of the people again felt that the issue
of domestic partnership interfered with customary marriage and that it
interfered generally with any relationship because what it was saying was
that, like any relationship that you get into, it may be a registered or
non-registered relationship, but automatically you would be covered by the
law. Most of the people felt very strongly that it was not necessary for us
to engage on that matter, especially a matter which was not quite urgent.
We put it aside so that we could begin to engage with the public again.

What was coming across, however, was the fourth point which was the time
allocated for Parliament to handle this matter because, generally, the
public felt very strongly about the time given to Parliament. The court in
its ruling said that it would give Parliament one year to come up with the
remedy to deal with this problem. So people felt very strongly that there
was a need in fact to have more time so as to allow more debate around the
issue before us.

The last point obviously was the usage of the word “marriage” in the Bill.
People felt very strongly that, whatever it is that we want to do, we
should not use the word ``marriage’’. You know that there were a number of
organisations and churches that marched to send their memorandums, who sent
a number of submissions that were talking about the usage of the word
“marriage” itself. Other speakers will come who will address that part as
to why we have opted to have ``marriage’’ in the Bill. Speakers who will
come after me will raise those issues.

So I think, generally, the approach we took as Parliament was to recognise
the very fact that whatever we do, we are guided by the Constitution. These
rights that we talk about are not rights that are made by the ANC somewhere
in the corner there. These rights are the rights that we ourselves, who
have participated in compiling this wonderful document that we call the
Constitution of South Africa which we all pride ourselves on, entrenched in
it. These rights are rights that you cannot take away. That is the manner
in which we ourselves approached these public hearings. We explained these
rights to the people. In fact, we mostly found that people understand the
Constitution better than some of you sitting in the Chamber here.

The biggest challenge facing us is obviously that we have to make sure that
we meet the Constitutional Court judgment and, given the manner in which
the Minister has elaborated on these issues, we have tried in fact to
respond to that Constitutional Court judgment. We have removed the domestic
partnership, as the people have said. We have looked at the Bill itself and
said that to draft it only for a specific group of people will not be
correct. Why can’t we widen the scope of this Bill to cover not only same-
sex partners but also everyone else? Mncwango, if you want to decide and go
to another extension of same-sex marriage, you may. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: It’s hon Mncwango.

Mr H P CHAUKE: You may obviously use the Bill and make sure that those
rights or marriages are solemnised. I am saying that it’s a challenge that
we have to take up as a country. There are still marriages that are not
even covered, and this Bill begins to attempt to cover some of the areas -
Hindu marriages, Muslim marriages. There are a number of marriages that are
not yet covered.

Now that is the challenge, and that’s what we have agreed upon in the
committee. We still need to look at some of these areas because there will
be a need to look at the general law that governs marriages as a state. The
part of the celebration of weddings and all of that is not done by the
state but is done by formations, organisations and individuals who decide
how they want to celebrate their marriage in the end. That is not the
responsibility of the state.

What you then found during these public hearings was that the majority of
people who asked us not to use the word “marriage” were from the church
formations, but the church formations themselves were very divided. The SA
Council of Churches came forward to say, ``We come from the SA Council of
Churches and our position on this Bill is that we don’t support it. We
don’t support the fact that a man must marry another man or a woman must
marry another woman.’’ Throughout, as we moved around the provinces and
coming to Parliament with public hearings, the same applied. The SA Council
of Churches then came and said, `You know, those who claimed that they were
representing the SA Council of Churches were lying. Here is the position of
the SA Council of Churches. Our position is that we agree that same-sex
couples should be given the opportunity to marry.’’

Now it was very clear from the beginning that we had this problem of church
formations being much divided on the issues that we were dealing with. That
in itself obviously wouldn’t hinder the progress that we had to make as a
committee, but other representations also came forward, for example, from
the House of Traditional Leaders. All of them were talking about amending
the Constitution. How then do you give this right and tomorrow, because you
feel very strongly that you no longer agree with this thing, you then
decide to amend the Constitution so as not to give that right? I think it’s
a challenge that all of us, when we speak here, must be able to respond to.
We must be able to respond to the right that we have given to this
individual, this minority, that we are now so fearful that they will come
and change the whole marriage system in the country.

I think we should engage on this so as to understand where our standpoint
is, because in our deliberation as a committee, almost every top lawyer in
this country, every constitutional expert that we have met in the committee
agreed with us that there is no getting  away from the rights of these
individuals because it’s entrenched in the Constitution. You cannot run
away. It’s something that is given and it’s something that we have to live
with. [Interjections.] So obviously, you gave it; you were part of the
constitution-making process and you were part of the drafting of the
Constitution. When we adopted that Constitution, all of us stood there -
there is a nice picture outside, showing that you are there - confirming
that we will respect and uphold the supreme law of the country which is the
Constitution.
Without any waste of time, I want to take this opportunity to thank the
Department of Home Affairs, the legal team, the Minister for giving that
leadership, the state law advisor and the parliamentary advisers, and to
thank Parliament in general for the support it has given to the portfolio
committee. It was not an easy thing to arrange the resources that were
provided, the transport arrangements as well as food and everything that
was put together in making sure that, in the law-making process, we move
along with our people. It is very important.

People have spoken on this issue, and the more we speak about it, the more
people will begin to understand that it is something you cannot ignore. On
that note, I really want to thank members of the committee who really gave
their best - from the DA, IFP, ACDP and everybody, in fact - in making sure
that we listened to the people and came up with something, which is a Bill
that we believe will pass constitutional muster. The argument has been that
this Bill will not pass constitutional muster, but we believe that the work
that was done by this committee confirms that this Bill will go through the
Constitutional Court. In its findings, if it finds that this Bill is not
constitutional, obviously, there will be a particular process that we must
engage in with Parliament. [Interjections.] No, there is nothing wrong with
doing that. It can be done all over again, but we have a responsibility as
lawmakers, and we cannot run away from our responsibility. If the
Constitutional Court finds that whatever we have made is still lacking, we
will come back to Parliament again and engage and resolve whatever it is
that is not in line with the constitutional requirements to make sure that
these individuals that we want to cover, are in fact covered.

I know that some members of the opposition have already declared their
position very clearly, and we will support you. We will make sure that if
you want to be unionised, you will be unionised. If you want to get
married, we will make sure that you get married. That is our
responsibility. As you go out as Members of Parliament, go and preach one
gospel: These rights are rightly given and are rights that you cannot take
away.

We will still listen to the debate and we will still want to engage more on
these issues as you speak. Thank you very much, and thank you very much
members on that point. [Applause.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: Deputy Speaker, Parliament is doing something unique today
by passing the Civil Union Bill. It is following an order by the
Constitutional Court to create legislation to remedy a defect in the
Constitution of our country, whereby same-sex couples are prohibited from
enjoying the same status, entitlements and responsibilities accorded to
heterosexual couples through marriage.

Normally, Parliament passes legislation in keeping with the Constitution.
Today is different because we are amending an Act of Parliament, which is
unconstitutional. We were given a whole year to effect this legislation,
but with the deadline almost upon us, the Department of Home Affairs
suddenly tabled the Civil Union Bill as a response to the Fourie judgment
in the second week of September 2006.

The original Bill tabled allowed for the civil union between same-sex
couples and, although there was a reference to the word “marriage” in
clause 11(1), we were told by the justice department’s legal team that this
was a mere legal nicety. The portfolio committee embarked on a series of
public hearings in all nine provinces and in Parliament to gauge public
opinion and sentiment on the proposed legislation.

A wide spectrum of input was received. With the exception of the NG Kerk,
all faith-based organisations represented were totally opposed to the
proposed Bill. Their main objection was that marriage could only be
concluded between a man and a woman.

Many Christians, if not all, maintain that the Bible was the first
constitution. Many called for the Constitution to be amended to protect
marriage as a sacred institution, and some even proposed a referendum to
settle the debate. Several legal opinions put forward the concept that the
Civil Union Bill was unconstitutional in that same-sex couples could only
conduct a union and not a marriage, and that the separate-but-equal
approach would not survive a Constitutional Court appeal.

The state law adviser, in fact, refused to certify the original Bill, and
even Parliament’s legal opinion was that the Bill was unconstitutional. Gay
and lesbian groupings echoed the sentiment that by being allowed to have
only civil unions, they were being treated as second-class citizens, and
were clearly unhappy with this.

I think the Bill faced its fiercest opposition from the National House of
Traditional Leaders and from Contralesa. The National House asserts that
the Bill disregards the culture, customs and traditions of the majority of
Africans, and thereby opposes this Bill. Contralesa regards Parliament’s
task, as ordered by the Constitutional Court, to be embarrassing and
divisive, and calls on Parliament to reject the Bill in its entirety.

A significant observation that emerged during the hearings is the
extraordinary high level of homophobia and homoprejudice that exists in our
country. While much of it is rooted in sheer ignorance, some of the views
expressed were just pure vitriol and malice.

On a personal note, during the public hearings I often had to sit on my
hand and bite my tongue when outrageous and often provocative antigay
comments were made. I would like to applaud the gay and lesbian groupings
for standing their ground, often in the face of strong opposition, mockery
and sarcasm.

Five thousand eight hundred petitions, 637 written submissions and
countless hearings later, we are here to vote on an amended version of the
Civil Union Bill. It is quite unfortunate that the ANC pulled the amended
version of this Bill out of the bottom drawer merely a day before voting in
the committee. It is my considered opinion that the portfolio committee has
misled the public in the hearings, because the version before us now is not
the one presented during the hearings. I wonder how Judge Sachs will view
the public participation clause he so expressly set out in the judgment.

The Bill in front of us today is not purely a Civil Union Bill, but is in
fact a second Marriage Act, merely couched in a different name in an effort
to appease both sides and arrive at a middle-of-the-road solution. The
essential difference is that the Marriage Act of 1961 allows for marriage
between girls and boys. The Civil Union Bill of 2006 allows for the union
or a marriage between boys and boys or girls and girls or girls and boys.
To put it bluntly, the straight guys have two choices in respect of
marriage, and the gay guys only have one option.

Yet another significant difference is that in the Marriage Act, one has to
be 21 years of age to marry, while in the Civil Union Bill the age of
consent is 18 years. One wonders what Judge Albie Sachs will make of the
law we have come up with and whether, in his opinion, it will pass the
equality test. The removal of all reference to gender, as proposed by the
DA, is indeed most welcome. Also, the exclusion of domestic partnerships in
this Bill is great, because it doesn’t belong here.

It was quite interesting to note how much support there was by the ANC for
the clause that refers to marriage officers who may apply to the Minister
on grounds of conscience not to conduct unions or marriages for same-sex
couples. This option creates space for further unnecessary discrimination,
and causes offence to same-sex couples. It is quite ironic that the ANC
will not allow its MPs to vote for the Bill on the grounds of conscience,
and yet supports legislation to that effect.

I do have a great deal of sympathy for my colleagues in the ANC who will be
forced to toe the line or face disciplinary action. Well done to those who
choose to exercise their choice. Judge Sachs was indeed provocative to
place a short timeframe on Parliament to enact legislation in this matter.
The time we devoted to this Bill was too short, given its consequences, and
adhering to a deadline is the wrong reason to pass legislation.

I was rather intrigued to read in the weekend papers a comment by the
chairperson of the committee that this is an interim piece of legislation.
I haven’t heard the Minister concur with this. If this is the case, then my
point about rushing legislation merely to meet a deadline is indeed well
made.

Parliament would do well to ask the Constitutional Court for an extension
of time, so as to do justice to the task at hand and to rewrite the
Marriage Act in the light of our democratic dispensation. Nevertheless, the
Bill is a starting point in the right direction, but in the wrong way. The
ideal is to have one Marriage Act for everyone. It is the only way to truly
recognise the equality of all our people.

As a nation, we have a long way to go to eradicate discrimination on the
grounds of sexual orientation. Some members of the DA are opposed in
principle to the Bill as they are of the opinion that the Bill fails in
terms of the equality clause of the Bill of Rights. The DA will allow a
conscience and free vote on this Bill. [Applause.]

Mrs I MARS: Madam Deputy Speaker, Minister, colleagues, the rights of
equality and dignity are enshrined in our Bill of Rights and contained in
the 1996 Constitution of the Republic. As part of the right to equality,
the Constitution holds that no one may be discriminated against based on
his or her sexual orientation. In the past few years, the affirmation of
this latter element of the right to equality has been the subject of
numerous legal challenges in the High Court, the Supreme Court of Appeal
and, ultimately, the Constitutional Court.

The Civil Union Bill is a result of a directive issued by the
Constitutional Court to Parliament to rectify certain defects in our common
law to give legal expression to the rights of equality and dignity.

However, the Bill before us today has, in many ways, been a headache and
heartache for many South Africans. And, if the Sunday Times quoted the
chairperson of the portfolio committee correctly, there is only temporary
respite, as the Committee on Home Affairs would begin negotiations with
“the Minister next year on a complete revision on the law on marriage,
cutting the state’s role to a minimum, while ensuring that all groups and
faiths are equally catered for”.

The conclusion – and the only conclusion – we can draw from this is that
the whole issue is to be revisited and that, currently, we are attempting
to satisfy the requirement of the Constitutional Court’s judgment by 1
December. This is a duty we have.

Whether the version of the Bill before the House today will, in fact, meet
the requirements of the judgment is open to debate, and one would expect
that only the court would provide clarity on this matter.
The issue of major concern for us is more or less the same as that for our
colleague from the DA, which is the shortness of time. The issue is so
simple, because in the judgment there was a hint of the separation of the
religious and the civil aspects of marriage, which should have been
considered. We feel that this issue should have been opened up for more in-
depth discussion. However, there was insufficient time, as mentioned by the
chairperson.

I would just like to say that the course the committee took in taking this
Bill to the provinces was really what I would call public consultation. The
Bill was put into the hands of ordinary citizens and we did not just
listen, as we often do when we have public hearings in Parliament where we
hear advocacy groups presenting their cases. We heard ordinary citizens
speak and they spoke extremely well, and it was amazing how informed they
were.

We as a party support strong moral values and the role of the family as the
foundation pillar of society. We know that many colleagues across the
political spectrum share this view. This, however, does not imply contempt
of the Constitution or of the judgment of the court. Last week, and only
last week, the ruling party presented the latest version of this Bill that
is now before us. In all honesty, we have not been able to discuss it
broadly enough, again, because of the shortage of time.

It would be the understatement of the year to say that the original Bill
has caused tremendous controversy on a subject that we all know is very
sensitive, as the chairman said, and it should be treated accordingly. When
the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs took the Bill around the country in
a comprehensive series of public hearings, it quickly became apparent that
not only did it stir up emotions on all sides, it was also opposed by large
sections of the communities on religious and moral grounds, as well as by
the intended beneficiaries but for very different reasons.

This Bill is not supported by the IFP. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mna K W MORWAMOCHE: Sepikara, Motlatša-Sepikara le Maloko ao a hlophegago a
Ntlo ye. Tla ke thome ka gore tšeo di boletšwego ke Phathi ya Kganetšo mo
ke ditaba tša bo, “sehlaga swara, e ja tša bo Pilo”. Ke ditaba tš a bo, “ba
lla kae re kgone go hula”.

E re ke thome ka go tlaleletša seo se boletšwego ke Modulasetulo wa Komiti
ye ya tša Selegae ka ditaba tša theeletšo phatlalatšwa moo setšhaba se bego
se lebeletše go šireletša setšo, setlwaedi, sedumedi le ditokelo tša sona -
se sa lebelela ditokelo tša batho bao ba sa swanego le bona e lego seo se
ka se re išego felo ge re lebeletše.

Ke laetše gape gore maloko kamoka a Ntlo ye ao a lego ka mo gomme a be a
eme pele ga sethala a laetša gore a tla ama ke Melao ya Ntlo ye - ge lehono
ba hlanoga, Motlatša Sepikara, go rata gore nke le ba senke gore naa tšeo
ba bego ba di botša setšhaba ba re ba tla ama ke Molaotheo wa Ntlo ye, ba
be ba rereša naa?

Go ditšhišinyo ka moka tšeo di bego di bolelwa ge go be go dirwa theeletšo
phatlalatšwa, ke laeditše gore e be e le tšeo ba lebeletšego ditokelo tša
bona gomme ba se ba lebelela tša bao ba sa dirego tša go swana le tša bona.
E be e le ditokelo tša go swana le gore, a re fetošeng Molaotheo gomme re
nyake referentamo gore re kgone go gatelela bao ba se nago ditokelo tšeo di
swanetšego - e lego seo Molaotheo wa rena o sa se dumelelego. Ka Sepedi ba
re:  “Di tlogeleng di gole mmogo le tla di bona ka mohla wa kotulo”.

Go bile le bao ba rego hlalosang lenyalo. Lenyalo o tla le hlalosa bjang mo
manyalong ao a lego gona mo Afrika Borwa. Ka lenyalo la setšo re bolela ka
monna ge a nyala basadi ka dikgomo. A nyala wona “makubukgomo basadi maraga
thetho”. Ge go bolelwa ka lenyalo la semolao, go bolelwa ka monna ge a
nyala mosadi o tee gomme le yena mosadi a tlaleletša se re rego: “A ba
tlale ba ate monapelo ga a tsebje”. Ka Sepedi ge mosadi a nyalwa ka dikgomo
re re: “Moraka monna ke mpa, go apara kobo ke mabala”. Bao ba rego go
nyakega gore go be le molao wa manyalo wa go swana, go tla swana bjang mola
go se na tshwano mo magareng ga manyalo a? “Monna ge a palelwa ke go tia
kati o re kgoro ke ye nnyane”. “Pudi ge e tšhaba go tswala e re kgwatla di
a lla”. (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[Mr K W MORWAMOCHE: Hon Speaker, hon Deputy Speaker and hon members of this
House, let me start by saying that what the opposition party is saying here
is that they are trying to find a loophole that they can use.

Firstly, I concur with what the chairperson of the committee on local
government said about the public hearings. People were promoting their
culture, tradition, religion as well as their rights, overlooking the
rights of other people different from them. If you look at it, it will not
take us anywhere.

Let me also indicate that all the members of this House present here went
under oath to abide by the Rules of this House. If they back off now, hon
Deputy Speaker, the truth about the promises they made to the people will
need to be looked into.

Of all the suggestions that came up in the public hearings, I already
indicated that they were looking out for their own rights and neglecting
others that were different from theirs. It was rights such as changing the
Constitution and holding a referendum that could enable them to oppress
those who do not have the appropriate rights. However, that is not what our
Constitution approves of. It is said in Sepedi that everything will reveal
its true colours at a later stage.

There were others who asked that we define marriage. How do you define
marriage with all the types of marriages in South Africa? In a traditional
marriage, a man pays lobola for his woman in the form of cattle. He marries
a real woman. A legal marriage is when a man marries only one woman and the
woman will bear enough children to increase the nation. In Sepedi, when a
woman is being paid lobola for, we say that a man has done something he can
be proud of. How can people insist on one type of a marriage when there is
nothing similar about these marriages? Let us not beat around the bush
about the things we are not able to do.]

The Civil Union Bill provides for the formal and legal recognition of gay
and lesbian partnerships with the same rights as conventional marriages.
Among its provisions any two people aged 18 years and older may enter a
civil partnership, which they may call a marriage and which will carry all
the rights of a marriage under the existing Marriage Act. Partners may
legally refer to each other as husband, wife, spouse or partner.

No one may be a partner in more than one civil union or marriage under
either of the laws providing for marriage. Any marriage officer may
solemnise a union under the Civil Union Act after its approval, but any
marriage officer may record his or her objection to the law and decline to
officiate the same-sex marriage. Churches may apply to have the marriage
officer registered under the Civil Union Act, but none are obliged to do
so. Partners wishing to marry need only produce a South African identity
document or affidavit confirming their identity. Anyone who has previously
been married under either law will need to produce proof of divorce or a
certificate confirming the death of the previous partner. There will be no
calling of bans during the ceremony, but objections can be made in writing
to the marriage officer before the ceremony and must be investigated.

Civil union marriages must, like traditional marriages, be conducted
indoors, in a public office, house, church or wedding centre. The ceremony
requires the taking of hands and is completed with a vow.

The ANC supports the Bill. Anyone who is opposing the Bill ...

... hulle kan maar lê en gaap en droom. Die ANC gaan regeer.
[Tussenwerpsels.] [... they can lie down and yawn and dream. The ANC will
govern. [Interjections.]]

Mr L W GREYLING: Madam Deputy Speaker, this is the tenth anniversary of our
beloved Constitution. South Africans always mention with pride that ours is
the most progressive constitution in the world. Unfortunately, however, the
values of our society do not always match the progressive values of our
Constitution.

This has been particularly evident in the public hearings on this Bill,
which some people have used as a platform to express some of the most
deplorable and deep-seated prejudices. It is clear that we have a long way
to go before we can build a truly tolerant society where all our divisions
can be bridged.

What has shocked the ID, however, has been the attitude of the ANC on this
issue. Instead of showing true leadership, they chose to compromise on
constitutional principles in an effort to appease both sides. Instead they
have alienated both and drafted legislation that could be challenged in the
Constitutional Court. In particular the clause that civil marriage officers
can refuse to marry gay couples can certainly be seen to be discriminatory.
Given our tragic history they should have also known that, as the South
African Council of Churches stated, separate doesn’t ever mean equal. As
the ID upholds the Constitution and the values therein, we are left with no
choice but to oppose the Civil Union Bill.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Deputy Speaker, I believe this is the saddest day of the
12 years of our democratic Parliament when some members of this House, led
by the ruling party, will be passing into law the Civil Union Bill which is
opposed by the overwhelming majority of our people.

It is indeed very sad that the ANC leadership chose to support this Bill in
spite of the overwhelming objections from bodies such as the Marriage
Alliance representing millions of Christians, various other church and
community groupings and the Congress of Traditional Leaders of South
Africa. Their views have, to all intents and purposes, been ignored and
rejected.

Hon Steve Swart made excellent legal submissions on behalf of the ACDP
during deliberations in defence of the sanctity of traditional marriages
and argued that the definition of marriage as a voluntary union between a
man and a woman should be protected by a constitutional amendment. This
argument was based on the fact that marriage was instituted by God Almighty
and not liberals and that we value marriage and the family as a fundamental
building block of society.

The ACDP, together with thousands of people and groupings that made
submissions to Parliament, have consistently stated that same-sex marriages
should not be legalised and that our Constitution should rather be amended
to protect the sanctity of marriage as the voluntary union between a man
and a woman.

The Civil Union Bill justifies immorality and by inference calls sexual
perversion a legitimate alternative lifestyle that should be openly
accepted. It calls immorality and perversion a true virtue that is
commendable freedom.

May I remind this House that rejecting God’s house and despising His word
will result in those doing it being given over to the consequences of their
sins and divine wrath. Members must also be reminded that God will not be
mocked. When this Parliament, under the instigation of the ANC, passes this
Bill today then Parliament will have gone too far and is about to cross the
line of God’s patience with us as a nation.

The prophet Isaiah said:

  Woe to those who call evil good, and good evil ... woe to those who are
  wise in their own eyes and clever in their own sight.


Why are some forces trying to convince  the  nation  that  homosexuality  is
okay when God calls it an abomination? For the sake of the  peaceful  future
of this nation, Members of this Parliament must stop provoking God to  anger
as the men of Sodom and Gomorrah did and came under His wrath.


The writer of the book of Hebrews said:



  ... marriage should be honoured by all and the marriage bed kept pure, for
  God will judge the adulterer and all the sexually immoral.

Adultery, sexual immorality and homosexuality are grave sins in God’s sight
since they are a transgression of His law and defile the marriage
relationship between a man and a woman. With this Bill, the ruling party
and all those who support it are inviting serious trouble on themselves
without even considering the impact this Bill will have on future
generations.

While the ACDP appreciates that this Bill is an attempt to meet the
Constitutional Court ruling, we nevertheless believe it has gone beyond
what was required by the court. [Time expired.]

Ms S H NTOMBELA: Madam Speaker, Ministers, colleagues, during our public
hearing I received this anonymous message. Let me read it to you.

   I am a boy of 25 years. My appearance is that of a girl. My voice, my
   movement and everything within is that of a girl. In short, I am a boy in
   a girl’s body. What must I do? I tried forthe past few years to be a boy,
   playing with boys, tried to make my voice deeper. Tried to move like a
   boy but I cannot. What must I do? Minister, where must I go? My family
   won’t understand. They say I bore them. They say I am a disgrace to the
   family.

   Ke ba tshehisa ka batho, ke tlontlolla lelapa la bona. [I make


   them a laughing matter in the community, and I am a disgrace to the
   family.]


   The truth of the matter is, I am a boy in a girl’s body. What must I do?
   Where must I go? Sometimes I feel like killing
   myself for my family and my community make a joke of me. Sometimes I ask
   myself: why me in this family? Why did God do this to me? It is because
   God hates me. Ntate Meshoe, (Mr)is it because God hates me? What must I
   do? Where must I go? Lucky are those who don’t have kids like me, those
   who don’t have grandchildren like me, those who live their lives freely,
   those who can move and those who are accepted by everyone, those who are
   loved by God. What must I do? Where must I go?


   The fact of the matter is: I am a girl. I feel free when I am with girls.
   You will never understand what is within me, because you are lucky. You
   are not like me. You are very lucky because in this land God only loves
   you. Please, I want to live like you. I want to be accepted like you. I
   want to practice my rights like you. I am human being. I want to be free.
   I think God loves me too.


   Don’t even wish to have children like me. Don’t even wish to have
   children and grandchildren like me. I wonder if that happens, what would
   you do, Ntate Meshoe? (Mr) It can happen. It can be your child or it can
   be your grandchild. I am a South African. I belong here. I also want my
   rights and my dignity to be protected because I am here to stay.

Mme Sebui, ka morao ha ho bala molaetsa ona, ke ile ka ipotsa hore, nna ke
mang, ke tswa kae? Ka ipotsa hore na ho a hlokahala hore ke hatelle
ditokelo tsa batho ba bang.
Ke mang nna, ya tlang ho tlosa le ho silafatsa seriti sa batho ba bang? Ke
mang nna, ya ka etsang hore batho ba bang ba se ke ba thabela tokoloho ya
bona? Nna ya neng a se na ditokelo, ya neng a hatelletswe.

Le nna ke ne ke se na ditokelo tse kang ho fumana metsi, ke ne ke fuwa
metsi a ditshila, ke nweswa metsi hammoho le matata le difariki letamong.
Nna ke mang ya ka bang le tokelo ya hore tjhe ho ditokelo tsa batho ba
bang? Nna ya neng a sa kgone le ho fuwa ntlwana, nna ya neng a sebedisa
thota, ke ne ke sebedisa lejwe le jwang jwalo ka pampiri ya ntlwaneng. Ke
ne ke amohilwe seriti sa ka.

Ke mang nna moo nka reng tjhe ho ditokelo tsa batho ba bang? Ke mang nna ya
neng a pepela ngwana fatshe ha ke ne ke ithwetse, ke ne ke sa tsamay e
tleliniki, ke ne ke tholla ngwana fatshe mobung, ho ne ho se na le ngaka,
ke ne ke nketswe ditokelo tsa ka tsa bophelo bo botle.

Hobaneng ke tshwanela ho etsa dintho tsena ho batho ba bang? Hobaneng ke
tshwanela ho kgetholla? Hobaneng ke tshwanetse ho hatella batho ba bang, ha
Molaotheo wa rona o dumelletse hore motho e mong le e mong o na le
ditokelo.

Mme Sepikara, ha re ne re tsamaile, ntho e hlokolotsi e ileng ya hlaha ke
hore, bana ba batho ba bong bo tshwanang ba nyalaneng, ba tla sotlakwa ka
thobalano. Modulasetulo, le manyalong a tlwaelehileng bana ba rona ba ntse
ba sotlakwa.

Ho na le bontate ba tswetseng bana, ba be ba boele hape ba robale le bona
bana bao, hona jwale re ntse re nyalane re le bomme le ntate. Hona jwale re
ntse re nyalana ka tsela ena e tlwaelehileng ho na le ntate mane Bethlehem
ya ileng a nka bana ba hae ba babedi a ba otla ka lejwe; a ba pakela ka
sutukheising; a ba lahlela letamong. E ntse e le motswadi wa bona. Ebe
phapang e kae he moo, ho tswa ho botho ba motho, re ke ke ra etsa dintho
tse tjena.

Modulasetulo re na le Molaotheo wa rona, Molaotheo ona ha oa ngolwa ke ANC
feela, o ngotswe ke Afrika Borwa kaofela, ho kenyeleditse le bona ba
hananang le ona kajeno lena, e ne le le bankakarolo ho ngolweng ha
Molaotheo ona.

Re tlameha ho hlompha Molaotheo ona, le hona ho etsa bonnete ba hore o a
sebetsa. Ke mosebetsi wa rona ho etsa bonnete ba hore Molaotheo o a
sebetsa. Rona ba ANC le ba bang re utlwisisa hore kgethollo bathong ke ntho
e jwang. Re phetse tlasa mahlasipa a kgethollo moo re neng re tshwantshwa
le ditshwene ebile re bitswa mekgodutswane. Afrika Borwa ena, ke ya rona
bohle, bohle ba dulang ho yona, seriti, hlompho le ditokelo tsa bona di
sireletsehile. [Nako e fedile.] [Mahofi.] (Translation of Sesotho
paragraphs follows.)

[Madam Speaker, after reading this message I asked myself, who am I and
where do I come from?. I asked myself whether it is necessary for me to
violate other people’s rights. Who am I to demean other people’s dignity?
Who am I to make other people not to enjoy their freedom? I was also denied
many rights and I was oppressed.

I did not have access to clean water. I used unhygienic water, drinking
from the dam with ducks and pigs. Who am I to have a right to say no to
other people’s rights? I am the same person who did not have a toilet, who
used an open field for a toilet, and used grass and stones for toilet
paper. I am the same person whose dignity was taken away.

Who am I then to say no to other people’s rights? How can I say that, when
I gave birth on the floor, when I did not attend a clinic, which is why I
gave birth on the dusty ground? There was not even a doctor. My rights to
good health were taken away. How can I do such things to other people? Why
should I discriminate? Why should I oppress other people when our
Constitution allows each and every person to have rights?

Madam Speaker while we were doing public hearings, the most sensitive thing
that was raised was that children in same-sex marriages will be sexually
abused. Even in normal marriages our children are being abused. There are
fathers who give birth to children and, as those children grow, they have
sex with the very same children. That also happens in a marriage of a man
and woman. There is a man in Bethlehem who is in a heterosexual marriage,
he stoned his two kids and stuffed them in a suitcase and thereafter he
threw them into the dam. Where is the difference in humanity? We cannot do
such things.

Madam Speaker, we have a Constitution that was not drafted by the ANC
alone. It was drafted by the whole of South Africa including those who are
opposing it today. They had a contribution in drafting this Constitution.
We must respect this Constitution and make sure that it works. It is our
duty to ensure that it is effective.

We, as members of the ANC and others, understand what discrimination is
like to other people.  We were victims of racism, and we were always called
baboons and lizards.  This South Africa is for all of us. The dignity and
rights of all those who live in it must be protected.] [Time expired.]
[Applause.]]

Dr C P MULDER: Agb Mevrou die Voorsitter, die agb lid Ntombela wat so pas
gepraat het, het ’n lang betoog gelewer oor die werklikheid van mense met
’n ander seksuele georiënteerdheid wat in Suid-Afrika bestaan. Dit is ’n
werklikheid en ons ontken dit nie, maar dit is nie waaroor dit vandag gaan
nie. Dit gaan vandag oor die instelling van die huwelik en die werklikheid
daar rondom. Hierdie wetsontwerp wat huwelike tussen mense van dieselfde
geslag moontlik sal maak, is uiters omstrede. Niemand wil dit hê nie, selfs
nie die meerderheid van die ANC se koukus nie. Die ANC moes ’n besluit
geneem het wat al sy lede forseer om vandag vir hierdie wetsontwerp te stem
en tog word dit deurgeforseer.

Die vraag kan gevra word: Hoekom is dit die geval? Hoekom? Omdat die Woord
van God nie die hoogste gesag in hierdie land is nie, maar wel die
mensgemaakte Grondwet. Die Grondwet behoort daar te wees om die gemeenskap
te dien. Dit kan nooit korrek wees dat die Grondwet kan verwag dat die
gemeenskap sy eie waardes moet verloën nie. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Hon Madam Chairperson, the hon member Ntombela who has just
spoken expounded at length on the reality that exists in South Africa for
people with a different sexual orientation. It is a reality and we do not
deny it, but that is not what this is about today. Today it is about
marriage as an institution and the reality that surrounds it. This Bill
that will make same-sex marriages possible is extremely controversial.
Nobody wants it, not even the majority of the ANC caucus. The ANC had to
resolve to compel all its members to vote for this Bill today and still it
is being forced through.

The question can be asked: Why is this so? Why? Because the Word of God is
not the highest authority in this country, but in fact the man-made
Constitution is. The Constitution should be there to serve the community.
It can never be acceptable that the Constitution can expect from the
community to deny their own values.]

A constitution and its practical implications in law should take the values
of the community it serves into account. Exercising rights should not go
against the value system of society, because if it does, it estranges the
constitution from the community.

Dit is presies wat hier gebeur. Hierdie saak druis in teen die
waardestelsel van die breë Suid-Afrikaanse gemeenskap. [This is exactly
what is happening here. This matter is at variance with the value system of
the broader South African community.]

The strong Christian nature of the South African community and the
influence of Islam and the traditional African religions in our communities
are all strongly opposed to the legitimising of marriages between persons
of the same gender. However, this government does not want to listen to the
people and what they are saying.

Die Christelike gemeenskap is daarteen. Die Moslemgemeenskap is daarteen.
Die tradisionele leiers is daarteen en tog word dit deur geforseer. [The
Christian community is against it. The Muslim community is against it. The
traditional leaders are against it and yet it is still forced through.]

Marriage is an institution created by God between a man and a woman. That
is why God created Adam and Eve and not Adam and Steve. We will vote
against this Bill for that reason. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Chairperson, hon members, I think it is
important that we place the Bill in its proper historical context. The
roots of this Bill lie in the pronouncements of our people over very many
years and decades of struggle. In particular, the roots of this Bill lie in
the declaration our people made at the Congress of the People in 1955. In
the preamble of the Freedom Charter, our people declared, and I quote:


  Only a democratic state based on the will of all the people can secure to
  all their birthright without distinction of colour, race, sex or belief.


It was this declaration, amongst others, which guided us in drafting the
present democratic national Constitution, hailed throughout the world as
one of the most advanced at this time.

The Constitution itself does not prevaricate on this question, for it says
so in Chapter 2, section 9, subsection 3. We ourselves declare to this
House that:


   The state may not unfairly discriminate directly and indirectly against
   anyone on one or more grounds, including race, gender, sex, pregnancy,
   marital status, ethnic or social origin, colour, sexual orientation, age,
   disability, religion, conscience, belief, culture, language and birth.


What the Constitutional Court did was not to impose on us the task of
making a new law. Rather, the Constitutional Court drew our attention to
the fact that we have granted the right to all South African citizens to
choose who to marry or take as a life partner. That right is already
granted to the citizens of our country.

The Constitutional Court reminded us that, in this regard, we have not as
yet delivered in relation to those who prefer same-sex partners for life.
They were not saying: Grant new rights. They said: You have already granted
this right, but deliver on that right in relation to those who prefer same-
sex partners. They said that we had not done so because we had not aligned
the law with the basic law of the country, the Constitution.

The question before us, therefore, is not whether same-sex marriages or
civil unions are right or not. That’s not the question. The question is
whether we suppress those in our society who prefer same-sex partners or
not. That is the challenge. Are we going to suppress them? [Interjections.]

At this time, we are bound to fulfil the promises of democracy that we made
to the people of our country, especially during the long, hard years of
struggle. Are we going to suppress this so-called minority, or are we going
to let these people, like ourselves, enjoy the privilege of choosing who
will be their life partners or not?

By the way, voting for this Bill is not advocating. We are not being asked
to advocate same-sex marriages. We are being asked to grant this right, so
if you vote for this, you only deliver, you only grant the right to those
concerned; you will continue to live your life as you choose, but let’s
grant the right to those who also must exercise the same right.

We have no need indeed to preserve for ourselves, purely because of the
majority of our numbers, the exclusive right of marriage as recognisable in
law, while we deny others the same right. Why would we want to do that?

I take this opportunity to remind the House, to remind those who know, and
inform those who do not know, that in the long and arduous struggle for
democracy very many men and women of homosexual and lesbian orientation
joined the ranks of the liberation and democratic forces. [Interjections.]
Some went into exile ... [Applause.] Some went into exile with the
movement, yet others went into the prisons of the country with us. They
accepted long prison sentences. Some stood with us, ready to face death
sentences.

Indeed, as we stand here today, we can recall names and graves of comrades
who resisted and refused to cave in in the face of probable death
sentences. How then can we live with the reality that we should enjoy
rights that we fought together for, side-by-side, and deny them that?

Today, as we reap the fruits of that democracy, it is only right that they
must be afforded similar space in the sunshine of our democracy. We do them
no favour, but reward their efforts in the same way that our own efforts
are being rewarded. I have to remind the House that, after all, culture is
not static.

There was a time when voting was only for men. It was rejected that women
should vote. There was a time when society would not accept that women
should vote. Yet, in the 1890s, New Zealand led the world in granting her
women the right to vote. Then, in 1918, Soviet Russia followed suit, and
then, in 1921, Great Britain followed. In 1924, the Soviet Union extended
the right to women. In this country, in 1930, white women, for the first
time, were allowed to vote.

Culture is not static. There was a time when you could not even talk about
the possibility of a woman becoming a church minister. Today,
denominations, one after another, are accepting that women may indeed
become church leaders and church ministers. [Applause.]

Oh yes, there was a time when being a homosexual meant imprisonment. Just
by being a homosexual, you got locked up in jail. Oscar Wilde, in Victorian
England, was locked up in jail, not for any crime, but simply because he
declared his homosexuality. Today, Great Britain is a different society,
because culture is not static.

This country cannot afford to continue to be a prisoner of the backward,
timeworn prejudices which have no basis. The time has come that we as this
society, as this Parliament, on behalf of our nation, must lead.

I therefore wish to urge members of the House to look past the prejudices
of our time, and grant this right to those who have been pleading with us
for so long now so that we may bequeath to succeeding generations a society
democratic and more tolerant than the one that was handed down to us by
those who preceded us. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B E PULE: Madam Chair, the UCDP will not align itself with any
institution that seeks to negate that marriage is between male and female.
The argument that the Constitution calls for same-sex marriages is lame,
because that very same Constitution is an outcome of the men and women in
this very same Chamber, whereas the Bible has stood the test of time as the
inspired Word of God.

It is a sad day in the history of this country that such bad legislation
has to be passed in our time. What is the result of a union that does not
procreate? The legislation is bad in the sense that it allows 18-year-olds
to enter into a union even without the authority of their families.

Civil unions are a direct negation of attempts at moral regeneration. We
should expect that with civil unions succeeding, we will be legalising
sodomy, because the impression we are being given here is that the struggle
was for sodomy and not for freedom. [Interjections.] Otherwise, how are
these men going to show their marital status? [Interjections.]

The UCDP pities some members of this House who will vote for this Bill much
against their will, conscience and religion. Poor colleagues will be voting
through fear and not from a sense of justice. The UCDP will always look
back and curse the day on which this legislation was passed.
[Interjections.] The UCDP will not and will never support the Civil Union
Bill. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you. Order, members! Order!
Order!

Dr S E M PHEKO: Chairperson, the traditional institution of a union between
a man and a woman for procreation must be protected. It cannot be equated
with same-sex unions. Same-sex marriages are so repugnant that only four
countries in the whole world have legalised them. Do we want our country to
be the fifth in the world and the first in Africa to be in this mess?
[Interjections.] Which country in Africa will accept leadership from a
country that suffers from Eurocentric eccentricity? Only those who have
sold their souls to cultural imperialism will support this obscenity.

It is hypocritical in the extreme to talk of moral regeneration and the
African Renaissance and then to turn around and surrender to this cultural
aberration. It is no excuse that it is in the Constitution. It should never
have been there in the first place.

The issues in the country are landlessness, inhumane squatting,
unaffordable education, unemployment, lack of good health care and the
eradication of poverty. These are the things that people fought for.

This Bill needed a national referendum if this Parliament were to respect
the people of this country. A large body of scientific researchers has
established that there is no scientific basis for a homosexual gene.
[Interjections.] [Izwe lethu.] [Our land.] [Time expired.]

Mr J B SIBANYONI: Hon Chairperson, members of the House ...

... ekulumenipikiswano le, ngifuna ukuqala khulu khulu ngehlangothini
lomthetho. Lapho ngithi khona: Uthini umthetho? AbeSuthu bathi: Molao o
reng? Amakhuwa wona athi: Wat sê die wet? [What does the law say?] [In this
debate, I would like to focus on the side of the law. Wherein I say, what
does the law say? The Sotho people say Molao o reng? Whites say, wat sê die
wet?]

The Constitutional Court has ruled that the definition of marriage under
the common law and the marriage formula in the Marriage Act of 1961
contradict the Constitution and are invalid to the extent that they fail to
provide the means in terms of which same-sex couples can enjoy the status
and benefits together with the responsibilities that marriage accorded to
heterosexual couples. In this respect, the Marriage Act and the common law
definition of marriage are in conflict with the Constitution and violate
the rights enshrined in the Freedom Charter and our Bill of Rights.

I will not go into detail regarding the Freedom Charter, because the hon
Lekota has already done that. But maybe I should immediately say that there
are those who are saying that we should consider amending the Constitution
and taking away the sexual orientation rights. To them I would like to say
that that will not be enough, because you would have to go further than the
Constitution and look at the Freedom Charter and try to amend the charter,
which was signed in 1956 at which there were 2 808 delegates from all
corners of the country. They came from Sekhukhune, from the Cape, from
Mafikeng and the like, and they said that “All shall be equal before the
law” and that all discriminatory laws shall be abolished.

The quote cautioned providing a remedy to the effect that Parliament should
avoid a remedy that, on the face of it, would provide equal protection but
would do so in a manner that, in its context and application, would be
calculated to reproduce new forms of marginalisation. Historically, the
concept of separate but equal served as a threadbare cloak for covering
distaste or repudiation by those in power of the group subjected to
segregation.

The hon Lekota has elaborated on the fact that when you are in power, you
should not oppress or suppress those who are not in power or who are in the
minority. Judge Sachs held that whatever legislative remedy was chosen must
be as generous and accepting towards same-sex couples as it was to
heterosexual couples, both in terms of the intangibles and the tangibles
involved, and that appropriate sensitivity must be shown to provide a
remedy that is truly and manifestly respectful of the dignity of same-sex
couples.

I submit that the present Bill caters for this. Parliament, as we know, has
until 1 December to correct this defect. Also, the Constitutional Court has
said that if Parliament fails to do so, the word “spouse” will be read as
being added to the Marriage Act after the words “wife” or “husband” in
order for the defect to be cured.
Now, in responding to the Constitutional Court judgment, Parliament enacted
this piece of legislation that goes a long way towards confirming our
constitutional values of equality, dignity and the advancement of human
rights and freedom.

The Bill defines a civil union as the voluntary union of two persons who
are both 18 years of age or older, which is solemnised and registered by
way of either a marriage or a civil partnership in accordance with the
procedures prescribed in this Act to the exclusion, while it lasts, of all
others. The effect of this is that the Civil Union Bill is open to
homosexuals, heterosexuals and intersex persons. Intersex refers to persons
with ambiguous genitalia and who are neither male nor female. The Marriage
Act excludes such persons from marriage.

The Civil Union Bill sets the age of getting married at 18 years. This will
be in line with the Children’s Act when it comes into operation. The age of
majority will be 18 years. So, too, is the case with the age at which one
can become a voter.

The Marriage Act provides for females of 12 years and males of 16 years to
get married with the Minister’s consent. But this Civil Union Bill is
saying everybody will get married at the age of 18 years.

During the era of the parliamentary state in South Africa, there was what
was known as a constitutional crisis. The parliament at that time wanted to
take away the rights of coloureds as voters. When the court declared that
law invalid, parliament convened and created what they called a high court
of parliament. In that court they appointed people as judges who did not
necessarily have legal qualifications.

The court also declared that high court of parliament not to be a court of
law, but to be parliament operating under another name. I am supporting my
argument by saying: let us not do that. Instead, we are going to be
affirming or giving rights to the people who do not have rights.

Ngifuna ukutjho ukuthi thina, njengabantu ababuya emtlhagweni webandlululo,
umtlhago nobuhlungu sibazi khulu. Akusingithi godu esingajika sifune
ukugandelela abanye abantu sibakhuphele ngaphandle. Umhlonitjhwa ukhulumile
bonyana abantu ebebagandelelwa ngaphandle, bagandelelwa ngilabo
ababaphetheko gade bathwele budisi kangangani. U-Kalyan uthi thina
esimalunga we-ANC bazosikatelela ukuthi sivowude namkha sikhethe
namhlanjesi. Mina-ke ngithi sithabe khulu namhlanjesi ngombana sifumene
ithuba lokobana sivowude; sinikele abantu amalungelo lawo ebegade
banganawo; sibe babantu abanikela abantu amalungelo lapha eSewula Afrika.
Abanye bavika ngeBhayibheli. Ngifuna ukutjho ukuthi ... (Translation of
isiNdebele paragraph follows.)
[I would like to say, as people who are from poverty caused by apartheid,
that we understand the pain caused by poverty. We cannot oppress other
people by excluding them. The honourable member spoke of how difficult it
was for people who were oppressed by those who were in power. Hon Kalyan
says they will force members of the ANC to vote or to elect today. I say we
are very happy that we got an opportunity to vote; we gave people rights
they did not enjoy before. We are the people who gave South Africans their
rights. Others are using the Bible as a scapegoat. I would like to say ...]

... marriage is an institution recognised by the state in South Africa.
Marriage, in terms of the Marriage Act, is a civil act. It is not a
religious act.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr J B SIBANYONI: I want to say that the ANC lives and leads. We support
this Bill. [Applause.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Madam Chair, the UPSA will not support this Bill.
[Interjections.] The nature and content of this Bill clearly reflects that
this institution, namely Parliament, is abandoning the essence of its
primary function. This primary function is not just one of law-making, but
rather of making laws that reflect the norms and values of society.
The Civil Union Bill, in its very essence, represents everything against
the norms and values of our society at large. The acceptance of this Bill
as an Act would be a failure of this Parliament’s objective to give a true
enunciation of society’s values. The sensitive nature of this matter should
have given government the opportunity to test this matter, together with
the death penalty and affirmative action, by means of a referendum,
precisely to test the will of the people.

The desire to have such an ethically challenged law is the wish of only a
portion of society, minute in relation to the overwhelming majority of
South Africans that finds it undesirable. I thank you. [Interjections.]
[Time expired.]

Mr M R SIKAKANE: Chairperson, this is one Bill in which we should have had
the Chair saying, “As there is no speakers’ list, the Bill will be sent to
the President for concurrence,” or something like that. [Applause.] I don’t
know what this is all about, because are you here to suppress other people,
to take away their rights? I can’t understand you. What are you talking
about? I just can’t believe you.

I take the podium as a disadvantaged person in the sense that I don’t know
what happens with technology. This is not the first time that the Minister
of Defence has handicapped me. I used to play soccer and I was a star, I’m
sorry to tell you. I played in Durban for Zulu Royals. I was called
“Terror”. [Applause.] And, as he is younger than me, when he came into the
picture playing for Claremont Home Defenders - we were playing at Msizini –
just because Claremont Home Defenders wanted him to be seen like terror,
they nicknamed him “Terror”. So all the time he has been following me.
[Laughter.]

So, this time I wrote my speech, and the title is: Rights. Now I see he has
taken everything – every word – I have written in my speech. [Laughter.]
I’m really, really disadvantaged. I don’t know what happens with technology
today. I’m not sure.

I want to highlight two things. I won’t bore you now by going back to what
my namesake has said. I grew up in Empangeni in the rural area. When I
opened my eyes, our neighbour – I’m telling the IFP – was Mulondo. This
baba was a huge man, bearded like myself. He used to dress up like this,
and then take a doek and put it on his head and put on a pinafore. He was
staying with a man, and this was in my youth. When I talk about my youth,
you must know I’m talking about the 1940s. He was staying with a man in the
rural area, but, for God’ sake, the community respected and accepted that
situation. [Applause.] There was no problem whatsoever.

In the early 1960s when I started working, I worked for the Department of
Bantu Administration in KwaMuhle, Durban. I went with Durban boy – the ANC
used to call him “Durban boy” – Johnny Makhatini. He stayed in North
Street. Black people could not stay in town, but he stayed in a back yard.

One day I was with him in his house and we were sitting there talking.
There were two guys there I didn’t know – with ... [Inaudible.] ... Ngoma,
who was the leader of the youth league. The next thing I saw a curtain open
– there was no door leading to the bedroom – and there tata Sulu came out.
That was at the time when they wanted tata Sulu dead or alive. He was
hiding in Johnny Makhatini’s room in North Street. He started saying to
these guys: Hey, what are you doing here? Didn’t I tell you to go and do
one, two, three? They jumped up and left. Afterwards, Johnny told me that
they were gay, but they were doing underground work for the ANC. They had
been part of us in the struggle. So, what are you saying today? [Applause.]

So, just to highlight my speech now ... [Laughter.] When we went out to
these public hearings, there was the outcry of “Change the Constitution;
call for a referendum”. All the time I was morose, feeling so out of place.
I asked myself that if people were saying: “Call for a referendum; change
the Constitution”, what does that mean? Does that mean that they want us to
change the Constitution so that we suppress other people? Because, in
short, that is what they were saying with their call for “change the
Constitution; call for a referendum”. Are you sitting here, wanting to
suppress other people’s rights? No, people, you can’t say that.
I won’t give my speech now; Terror, my namesake, has said everything. The
other thing I want to highlight is that when you say “Change the
Constitution” and so forth, what does that mean? Are you telling me you are
the first people sitting here to say: “This is our success; today I’m going
to have a very good, peaceful sleep”? Because I would say to myself this is
one time I have made a contribution because I have liberated other people,
I have freed them; I have given them equal rights just like everybody else.
So, this is a good time for members to pass and endorse this Bill.
[Interjections.] And, understand one thing: when the Constitutional Court
said we must amend, what it was saying to us was: “Parliament, you have
repealed all discriminatory laws, but I think you have overlooked this one.
Just go and repeal this law so that everybody is equal.” So, it is not
actually the court that told us what to do. It reminded us of our duty, of
our function, to change and repeal this discriminatory law.

The other thing that bothered me during the hearings was people saying,
“Don’t use a certain word like ‘marriage’.” I was saying to people, “Where
do you get the right to say to other people ‘don’t use this word’?” No one
seated here has the right to say “The word ‘marriage’ belongs to me; it’s
my right. Don’t use it.” Where do you get the right to say, “This word
belongs to us”, or “to me” and “You mustn’t use the word ‘marriage’”?

I don’t want to say it’s all crazy when we use those terms. A very
important part of this is that today we are fulfilling the requirements of
the Freedom Charter. When you look at it all, all of our struggling, being
arrested for freedom, arrested for nondiscrimination, arrested for
uplifting the lives of other people – how on earth could we think, in all
of those respects, of not allowing and giving other people their rights? We
are fulfilling our document that was crafted and done by the ANC. That is
all we are supposed to do today.

I should thank you that finally we have now honoured the wishes and the
aspirations of other people by voting solidly for this Bill. I thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, the FD will never support legislation that
undermines the Word of God. The FD rejects the Civil Union Bill because we
believe it undermines biblical values, especially the sanctity of marriage
between a man and a woman ordained by God.

Michael Cassidy of the Marriage Alliance of South Africa writes in a
leaflet entitled Same-Sex Marriage, why South Africa should say no to this
legislation:


  I imagine some 98% of South Africans believe we should say no to the same-
  sex marriage.

Let me add that I do not know of one Islamic country throughout the world
that would support same-sex civil unions. Most Islamic countries view same-
sex unions as the immoral decadents of the worst kind, and they are right
in this regard.

Why do committed Christians, Muslims and Jews collectively and
unequivocally reject same-sex relations, let alone civil unions? According
to the Bible, the Koran and Torah, homosexuality and lesbianism are an
abomination in the sight of God. The versions of the creature He made in
His own image.

Chairperson, I have two minutes and I only used one. [Interjections.] The
Bible says in the book of Leviticus 18:22 that homosexuality is absolutely
forbidden for it is an abomination. God has a monopoly on human rights. He
created us and he knows what is good for us. He defines what is right and
wrong, not culture or man-made constitutions. God destroyed Sodom and
Gomorrah because of the sin of homosexuality.

In the New Testament God equally condemns homosexuality and same-sex
unions, especially in Romans 1:26, where the Bible says that that is why
God let go of them and let them do all these things so that even their
women turned against God’s natural plan for them and indulged in sexual sin
with each other.

As believers we must decide today whether we will accept and support God’s
Word or whether we will support the sexual orientation clause in the
Constitution. Our decision is quite unequivocal; we believe that God is
greater than our Constitution and our courts and that His Word is the final
authority. The FD therefore rejects the Civil Union Bill with the contempt
it deserves. [Applause.]

Mr M SWART: Chairperson, the Constitutional Court recently declared two
Acts of Parliament unconstitutional due to a lack of public consultation
and participation. The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs however went to
great lengths and great expense to obtain the views of the public on the
Civil Union Bill being considered here today.

Interested parties were provided an opportunity to present Parliament with
written and oral submission and thousands of submissions were in fact
received. Public hearings were mostly held in rural areas and it became
abundantly clear that the majority of citizens preferred that reference to
the words “marriage” and “same-sex” be deleted from the Bill.

After conducting public hearings the portfolio committee held a series of
committee meetings at which very little was achieved. One of these meetings
was scheduled for 6 November 2006, but members received scant notice of the
meeting. Diaries had to be rearranged and appointments cancelled off to
attend the meeting.
An hour before the scheduled time, members were advised that the meeting
was cancelled. No explanation for the cancellation of the meeting or an
apology to members has been forthcoming. It became abundantly clear then
that then ANC had not yet clarified their mandate. Committee members were
asked to put their mandates before the committee, which they did, but no
input came from the ANC.

Only two days later the ANC came up with an amended Bill now before
Parliament. The Bill was steamrolled through the committee with no
discussion being allowed and in totally unprocedural and undemocratic
manner it virtually disregarded of the views of the public. According to
press reports the chairperson of the portfolio committee now states that
the Bill should be regarded as an interim measure.

Should this be true, it would probably have been easier and cheaper to
allow the Constitutional Court judgement to take effect, i.e. by inserting
the word “spouse” in the Marriage Act. It would have achieved the same
result as this new Bill and it could have been amended in time to come. By
just having two Bills, it could be seen as discrimination. The Bill is
therefore unconstitutional; it would attract constitutional action and
government should not be surprised if they land up with egg on their face
once more.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chairperson, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, when I was growing up in a
Christian home I was taught that God is love. I was told that religion is
about tolerance, inclusivity and love.

Today I feel ashamed to be a South African, having seen the intolerance
that people had to experience during the passing of this Bill, and about
some of the things that were said in this House. If God is the God of love
and you want to come and profess that God to us, then show us his loving
face. That is what you should be doing. [Applause.]

Jammer, ek het nie vir jou gewys nie. [Sorry, I didn’t point at you.]

I think the second issue is that the ANC has very clearly stated its
position on this matter from the outset. The Constitution is very clear; we
are not doing any favours to gay people here. We are not giving them little
pieces of goodwill. We are dealing here with what we decided upon at least
12 years ago when the equality clause was passed, which provided that we
should not discriminate on the basis of sex, sexual orientation or marital
status. That is what your Constitution says.

Today some of the people who helped pass that Constitution are sitting here
with wide eyes, saying: But we could never have meant that. What on earth
do you think you meant? [Laughter.] If you said you are not going to
discriminate on the basis of marital status and on the basis of sexual
orientation?

So the ANC position, which derives from long before the Constitution passed
and which has been entrenched in the Constitution, is that these are rights
that a group that has always been marginalised in our society is entitled
to and all that we are doing now is making sure that we bring about that
realignment. Some people have said here that all this happened just the
other day. However, I would remind you that when the Fourie judgment was
given, the ANC already made a statement on this matter. On 1 December 2005
already, the ANC had the following to say about the Fourie judgment:


  The ANC reaffirms its view that citizens should not be discriminated
  against on the basis of sexual orientation and that the Constitution’s
  legal system and institutions of state have a responsibility to uphold
  that basic human right.


  Today’s ruling, like others before it, is an important step forward in
  aligning the laws of the country with the rights and freedoms contained in
  the South African Constitution.


So the issue is not whether we should give rights. The issue is how we
should do that, and I will get back to that in a minute.

Regarding the second issue, of which we have some luminaries here, with the
hon Kalyan being one and the hon Greyling another, who tell us that it is
definitely going to be unconstitutional to allow people not to solemnise
marriages on the basis of their conscience. Now, I see there is a law
adviser who also said this in the newspapers. I find this astounding,
because all you had to do is to go and read the judgment, which deals with
this issue.

So, it shows me that those members and the legal adviser did not read the
judgment. Let me remind you what Judge Sachs said on dealing with this
issue about conscience. It says in paragraph 159:


  The principle of reasonable accommodation could be applied by the state
  to ensure that civil marriage officers who had sincere religious
  objections to officiating at same-sex marriages would not themselves be
  obliged to do so if this resulted in the violation of their conscience.

It goes on to quote the Christian education case, where it ends off by
saying:


  At the same time the state should wherever reasonably possible seek to
  avoid putting believers to extremely painful and intensely burdensome
  choices of being either true to their faith or else respectful to the
  law.


  Therefore the judgment dealt with this issue. It says:


      Do not allow such people to be forced to do anyagainst their
      conscience or religion.

Now, we are also told that the Constitutional Court will find this Bill to
be unconstitutional on other grounds. I think the issue here is simply
this. The Constitutional Court in its court order found two aspects of the
substance of marriages, which needs to be dealt with. Firstly, in the
common law, the definition of marriage is to be dealt with and in the Act
the formula for marriage is to be dealt with. The rest of the Marriage Act
deals only with the procedures and processes to be followed. Therefore,
only the two substantive issues the court found to be unconstitutional,
namely both the definition of marriage and the formula to marriage, need to
be dealt with.

Now, the issue for us in government was not whether we would allow this or
not, but it was how best to do it. The problem with amending the Marriage
Act is that we all know the Marriage Act really catered for Christian
marriages of a certain kind. By amending that Act there were certain
unforeseen circumstances that we are very worried about. For example, the
Act, as it stands today, allows girls between 15 and 21 to marry. It allows
girls under the age of 15 to marry if they have the permission of the
Minister to do so. So if we were to amend the Marriage Act, the consequence
would be that we would have had the problem of children at very young and
tender ages getting involved in gay marriages or trying to do so and
creating further controversy in society.

There were two other unforeseen circumstances. I do not have time to deal
with them, but we will do so at a later occasion. Thank you very much.
[Time expired.][Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Madam Chair, I just want to correct the fact
that some people have made comments which I really think are not correct,
and we need to set the record straight.

It is not true that we are dealing here with a new piece of legislation. I
think what we are dealing with here is the same Bill which was presented
before the portfolio committee or before Parliament. What has happened is
that, on the basis of what has emerged from the public participation
process and from the consultation with a variety of stakeholders, certain
amendments have been made and that’s what we are dealing with here. So,
there is no new piece of legislation.

If I may touch on just two of those, most stakeholders actually made the
point that there is a need to deal with the issue of domestic partnerships
at a later date, because we had no constitutional deadline to meet. That
has been removed from this piece of legislation.

The second issue was the issue of being separate but equal. In spite of
trying our best to meet the two principles which were stated by the
Constitutional Court and also to look at the rights, status, benefits and
the responsibilities to give all those to same-sex couples in this
particular piece of legislation, people still maintained that this was a
separate but equal route. The religious groupings were raising the issue
of, for instance, even the mere mentioning of same-sex.

To deal with the issue of separate but equal, we then had to actually make
sure that this Bill did not only cater for same-sex couples but also for
heterosexual couples who want to go the civil partnership route. That’s
what we have done here.

So, it is not a new piece, but one area which remains contentious, which I
believe is still in the public discourse and there is a need to engage on,
is the whole issue of marriage. There has been insistence on that from
quite a number of stakeholders, that there should be no reference to
marriage at all in this piece of legislation. That is the one issue which
is the bone of contention here.

What we have been advised is that we then have to engage in a discussion as
to whether having the word marriage in this piece of legislation is a legal
necessity or a legal nicety. That’s what somebody said. It was said, in
fact, that it is a legal necessity because what we are likely be confronted
with is a ruling against the Bill, that it is unconstitutional even before
people have looked at this piece of legislation.

I am not sure if in this debate, by rejecting this piece of legislation,
people are suggesting that perhaps government should have allowed the
courts to then amend the Marriage Act on 1 December.

We believe we knew when we brought about this Civil Union Bill that this is
not a matter society is going to agree on. That society is polarised. We
are a divided society on this matter, but we have a responsibility of
conducting continuous public education, of actually talking to people about
the rights which have been provided by this very Constitution which we all
passed in 1996; which we provided to all the people of South Africa. We now
have a responsibility to deliver the promise contained, amongst others, in
that Constitution and that Bill of Rights and that’s what we are trying to
provide here.

Now I just thought that we needed to set the records straight that it is
not true that we are bringing in a new piece of legislation.

I have actually seen the submissions of all the parties, including the
submission from the DA. One of the proposals you made two weeks or a week
ago before this matter was finalised was the issue of actually ensuring
that this Bill does not just cater for same-sex partnerships but also is
inclusive and therefore you have two consenting adults allowed to go the
route of a civil union if they so wish. [Interjections.] You did say that.

But, secondly, you yourselves proposed in your submissions that the entire
clause on domestic partnerships should be removed. That is exactly what has
happened here; it has been removed.

The issue revolves around marriage, and I think it is the responsibility of
all parties, not just the opposition party or the ANC. Our responsibility
as leadership or representatives is to continuously engage on the issue
because, of course, some of the people are going to be voting for the Bill,
because they have an obligation to do so to provide these rights, not
necessarily because people may agree on this particular issue.

The last thing I want to say is, I think we all have a responsibility to
step back, remove ourselves from the situation and look at the rights of a
particular grouping of people here in this country, which does exist. It
does exist and you cannot wish them away. There is no dustbin where you are
going to collect a particular group of people and throw them into. We have
a responsibility to society. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be read a second time.

Division demanded.

The House divided:

   AYES - 229: Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asmal, A K;
   Balfour, B M N; Baloyi, M R; Benjamin, J; Beukman, F; Bhamjee, Y S;
   Bhengu, F; Bloem, D V; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Bonhomme, T J; Booi, M S;
   Burgess, C V; Cachalia, I M; Camerer, S M; Carrim, Y I; Cele, M A;
   Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P; Chohan-Khota, F I; Coetzee, R; Combrinck, J J;
   Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Davidson, I O; De Lange, J H; Diale, L N;
   Didiza, A T; Dikgacwi, M M; Direko, I W; Dithebe, S L; Dlali, D M;
   Doidge, G Q M; Dreyer, A M; Du Toit, D C ; Ellis, M J; Erwin, A; Farrow,
   S B; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Frolick, C T; Fubbs, J L;
   Gabanakgosi, P S; Gaum, A H; George, M E; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M N;
   Gololo, C L; Gumede, D M; Gumede, M M; Hendricks, L B; Hendrickse, P A C;
   Hogan, B A; Huang, S; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H; Johnson, C B; Johnson, M;
   Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M U; Kalyan, S V; Kasienyane, O R; Kasrils, R;
   Kekana, C D; Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K K; Kohler-Barnard,
   D; Komphela, B M; Koornhof, G W; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G;
   Lekota, M G P; Leon, A J; Lishivha, T E; Loe, S J; Louw, J T; Louw, S K;
   Lowe, C M; Ludwabe, C I; Maake, J J; Mabandla, B S; Mabena, D C; Maduma,
   L D; Madumise, M M; Magubane, N E ; Magwanishe, G B; Mahlaba, T L;
   Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Mahote, S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Makgate, M W;
   Maloney, L; Maloyi, P D N; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, D K; Manana, M N S;
   Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane, L M;
   Mashigo, R J; Mashile, B L; Masutha, T M; Mathebe, P M; Matlala, M H;
   Matsemela, M L; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Matsomela, M J J ; Mayatula, S M;
   Maziya, A M; Mbili, M E; Mbombo, N D; Mentor, M P; Mgabadeli, H C;
   Mkhize, Z S; Mlangeni, A; Mnguni, B A; Mnyandu, B J; Modisenyane, L J;
   Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mohlaloga, M R;
   Mokoena, A D; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morgan, G R; Morobi, D M;
   Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B G; Moss, L N; Moss, M I;
   Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mpahlwa, M B ; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B;
   Mtshali, E; Mufamadi, F S; Mzondeki, M J G; Nawa, Z N; Ndzanga, R A; Nel,
   A C; Nene, M J ; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E;
   Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngculu, L V J; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, W;
   Njikelana, S J ; Njobe, M A A; Nkem-Abonta, E; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z;
   Ntombela, S H; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, R S; Nwamitwa-Shilubana, T
   L P; Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N ; Nyambi, A J; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant,
   D A A; Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C; Pieterse, R D; Rabie, P J;
   Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M;
   Rasmeni, S M; Reid, L R R; Saloojee, E; Schippers, J; Schmidt, H C;
   Schneemann, G D; Schoeman, E A; Seadimo, M D; Sefularo, M; Sekgobela, P
   S; Selfe, J; September, C C; Shabangu, S; Sibande, M P; Sibanyoni, J B;
   Siboza, S ; Sikakane, M R; Sisulu, L N; Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M;
   Skweyiya, Z S T; Smith, V G; Smuts, M; Solo, B M; Solomon, G; Sonto, M R;
   Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Stephens, J J M; Steyn, A C; Surty, M E ; Swart,
   P S; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tlake, M F; Tolo, L J; Trent, E W; Tsenoli, S
   L; Tshwete, P; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van Niekerk, A I; Van Wyk, A;
   Vundisa, S S; Wang, Y; Waters, M; Xolo, E T; Yengeni, L E; Zita, L.

   NOES - 41: Bhengu, M J; Blanché, J P I; Cupido, H B ; Doman, W P; Godi, N
   T; Gore, V C; Green, L M; Greyling, L W; Groenewald, P J; Harding, A;
   Jankielsohn, R; King, R J; Labuschagne, L B; Mars, I; Masango, S J;
   Meshoe, K R J; Minnie, K J; Mncwango, M A; Mpontshane, A M; Mulder, C P;
   Mulder, P W A; Nel, A H; Nkabinde, N C; Opperman, S E; Pheko, S E M;
   Pule, B E; Rabinowitz, R; Roopnarain, U; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Seaton, S A;
   Sibuyana, M W; Sigcau , S N; Simmons, S; Smith, P F; Spies, W D; Swart,
   M; Swart, S N; Van der Merwe, J H; Van Dyk, S M; Zikalala, C N Z; Zulu, N
   E.

   ABSTAIN - 2: Phungula, J P; Seremane, W J.

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: Madam Chair, we seem to have a fault with some of the
equipment. Would it have been registered or not?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Blanché, will you come to the
Table, and they can record your vote here please?

Question agreed to.

Bill accordingly read a second time.

                    TRANSNET PENSION FUND AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Madam Chairperson, I must say that
after what was, I believe, quite a momentous debate and vote, we are
dealing with matters which may seem more mundane, but which I think also
relate to some important rights that pensioners have. I would like once
again to table before this House the second reading debate for the Transnet
Pension Fund Amendment Bill, because this ends a long process and it is my
hope that the House will support the Bill.

Members will recall that the basic changes being made to the Transnet
Pension Fund Bill are the outcome of the protected negotiation and strike
action earlier this year. In the first reading debate, the portfolio
committee and I gave quite a bit of detail on the actual contents of the
Bill, so I will not repeat that now. I will just take some time to remind
us all of the origins of this piece of legislation.

The problem arose when we began to implement the restructuring of Transnet
by moving certain entities off its balance sheet into separate entities.
The particular issue arose when the process of transferring Metrorail to
the Department of Transport commenced. The unions raised the point that it
seemed unfair that when their members who’d been moved from one part of the
public sector to another should be prejudiced in any way. Such prejudice
particularly arose out of historically specific provisions in the pension
dispensation in Transnet. This is quite a complex issue but it was agreed
as part of the resolution of the strike that the matter would receive
attention.

After very constructive negotiations the amendment Bill embodies the final
solution to this problem. This essentially allows existing employees to
move out of Transnet to another SOE or public entity, but to remain within
the new Transport Pension Fund. Whilst this does create a new degree of
complexity, and does not make for the most elegant arrangement between
employees and the employer company, I believe it is a workable and fair
solution to the problem.

It was, and I believe is, the view of some unions that the new fund should
be opened for new employees entering those new SOEs or public entities.
However, we were not prepared to accommodate this as it makes for a complex
situation and creates unnecessary complexities and operational problems for
both the enterprises and the future pensioners. I am quite clear in my mind
that the implementation of this suggestion would not be in the best
interest of either the SOE or the pensioners.

The hon member Peter Hendrickse, who chaired the sessions on the Bill of
the portfolio committee, will provide more detail to the House on the
excellent work that they have done on improving the Bill since the first
reading debate. Let me just highlight one or two points: Firstly, the
definition of “alternate employer” makes it quite clear that this applies
to a specific situation relevant to Transnet and its employees, who moved
to a location where the state is either a shareholder or the controlling
structure as defined in the PFMA.

We are dealing with particular circumstances related to the current
restructuring of Transnet. I stress this point as it is in no-one’s
interest to have overly complex pension funds. An insight into what I mean
by complexity as found in the fairly detailed structure of the fund and
subfunds that is dealt with in clause 4. This complexity is necessary in
order to protect the interests of the enterprises and the employees. We can
accommodate this complexity to meet the legitimate needs of employees in a
very specific current and historical situation we find ourselves in now,
but clearly this is not best practice model for the future.

I believe that we have protected the rights of existing employees through
the amendment Bill. There have been no significant changes in regard to the
second defined benefit fund. One positive note I have in regard to this
second defined benefit fund is its improved financial position. As
indicated by the CEO of Transnet, this will allow us to address certain
real problems in that fund.

Let me conclude by once again thanking the portfolio committee for the hard
work they have done and, in particular, the hon Peter Hendrickse for
chairing the process. We were dealing with the pressure of time and an
antiquated form of drafting. It is often much more difficult to start from
something that is from another era when amending an Act than it is to start
with a clean slate.

I know that the subcommittee put in many hours of work. It was a hard task
for this time of the year and I would like to thank them for that. I would
like to thank the CEO of Transnet and her team for their commitment to
ensuring that the settlement condition of the strike was indeed
implemented, and my thanks to the unions for their steadfast commitment to
the interests of their members. It is my sincere hope that the House will
support this amending Bill. Thank you.

Mr P A C HENDRICKSE: Madam Chair, as the Minister has just stated and as we
said during the Bill’s first reading, the Bill deals with the consequences
of Transnet’s restructuring, with particular reference to Metrorail and SAA
– South African Airways. It was also meant to protect the pension benefits
accumulated by Transnet employees, with regard to the tax-free amounts that
they accumulated before March 1990.

An agreement was reached after a protracted strike earlier this year and we
wanted to ensure that in the processing of this Bill we did not
inadvertently detract from it. To this extent, we kept the unions and
Transnet abreast of all developments, changes and the committee’s progress.
We spent a lot of time tying to improve the writing and style of the Bill
to make it much more user-friendly and easier to read. The Minister himself
referred to the antiquated wording in the original Act.

Some of the substantive changes included the following: to formalise the
initial transfer from the Transport Pension Fund to the Transnet subfund;
to remove the veto powers of the Transnet Pension Fund valuator in
determining the value of assets to be reassigned from one subfund to
another; to provide for the general powers of the board of trustees as
opposed to the subfund board powers; to provide that special rules rather
than the general rules deal with the outsourcing of liabilities - special
rules are those rules that are applicable to subfund boards; to remove the
unfettered discretion of the board of trustees; to determine the allocation
of benefits, costs and losses or liabilities between subfunds of the
Transnet Pension Fund, and this means that any aggrieved party will be able
to go to court to challenge the decision of the board; to remove the
obligation on the board in terms section 9 to stop the payment of the
pension to an insolvent pensioner, and instead to give the board the
discretion to decide whether to do so or not; to provide for the transfer
of special pensioner categories – these are people who are already
receiving a pension from Transnet, for example the black widows pension
fund; and to transfer this liability from Transnet to this Transnet Second
Defined Benefit Fund, with the approval of the trustees, Transnet and the
Minister.

During our committee public hearings some issues were raised and I’d like
to refer to them. As I said, although the key provision of the Bill was
meant to be an outcome of the negotiated settlement between Transnet
management and the trade unions, it did emerge at the public hearings on
the Bill that at least one of the Transnet unions, Utatu – United Transport
and Allied Trade Union - and the SA Airways union, that is the Aviation
Union of Southern Africa, felt that people who became employed by an
alternative employer should, as defined in the Bill and after its
implementation, be allowed to join the Transnet Retirement Fund, and that
if they were to be excluded, that this exclusion should be set out in the
rules of the fund and not in the Act.

Transnet management were opposed to these proposals. The Transnet
management and the unions presented their respective arguments regarding
these issues in written form to the committee. Consistent with the
committee’s views that we cannot serve as an industrial relations forum or
a bargaining chamber, we felt that it was not appropriate for us to decide
on whether the new employees should belong to the Transnet Retirement Fund.

Following further negotiations between Transnet management and the trade
unions on the recommendations of the committee, we were informed that the
SA Transport and Allied Workers Union, Satawu, and the SA Railways and
Harbours Workers Union, Sarhru - who represent the majority of workers,
agreed that new employees should not be included in the Transnet Retirement
Fund, and that this exclusion should be set out in the Act and not just in
the rules of the fund.

Utatu and AUSA still held to their views but decided that they would not
pursue the matter further with us. They wanted us to record their views in
our report to Parliament, and this is what we are doing here today.

The committee processed the Bill accordingly. However, some members of the
committee felt that it was not necessary that the exclusion of new
employees be set out in the Bill. We thus suggested that whether the
provision to exclude new employees from the Transnet retirement fund was in
the Bill or not would ultimately not affect decisions by the unions to take
industrial actions on the matter. So, not too much should be made of the
practical effects of the differences between management and some of the
unions on this matter.

Several members of the public who responded to our request for comments on
the Bill raised concerns about the Transnet Second Defined Benefit Pension
Fund. These concerns cannot be addressed with the processing of this
particular Bill. They essentially revolve around some of the following
issues: that since 2003 members of the Transnet Second Defined Benefit
Pension Fund have been receiving increases of 2% per annum; and that there
are pensioners who receive less than the amount granted to those receiving
state old-age pensions, and also that there are potential pensioners or
dependent pensioners who, for a variety of reasons, including the system of
migrant labour and wide-scale illiteracy in the past, may not have been
aware that they are entitled to certain benefits. Transnet has offered to
assist these people if they should be approached. Obviously, the committee
empathises with the above concerns.

In a briefing on Transnet‘s annual report to the portfolio committee on 10
October, the chief executive officer, Ms Maria Ramos, said that Transnet
was also concerned about the issues raised above and had presented a
proposal to the trustees of the fund in this regard. With the money that
will come into the Transnet Second Defined Benefit Pension Fund – what a
long name – and with the recent sale of the V&A Waterfront, the prospect of
resolving these matters are much greater.

The committee also raised the matter during the First Reading debate on the
Bill and welcomes the Minister’s favourable response as he again responded
today. Secondly, I would like to comment on the circumstances in which we
had to process the Bill. The committee has given notice that it will not
again fast-track a Bill of this nature, particularly in the difficult end
of the year period. We had very limited time to finalise this Bill.

The committee would also like to express its unanimous frustration at the
fact that we do not have the necessary resources to assist us to do our
work efficiently and effectively. I believe that it is a severe indictment
on all of us – the presiding officers, the Whippery, the chairpersons of
committees, the management of Parliament and ourselves that, 12 years into
our democracy and with everyone proclaiming that committees are the
backbone of Parliament, we do not have the necessary skilled and
technically competent people dedicated to each committee - people who are
there to assist us when we review annual reports or budgets or deal with
legislation such as this.

It is nonsense that committee chairpersons must spend hours writing reports
– be it on study tour reports, oversight visits, public hearings or annual
reports. It is also ridiculous that members are required to ensure that
each comma, “may or shall” is correctly used to reflect the committees’
wishes.

Allow me, in passing, just with envy, to report to you that when we visited
the Brazilian parliament last year, we found that they had 200 – and I want
to repeat – they had at least 200 lawyers to assist members with, amongst
others, research, report and speech writing. And I think we can take a tip
from them.
In conclusion, may I express my appreciation to all those who participated
in the processing of this Bill; the unions and Transnet; and all those who
took time to write to us, particularly regarding the Transnet Second
Defined Benefit Fund. You have our support and our well wishes.

A particular word of thanks goes to Carla Prentice from Transnet, to Ursula
Fikelepe and Denzel Matjila at DPE, to Fazile and Ouma and Gideon Winn –
the state law advisers, Martin Stephens from the DA for his contribution to
the work of the subcommittee... [Interjections.] ... I thought we’d get
your support. I also want to thank our ANC researcher, Desmari Carolus.
These people were prepared to meet at short notice, to work long hours and
oftentimes had to work late at night at home.

Last but not least, allow me to thank my colleagues and comrades in the
committee and our chairperson, Yunus Carrim – I hope you’re paying
attention. Yunus Carrim is a perfectionist, a terribly hard task master but
one who at least leads by example.

The committee unanimously recommends that the House passes this Bill. With
the few seconds remaining to me, may I, on behalf of this House,
congratulate my wife on her birthday today. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Congratulations to your wife, hon
member!

Mr M STEPHENS: Thank you, Madam Chair. May I also associate myself with
those congratulations. During the first reading debate I stated that we
regard this Bill as an important piece of legislation since it aims to
protect the vested rights of Transnet employees and pensioners in the
Transnet restructuring process.

Its aims are laudable, although the Bill in its original form, as we have
heard, had not been meticulously drafted and the committee had to spend a
great deal of time redrafting it. This was done primarily by the
subcommittee already mentioned, consisting of myself and the hon Hendrickse
as acting chair, with valuable inputs coming from the committee chair, hon
Carrim, and very ably assisted by the already mentioned personnel from the
pension fund, the Department of Public Enterprises, Transnet and the state
law advisers. We owe them all a great deal of thanks.

In the same breath, however, it must be said that drafting legislation is
not the function of parliamentarians. We should not find ourselves in the
position of having virtually to reconceive the structure of a Bill and then
to redraft it on the trot.

Apart from the many amendments in order to get rid of as much legalese as
possible, the committee rejected the original clause 5 of the Bill and then
had to redraft a whole new clause to insert into the Act as section 4A.

Section 4A contains the core provisions of the Bill. The other provisions
essentially follow on from these, thus when the new section 4A was drafted
a number of consequential changes in other clauses became necessary. The
speed at which this had to be done is not acceptable. It increases the
likelihood of unintended consequences in practice and at the minimum might
saddle the Statute Book with a badly worded and ill-structured piece of
legislation.

Under the circumstances and given the time constraints, we did our best to
produce a workmanlike document that embodies the spirit and the intent of
the agreement that was reached between Transnet and the labour unions. We
trust that there will be no unintended consequences, but if there are we
invite all parties concerned to approach the committee so that suitable
amendments can be proposed. We sincerely believe, however, that this will
not be necessary.

I have been approached by many Transnet pensioners seeking reassurance that
their pensions will not be detrimentally affected. This insurance can
indeed be given, but the weakness is that there are no changes that will
materially benefit their plight. As a committee we had inputs from the
pensioners, and we can assure all of them that we are very much aware of
their problems.

We are currently urging the department and Transnet to bring these
pensions, which have lagged behind inflation for years, up to a proper
civilised standard. We are informed that some pensioners receive less than
a civil pension, as has been mentioned. That is no way to reward those who
served Transnet faithfully over many years. Transnet assures us that the
sale of the V & A Waterfront might ameliorate that situation.

I have also tried to inform the Minister of Finance, the hon Trevor Manuel,
that his department is indeed the guarantor of the Transnet Pension Fund,
contrary to his denial of a few days ago in this House. I hope he got the
message. When he becomes alive to that fact we trust that he, too, will
start taking a keener interest in the whole matter of Transnet pensions.

Everything considered, we are satisfied with the Bill as it now stands and
the DA supports its second reading. I thank you.

Dr U ROOPNARAIN: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, the Transnet Pension
Fund Amendment Bill is a direct result of the restructuring processes at
Transnet, and in particular the strategic disposal of noncore assets.

The hon Minister spoke at length about the context of this Bill.
Understandably, the disposal processes caused a great deal of concern and
anxiety amongst the affected employees about their retirement benefits. As
a result the labour unions, Transnet management, and the Minister for
Public Enterprises agreed, after negotiations, that a special amendment of
the Transnet Pension Fund Act was necessary to ensure that the disposal
process had little effect on the retirement savings of employees.

The Bill therefore provides that transferring employees and pensioners can
retain membership in existing Transnet pension and retirement funds. Very
importantly, the Bill retains the status of the Transnet Pension Fund as
“paragraph (a)” funds in terms of the 1956 Pension Funds Act. This means
that when a member leaves employment he or she is entitled to have his or
her lump sum benefits taxed on the basis that that portion attributable to
membership prior to 1 March 1998 will not be subject to tax. The IFP
welcomes this protection given to the retirement savings of qualifying
members.

The Bill provides that members’ pensions may in future be attached not just
in terms of the Divorce Act but also the Maintenance Act. The IFP supports
this as this is yet another victory for women and children.

The IFP is satisfied that the Bill is a result of extensive negotiations
between the relevant stakeholders and that it is in their common and best
interest. After much re-engineering of the Bill and the elimination of
legalistic jargon, the IFP will therefore support the Bill. I thank you.

Mr H B CUPIDO: Deputy Speaker, the ACDP is satisfied with the provisions of
this Bill, particularly as far as they relate to the protection of the
interests of affected employees. The Transnet Pension Fund Amendment Bill
is fully compliant with current labour legislation.

The proposed creation of a multi-employee fund for state-owned enterprises
will further facilitate the establishment of a dedicated pension fund for
Transnet employees. This means that the implementation of innovative human
resource strategies can take place in an efficient, cost-effective and
independent manner.

The selling off of noncore assets generally results in improved operational
efficiency, and also financial gain. In the case of Transnet in particular
these positive spin-offs hold significant implications for the country.
Proceeds from the disposal of noncore assets will boost Transnet’s R64,5
billion capital investment programme over the next five years. The economic
growth for the country through strengthening of infrastructure is therefore
guaranteed.

The Transnet Pension Fund Amendment Bill reassures South Africans that care
will be taken to ensure that employees are not disadvantaged by initiatives
aimed at shifting focus to one operation. We support the Bill. Thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. In view of the current
disposal process of Transnet’s noncore assets to government and the private
sector, the MF finds this Bill crucial in protecting the interests and
rights of employees and pensioners who are being transferred due to this
process, as well as to allow them to exercise the option to retain their
current membership of the fund.

The Bill correctly makes available provisions for subfunds that shall cater
for the transfer of liabilities to the new employer. This will secure
Transnet’s commitment to guarantee the benefit of its funds to its members.

We are, however, interested in the impact this will have on new employees
of Transnet as well as the state-owned enterprise employers that have taken
over Transnet’s noncore business, and the efficacy of the process.

We also express our concerns about the new section 10(b) in respect of
which clarity is needed in the event of death.
However, we believe that the multi-employer pension fund housed by the
Transnet Pension Fund is certainly a good means to extend the risks carried
by Transnet and to protect the interests of older members of the fund.

The MF supports the Transnet Pension Fund Amendment Bill. Thank you, Madam
Chair.

Mr Y I CARRIM: Comrade Deputy Speaker, comrades, friends, I want to say
something that I think is unprecedented in the history of this House. I
hope it will be recorded. I have been allocated five minutes, and I am
going to use only a minute. So can we start by applauding me?
[Interjections.] If you do not applaud, I am going to speak for the full
five minutes. [Applause.]

I want to say, firstly, thank you to everybody who participated in
processing this Bill, which is a fast-tracked Bill. In particular of course
I want to thank Peter Hendrickse, especially as he praised me so much.
Those are the words, by the way, that I wrote, of his speech. He wrote a
longer speech for me to present today on how good he has been, but
unfortunately I left the speech upstairs in my room, Peter! All I can say
is that Peter Hendrickse ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member Hendrickse!

Mr Y I CARRIM: Yes, hon member Hendrickse. Sorry, that was most ungracious
of me. He has been really outstanding, Madam Speaker, and I really think
there is no need for me ...

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I think the hon member’s minute is up.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not as yet.

Mr Y I CARRIM: Not as yet, thank you. But let me just say, finally, that
there were other issues, Minister, that arose from this Bill, dealing with
the broader pension fund industry. And members, not least the hon – let me
stress, honourable – Peter Hendrickse, raised these issues, because they
know more about the pension industry.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Carrim, we have given you back your five minutes.

Mr Y I CARRIM: Oh, OK. Well, I just want to say one final thing, that we
have drawn the attention of the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on
Finance, Nhlanhla Nene, who is here, to the broader pension fund industry
issues which arose while we processed this Bill. We are pleading that the
pension fund industry be reviewed before the year 2020 by your Minister of
Finance and be brought to this House, that the matter be accelerated, and
that all the members who raised issues bring it to your door so that you
can put pressure on the Minister of Finance to finalise that process. Thank
you, all. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker,
and to all those members who have spoken. Once again, I really do commend
and sympathise with the committee for having to work under difficult
circumstances, but I think from my side as a Minister I have seen a
committee with a lot of capacity to make sensible changes. I think that is
valuable. It may not be entirely what you expected to do, but I do think
that it is actually a very useful exercise.

This is the first of a number of pieces of legislation that will emanate
from the restructuring process. I am afraid we are putting some pressure on
you again to table the SAA Bill, but it does not have to be passed by the
end of this year. Originally, with some of these new Bills, we had thought
we may not need them, but I think it is a wiser decision to incorporate
many of these changes in legislation. When we started the relationship
between the Ministry and the committee I do not think we envisaged a great
deal of legislation, but we will in fact end up with a few pieces of
legislation. So I am very pleased that you were able to practise and hone
your skills on this particular fairly simple Bill, because there are some
others coming up next year.

We are conscious of the issues in the second defined benefit fund. I think
some steps will be taken that will be beneficial in the near future, but it
really reinforces my viewpoint that our objective for our employees in the
state-owned enterprises is to have stable, simpler pension funds. The
complexities that we have inherited from the past are not a good thing and,
generally speaking, our objective over time must be to simplify these
Bills, make them stable, make them financially sound, in the best interests
of people who have worked all their lives and really do deserve a good
pension. But thank you for the support, and I hope the House approves the
Bill. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

  GIVEN THE IMPORTANCE OF THE LOCAL SPHERE OF GOVERNMENT, THE PROGRESS THE
     NATION HAS MADE WITH THE BUILDING OF THE NECESSARY INSTITUTIONS AND
 CAPACITY, WITH RESOURCE ALLOCATION, AND WITH THE PROMOTION OF PARTICIPATORY
   DEMOCRASCY, THEREBY IMPACTING ON THE QUALITY OF LIFE OF SOUTH AFRICANS

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Mrs L E YENGENI: Madam Speaker, it is appropriate that, as the first
speaker on my party’s list, I should begin with a few reminders of the
fundamental principles, values and policies that inform the manner in which
we look at the various aspects of local government.

The cornerstone of our policies is the Freedom Charter. The vision of local
government as expressed in the Freedom Charter is that there shall be
houses, security and comfort under which clause, amongst others, the
following rights and conditions are called for:


  All people shall have the right to live where they choose, be decently
  housed and to bring up their families in comfort and security;


  Slums shall be demolished, and new suburbs built where all have
  transport, roads, lighting, playing fields, crèches and social centres;


  Fenced locations and ghettos shall be abolished, and laws which break up
  families shall be repealed.


Another foundation of our system of governance is the Reconstruction and
Development Programme, the RDP. In the RDP, we envisaged local government
that will be guided by the following principles: a people-centred approach;
developing human resources; building the economy; democratising the state
and society; being people-driven; being people-centred; innovative in the
ways in which it combines growth and development; and committed to
continuously achieving overall coherence, and unity of purpose.

When we started 11 years ago, we set the following goals for local
government. To ensure the end of apartheid local government, about 800
municipalities would need to be linked together and create 300 new
democratic nonracial local authorities. Informal settlements as well as
those hidden behind Bantustan boundaries must be included when drawing up
local boundaries. Rural areas and traditional authorities should also have
elected local authorities. Rich consumers should be able to subsidise the
poor so that they can have access to services.

Local government in South Africa has undergone a major process of
transformation that has resulted in our new system of local government. The
most significant achievement in the area of governance since 1994 has been
the dismantling of the apartheid state and establishment of a nonracial
democratic unitary state.

This fundamental transformation saw a shift from over 1 200 racially based
local authorities, four provincial administrations and 10 Bantustans into
284 democratically elected municipalities, nine provinces and a strong
national government.

This process demanded a democratic and developmental local government that
puts responsibility and accountability on officials, councillors and front-
line workers and good relations with the citizens of the municipality.
Capacity-building therefore became one of the important tools available to
local government in bridging the gaps in what would be expected of us and
what we could now deliver.

It can be said that as we enter into our second decade of freedom, our
evolving system of integrated governance is increasingly making it possible
for the country’s development objectives to be met. This process we are
talking about also resulted in the establishment of a progressive policy
and institutional framework and a regulatory environment conducive to
developmental local government.

As provided in our Constitution, local government has become responsible
for a growing number of services that were previously managed by central
government. This has left municipalities with many needs for new skills to
meet new performance demands, yet many municipalities do not have the
managerial, administrative, financial and institutional capacity to meet
the rising expectations of local communities.

Thus a way had to be found to transform this delivery arm of government
into a truly service delivery model to meet the development needs of the
communities and ensure stability, predictability, and efficiency.

The progress made towards achieving a legal and financial framework
necessary to consolidate the system of local government for accelerated
service delivery must be viewed from the lenses of the following pieces of
legislation: the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act of 2000, the Local
Government: Municipal Finance Management Act of 2003, and the Local
Government: Municipal Property Rates Act of 2004.

The Local Government: Municipal Systems Act has built up a momentum for
municipal reform, and created incentives for improved performance that
would eventually increase confidence and the possibilities of positive
change. The MFMA and MSA therefore strengthened institutional capabilities
by fostering transparent decision-making and citizens’ participation in the
political and municipal processes.

They also call for a need to have strong local partners that are critical
to the sustained improvement of municipal management which in turn would
lead to the strengthening of initiatives like local economic development.
The capacity of local government in financing and administering local
economic development initiatives is a critically important consideration
when attempting to eradicate poverty and create employment.

The transfer of redeployable skills is limited, causing the assistance
provided to be largely temporary. Therefore, we must make more effort to
enhance the skills development initiatives that are aimed at upgrading
skills and competencies which is a critical ingredient for sustainable
economic growth.
The Intergovernmental Relations Framework Act has assisted with better co-
ordination and integration among three spheres of government so that we are
more effective in reaching targeted groups. We have now seen many
programmes that are directly aimed at building capacity within the local
municipalities, namely the Municipal Service Partnerships. The MSP is based
on the implicit recognition that the capacity and skills in local
government differ. Consequently, municipalities are assisted in the
identification of potential service delivery partnerships as well as in the
development of technically sound contractual arrangements.

The Municipal Infrastructure Investment Unit also offers support and
guidance to municipalities in the area of structuring the public-private
partnerships. The new local government capacity-building system will also
bring a shift in the way that municipalities work as part of the move
towards developmental local government.

In the context of overall transformation of local government, the new
skills development strategy has laid a basis for a more people-orientated
local government system, able to meet the demands of our people for
democracy, reconstruction and development. Moreover, the MSA sets out the
principles and values of the administration and a code of conduct, Batho
Pele, in the local government sphere.

For a new system of local government to be implemented effectively, there
will have to be much greater co-operation between the three spheres of
government in the spirit of co-operative governance. In this regard, we are
very optimistic that the newly elected councillors will assist in the
realisation of this objective.

In our election manifesto for the local government elections that took
place on 1 March this year, we as the ANC said the following:

  Although much still needs to be done, and although change has come faster
  to some areas than others, many communities around the country have seen
  positive change in the last five years. Roads have been tarred and
  streets lit for the first time. Water and electricity have become more
  accessible than ever before. More houses have been built. Local services
  like waste removal have improved. Free basic services have been provided
  to many. Sporting and recreation facilities have been built. Local
  government offices have become more effective in meeting the needs of the
  citizens.


  While we are pleased with these achievements, we have also taken action
  to learn from our experiences of the past five years.


It is my submission that, as the ANC, we have successfully led the
government and people of South Africa in transforming local government for
the greater benefit of all our people through the many policies and
legislative, fiscal and other resource allocation measures we implemented.
We can boldly say that we have been faithful to the vision of our forebears
as captured in the Freedom Charter and the Constitution of the Republic;
the will of the people.

Many challenges remain, but we cannot come to any other conclusion than
that our achievement and progress in the sphere of local government is a
cause for celebration. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr W P DOMAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, at a glance a lot has happened in local
government. The amalgamation of over 800 municipalities to the present 283
was a huge undertaking. No wonder that this amalgamation process,
especially in the metros, is not fully completed.

The country experienced two fully democratic elections, but the new
developmental nature of municipalities is unfortunately still not fully
grasped by all councillors. Parliament completed the package of laws for
local government with the enactment of the Municipal Property Rates Act and
the Public Finance Management Act. A wide range of changes in respect of
the funding of municipalities was also implemented by the National
Treasury.

The scene is really set for this sphere of government to perform. The DA
can concur with the motion that progress has been made with the building of
the necessary institutions, with resource allocation and, to a large
extent, with participatory democracy. However, we cannot agree as far as
governance, capacity and improving the quality of life of South Africans
are concerned, that local government has made the strides it should have.

Terwyl ons erken dat ’n groot deel van die bevolking eenvoudig te arm is om
’n bydrae te maak vir die dienste wat hulle ontvang, en dat Suid-Afrika
klaarblyklik nie oor genoeg geskoolde en professionele persone beskik om al
die poste in plaaslike regering te vul nie, het die ANC veroorsaak dat
munisipaliteite veral in twee opsigte klaaglik misluk.

Die eerste is dat kundigheid wat wel beskikbaar was, en ’n groot positiewe
verskil kon maak, by munisipaliteite weggejaag is. Baie van hierdie
amptenare het al die pad bank toe gelag met die pragtige pakkette wat hulle
ontvang het. Maar daardie geld kon eerder vir beter dienslewering gebruik
gewees het. Vir baie was dit egter ook ’n gevoel van misnoeë, omdat
loopbane van diensbaarheid tot ’n einde gebring is. Dit het ongelukkig
daartoe gelei dat in die proses ook talle onbevoegde amptenare by
munisipaliteite aangestel is. Kort-kort maak die vergoedingspakkette en
onverdiende bonusse opslae. Dit wil voorkom asof veral die aanhoudende
transformasie ten opsigte van personeel hul motivering totaal geknak het.

Uit ’n onlangse vraag van die DA blyk dit dat daar tans 112 geskorste
munisipale amptenare is wat belastingbetalers alreeds R12,5 miljoen gekos
het, sonder dat hulle ’n steek werk doen. En ek vermoed dit is slegs die
ore van die seekoei.

Die tweede teleurstellende aspek wat die President verlede week uitgelig
het, en laat waarsku het dat plaaslike regering dié sfeer van regering is
wat verreweg die swakste presteer en Suid-Afrika op ’n tydbom geplaas het,
is die gebrek aan toewyding by talle raadslede. Omdat munisipaliteite ’n
eie sfeer van regering is met groot mag, misbruik talle rade hul mag om
korrupsie en nepotisme te pleeg, of sommer doodgewoon swak te regeer.

In hierdie verband wil dit voorkom asof provinsiale LUR’e traag is om hul
mag te gebruik en hul partygenote op hierdie manier beskerm. In antwoord op
’n vraag van die DA moes ons verneem dat die LUR in die Noord-Kaap
byvoorbeeld niks gedoen het nie, terwyl die burgemeester en die munisipale
bestuurder van Ubuntu-munisipaliteit op Victoria-Wes in die hof verskyn het
omdat hulle na bewering munisipale eiendom gesteel en hier in die Kaap kom
verkoop het.

Die President het in hierdie Raad met my saamgestem dat politieke partye
groter verantwoordelikheid sal moet neem vir die dissiplinering van hul
lede. Daarom vra ek: Waar is die streek- en plaaslike beheer van raadslede,
van veral die ANC, wat meer as 75% van munisipaliteite regeer? Dit is geen
wonder, wat gratis basiese dienste betref, dat daar waar daar nog
infrastruktuur is – ek praat nie eens van waar daar nie infrastruktuur is
nie – slegs 73% van huishoudings gratis water ontvang, en slegs 57% gratis
elektrisiteit. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Whilst we acknowledge the fact that a large proportion of the population
is simply too poor to make a contribution in respect of the services they
receive, and that South Africa obviously does not have enough skilled and
professional people to fill all the posts in local government, the ANC was
the cause of municipalities failing miserably, especially in two respects.

The first is that expertise that was, in fact, available and which could
have made a major positive difference, has been chased away from
municipalities. Many of these officials laughed all the way to the bank
with the lovely packages they received. But that money could have been used
for better service delivery instead. However, it also left many people
feeling disgruntled because productive careers were brought to an end.
Unfortunately this also led to many incompetent officials being appointed
to municipalities in the process. The remuneration packages and unwarranted
bonuses frequently cause an outcry. It seems that the constant
transformation with regard to staff dealt a permanent blow to their
motivation.

A recent question by the DA brought to light that there were 112 suspended
municipal officials who had already cost taxpayers R12,5 million, without
them doing a stroke of work. And I suspect that this is only the tip of the
iceberg.

The second disappointing aspect the President highlighted last week, and
made him warn that local government was the one sphere of government that
performs the worst by far and has put South Africa on top of a time bomb,
was the lack of dedication of many councillors. Because municipalities are
a stand-alone sphere of government with wide powers, many councils abuse
their power for corruption and nepotism, or simply to govern poorly.

In this regard it seems that provincial MECs are reluctant to use their
authority, and protect their fellow party members in this way. From a reply
to a question by the DA we learnt that the MEC in the Northern Cape, for
example, did nothing while the mayor and the municipal manager of the
Ubuntu municipality appeared in court at Victoria West on a charge of
allegedly stealing municipal property and selling it here in the Cape.

The President agreed with me in this Chamber that political parties will
have to accept more responsibility for disciplining their members. For this
reason I ask: Where is the regional and local control of councillors,
especially of the ANC, which governs more than 75% of municipalities? Small
wonder that as far as free basic services are concerned, where
infrastructure still exists – I am not even speaking about areas where
there is no infrastructure – only 73% of households receive free water, and
only 57% free electricity.]

Lastly, this subject for discussion also refers to resource allocation to
municipalities. On the one hand we can praise central government for the
R15 billion that was transferred to municipalities and for all the
municipal infrastructure programmes - 70 000 jobs were created through this
- but on the other hand there is serious concern about how municipalities
manage their finances. The Auditor-General reports that a number of
municipalities had significant underspending and that they don’t even hand
in their financial statements. Thank you very much. [Time expired.]

Mr P F SMITH: Thank you, Chairperson. Colleagues, since 1994 South Africa
has been characterised by enormous change, but I think it’s true to say
that this has been more pronounced in respect of local government than
anything.

Now, constitutionally, if you look at Chapter 3, we have three spheres and
they all enjoy equal status, though of course different powers and
functions, but if you compare the establishment of local government to that
of the provinces or the national government, you’d have to agree that this
process has been far more challenging. This has a direct bearing on how you
measure progress in local government and its achievements.

Now you can measure progress by the roll-out of water or the roll-out of
electricity, but I don’t want to refer to those statistics today, but
rather look at a few broader considerations.

First, I think we need to recognise that there are enormous differences
between the 283 municipalities in our country, and it hardly seems
appropriate to discuss them in the same breath. Six of those 283 comprise
the six metros. They generate more than half of our GDP. They employ tens
of thousands of people each. Their budgets are larger than those of most
provinces. In contrast to that, you’ve got a plethora of very small
municipalities, the smallest of which are barely blips on the radar screen.
They have miniscule budgets, they are totally reliant on national funding,
and in a sense talking about progress there and across the spheres as a
whole becomes quite difficult. However, we would conclude in this respect
that there has been progress all round, but far more needs to be done in
respect of those smaller municipalities which are really not necessarily
very viable now, but need to be made viable over time.

Secondly, we need to look at the whole institutionalisation of the local
government sphere. Let’s say that it is bedded down now, and this bedding
down is an achievement rather than the converse. It could have been
construed as converse considering it has taken many years to get to where
we are now, but the reason we think this is progress and is an achievement
is because, if you look at this transformation process since 1994, it’s
been extremely disruptive, politically for the local role-players, but
especially administratively, and this has been highly problematic in
respect of delivery for local government.

We are now in the last of our three phases - the pre-interim, the interim,
and the final phase - and we have subcategories even within these. But I
think it is fair to say that this bedding down is finished now and
hopefully things will be far smoother in future.

Thirdly, I think we need to recognise that although service delivery has
been very patchy, sometimes good and sometimes, as these protests last year
showed us, rather poor, the general trend is one of improving performance.
The single largest constraint on delivery has certainly not been money, but
probably human capacity, and I think this is also improving now.

Project Consolidate is playing it’s part, yes, but in addition to this I
think it’s true to say that there is a growing cohort of experienced local
politicians and local administrators who are able to keep the ball on the
ground, and have an institutional memory and are able to concentrate on
good governance rather than establishment matters, which have preoccupied
them for so long.

Having said that, there’s obviously still enormous scope for improvement,
and elimination of corruption is one issue, as is improvements in financial
management. These are both key concerns, and whilst we as a House shouldn’t
expect miracles, we should demand and we should expect steady improvement
all round and substantially greater compliance with good governance norms.

And finally, I think it’s true to say that it’s unfortunate that local
government has been left to its own devices for far too long, meaning that
the level of support required from both the national and the provincial
governments, in particular, over much of the first decade was less than
desirable, given the needs of local government, and this impacted
negatively on the achievements and progress in this sphere.

Fortunately, again, this appears to be changing and there are many signs of
positive outcomes in respect of support, and this again should represent
further acceleration in the future. In this regard, too, it is significant
that the department has repositioned itself and its strategic focus now is
far more appropriate to the needs of local government than it has been in
the past, when its preoccupation was policy-centred rather than delivery-
centred. So all round we think there is some scope to say that there has
indeed been progress in local government, although of course much more can
be done. Thank you.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Voorsitter, die kwaliteit van dienslewering op
plaaslike regeringsvlak hang af van die kwaliteit en die kundigheid van die
betrokke munisipale bestuurder.
Die agb lid mev Yengeni raak hier liries oor die Vryheidsmanifes en hoe
wonderlik dienste op plaaslike regeringsvlak is, maar ek verstaan nie. As
ons gaan kyk na die situasie op plaaslike regeringsvlak, sien ons plaaslike
regerings is besig om in duie te stort, juis as gevolg van swak munisipale
bestuurders wat nie bevoeg is om hul werk te doen nie.

’n Tipiese voorbeeld kan gevind word in die stadsraad van Matlosana, wat
Klerksdorp, Stilfontein en Hartebeesfontein insluit. Daardie stadsraad, wat
deur die ANC beheer word, het ’n munisipale bestuurder aangestel wat deur
’n ouditverslag skuldig bevind is dat hy by ’n vorige munisipaliteit
vrugtelose uitgawes aangegaan het en dat hy mense met ’n kriminele rekord
aangestel het, en dat daar dissiplinêr teen hom opgetree moet word. Maar
die ANC stel nog steeds die persoon aan, om maar net met sy onbevoegdheid
nou op ’n nuwe stadsraad te gaan toepas. Dit is onaanvaarbaar. [Time
expired.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Chairperson, the quality of service delivery at local
government level depends on the quality and expertise of the municipal
manager concerned.

The hon member Mrs Yengeni is getting lyrical here about the Freedom
Charter and how wonderful services are at local government level, but I do
not understand. If we go and look at the situation at local government
level, we see that local governments are collapsing, specifically because
of weak municipal managers who are not competent to do their work.

A typical example is to be found in the City of Matlosana, which includes
Klerksdorp, Stilfontein and Hartebeesfontein. That city council, controlled
by the ANC, appointed a municipal manager who had been found guilty, by way
of an audit report, of incurring unnecessary expenditure and appointing
people with a criminal record, and it was recommended that disciplinary
steps be taken against him. But the ANC went ahead and appointed this
person, only to have him exercise his incompetence in a new city council.
This is unacceptable. [Time expired.]]

Mr B M SOLO: Chairperson and hon members, in 2000 the ANC-led government
ushered in a new system of local government. In fact, this took place
immediately after the local government elections of November 2000. Five
years after the introduction of democracy in this country, indeed in all
spheres of government, democratic practices have become paramount. Central
to that is the importance of participatory democracy, which we do not have
to overemphasise for it is the pillar of our fundamental policy, as
enshrined in the Freedom Charter, that the people shall govern.

Local government in any society is the most important practical sphere of
government. This sphere of government is so important as it is the one that
is very close to the people it serves. For democracy development to be
realised, it should be mostly effected at the level where people stay in
their daily lives, influenced by their environment.

To ensure participatory democracy, a system has to be developed and
structures have to be created to facilitate and promote participation of
communities in local government activities. This is done to ensure proper
services for development and a better life. Without sketching the history
of the past in our country, we are still faced with huge problems of
amongst others underdevelopment, poverty and inequality. One does not need
to be a rocket scientist to realise that.

To improve the quality of life for every South African in terms of basic
services, such as clean water provision and environmental health care,
sanitation, electricity, roads, etc, people themselves have to participate
constructively in such programmes, not only by periodically going to the
polls every five years, but by ensuring that development and improvement of
the quality of life is ongoing to address the huge backlogs of
underdevelopment, as development is for the people.

From government’s perspective to deepen democracy and promote
participation, the ANC-led government, for the first time, has created a
legislative framework to ensure that there is indeed participatory
democracy. The ANC-led government did not stop there, but also introduced
other measures, such as the izimbizo led by the President himself and
others by Ministers, Premiers, MECs and mayors. This government has ensured
the establishment of community radio stations where people are able to
debate local issues of development.

In a structured form, the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act makes
provision for the establishment of ward committees. These ward committees
are established in terms of section 72 and their functions are clearly
spelled out in section 74 of the Act. In an effort to strengthen these
structures, community development workers are encouraged to be part of
these structures, as they are involved through their daily work with
various communities.

Chapter 4 of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act ensures the
operational sustainability of these structures. It then becomes important
not only to draw this House’s attention to relevant sections of this
chapter, maybe to refresh our minds to quickly read those provisions, to
signify their importance in participatory democracy. Now I refer members to
chapter 4 of the Act, which deals with community participation and section
16 reads as follows:


  A municipality must develop a culture of municipal governance that
  compliments formal representative government with a system of
  participatory governance and must for this purpose, amongst other things,
  encourage and create conditions for the local community to participate in
  affairs of the municipality, including, amongst others, the establishment
  and implementation and review of its performance management system in
  terms of chapter 6 and contribute to building the capacity.

Section 17 also indicates that participation by local communities in the
affairs of municipalities must take place through, amongst other things,
other appropriate mechanisms, processes and procedures established by the
municipalities. All of the above is geared at promoting and deepening
participatory democracy.

The introduction of community development workers has assisted in ensuring
that community issues are part and parcel of the council’s agenda, either
through the ward committee or the IDP forums. As we all know, one of the
functions of the community development workers is to work closely not only
with ward councillors, but to perform some duties for the ward committees.
As previously indicated, izimbizo at various levels have created another
platform for communities to engage with government. We would, at this
point, like to recognise efforts by the MECs, who crisscross the various
provinces, conducting izimbizo, which are, in many instances, not published
by the mainstream media institutions. To them we say: May the stork not
grow old. This also applies to some hon members of the House.

The department has launched various community participation forums at
national level where issues of service delivery and development are
debated. I know the department has made calls to other spheres of
government to do likewise, so as to ensure participatory democracy is
alive. All this, to a large degree, has empowered our community but largely
the previously disadvantaged communities. People are now able to stand up
and argue their case confidently. A forum and culture has been created both
materially and otherwise to ensure the deepening of participatory
democracy. Various interventions took place at various levels of
government, in some instances in the form of Project Consolidate and
others.

Today as we speak we are able to say that this has all impacted positively
on the lives of the people, particularly the previously disadvantaged
communities. So we are able to say that today is different from yesterday,
and tomorrow will be different from today – as stated by the President.
This comes in various forms and sometimes with an element of mere protest.
Through the principal policy of the ANC that the people shall govern,
participatory democracy is now being implemented as a programme of social
evolution and material development. By and large, we are now able to see
the impact driven by the spirit of hope.

Once more allow me to emphasise the commitment that was made 50 years ago
that the people shall govern. Ours is to strengthen popular participation.
Participatory democracy must find expression in a structured form amongst
others in ward committees, IDP forums and any other relevant forums.
Indeed, through the establishment of ward committees, IDP forums and local
economic development forums and others, public participatory democracy has
become a reality and has impacted positively on the lives of the people.
All those issues such as clean water, halving poverty and others as
espoused by the President in his state of the nation address are now
reality and are beginning to impact positively on the lives of our people.
The people shall govern. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B E PULE: Chair, local government is to a large extent dependent upon
national and provincial treasuries in order to fulfil their constitutional
mandate and to speak to the objects of the Municipal Finance Management
Act, that is, by ensuring transparency, accountability and appropriate
lines of responsibility in their fiscal and financial affairs. It is also
to ensure that their budgetary and financial planning processes are co-
ordinated with the processes of the organs of state in other spheres of
government.

Achievement will remain a mirage unless there is monitoring of their
budgets to establish whether they are consistent with the fiscal and
microeconomic policy of the national government. Municipalities must be
monitored to assess compliance with applicable standards of generally
recognised accounting practice and uniform expenditure and revenue
classification systems. In order that local governments must deliver on
their constitutional mandate, the national and provincial governments must
help build their capacity for proper financial management. Co-operative
governance will also remain lip service unless ... [Time expired.]

Mrs M M GUMEDE: Hon Chairperson, members and colleagues, it is with great
pleasure that I am delegated once more to debate on behalf of the Portfolio
Committee on Provincial and Local Government. My mandate is mainly to focus
on building of the necessary institutions of democracy and capacity. There
is greater alignment between the National Spatial Development Perspective,
the NSDP, Provincial Growth and Development Strategies, and Integrated
Development Plans, the alignment of which can help government programmes to
complement each other. The rationale behind the call for greater alignment
between NSDP, PGDS and IDPs is to facilitate better performance of our
developmental state.

This can be then achieved by getting government and organs of people’s
power to work better in meeting the common objectives and outcomes. Project
Consolidate is already beginning to have a positive impact in some
municipalities by drawing the collective strengths of national and
provincial government.

A o a utlwa Ntate Pule? E tla ke e boeletse. [Is it clear, Mr Pule? Let me
repeat myself.]

Project Consolidate is already beginning to have a positive impact in some
municipalities, especially those that have vision, and those that are led
by the ANC. By drawing the collective strengths of national and provincial
government, the ANC is well-placed to ensure that these spheres of
government work harder from now going forward to further build on what has
been achieved. You cannot achieve in one day, but only bit by bit. We are
seeing serious capacity- building taking place to strengthen different
institutions of people’s power in order to make a reality of the Age of
Hope.

Lo nne lo reetsa fa go buiwa. [You must always pay attention when someone
is talking.]

Nibolalela uma kukhulunywa. Anilaleli. Kukhulunywa njalo nje ...
[You must learn to listen when someone is talking. You don’t want to
listen. People are always talking here ...]

... but community development workers are being trained and deployed in
municipalities, ward committees are being revitalised, a leadership academy
in the department is shaping up and the Intergovernmental Relations Act ...
e lo tlholang lo e opela [... the one that you always sing] ... is bringing
greater stability and co-ordination in our system of developmental local
government. These are meant for the public cadres that are committed to the
principles of Batho Pele.

We are further seeing serious empowerment initiatives being made in
targeting women in local government, and resources directed at youth
development programmes. You can see even in this very institution and that
is why the masses of this country endorsed it again on 1 March so that the
ANC must keep on ruling. All these programmes communicate a message, and we
as the ANC have continued to say that it is time to ensure that tomorrow
will be better than today and today is already better than yesterday. That
is ensuring that all South Africans enjoy equal rights as stipulated in the
Freedom Charter fifty years ago.

Chairperson, all this indicates that the ANC-led government has totally
done away with apartheid laws; one reason being that ...

... ngabe asikho kule podium ukube kwakungalesiya sikhathi.
[... we would not be here at this podium if it was during the apartheid
time.]

Has it ever happened before? All that it was is that I stayed stuck in the
Bantustans like when I grew up there.

Soos jy kan sien, is ek so dom vandag. [As you can see, I am so stupid
today.]

The following are some further indications of democracy and building of
institutions. Local government has been mandated with the building of
houses for all needy people; eradication of the bucket system by 2007;
halving poverty and unemployment by 2014; equal rights in the workplace
where there is no discrimination of sex, colour, religion, plus the Bill
that was placed here today; free basic services for all who need them; and
lastly the eradication of past laws.

The ANC applauses the recent improvements in spending by provinces, the
recent capacity of spending of provinces, and in making significant
progress in all delivery sectors like education, health, social services
and public works etc. The ANC commends this shining example of a people’s
contract in action, and further encourages provinces to continue to emulate
this pattern of improved service delivery. Existing historical evidence
confirms that the ANC remains the only organisation in our country that in
fact delivers services to all people of South Africa, black or white,
despite fundamental challenges inherited from the past.

Our challenges are therefore around strengthening capacity, transforming
the financial systems and achieving greater co-operative governance.
Popular participation in the governance of our country is a pillar of our
democracy, therefore participatory democracy must find expression through
the functioning of ward committees.

Lastly, President Thabo Mbeki in his closing remarks to the ANC on 17
February said: “These targets may be ambitious, yet they are also
realistic. They demonstrate both the extent of our achievements, date and
value of the experience we have gained. They are an indication that
whatever challenges we may continue to face, working together in a people’s
contract we can still do more.” Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, the Constitution advocates a system of
governance that shall avoid centralisation of power, and institute co-
operative governance. Whilst all of the building blocks are in place the
reality of the mechanics to make the system a success, though, has been
sabotaged by a lack of capacity, skills shortages, competition rather than
co-operation and minimal resources. These are among a number of factors
that hinder the process. As marked out by the hon state President Thabo
Mbeki to the NCOP last week, the weaknesses in the municipalities are a
great threat to the country’s democracy.

However, we believe that the efficiency of municipalities depends on the
filtration of efforts from the national departments to the provinces, and
then further filtrated to the municipalities. A common problem at
municipalities is that section heads appear to be the only beneficiaries of
training, and the infiltration of skills development appears to freeze at
that level, neglecting to extend to the necessary levels where
implementation is dispatched.
Provinces need to workshop municipalities to bring them on board so that
they may implement government policies at ground level. We have policies
such as the enhanced extended discount benefit scheme that has been
instituted since December 2005 and to date is still not operating at
municipal level. As a result, we have prejudiced communities who are
wrongfully forced to continue paying rentals that government has already
served to subsidise. The MF finds that it is at this stage that we, as
members of this House, play a vital role of oversight.

We need to go into areas and visit the operations of municipalities and the
progress of communities and bring it back to the House where we can call on
our executive to address the blockages in this filtration to the ground
level. It is through this oversight that loopholes and shortfalls may best
be attended to. Transparency may be strengthened, responsibility better co-
ordinated and management improved. Co-operative government is the key to
infiltration to a truly democratic development to a better life for all.

Mr S SIMMONS: Chair, it is critical that we closely examine the
relationship and responsibilities respective to our governing bodies, and
review the impacts national and provincial government restrictions and
interference have on the provinces, and on local councils’ ability to
govern effectively. The recent occurrence in the City of Cape Town puts
emphasis on the need for this approach. We therefore need to discard the
current prevailing attitude of “government always knows best”. There is a
dire need for genuine consultation, disclosure, impact statements,
deference and most importantly, enforcement.

More importantly therefore we must reinvigorate the partnership amongst
national, provincial and local governments to ensure that all South
Africans, and not just a portion of the population, are the true
benefactors of a strong united effort to address and solve the problems
that face our country.

Ms L M MASHIANE: Chairperson, in its statement of 8 January the ANC made
the assertion that this year must be set aside as the year for “the
mobilisation of people’s power through democratic local government”. With
this assertion the statement of 8 January had thus provided us with on
opportunity to table our plans, our priorities and our programmes for the
year ahead.

Once again, with this debate, we are making efforts to review the degree of
achievement in meeting the objectives contained in the statement of 8
January and as translated in the state of the nation address.

Such efforts, together with others within the machinery of government, must
clearly stand as a symbol of commitment in our continued responsibility of
ensuring that we as the ANC will never deter from the noble cause of social
transformation.
In terms of the statement of 8 January 2006, the central national challenge
facing our country is the eradication of the legacy of colonialism and
apartheid that has condemned the majority of our people to a life of
material misery.

The 2006 state of the nation address set out targets on sanitation,
electrification and the eradication of the bucket system, which are all
connected to reducing poverty and unemployment by 2014 and meeting the
Millennium Development Goals, which are, firstly, that all communities have
access to clean running water and decent households by 2010; secondly,
halving poverty and unemployment by 2014; thirdly, meeting the demand for
electricity and satisfying the demand for water; fourthly, ensuring that
there is universal provision of free basic services; fifthly, prioritising
the eradication of the bucket system by 2006 or 2007 and in the sixth
instance, ensuring that by March this year we had deployed 3 000 community
development workers.

The Department of Provincial and Local Government has been allocated
R82 billion over the MTF period. This amount represents a financial
commitment to improving performance at provincial and local government
levels. The department must, however, continue to intensify its support for
other delivery arms of government to ensure that the spread and
distribution of finances responds to the realities on the ground. The
department has done particularly well in spending its finances, which saw
it spending over 90% of its budget this year.

Municipalities have also registered significant progress in terms of
overall performance, including those within Project Consolidate. The
department has met the largest part of the targets, as encapsulated in the
government programme of action. National Treasury recently reported that
the nine provinces had vastly improved their spending patterns in the first
six months of the 2006-07 financial year. They had spent an average of 45%
of their combined budgets. This represents a spending increase higher than
for the same period last year.

The ANC applauds the improvement in spending by provinces, and this
capacity to spend saw provinces making significant increases in all
delivery sectors such as education, health, social services, Public Works,
etc. Moreover, the capacity of provinces to spend their budgets is an
encouraging move and one that presents us with a sense of assurance that
the turnaround strategies implemented are showing results and that
resources are now being properly channelled to focus on the programmes
directed at improving the lives of ordinary South Africans.

The ANC commends the shining example of a people’s contract in action and
further encourages provinces to continue to emulate this pattern for
improved service delivery. Existing historical evidence confirms that the
ANC remains the only organisation in the country that, in fact, delivers
services to all the people of South Africa, black or white, despite the
fundamental challenges inherited from the past.

I am pleased to report that improvements in communication and the
acceleration of the imbizo programme have significantly contributed to
deepening social mobilisation within and across local government, thus
confirming that our transformation project remains and continues to be
grounded on people-centred sustainable development.

This year also saw the Department of Provincial and Local Government
extending the period of Project Consolidate, which was previously two
years, to a more permanent hands-on support system for municipalities. This
important step is part of our efforts to support and capacitate
municipalities, and is further testimony that the ANC-led government is
leading the direction and pace of development.

The efforts undertaken this year of accelerating the implementation of
government’s programme of action and intensifying the imbizo programme mean
that our system of local democracy derives content from the actual
participation of our communities in institutions of people’s power.

The concept of “government of the people, by the people” means that the ANC-
led government did not only improve the participation of citizens in
decision-making, but also in the allocation of resources and in the
identification of local needs and priorities in the form of ward-based
IDPs. As a result, more people this year have access to clean water and
electricity and have more opportunities to improve their lives.

The sphere of local government is best placed to give practical meaning and
substance to the basic political commitment we made 55 ago in the form of
the Freedom Charter that “The people shall govern.” It is through the same
commitment that we agreed “All people shall be entitled to take part in the
administration of the country.”

In more areas than before, through the establishment of ward committees,
public participation has become a reality. More than 80% of ward committees
have been established in order for communities to be active and involved in
managing their development, claiming their rights and exercising their
responsibilities.

I am particularly pleased to report that municipalities now have realistic
integrated development plans, credible local economic development
programmes and the material and human resources, as well as the management
and operational systems to implement these integrated development plans and
local economic development programmes, as opposed to previous consultancy-
based IDPs.

A significant degree of achievement continues to be made around the
eradication of the bucket system through its replacement with decent
sanitation facilities. The ANC is determined to ensure that the goal of
universal provision of free basic services is achieved. Already around
3,9 million households receive free basic water, and free basic electricity
reaches 2,9 million households. The Department of Provincial and Local
Government has expanded the provision of free basic services to even the
remotest areas of our country.

The RDP envisaged universal access to water and sanitation facilities and
the elimination of hunger and malnutrition, all to be achieved on the basis
of people’s participation in development. In a book entitled State of the
Nation published this year, the authors state, and I quote:

  ... despite the considerable growth in the number of households requiring
  services, notable progress has nevertheless been made in several arenas.
  One particularly successful field has been the provision of electricity.
  In 1994 only 55% of all households had access to electricity, but by 2003
  this had increased to 78%. The most marked improvements in the provision
  of electricity are evident in informal and traditional dwellings.

The authors go on to say that in both these cases more than a third of all
dwellings were electrified for the first time only after 1994.

The Department of Provincial and Local Government has launched an
anticorruption strategy at 30 municipalities to ensure that the vision of
rooting out corruption in the local government sphere becomes a reality.

In conclusion, President Thabo Mbeki, in his closing remarks in the ANC
Today of 17 February 2006, said that these targets were captured in the
state of the nation ... [Time expired.]

Mnr M SWART: Voorsitter, enigiemand wat glo dat munisipale dienste aan
inwoners sedert 1994 verbeter het, leef in ’n droomwêreld. Daar is tans 136
munisipaliteite wat in gevolge Projek Konsolideer deur die staat gehelp
moet word om uit die administratiewe en finansiële gemors waarin hul
hulself bevind, te kom. Hierdie hulp het nodig geword, hoofsaaklik vanweë
die feit dat daar weens politieke redes, asook regstellende aksie, swak
bestuur in plaaslike owerhede toegepas word.

Kundige amptenare het bloot die trekpas gekry en is in baie gevalle deur
persone vervang wat nie oor die nodige ervaring of agtergrond van plaaslike
bestuur beskik het om hul pligte na behore te kon uitoefen nie. Dit is dus
nie die regering wat uit eie inisiatief by wyse van Projek Konsolideer dit
nodig geag het om opleiding en hulp aan plaaslike owerhede te verleen nie,
maar hulle is daartoe gedwing ten einde die absolute chaos wat in
munisipaliteite ontstaan het, hok te slaan.

Daar is nog baie munisipaliteite wat jaarliks gekwalifiseerde ouditverslae
ontvang. Daar is inderdaad min plaaslike owerhede wat behoorlike finansiële
beheer uitoefen. Jaar ná jaar word korrupsie, soos byvoorbeeld in die Bitou-
munisipaliteit, oopgevlek en as daar comrades by betrokke is, word dit baie
stadig hanteer of bloot onder die mat ingevee. So byvoorbeeld is die
munisipale bestuurder van die Bitou-munisipaliteit steeds deur die staat
gebruik om kwansuis die sake by die Kannaland-munisipaliteit reg te ruk,
alhoewel daar op daardie stadium reeds korrupsieklagte teen hom aanhanging
gemaak is. Praat van vir wolf skaapwagter maak!

Een van die doelwitte van die regering was om aan behoeftige huishoudings
gratis munisipale dienste te verskaf en dit is ook reg so. Staatsgelde word
vir hierdie doel aan munisipaliteite beskikbaar gestel. Daar is egter nog
etlike munisipaliteite waar hierdie gelde nie vir die regte doel aangewend
word nie. Baie ander gelde word ook jaarliks deur die staat aan
munisipaliteite beskikbaar gestel vir infrastruktuur, maar is dit duidelik
dat sodanige gelde selde behoorlik en volledig aangewend word.

Die wil van die staat is dus moontlik daar om munisipaliteite te laat
presteer, maar dit is ver verwyderd van wat werklik op grondvlak gebeur.
Dit is dus nie verbasend dat gemeenskappe en baie plaaslike owerhede
gereelde optogte en betogings teen swak dienslewering hou nie. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr M SWART: Chairperson, anyone who believes that the municipal services
rendered to citizens have improved since 1994, is living in a dream world.
Presently there are 136 municipalities that are being assisted by the state
under Project Consolidate to help them out of their financial and
administrative troubles in which they find themselves. This assistance was
necessitated primarily because of poor management exercised by local
government as a result of political reasons, as well as affirmative action.


Skilled officials were merely given the boot and were replaced, in many
instances, by people who did not have the necessary experience or
background of local government to carry out their duties properly. It is
therefore not the state, of its own volition and by way of Project
Consolidate, that thought it necessary to train and provide assistance to
the local governments, but it was forced to intervene in order to arrest
the absolute chaos that was developing in municipalities.

There are still many municipalities that receive qualified audit reports
every year. In fact, there are very few local authorities that exercise
proper financial control. Year after year corruption is exposed, as in the
case of the Bitou Municipality, and if there are comrades involved, the
matter is delayed or merely swept under the carpet. For example, the
manager of the Bitou Municipality is still being used by the state
ostensibly to get the house of the Kannaland Municipality in order,
although at that juncture charges of corruption had already been instituted
against him. Is this not a case of setting the wolf to keep the sheep?

One of the objectives of the government was to provide free municipal
services to indigent families, and that is also in order. Government funds
are provided to municipalities specifically for this purpose. There are,
however, still several municipalities where these funds are not utilised
for the intended purpose. Many other funds are made available annually to
municipalities for infrastructure by the government, but it is clear that
such funds are rarely appropriated in a proper and thorough manner.

It is possible that the state has the desire for municipalities to perform;
however, it is far removed from what actually transpires on the ground. It
is therefore not surprising that communities and many local authorities
stage regular protest marches and demonstrations against poor service
delivery.]

I trust that Mrs Yengeni has noticed the absence of both the Minister and
the Deputy Minister in this debate. I don’t blame them. They might be shy
about their achievements to date. [Applause.]

Mrs L E YENGENI: Chair, I am not surprised that the Minister is not here.
They are not supposed to be here all the time and there is no reason for
them to be here. Hon Doman, your approach to the question of skills has an
element of racism. The people that you are referring to and whom you claim
have been chased away by the ANC are all white people. The majority of them
are white people. Even if they were Coloured but they were serving you,
they were not serving the people of South Africa. That is why you are
complaining. [Interjections.]

Hon Smith of the IFP, thank you very much for acknowledging the progress
that has been made. We know that we still have some ... [Interjections.]
Hon Groenewald, I will ignore you because what you have raised are things
that were raised before and you are merely repeating yourself. The Minister
has answered the questions.

Hon Gumede, thank you very much for your kind words of support and free
lecture that you gave to the DA. We cannot do all of this in a period of 10
years.
Mr C M LOWE: Twelve years.

Mrs L E YENGENI: It does not matter. [Interjections.] Hon Solo, thank you
for an excellent explanation of the Act. We hope that the DA and other
opposition parties realise the progressive implications of the Act. To hon
Bhoola of the MF, we also thank you very much for your understanding.

Hon Mashiane, we agree that the increased allocation of funds will deal
with one of the reasons why the local government was unable to perform to
full potential. It is not surprising that a combination of support like
Project Consolidate, together with increased funds, will lead to increased
spending and benefit for all our people. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 18:08.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          FRIDAY, 10 NOVEMBER 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Submission of Private Members’ Legislative Proposals

     (1)    The following private member’s legislative proposal was
         submitted to the Speaker in accordance with Rule 234:

         (a)     Constitution Seventeenth Amendment Bill (Mrs C Dudley)

         In accordance with Rule 235 the legislative proposal has been
         referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Legislative
         Proposals and Special Petitions.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Labour

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Transport Education and
        Training Authority (Teta) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Commission on Gender
        Equality (CGE) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs on the Civil Union
    Bill [B26 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 9 November 2006:


        The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs, having considered the
        subject of the Civil Union Bill [B 26  – 2006] (National Assembly –
        sec 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging
        Mechanism as a section 75 Bill,  presents a redraft of the Bill [B
        26B – 2006]

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry  on  the  Free
    Trade Agreement (FTA) between the Southern African Customs Union (SACU)
    and the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), dated 3 November 2006:

        The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered
        the request for approval by Parliament of the Free Trade Agreement
        (FTA) between the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) and the
        European Free Trade Association (EFTA), referred to it, recommends
        that the House, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
        approve the said Agreement.

    Request to be considered.

                          MONDAY, 13 NOVEMBER 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Public Enterprises


          a) South African Airways Bill [B 35 – 2006] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 29359 of
             3 November 2006.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Public
             Enterprises of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
             the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
             of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    This tabling replaces item 1 under “Tablings” on page 2558 of the
    Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 9 November 2006:

    (a)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran regarding
        Mutual Assistance between their Customs Administrations, tabled in
        terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

     b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government of
        the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Islamic
        Republic of Iran regarding Mutual Assistance between their Customs
        Administrations.


     c) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
        and the Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo regarding
        Mutual Assistance between their Customs Administrations, tabled in
        terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     d) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government of
        the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Democratic
        Republic of Congo regarding Mutual Assistance between their Customs
        Administrations.

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Report of the National Industrial Participation Programme for
    2005-2006.

3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Umgeni Water for the year ended
        30 June 2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2006.

     b) Report and Financial Statements of Albany Coast Water for the year
        ended 30 June 2006, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
        2006.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence on Employment of
   SANDF to the Kingdom of Lesotho, dated 3 November 2006:


   The Joint Standing Committee on Defence, having considered the letter
   from the President on the employment of the South African National
   Defence Force (SANDF) to the Kingdom of Lesotho, referred to the
   Committee, reports that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.


2.    Report of the Joint Constitutional Review Committee on Annual
   Constitutional Review Report 2006, dated 13 November 2006:

                  ANNUAL CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW REPORT 2006
                   COMMITTEE: JOINT CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW
                        CHAIRPERSON: DR E A SCHOEMAN

Section  45(1)  (c)  of   the   Constitution   provides   that   the   Joint
Constitutional  Review   Committee   (the   Committee)   must   review   the
Constitution at least once annually.

In giving effect to section 45(1) (c), the Committee placed several  adverts
in the media on 1 May 2006 which invited  members  of  the  public  to  make
submissions that propose amendments  to  the  Constitution.  This  year  the
Committee specifically encouraged the public  to  make  submissions  on  the
equality  clause  and   on   Chapter   9   State   Institutions   Supporting
Constitutional Democracy.

In total, 11 submissions were received from the public.

The Committee also received a submission from the  National  Assembly  Rules
Committee as well as the Free State Legislature.

The Committee requested the Parliamentary Legal Services Office to  consider
the various submissions that proposed amendments to the Constitution in  the
light of current constitutional jurisprudence.

Hereunder  are  brief  summaries  of  the  submissions  received   and   the
Committee’s views and recommendations thereon.

A: REFERRAL FROM THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY RULES COMMITTEE - THE LEADER OF THE
OPPOSITION AS CONTAINED IN 57(2)(D) OF THE CONSTITUTION

The National Assembly Rules Committee requested the Committee to consider
the appropriateness of “the recognition of the leader of the largest
opposition party in the Assembly as the Leader of the Opposition” as
contained in section 57(2) (d) of the Constitution.

Recommendation

The committee deliberated this matter extensively and has communicated its
decision to the National Assembly Rules Committee for further
consideration.


B: REFERRAL FROM  THE  FREE  STATE  LEGISLATURE  -  SECTION  105(2)  OF  THE
CONSTITUTION RELATING TO THE NUMBER OF SEATS IN A PROVINCIAL LEGISLATURE

The  Free  State  Legislature  submitted  that   section   105(2)   of   the
Constitution be amended so  as  to  increase  the  size  of  the  respective
legislatures to inter alia allow them to conduct  more  efficient  oversight
and ensure public participation.
Recommendation

The Committee has written to all provincial legislatures inviting them to  a
meeting to be convened in the first term of 2007 to hear their views on  the
matter.

C: SUBMISSIONS FROM MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC

1: SUBMISSIONS ON THE EQUALITY SECTION




1.1 Section 9(2)

It was submitted that whereas section  9(2)  of  the  Constitution  provides
that equality requires that legislative and other measures must be taken  to
protect or advance persons or categories of persons disadvantaged by  unfair
discrimination,  there  are  still  inequalities   in   the   provision   of
educational services between the Provinces as equality in education has  not
been progressively and equally achieved across all provinces.

The Committee was of the  view  that  the  petitioner  did  not  propose  an
amendment to the Constitution but was instead of the view that there was  an
infringement of the right to education (as contained  in  section  29)  read
together with the right to equality and as such the remedy in this  instance
is judicial rather than a constitutional amendment.

Recommendation

The Committee was of the  view  that  the  petitioner  did  not  propose  an
amendment to the Constitution.
1.2 Section 9(4)


It was submitted that section 9(4) of the Constitution  be  amended  whereas
section 9(4) stipulates that no person may  unfairly  discriminate  directly
or indirectly against anyone and that national legislation must  be  enacted
to prevent or  prohibit  unfair  discrimination,  “it  does  not  create  an
obligation on provinces to enact  legislation  that  prevents  or  prohibits
unfair discrimination”.

The Committee noted that in terms  of  item  23(1)  of  Schedule  6  to  the
Constitution, the national legislation envisaged in section 9(4) had  to  be
enacted within 3 years of the date on  which  the  final  Constitution  took
effect and that Parliament, in accordance  with  section  9(4)  has  already
enacted the Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act of 2000 (PEPUDA).

Furthermore, the Committee  was  also  of  the  view  that  the  legislation
referred to in section 9(4) is an area  of  exclusive  national  legislative
competence as it is not listed in Schedule 4 to the Constitution as an  area
of concurrent national and provincial legislative competence, nor is  it  an
area of exclusive provincial legislative competence in terms of Schedule 5.

Recommendation

The Committee does not recommend that section 9(4) of  the  Constitution  be
amended as the legislation  envisaged  in  section  9(4)  has  already  been
enacted  and  its  scope  falls  within  an  area  of   exclusive   national
legislative competence.

1.3 Section 9

It was submitted that section 9 of the Constitution be  amended  as  “it  is
unfair to declare some forms of discrimination as fair”.

The Committee noted that the Constitution was based on  the  achievement  of
substantive equality and noted that  cases  such  as  Brink  v  Kitshoff  NO
1996(6)  BCLR  752  (CC),  emphasized  that  given  the  past  patterns   of
discrimination, the Constitution prescribes that  remedial  action  must  be
taken to achieve substantive equality.

Recommendation

The Committee does not recommend that  section  9  of  the  Constitution  be
amended so as remove provisions which allowed for “fair  discrimination”  as
to do so would prevent any remedial or restitutionary measures to  be  taken
to address past patterns of discrimination.




1.4 Section 214(2)


It was submitted that section 214(2) of  the  Constitution  be  amended  and
linked to the equality section to ensure  that  that  the  determination  of
each province’s equitable  share  of  the  budget  must  be  linked  to  the
equality provision to prevent unequal service delivery in the provinces.

The Committee noted that section 214 of the Constitution stipulates that  an
Act of Parliament must provide for the equitable division of revenue  raised
nationally among the national, provincial and local spheres  of  government,
the determination of each  province’s  equitable  share  of  the  provincial
share of that  revenue,  and  any  other  allocations  to  provinces,  local
government or municipalities from the national government’s  share  of  that
revenue, and any conditions on which those allocations may be made.

The Committee was of the view that the Constitution currently  sketches  the
broad outlines of the complex  intergovernmental  fiscal  system  which  the
three distinct but inter-related spheres of government must  adhere  to.  At
the same time the Constitution also contains an  extensive  Bill  of  Rights
which includes social  and  economic  rights  and  in  terms  of  which  the
intergovernmental fiscal system must ensure  cooperative  service  delivery.
Furthermore, the Constitution is founded on human dignity,  the  achievement
of equality and the advancement of human rights and freedoms and  the  state
must respect, protect promote and fulfill the rights in the Bill  of  Rights
(section 1(a) and section 7). Thus notwithstanding that an  order  of  court
will have fiscal or intergovernmental implications, where  rights  contained
in  the  Bill  of  Rights  are  infringed,  the  Committee  noted  that  the
Constitution permits a court to order an appropriate remedy.

Recommendation

The Committee does not recommend the amendment of section 214(2) as such  an
amendment is superfluous.

1.5 Section 100

It was submitted that in the light of  the  unequal  provision  of  services
between the provinces, that section 100(1) of the  Constitution  be  amended
to ensure that where a province cannot or  does  not  fulfill  an  executive
obligation in  terms  of  the  Constitution  or  legislation,  the  national
executive must intervene to ensure equality.


The Committee noted that  the  proposed  amendment  would  impact  upon  the
current system of co-operative  government  as  provided  for  in  terms  of
Chapter  3  of  the  Constitution  which  recognises  that   government   is
constituted as  national,  provincial  and  local  spheres  that  that  such
spheres are distinctive, interdependent and interrelated. The Committee  was
of the view that section 100 is an exceptional measure and  that  the  right
to intervene is inter alia subject to the provisions of  41(1)(e),  (f)  and
(g) which require all levels of government  to  respect  the  constitutional
status, institutions, powers  and  functions  of  government  in  the  other
spheres, not assume any power or function except those conferred on them  in
terms of the Constitution and to exercise their powers and  functions  in  a
manner  that  does  not  encroach  on  the   geographical,   functional   or
institutional integrity of government in another sphere.

Recommendation

The Committee does not support the proposed amendment to section  100(1)  as
it would significantly alter the system of co-portative government  and  the
independence of provincial spheres of government as it currently exists.


1.6 Schedule 4 of the Constitution

It was submitted that Schedule 4 to the Constitution “be amended  so  as  to
provide a legal space for intervention by national  departments  with  clear
warnings to provinces on areas where their competence  may  be  “temporarily
revoked” so as to ensure equality in the provinces.

The Committee noted that Schedule 4 lists areas of concurrent  national  and
provincial legislative authority and  does  not  pertain  to  interventions.
Furthermore, as section 100 already  provides  for  interventions,  such  an
amendment will be superfluous.

Recommendation
The Committee does not support the proposed amendment to Schedule 4  to  the
Constitution as section 100 already provides for interventions.

2.SUBMISSIONS ON CHAPTER 9:  STATE  INSTITUTIONS  SUPPORTING  CONSTITUTIONAL
DEMOCRACY (CHAPTER 9 INSTITUTIONS)

2.1 GENERAL SUBMISSIONS ON CHAPTER 9 INSTITUTIONS

2.1.1       Submission on the number of commissioners appointed  to  Chapter
      9 Institutions

It was submitted that the Constitution be amended  as  there  are  too  many
Commissioners appointed to each of the Chapter 9 Commissions.

The Committee noted that the Constitution does not  specify  the  number  of
Commissioners that must be appointed to each Commission as  the  composition
of each Commission is governed by the relevant national legislation.

Recommendation

The Committee does not recommend that the Constitution be amended so  as  to
limit the number of commissioners appointed  to  each  commission  as  these
numbers are already defined in national legislation.

The Committee was of the view that the submission be  sent  to  the  ad  hoc
Committee on the Review  of  State  Institutions  Supporting  Constitutional
Democracy for further consideration.
Furthermore as the matter pertained to national  legislation  the  Committee
was also of the view that  the  submission  be  referred  to  the  Portfolio
Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development.


2.1.2         Submission   on   the   qualification   and   performance   of
Commissioners


It  was  submitted  that  the  Constitution  be  amended   to   define   the
requirements and qualifications of Commissioners and yardsticks  with  which
to measure their performance.

The Committee noted that section 193 of the Constitution currently  requires
that the Public Protector,  the  Auditor-General  and  the  members  of  any
Commission established in terms of Chapter 9 must inter  alia  be  “fit  and
proper persons to hold the particular  office”  and  must  comply  with  any
other requirements prescribed by national legislation. Furthermore,  section
194 provides that Commissioners may only  be  removed  from  office  on  the
grounds of misconduct, incompetence or incapacity,  on  a  finding  to  that
effect by committee  of  the  National  Assembly  and  the  adoption  of  an
Assembly resolution calling for that person’s removal. The  Committee  noted
that  these  measures  were  designed  to  protect   the   independence   of
commissioners and the Chapter 9 Institutions.

Recommendation

The Committee does not recommend that the  Constitution  be  amended  as  it
currently defines the requirements and qualifications  of  Commissioners  as
well as the  grounds  for  their  removal  should  they  not  perform  their
functions.

The Committee was also of the view that the submission be  sent  to  the  ad
hoc Committee on the Review of State Institutions Supporting  Constitutional
Democracy to consider.

2.1.3 Merging Chapter 9 Institutions under a national government  department
      to make them more accountable


It was submitted the Constitution be amended to make Chapter 9  Institutions
more  accountable  by  merging  them  and  placing  them  under  a  national
government department.

The Committee  noted  that  section  181(1)  and  (2)  of  the  Constitution
provides that the institutions listed  in  Chapter  9  of  the  Constitution
“strengthen constitutional  democracy”  and  that  these  institutions  “are
independent, and subject only to the Constitution  and  the  law,  and  they
must be impartial and exercise their  powers  and  perform  their  functions
without  fear,  favour  or  prejudice”.  Furthermore  while  section  181(3)
provides  that  other  organs  of  state,  through  legislative  and   other
measures,  must  assist  and  protect  these  institutions  to  ensure   the
independence,   impartiality,   dignity   and   effectiveness    of    these
institutions, section 181(4) provides that no person or organ of  state  may
interfere with the functioning of these institutions.

The Committee was of the view  that  the  independence  of  Chapter  9  were
essential so that they could fulfill their roles as Institutions  Supporting
Constitutional Democracy.

Recommendation
The Committee does not recommend that the Constitution be amended so  as  to
place Chapter 9 Institutions under the control of  a  government  department
as this would significantly diminish their  independence,  impartiality  and
effectiveness as currently provided for in the Constitution.

The Committee was of the view that the submission be  sent  to  the  ad  hoc
Committee on the Review  of  State  Institutions  Supporting  Constitutional
Democracy for further consideration.

2.1.4 Section 193(4) - selection of Commissioners and members of  Chapter  9
      Institutions

It was submitted that section 193 of the Constitution be amended to  provide
that  instead  of  Parliament  short-listing,  interviewing  and  nominating
members of Chapter 9 Institutions, that an  external  panel  or  independent
committee similar to the Judicial  Services  Commission  be  constituted  to
deal with the selection of all members.

The Committee noted that currently the  appointment  provisions  in  section
193 gives effect to  section  181(2)  which  provides  that  the  Chapter  9
Institutions are independent, subject only to the Constitution and the  law,
and “must be impartial, and must exercise their  powers  and  perform  their
functions without fear, favour or prejudice”. The Committee was also of  the
view that it was a matter of policy whether  members  are  appointed  by  an
external panel or independent committee similar  to  the  Judicial  Services
Commission or in terms of section 193, provided that they are  appointed  in
a manner consistent with section 181.

Recommendations:


The Committee decided to refer the above submission to the ad hoc  Committee
on the Review of State Institutions Supporting Constitutional Democracy  for
further consideration.


2.1.5 Chapter 9 Institutions need to  be  more  accessible  to  the  public,
      especially the uneducated and the poor

It was submitted that the Constitution be amended to ensure that  Chapter  9
Institutions are more accessible to the public,  especially  the  uneducated
and the poor.


The  Committee  noted  that  whereas  section  182(4)  of  the  Constitution
provides that the Public Protector “must be accessible to  all  persons  and
communities there are no specific provisions that require  other  Chapter  9
Institutions to be accessible to the public, especially those  sectors  that
remain marginalized.

Recommendation

The Committee was of the view that while there was merit in the  submission,
it could be more comprehensively dealt with by the ad hoc committee  on  the
Review of State Institutions Supporting Constitutional Democracy.

2.1.6 Members of Chapter 9 Institutions be appointed purely on merit


It was submitted that irrespective of any other criterion, that  members  of
Chapter 9 Institutions must be appointed “purely on the basis of merit”.

The Committee noted that section 193 of  the  Constitution  stipulates  that
the Public Protector, the Auditor-General and the members of any  Commission
established in terms of Chapter  9  must  inter  alia  be  “fit  and  proper
persons to hold the particular  office”  and  must  comply  with  any  other
additional requirements prescribed by  national  legislation.  In  addition,
section 193(3) provides  that  the  Auditor-General  must  have  specialized
knowledge  of,  or  experience  in  auditing,  state  finances  and   public
administration.

The Committee also noted that section 193(2) also requires that the  members
of  Chapter  9  Commissions  must  broadly  reflect  the  race  and   gender
composition of South Africa. The Committee was of the view that while it  is
a matter of policy whether or not to  amend  the  above  provision,  it  was
necessary  that  the  Commissions  broadly  reflect  the  race  and   gender
composition of South Africa as this is essential to ensure  that  they  have
legitimacy in the community at large.

Recommendation

The Committee does not recommend that the Constitution  be  amended  in  the
manner suggested as it is of the view that  the  Constitution  and  national
legislation  adequately  provided  for  the  appointment  of   appropriately
skilled and suitable commissioners.


2.1.7 Measures to ensure the impartiality of Chapter 9 Institutions need  to
      be included in the Constitution


It was submitted that the Constitution be amended so as to provide  for  the
impartiality of Chapter 9 Institutions.

The Committee  noted  that  section  181(1)  and  (2)  of  the  Constitution
provides that the institutions listed  in  Chapter  9  of  the  Constitution
“strengthen constitutional  democracy”  and  that  these  institutions  “are
independent, and subject only to the Constitution  and  the  law,  and  they
must be impartial and exercise their  powers  and  perform  their  functions
without fear, favour or prejudice”.  Furthermore that  the  independence  of
these institutions are additionally strengthened and  protected  by  section
181(3), which provides that other organs of state, through  legislative  and
other measures, must assist and protect these  institutions  to  ensure  the
independence,   impartiality,   dignity   and   effectiveness    of    these
institutions.  Furthermore section 181(4) provides that no person  or  organ
of state may interfere with the functioning of these institutions.

Recommendation

The Committee does not support the proposed amendment as it was of the  view
that the Constitution  adequately  provides  for  the  impartiality  of  the
Chapter 9 Institutions.

2.1.8 The public needs to be informed on an ongoing basis  about  Chapter  9
      Institutions, their functions and how to contact them



It was submitted that the Constitution be amended  to  stipulate  that  “the
public  needs  to  be  informed  on  an  ongoing  basis  about   Chapter   9
Institutions, their functions and how to contact them”.


The Committee was of the view that such detail is usually  not  included  in
the Constitution itself, but rather in legislation or policy documents.

Recommendation
The Committee did not support the proposed amendment as it was of  the  view
that such detail should not be included in the Constitution.

The Committee recommended  that  the  matter  be  referred  to  the  ad  hoc
committee on the Review  of  State  Institutions  Supporting  Constitutional
Democracy for further consideration.


2.2         SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS ON CHAPTER 9 INSTITUTIONS



2.2.1 SUBMISSIONS ON THE COMMISSION ON GENDER EQUALITY



2.2.1.1     Section 187(2) - empowering the Commission  on  Gender  Equality
           to  ensure  appropriate  redress  where  gender   discrimination
           occurred


It was submitted that section 187(2)  of  the  Constitution  be  amended  to
empower the Commission on Gender Equality (CGE)  to  take  steps  to  secure
appropriate redress in cases of gender discrimination in  a  similar  manner
that section 184(2)(b) empowers the South African  Human  Rights  Commission
(SAHRC) to take steps to secure appropriate redress where human rights  have
been violated.

The Committee noted that any unfair discrimination on the  basis  of  gender
would also constitute a human rights violation and as such the  SAHRC  would
have the requisite jurisdiction to seek appropriate redress on behalf  of  a
complainant.

Recommendation

The Committee does  not  recommend  that  the  Constitution  be  amended  to
provide that the (CGE) with the power to take steps  to  secure  appropriate
redress in cases of gender discrimination  as  the  SAHRC  already  has  the
power to take such steps where human rights have been violated.


2.2.2       SUBMISSIONS ON THE PUBLIC PROTECTOR



2.2.2.1     Section 182 to be amended  to  allow  the  Public  Protector  to
        investigate violations in the private sector


It was submitted that section 182 of the Constitution be amended  so  as  to
enable the Public Protector to investigate “people and violations  committed
in the private sector”.
The Committee noted that the Public Protector is by definition a high  level
official  whose  function  is  to  strengthen  and  support   constitutional
democracy and not to adjudicate or investigate violations of the  rights  of
the general public in all matters.

Recommendation

The Committee does not recommend that the Constitution be amended to  expand
the functions of the Public Protector to  generally  investigate  violations
committed in the private sector.

2.2.2.2     Term of office of the Public Protector be reduced to five years

It was submitted that the term of  the  Public  Protector  be  reduced  from
seven years to five years to reduce the possibility of the  abuse  of  power
by the Public Protector
The Committee noted that that in Ex parte Chairperson of the  Constitutional
Assembly: In re Certification of the Constitution of the Republic  of  South
Africa, 1996 (10) BCLR 1253 (CC), the Constitutional Court  did  not  regard
the seven year term of the Public Protector as problematic. Furthermore  the
Committee was of the view that given that the Public Protector  only  served
1 term it did not regard the seven year term as problematic

Recommendation

The Committee does not recommend that the Constitution be amended to  reduce
the term of the Public Protector to five years as the  seven  year  term  is
reasonable.

2.2.2.3     The Public Protector be empowered to review court decisions


It was submitted that the powers of the  Public  Protector  be  extended  to
enable the Public Protector to review court decisions


The  Committee  noted  that  section  182(3)  stipulates  that  the   Public
Protector may not investigate court decisions and that  this  provision  was
consistent with section 165 of the Constitution  which  vests  the  judicial
authority of the Republic in the courts and provides  that  the  courts  are
independent, subject only to the Constitution and the law, which  they  must
apply impartially  without  fear,  favour  or  prejudice.  Furthermore,  the
Committee also noted that section 165(3) stipulates that no person or  organ
of state may interfere with the functioning of the courts.

Recommendation

The Committee does not recommend that the Constitution be amended to  enable
the Public Protector to  review  decisions  of  the  courts  as  this  would
conflict with  section  165  and  it  would  have  a  major  impact  on  the
impartiality of the courts and the  separation  of  powers  implied  in  our
Constitution.

2.2.2.4     The Public Protector must report  to  Parliament  regularly  and
        make recommendations
It was submitted that the Constitution be amended so as to provide that  the
Public Protector “report to Parliament regularly and  make  recommendations”
on his or her findings.

The Committee  noted  that  section  182(5)  provides  that  all  Chapter  9
Institutions are accountable to the National Assembly  and  must  report  on
their activities and the performance of their functions to the  Assembly  at
least once a year. Section 182 also provides that the Public  Protector  has
the power to investigate any conduct in state affairs  that  is  alleged  or
suspected to be improper or to result in any impropriety  or  prejudice,  to
report on that conduct and to take appropriate remedial action.

The Committee was of the view that while the Constitution does  not  specify
the remedial action that must  be  taken,  section  6(4)(c)  of  the  Public
Protector Act inter alia provides that at a time prior to, during  or  after
an investigation, if the Public Protector is of the opinion that  the  facts
disclose the commission of an offence by any person, he  or  she  may  bring
the matter to  the  notice  of  the  authority  charged  with  prosecutions.
Furthermore he or she may make an appropriate recommendation  regarding  the
redress of the prejudice resulting therefrom or make any  other  appropriate
recommendation he or she deems expedient to  the  affected  public  body  or
authority.

Recommendation

The Committee does not support the proposed amendment  to  the  Constitution
as it is of the view that  the  suggested  amendment  will  not  confer  any
additional benefits or protection nor will it  enhance  the  functioning  of
the Public Protector.

2.2.2.5     The Public Protector must devise  mechanisms  to  shorten  legal
        processes


It was submitted that the Constitution be amended so as to ensure  that  the
Public Protector “must devise mechanisms to shorten legal processes”.

The Committee noted that while section 182(3) does  not  permit  the  Public
Protector  to  investigate  court  decisions,  the  Public   Protector   may
investigate complaints relating to delays in judicial decision-making.

Recommendation

The Committee does not support the proposed amendment  to  the  Constitution
as it was of  the  view  that  the  role  of  the  Public  Protector  is  to
investigate conduct in state affairs or in the public administration in  any
sphere of government that is alleged or suspected to be improper  to  result
in any impropriety or prejudice and not to regulate judicial processes.


2.2.3 SUBMISSIONS ON THE SOUTH AFRICAN HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION (SAHRC)


2.2.3.1     Expanding the powers of the SAHRC to enter any  institution  and
           peruse all documents in so far as human rights are concerned

It was submitted  that the SAHRC be empowered to enter  any  institution  to
peruse all documents, including the policies of the institution  in  so  far
as human rights are concerned.

The Committee noted  that  section  184(2)  of  the  Constitution  currently
provides that the Commission  has  the  powers,  as  regulated  by  national
legislation, necessary to perform its  functions,  including  the  power  to
investigate and report on the observance of  human  rights,  take  steps  to
secure appropriate redress where human rights  have  been  violated  and  to
educate the public on human rights issues.

Recommendation

The Committee does not support the proposed amendment  of  the  Constitution
as national legislation already empowers the SAHRC and as such there was  no
need to amend the Constitution in the manner suggested.

The Committee was however also of the view that the matter  be  referred  to
the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional  Development  and  the
ad  hoc  Committee  on  the  Review   of   State   Institutions   Supporting
Constitutional Democracy for further consideration.


2.2.3.2     The SAHRC must report regularly to  Parliament  with  regard  to
           progress in providing basic services such  as  health,  housing,
           water and sanitation


It was submitted that the Constitution be  amended  so  as  to  require  the
SAHRC  to  report  regularly  to  Parliament  with  regard  to  progress  in
providing basic services such as health, housing, water and sanitation.

The Committee noted that section 184(3) currently provides  that  each  year
the SAHRC  must  require  relevant  organs  of  state  to  provide  it  with
information on the measures they have taken towards the realization  of  the
rights in the Bill of Rights concerning housing, health care,  food,  water,
social security, education and the environment. In addition, section  181(5)
stipulates that the SAHRC is accountable to the National Assembly  and  must
report on their activities and the performance of  their  functions  to  the
Assembly at least once a year.

Recommendation

The Committee was of the view whether  or  not  the  SAHRC  be  required  to
report to Parliament on  the  measures  taken  in  respect  of  housing  and
sanitation as a matter of policy.

The Committee  recommends  that  the  matter  be  referred  to  the  ad  hoc
committee on the Review  of  State  Institutions  Supporting  Constitutional
Democracy.

2.2.3.3     The SAHRC to promote  respect  for  all  peoples  regardless  of
           their religious conviction or their lack thereof


It was submitted that the Constitution be amended to require  the  SAHRC  to
promote respect for all peoples regardless of their religious conviction  or
their lack thereof.

The Committee noted that section 184(1) of  the  Constitution,  inter  alia,
stipulates that the SAHRC must  promote  respect  for  human  rights  and  a
culture of human rights as well as promote the protection,  development  and
attainment of human rights. The Committee was of the view  that  this  would
include the promotion  of  the  rights  contained  in  section  15(1)  which
provides that everyone has the right to  freedom  of  conscience,  religion,
thought, belief and opinion.

Recommendation

The Committee does not support the proposed amendment  to  the  Constitution
as it is of the view that the Constitution already provides that  the  SAHRC
must promote the rights contained in the Bill of Rights and  that  there  is
thus no need to specifically promote the rights contained in section 15.


2.2.3.4     Prisoners should loose their right to vote


It was submitted that the Constitution be amended to provide that the  SAHRC
must ensure that prisoners must loose their right to vote.

The Committee was of the view that the  rights  of  prisoners  to  vote  are
unrelated to the functioning of the SAHRC except in so  far  as  a  prisoner
who is not allowed to vote may lodge a complaint with the SAHRC.

The Committee noted that the issue of prisoners’ rights to vote  was  before
the Constitutional Court in August and Another v  Electoral  Commission  and
Others 1999 (3) SA 1 (CC), and Minister of Home Affairs v NICRO  and  Others
2004 (5) BCLR 445 (CC). In the latter case  it  was  noted  that  given  the
history of disenfranchisement in South African, the right to  vote  occupies
a special place in our democracy and that any limitation of this right  must
be supported by clear and convincing reasons. The court  indicated  that  if
the Government sought to disfranchise a  group  of  its  citizens,  it  must
place sufficient information before the  court  demonstrating  what  purpose
the disenfranchisement is intended to serve.

Recommendation

The Committee does not support the proposed amendment  to  the  Constitution
as the petitioners did not demonstrate or motivate why they are of the  view
that prisoners may not vote. The Committee  also  noted  that  such  a  view
conflicts with the current jurisprudence  of  the  Constitutional  Court  on
prisoners’ right to vote.



2.2.3.5     The SAHRC to hold a referendum on the death penalty


It was submitted that the SAHRC should hold  a  referendum  on  whether  the
death penalty should be reinstated.

The Committee was of the view the submission did not  propose  an  amendment
to the Constitution. Furthermore it noted that neither the Constitution  nor
legislation empowers the SAHRC to hold such a referendum.

The Committee noted  the  judgment  of  the  Constitutional  Court  in  S  v
Makwanyane and Another 1995 (3) SA 391 (CC), in which it was held  that  the
death  penalty  was  unconstitutional  as  it  inter   alia   violated   the
fundamental right not to be subject to cruel, inhuman or degrading  form  of
punishment, the right to dignity and the right to life as protected  in  the
Bill of Rights. The Committee also agreed with the  view  of  the  Court  in
respect of public opinion on the death penalty in terms of which  the  Court
held that “[i]f public opinion were to be decisive there would  be  no  need
for constitutional adjudication. The protection  of  rights  could  then  be
left to Parliament, which has a mandate from the public, and  is  answerable
to the public for the way its mandate is exercised,  but  this  would  be  a
return to parliamentary sovereignty, and a retreat from the new legal  order
established by the 1993 Constitution. By the same token  the  issue  of  the
constitutionality of capital punishment cannot be referred to a  referendum,
in which a majority view would prevail over the wishes of any minority.  The
very reason for establishing the new legal order, and for vesting the  power
of judicial review of all legislation in the  courts,  was  to  protect  the
rights of minorities and others who cannot protect their  rights  adequately
through the democratic  process.  Those  who  are  entitled  to  claim  this
protection include the  social  outcasts  and  marginalized  people  of  our
society. It is only if there is a willingness to protect the worst  and  the
weakest amongst us, that all of us can be secure that our  own  rights  will
be protected” (paragraph 88).

The Committee also noted that the reinstatement of the death  penalty  would
conflict with South Africa’s international  law  obligations  as  Parliament
ratified the Second Optional  Protocol  to  the  International  Covenant  on
Civil and Political Rights which inter alia provides that no one within  the
its jurisdiction shall be executed and that the state  is  obliged  to  take
all necessary measures to abolish the death penalty.

Recommendation

The Committee does not support the proposal as the Court in Makwanyane  held
that the death penalty was, inter alia, a violation of the right not  to  be
subjected to cruel, inhuman or degrading forms of  punishment  the  freedom,
the right to dignity and the right to life. The Committee was  also  of  the
view that the reinstatement of the death penalty would  in  all  probability
require  amendments  to  fundamental  provisions  of  the  Bill  of   Rights
including sections 9, 10 and 12, dealing with equality,  human  dignity  and
freedom and security of the person  respectively  and  that  it  would  also
conflict with South Africa’s international law obligations.


2.2.3.6     The SAHRC should impose heavier sentences on offenders



It  was  submitted  that  the  SAHRC  should  impose  heavier  sentences  on
convicted offenders.

Recommendation

The  Committee  was  of  the  view  that  no  specific  amendment   to   the
Constitution was proposed. It also noted that the  imposition  of  sentences
is not a matter to be dealt with by the SAHRC  as  it  is  either  a  matter
regulated by Parliament in terms of legislation or by  judges  in  terms  of
the common law.

2.2.4 SUBMISSIONS ON THE COMMISSION FOR THE PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF  THE
      RIGHTS OF CULTURAL, RELIGIOUS AND LINGUISTIC COMMUNITIES (CPPRCRLC)


2.2.4.1     The powers of the Commission be extended to enable it to  put  a
           stop to discrimination on the basis of cultural,  religious  and
           linguistic communities


It was submitted that the Constitution be amended to  empower  the  CPPRCRLC
to put a stop to discrimination against cultural, religious  and  linguistic
communities.

The Committee noted that in terms of section  185(1)  of  the  Constitution,
the primary objects of the CPPRCRLC are to promote respect  for  the  rights
of cultural, religious and linguistic communities, to  promote  and  develop
peace,  friendship  and  national  unity  among  cultural,   religious   and
linguistic communities on the  basis  of  equality,  non-discrimination  and
free association and  to  recommend  the  establishment  or  recognition  in
accordance with national legislation, of a  cultural  or  other  council  or
councils for a community or communities in South  Africa  and  that  section
185(2) further provides that the Commission has the power, as  regulated  by
national legislation, necessary to achieve its  primary  objects,  including
the power to monitor,  investigate,  research,  educate,  lobby  advise  and
report  on  issues  concerning  the  rights  of  cultural,   religious   and
linguistic communities.


The Committee was of the view that while section  185(2)  does  not  empower
the CPPRCRLC to itself investigate violations of rights, it may  report  any
matter that  falls  within  its  powers  and  functions  to  the  SAHRC  for
investigation.


Recommendation

The Committee does not recommend that the Constitution  be  amended  as  the
SAHRC already has the power to investigate any violation of human rights.

2.2.4.2     The CPPRCRLC needs to be more visible and  the  public  must  be
           informed about the rights of minorities

It was submitted that  the  Constitution  be  amended  to  ensure  that  the
CPPRCRLC becomes more visible and that it must inform the public  about  the
rights of minorities.

The Committee noted  that  such  detail  is  not  usually  included  in  the
Constitution itself, but rather in legislation or policy documents.
Recommendation

The Committee does not support the proposed amendment as it is of  the  view
that such detail should be contained in  legislation  or  policy  documents,
rather than the Constitution.
The Committee also recommends that the matter be  referred  to  the  ad  hoc
committee on the Review  of  State  Institutions  Supporting  Constitutional
Democracy for further consideration

2.2.5 SUBMISSIONS ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL (AG)

2.2.5.1      The  Auditor-General  must  be  empowered  to  act  immediately
           against  perpetrators  of  fraud  and  not  just  to  report  on
           irregularities


It was submitted that the Constitution be  amended  so  as  to  empower  the
Auditor-General (AG) to act immediately against perpetrators  of  fraud  and
not just to report on irregularities.


The Committee noted that section 188(1) makes it clear that the function  of
the AG is to audit and report on  the  accounts,  financial  statements  and
financial management of  all  state  departments  and  administrations,  all
municipalities and any other institution or accounting  entity  so  required
by national or provincial legislation and that in terms  of  section  188(2)
the AG may also audit other state institutions that  receive  public  monies
for a public purpose.

Recommendation

The Committee does not support the proposed amendment as  in  its  view  the
task of the AG is to report on financial irregularities and  report  thereon
to the relevant authorities and thereafter it is the function of  the  South
African Police Services and the National Prosecuting  Authority  to  act  on
such information.

2.2.5.2     The AG must  make  concrete  and  practical  recommendations  to
           Parliament

It was submitted that the Constitution be amended to  provide  that  the  AG
must make concrete recommendations to Parliament.


The  Committee  noted  that  section  188(3)  of  the  Constitution  already
currently provides that the AG must submit audit reports to any  legislature
that has a direct interest in the audit.

Recommendation

The Committee is of the view that as  188(3)  of  the  Constitution  already
provides that the AG must submit audit reports to any legislature  that  has
a direct interest in the audit, the amendment suggested is superfluous.

2.2.6 SUBMISSIONS ON THE ELECTORAL COMMISSIONS

2.2.6.1      The  Electoral  Commission  must  make  more  voting   stations
           available, prescribe more stringent regulations with  regard  to
           the registering of political parties and become more visible

It was submitted that the Constitution be amended so as to ensure  that  the
Electoral Commission make more voting  stations  available,  prescribe  more
stringent regulations with regard to the registering  of  political  parties
and become more visible.
The Committee was of the view that such detail is not  usually  included  in
the Constitution itself, but rather in legislation or policy documents.

Recommendation

The Committee does not recommend amending the Constitution to  provide  that
the Electoral Commission make  more  voting  stations  available,  prescribe
more stringent regulations with  regard  to  the  registering  of  political
parties and become more visible as it  is  of  the  view  that  such  detail
should not be included in the Constitution.

2.2.7 SUBMISSIONS ON THE INDEPENDENT AUTHORITY TO REGULATE BROADCASTING



2.2.7.1     The IBA to promote locally  produced  programmes  and  design  a
           cheaper and shorter process to apply for a broadcasting  licence
           to benefit smaller and poorer communities


It was submitted that the Constitution be amended so as to ensure  that  the
IBA must promote locally  produced  programmes  and  design  a  cheaper  and
shorter process to apply for a broadcasting license to benefit  smaller  and
poorer communities.


The Committee noted that section  192  provides  that  national  legislation
must establish an independent authority  to  regulate  broadcasting  in  the
public interest and to ensure fairness and  a  diversity  of  views  broadly
representing  South  African  society  and  as  such  the  drafters  of  the
Constitution did not specify the functions of the IBA.
Recommendation

The Committee does not recommend amending the Constitution  to  ensure  that
the IBA promote  locally  produced  programmes  and  design  a  cheaper  and
shorter process to apply for a broadcasting license as such  details  should
not be included in the Constitution.

   3. OTHER RECOMMENDATIONS ON CHAPTER 9 INSTITUTIONS


   1. Creation of a Chapter 9  Institution  to  promote  and  safeguard  the
      rights of children

It was submitted that that  a  new  Chapter  9  Institution  be  created  to
promote and safeguard the rights of children.

The Committee noted that section 28  of  the  Bill  of  Rights  specifically
protects the rights of children and  that  the  inclusion  in  the  Bill  of
Rights of a special section on the rights of  the  child  was  an  important
development  for  South  African  children  as  they  are  among  the   most
vulnerable members of society.

The Committee was of the view that Chapter 9 Institutions  were  established
to provide meaningful support for the system  of  constitutional  democracy,
open government and good governance and as such it would not be  appropriate
to locate an institution safeguarding the rights of children  in  Chapter  9
of the Constitution.

Recommendation

The Committee does not support the proposed amendment as it is of  the  view
that it would not be appropriate for  such  a  body  to  be  included  as  a
Chapter 9 Institution.

3. OTHER PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION

3.1         Amendment of section 23(2)(c)

It was submitted that section 23(2)(c) of the Constitution be amended so  as
to list essential services and prevent  such  employees  from  embarking  on
industrial action.

The Committee noted that section 213 of the Labour  Relations  Act  of  1995
already defined essential services and regulated such  employees’  right  to
strike.

Recommendation

The Committee does not recommend the amendment of section 23(2)(c) as it  is
of the view that the proposal is captured in various sections of the  Labour
Relations Act.

3.2   The President to be directly elected

It was submitted that the Constitution be amended so that the  President  is
directly elected by the people rather than the National Assembly.

The Committee noted that  it  was  possible  for  Parliament  to  amend  the
electoral  system  provided  that  it  did  so  in   accordance   with   the
Constitution, the Committee  was  of  the  view  that  proposal  was  a  far
reaching one  which  would  change  our  current  system  of  elections  and
parliamentary democracy in general.

Recommendation

The Committee was  of  the  view  that  the  desirability  of  amending  the
electoral system was a far reaching policy consideration that would  require
more research and discussion before the Committee can consider the matter.

3.3   Floor-crossing

It was  submitted  that  floor-crossing  is  a  feature  of  many  so-called
“established” and “developing” democracies and as  such  was  unsuitable  to
South Africa currently.

The Committee noted the judgment  of  the  Constitutional  Court  in  UDM  v
President of the RSA and Others (1) [2002 (11) BCLR  1179  (CC)  which  held
that the that floor-crossing  provisions  were  not  inconsistent  with  the
founding values set out in section 1 of the Constitution,  with  multi-party
democracy, or with proportional representation.

Recommendation

The Committee noted that the matter was already before Parliament  in  terms
of a private member’s legislative proposal which has been  referred  to  the
Standing Committee on Private Members’  Legislative  Proposals  and  Special
Petitions by the Speaker. As such the Committee was of the view that it  was
not feasible to engage in what would amount to a parallel process.

3.4   Free quality mother tongue education


It was submitted that the Constitution be  amended  so  as  to  provide  for
“free quality mother tongue education”.

The Committee noted that section 29(2) of the Bill of Rights  provides  that
everyone has the right to receive education  in  the  official  language  or
languages of their choice in  public  educational  institutions  where  that
kind education is reasonably practicable. In order to ensure  the  effective
access to, and implementation of this right, the  state  must  consider  all
reasonable alternatives including single  medium  institutions  taking  into
account equity, practicability, and the need to redress the results of  past
racially discriminatory laws and practices.

As such the Committee was of the view that  the  Constitution  provides  for
the provision of mother tongue education at  state  cost  in  terms  of  the
guidelines set above.

Recommendation

The Committee does not support the proposed amendment as it is of  the  view
that the Constitution adequately provides for reasonable  access  to  mother
tongue education at state cost.

D. Other submissions that did not propose amendments to the Constitution

The Committee received a submission from the SAHRC which  commented  on  the
progress made in respect of persons with disabilities. While the  SAHRC  did
not propose any amendments to the  Constitution,  the  submission  indicated
that state  departments  were  not  giving  effect  to  the  rights  of  the
disabled. As such the Committee referred the  submission  to  the  Portfolio
Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development.

The Committee also  received  a  submission  from  the  CGE  which  proposed
amendments to the Commission on Gender  Equality  Act,  the  Public  Finance
Management Act and the Promotion of Equality and the  Prevention  of  Unfair
Discrimination Act. As these submissions  related  to  national  legislation
and not the Constitution, the  Committee  referred  the  submission  to  the
Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice   and   Constitutional   Development   for
consideration.

In addition the Committee also received submissions from the public which
    • complained about the administration of Chapter 9 Institutions;
    • alleged that there was unfairness in the justice system;
    • and alleged that it is  unfair  that  the  state  observes  Christian
      public holidays such as Easter.

Report to be considered.

National Assembly

1.  Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and   Constitutional
Development on the Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Amendment  Bill  [B  50  -
2003] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 10 November 2006:

      The Portfolio Committee on  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,
      having considered the subject  matter  of  the  Criminal  Law  (Sexual
      Offences) Amendment Bill [B 50 – 2003] (National Assembly –  sec  75),
      and the Compulsory HIV Testing of Alleged Sexual Offenders Bill [B  10
      – 2003] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified by
      the Joint Tagging Mechanism as  section  75  Bills,  agrees  with  the
      tagging of the Bill as a section 75 Bill and presents the Criminal Law
      (Sexual Offences and Related Matters) Amendment Bill [B 50B - 2003].


      The Committee wishes to report further, as follows:
      1.    Public Participation:
            In the  light  of  certain  media  reports  and  representations
           received,  the  Committee  deems   it   expedient   to   address
           allegations  that  there  was  not  sufficient  opportunity   by
           roleplayers, stakeholders and individual members of  the  public
           to participate in the parliamentary process.  The  following  is
           relevant in this regard:


      1.1   The Committee, from the outset, took cognisance of the fact that
           –
           *     the Criminal Law (Sexual  Offences)  Amendment  Bill  (the
                 Bill) emanated from an investigation of the  South  African
                 Law  Reform  Commission  (the  Commission)    into   sexual
                 offences;    and
           *     the final recommendations of the Commission were based on,
                 among others, a process of extensive  public  participation
                 during   the   different   stages   of   the   Commission’s
                 investigation.
           The Committee  consequently  made  extensive  reference  to  the
           Commission’s report, which highlighted all relevant  submissions
           made to it and the reasons why  the Commission  did  not  always
           follow  the  recommendations  in  some  of  the  submissions  or
           portions thereof.


      1.2   After the Bill was introduced into Parliament in August 2003 and
           referred to  this  Committee,  the  Department  of  Justice  and
           Constitutional  Development   (the   Department)   briefed   the
           Committee  comprehensively  on  the  Bill.   At  the   time   of
           introduction, the  Chairperson  invited  interested  persons  to
           comment on the Bill.  One hundred and twenty eight (128) written
           submissions  were  received.   Oral  hearings  were  also  held.
           During the public hearings a number of  persons,  many  of  whom
           participated in the consultative process of the Commission, made
           oral  and  written  submissions.   The  persons  presenting  the
           various submissions were subjected to  thorough  questioning  in
           order to clarify the many issues that arose.  The Committee-
           *     being aware that the Commission, during its investigation,
                 had consulted widely; and
           *     using the Commission’s report as a point of departure,
           among others, questioned the persons who  made  submissions  for
           the amendment of the Bill on the feasibility and desirability of
           the proposed amendments generally, and more  specifically  where
           these  recommendations  were  a  repetition  of  issues  already
           canvassed during  the  Commission’s  consultative  process.  The
           Department was also requested to summarise all oral and  written
           submissions made.


      1.3   At the end of January 2004 the Portfolio Committee  resumed  its
           deliberations on the Bill and,  at  that  stage,  the  Committee
           considered  at  length  all   the   submissions   made.    These
           submissions, to a large extent, informed  the  deliberations  of
           the Committee which gave rise to numerous suggestions on how the
           Bill should be adapted.  The Committee  consequently  instructed
           the Department to  adapt  the  Bill  in  numerous  respects  for
           further debate, after which final decisions would be made.


      1.4   Immediately before  Parliament  dissolved  for  the  April  2004
           elections the then Chairperson of the  Portfolio  Committee  was
           requested and mandated by  the  Committee  to  engage  with  the
           drafters of the Bill, in an attempt to have the Bill ready in  a
           format for consideration  by  the  newly  constituted  Portfolio
           Committee after the elections, in line with the suggestions made
           by the Committee up until that stage.


      1.5   After the elections, on 15  June  2004,  the  National  Assembly
           adopted a resolution to the following effect:
                 “That the following  bills  be  revived  and  consideration
                 thereof be resumed from the stage reached with them in  the
                 Second Parliament before lapsing,  namely  that  the  bills
                 were before committees of the National Assembly:
                 (1)   ….
                 (6)   Compulsory HIV Testing of  Alleged  Sexual  Offenders
                       Bill [B10-2003] (National Assembly – sec 75);
                 (7)   Criminal Law (Sexual Offenders) Amendment Bill [B50 –
                       2003] (National Assembly –sec 75);”.

      1.6   Due to  the  changes  suggested  by  the  Committee,  the  newly
           appointed Minister for Justice  and  Constitutional  Development
           requested that the Committee only resume  its  deliberations  on
           the Bill after Cabinet had taken  cognisance  of  the  suggested
           changes.  After the Bill had been  considered  by  Cabinet,  the
           Minister indicated by way of a letter, dated 10 May 2006, to the
           Speaker of the National Assembly  and  the  Chairperson  of  the
           Committee that the adapted Bill had been submitted  to  Cabinet.
            The Committee resumed its deliberations on  the  Bill  in  June
           2006.


      1.7   Before  resuming  its  deliberations,  the  Chairperson  of  the
           Committee again invited roleplayers, stakeholders and individual
           members of the public to comment on the adapted Bill, which was,
           in  essence,   the   product   of   the   Committee’s   previous
           deliberations, the Committee  having  suggested  the  amendments
           that were submitted to  Cabinet  in  the  first  place.   Again,
           numerous representations were received:  fifty nine (59).  Those
           received up until 31 August 2006 were distributed to all members
           of the Committee, summarised  and  considered  formally  by  the
           Committee.  Since it is custom to have oral hearings only at the
           beginning of the passage of a Bill through Parliament and  since
           many of the submissions received on  the  adapted  Bill,  boiled
           down to a repetition of previous submissions made  in  2003,  no
           further  oral  hearings  were  held.  Some  of   these   written
           representations  did,  however,   give   rise   to   amendments.
           Representations received after 31 August 2006  were  distributed
           to Committee members who were  requested  to  raise  any  issues
           arising from these representations that required  consideration.
           Some of the last amendments made by  the  Committee  were  as  a
           direct result of these late submissions.

      2.    Provisions of the Bill which require  specific  mention  in  the
report:


      2.1   Prior to the elections in  2004,  the  Committee  suggested  the
           inclusion of a clause  in  the  Bill  criminalising  a  person’s
           intentional non-disclosure of his or  her  HIV  positive  status
           when engaging  in  intimate  contact  with  another  person.   A
           similar clause was suggested in the case of a person who  has  a
           sexually transmissible infection, other than HIV or AIDS.   When
           the  adapted  Bill  was  before   Cabinet,   Cabinet   expressed
           reservations about these provisions.  The Committee took note of
           Cabinet’s  reservations  in  this  regard   and   requests   the
           Department to embark on  further research, including comparative
           international trends in this regard, with the view to addressing
           these reservations and to revert to the  Committee  as  soon  as
           possible.


      2.2   Clause 11 which, in effect, confirms the existing legal position
           that persons who solicit the sexual services  of  persons  older
           than 18 years are also guilty of an offence, as are the  persons
           who sell these services, is intended  to  address  the  concerns
           raised by the Constitutional Court in its judgment in  the  case
           of S v Jordan and Others.   When deliberating  on  this  clause,
           the Committee raised the  question  why  in  practice  only  the
           seller of the services is charged and prosecuted.  The Committee
           expressed concern that, in a constitutional  democracy  such  as
           ours, there should not be a selective application  of  the  law,
           where mostly women are prosecuted for  selling  sexual  services
           while their clients, mostly men,  who  are  equally  guilty,  go
           unpunished.  The Committee consequently requests the  Department
           to ensure  that  this  very  real  concern  is  brought  to  the
           attention of  the  Commissioner  of  the  South  African  Police
           Service and the National Director of Public Prosecutions who are
           requested to revert to the Committee in writing on this  aspect,
           explaining, among others,  why  the  clients  who  are,  by  all
           accounts, mostly men, are not arrested, charged  and  prosecuted
           in accordance with the findings  of  the  Constitutional  Court.
           The  Committee,  however,  noted  that  the  matter   of   adult
           prostitution is the subject of review by the South  African  Law
           Reform Commission.


      2.3   When the provisions dealing with statutory rape  were  discussed
           (clause 15), the age of consent became a burning  issue,  around
           which there were heated debates.  The Committee finally  settled
           on 16 years as the age of consent, as contemplated in clause 15,
           read with  the  definition  of  “child”,  in  order  to  protect
           children under that age, but also to avoid  the  possibility  of
           thousands of children 16 years and older being  drawn  into  the
           criminal justice system and being  prosecuted  for  engaging  in
           sexual acts and sexual experimentation,  a  reality  from  which
           there is no escape in virtually all societies across the  globe.
           The Committee, however, noted an argument in favour  of  raising
           the age of consent to 18 years,  namely  that  “age  of  consent
           offences” (acts of  consensual  sexual  penetration  and  sexual
           violation with certain children, as proposed in clauses  15  and
           16 of the Bill) offer (automatic) legal protection for both boys
           and girls against adult sex predators since the prosecution,  in
           these cases, knowing the age of the child to be under the age of
           consent, is only required  to  prove  that  the  sexual  act  in
           question took place.  The Committee, recognising  the  need  for
           continued discussions on this issue, pending  further  research,
           requests the Department to  see  how  other  jurisdictions  have
           dealt with the two competing issues  mentioned  above  and  what
           protective mechanisms they have put in place.


      2.4   Clause 17 of the Bill, similar to clause  11,  criminalises  the
           soliciting of a person under 18 years for  sexual  purposes,  in
           other words, sexual exploitation  of  a  child.   A  person  who
           solicits the sexual services of a child under 12  years  and  in
           fact has sex with the child, can be prosecuted for the crime  of
           soliciting as well as for rape, since a child under 12 years can
           never consent to sex.  In similar vein, a  person  who  solicits
           the sexual services of a child between 12 years and 16 years and
           in fact commits a sexual act with the child, can  be  prosecuted
           for the crime of soliciting as well as for statutory rape, since
           no person may have sex with a child under 16  years,  even  with
           the consent of the child.   The  Committee,  however,  expressed
           concern that a person who solicits  the  sexual  services  of  a
           child between 16 years and 18 years, even with  the  consent  of
           the child, can only be prosecuted for the crime  of  soliciting.
           The extra protection that children under 16 years enjoy in  this
           regard, namely  that  the  perpetrator  (the  “client”)  can  be
           prosecuted for  two  offences,  is  not  available  to  children
           between 16 and 18 years who are exploited for  sexual  purposes.
           The   Committee,   understanding   that   the   Commission    is
           investigating various aspects of  adult  prostitution,  requests
           the Commission, in its investigation, to take cognisance of this
           legal  position   when   making   its   final   recommendations,
           nothwithstanding the fact that  the  Commission’s  investigation
           only deals with adult prostitution, that is persons who  are  18
           years and older.


      2.5   Clause 19 of the Bill, as introduced, reads as follows:

      2.5.1       “Drug and alcohol treatment orders

                       19.   A court may, upon conviction of a person having
                 committed a  sexual  offence  and  if  satisfied  that  the
                 convicted person is dependent on or has the  propensity  to
                 misuse alcohol or any drug and may benefit from  treatment,
                 grant an order in terms of  section  296  of  the  Criminal
                 Procedure Act, 1977 (Act No. 51 of 1977), and such an order
                 may be made  in  addition  to  any  sentence,  including  a
                 sentence of imprisonment which is not suspended.”.


      2.5.2 While not wishing to express  a  view  on  the  merits  of  this
           provision, the Committee was of the opinion that this provision,
           dealing with the sexual offender rather  than  sexual  offences,
           which is the focus of the draft legislation, should be  referred
           back  to  the   Department   for   further   consideration   and
           investigation.  The question was raised whether a  provision  of
           this nature, if it is to be enacted, would not be better  placed
           in the Criminal Procedure Act, 1977 (Act No. 51 of  1977).   The
           Committee also requested the Department to revisit this proposal
           in the context of  sections  51  and  52  of  the  Criminal  Law
           Amendment  Act,  1997  (Act  No.  105  of  1997),  dealing  with
           compulsory/minimum  sentences.    The   Committee   consequently
           decided to suspend this clause until the Department has reported
           back.

      2.6   Clause 20 of the Bill, as introduced into Parliament, deals with
           the supervision of  dangerous  sexual  offenders  and  provides,
           among others, that a court that has  convicted  a  person  of  a
           sexual offence can declare such  a  person  to  be  a  dangerous
           sexual offender if that person has more than one conviction  for
           a  sexual  offence,  if  the  sexual  offence  in  question  was
           accompanied by violence or if the person has been convicted of a
           sexual offence against a child.  In such a case  the  court  can
           order, as part of  the  sentence,  that  when  the  offender  is
           released from prison after serving part of his or her  sentence,
           he  or  she  be  placed  under  long  term  supervision  by   an
           appropriate person for a period of not  less  than  five  years.
           The Committee  raised  a  number  of  questions  regarding  this
           provision, among others, the following:
           (i)   What are the financial implications?
           (ii)  Are statistics available about recidivists?
           (iii) Have the constitutional  implications  of  this  provision
                 been addressed adequately?
           (iv)  Why is a clause of this nature necessary and what  is  the
                 mischief it aims to address?
           The Committee requests the Department to look  into  the  issues
           raised and to revert to it as soon as circumstances permit.


      3.    Schedule to the Bill:
           Schedule 2 to the Bill, as introduced into Parliament,  effected
           amendments to numerous Acts of Parliament, as a  result  of  the
           provisions  in  the  Bill.   The  Committee  decided  to  delete
           Schedule 1  of  the  introduced  Bill  which  sets  out  guiding
           principles  to  be  considered  in  the   application   of   the
           legislation and the adjudication of sexual  offences  generally.
           The Committee was of the view that guiding  principles  of  this
           nature would be better placed or reflected in the  body  of  the
           legislation and, more particularly, in  the  provisions  setting
           out the objects of the legislation and in the provisions dealing
           with  implementation.   The  Bill  approved  by  the   Committee
           consequently only has  one  Schedule,  containing  consequential
           amendments to various Acts of Parliament.

      3.1   In the Bill  as  introduced  into  Parliament,  Item  8  of  the
           amendments to the Criminal Procedure Act, 1977 (Act 51 of 1977),
           proposed the insertion of a new section  192A  in  the  Criminal
           Procedure Act, 1977, after the existing  section  192.   Section
           192 provides that every witness is competent and compellable  to
           testify, unless expressly excluded.  The aim of section 192A, as
           recommended by the Commission, was to provide expressly that all
           children (not only  witnesses  in  sexual  offences  cases)  are
           competent to testify in criminal proceedings.  This was done  so
           as not to create an artificial distinction between  children  in
           sexual  offences  matters  and  other  child   witnesses.    The
           Committee decided to delete this provision from the  Bill  since
           it applies to all children and not just children who are victims
           of a sexual offence or who are witnesses  in  a  sexual  offence
           case.  The Committee requested the Department to  consider  this
           proposal outside the scope of the Bill  and  to  revert  to  the
           Committee if an amendment of this nature  is  considered  to  be
           necessary.

      3.2   Because of the many changes made to the Bill as introduced  into
           Parliament, the Department was required to revisit the  Schedule
           to the Bill containing consequential amendments to other Acts of
           Parliament.   During  this  process  the  Department  identified
           numerous   provisions   on   the    Statute    Book    requiring
           synchronisation with the Bill under  discussion.   Many  of  the
           statutory provisions requiring amendment in order to bring  them
           into line with the Bill are straight-forward and can be  amended
           without further ado and have in fact been amended,  giving  rise
           to a schedule considerably longer than the one contained in  the
           introduced  Bill.   There  is,  however,  another  category   of
           statutory provisions which were identified as possibly requiring
           amendments.  These  provisions,  particularly  those  which  are
           administered by Departments other than the Department of Justice
           and Constitutional Development,  require  further  investigation
           and  consultation.   Since  the  Bill  can  be   finalised   and
           implemented  without  effecting  this  particular  category   of
           amendments, the Committee has decided to keep them  in  abeyance
           pending  further  investigation.   The  Committee   consequently
           requests the Department to –
           (a)   approach  the  Departments  in  question  to  revisit  the
                 statutes  administered  by  them  and  identified  by   the
                 Committee with the view to aligning them, where  necessary,
                 with the legislation under discussion;  and
           (b)   report back to the Committee on whether the provisions  do
                 in fact need to be amended in order to align them with  the
                 legislation under discussion.

      3.3   One of the provisions that  required  synchronisation  with  the
           legislation under discussion is  section  195  of  the  Criminal
           Procedure Act, 1977.  This section deals with “evidence for  the
           prosecution by the husband or wife of the accused,  the  aim  of
           which is to protect the  inviolability  of  the  institution  of
           marriage.  It provides that the wife or husband  of  an  accused
           person shall be competent but not compellable to  give  evidence
           for the prosecution in criminal proceedings,  but  is  competent
           and compellable to give evidence for the prosecution in criminal
           proceedings in relation to certain offences.  It is quite  clear
           why some of the offences mentioned in the list  are  there,  for
           instance any offence committed against the person of  either  of
           them or of a child of either of them.  Some of the  offences  in
           the list, however, do not seem  to  have  a  similar  clear  cut
           rationale or connection, for instance the reference to  offences
           contained  in  the  Sexual  Offences  Act,   1957,   which   are
           prostitution-related  offences.   The   Committee   raised   the
           question whether this list of offences should not be  re-visited
           in the light of prevailing public mores and circumstances  which
           have undergone changes since these provisions  were  enacted  in
           1977, and which, at the time of such  enactment,  were  probably
           simply taken from the Act’s predecessor, the Criminal  Procedure
           Act of 1955.  The Committee consequently requests the Department
           to undertake an investigation  in  order  to  determine  whether
           adaptations in this regard are necessary and to report  back  to
           the  Committee  on  its  findings  and  to  submit   appropriate
           amendments, if necessary.


      3.4   Another provision of the  Criminal  Procedure  Act,  1977,  that
           required synchronisation with the legislation  under  discussion
           is section 268.  This section  deals  with  “statutory  unlawful
           carnal intercourse” and provides,  among  others,  that  if  the
           evidence  on  a  charge  of  unlawful  carnal   intercourse   in
           contravention of any statute does not  prove  that  offence  but
           proves –
           (a)   the offence of indecent assault;
           (b)   the offence of common assault;
           (c)   the statutory offence of  -
                 (i)   committing an immoral or indecent  act  with  another
                       person;
                 (ii)  soliciting, enticing or importuning such other person
                       to have unlawful carnal intercourse;
                 (iii) soliciting, enticing or importuning such other person
                       to commit an immoral or indecent act;  or
                 (iv)  conspiring with such other person  to  have  unlawful
                       carnal intercourse,
            the accused may be found guilty of the offence so proved.
           Not  only  is  the  language  of  this  provision  archaic,  the
           rationale behind the provision, in the opinion of the Committee,
           needs to be re-visited. This section has been amended in so  far
           as it can be adapted in order to bring it in line with the Bill,
           as mentioned above.  This section,  dealing  with  prostitution-
           related issues is, however, of such a nature that it should form
           part of the Commission’s investigation  on  adult  prostitution.
           The Committee  requests  the  Commission  to  ensure  that  this
           section is also  given  attention  during  the  course  of  this
           investigation, in addition to the provisions dealing with  adult
           prostitution, contained in the Sexual Offences Act, 1957.


      4.    Training:
            The Committee recognises that the Bill, which is a comprehensive
           review of the existing law relating  to  sexual  offences,  will
           inevitably give rise to many questions by those who are required
           to implement and apply it in practice. In order to  ensure  that
           it is  understood  properly  and  is  applied  as  uniformly  as
           possible throughout the country, the Committee is  of  the  view
           that the Department should initiate and, as far as possible  and
           appropriate (in so far  as  the  judiciary  is  concerned),  co-
           ordinate  a  project  which  is  aimed  at  the  promotion   and
           facilitation  of   training   on   the   legislation   and   its
           implications.    The   Committee   consequently   requests   the
           Department to revert to it with a detailed proposal, prepared in
           conjunction  with  all  relevant  roleplayers,   on   how   this
           initiative should be undertaken, including,  among  others,  the
           following:
           (i)   Aspects identified in the Bill that require attention,  in
                 general, as well as specific aspects that require attention
                 by the various functionaries which will be responsible  for
                 the implementation of the legislation;
           (ii)  categories of persons or functionaries that  will  benefit
                 from such training;
           (iii) persons or institutions  that  should  be  approached  for
                 developing and providing the required training courses;
           (iv)  funding the training;  and
           (v)   timeframes.


Report to be considered.


                          TUESDAY, 14 NOVEMBER 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Translations of Bills submitted


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


          a) Aansuiweringsbegrotingswetsontwerp [W 32 – 2006] (National
             Assembly – art 77)


              This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the
              Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 32 – 2006] (National
              Assembly – sec 77).


National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Labour for consideration and report:

          a) Instrument for the Amendment of the Constitution of the
             International Labour Organisation (ILO), tabled in terms of
             section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


          b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Instrument for the Amendment of
             the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation
             (ILO).

    2.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Agriculture and Land Affairs for consideration and report:

          a) Agreement between the Republic of Botswana, the Republic of
             Mozambique, the Republic of South Africa and the Republic of
             Zimbabwe on the Establishment of the Limpopo Watercourse
             Commission, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
             Constitution, 1996.

          b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Republic of
             Botswana, the Republic of Mozambique, the Republic of South
             Africa and the Republic of Zimbabwe on the Establishment of the
             Limpopo.

    3.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration and report:

          a) Request for approval by the National Assembly of the exclusion
             of Portion 1 of the farm Mozib 279, the farm Droogte Veldt 292
             and Portion 1 of the farm Than 280 from the Vaalbos National
             Park in terms of section 21(1)(a) of the National Environmental
             Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of 2003).

          b) Explanatory memorandum on the proposed exclusion of Portion 1
             of the farm Mozib 279, the farm Drooge Veldt 292 and Portion 1
             of the farm Than 280 from the Vaalbos National Park in terms of
             section 21(1)(a) of the National Environmental Management:
             Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of 2003).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson
    a) General Report of the Auditor-General on Audit Outcomes for 2005-06
       [RP 247-2006].

    b) General Report of the Auditor-General on the Audit Outcomes of Local
       Government for the year ended 30 June 2005 [RP 172-2006].

2.    The Minister of Safety and Security

     a) Report of the National Commissioner of the South African Police
        Service (SAPS) for the period of January 2006 to June 2006, in
        terms of section 18(5)(d) of the Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act
        No 116 of 1998).


3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     a) Government Notice No R.967 published in Government Gazette No 29265
        dated 6 October 2006: Withdrawal and replacement of the compulsory
        specification of circuit breakers, in terms of the Standards Act,
        1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture on the
   Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural
   Expressions, dated 14 November 2006:

      The Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture, having considered the
      request for approval by Parliament of the Convention on the Protection
      and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions, referred to
      it, recommends that the House, in terms of section 231(2) of the
      Constitution, approve the said Convention.


Request to be considered.


