---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 26 October 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2006-10-26
---

THURSDAY, 26 OCTOBER 2006
                                    ____




              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:00.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.




     ELECTION OF ROTATING DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF
                                  PROVINCES



                               (Announcement)


The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, we shall now proceed to the
election of Rotating Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of
Provinces to fill the post vacated by the Premier of Gauteng, the hon Mr M
Shilowa. I now call for nominations.

The PREMIER OF THE FREE STATE (Ms B Marshoff): Chairperson, we, the
undersigned delegates to the National Council of Provinces, hereby nominate
the following person as a candidate for the election of Rotating Deputy
Chairperson. We are nominating Joel Sibusiso Ndebele, the Premier of
KwaZulu-Natal.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Is there anyone who seconds this nomination?

The PREMIER OF MPUMALANGA (Mr T Makwetla): Hon Chairperson, thank you for
the opportunity. I am not sure what the proxy of the Premier of Gauteng was
trying to do. [Laughter.] However, allow me, Chairperson, to take this
opportunity to second the nomination of the hon Premier of KwaZulu-Natal,
hon Joel Sibusiso Ndebele, as the Rotating Deputy Chairperson of the
National Council of Provinces. I thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, hon Premier. Could the proposer
please hand the nomination form to the Table? Are any further nominations?
None. That’s what they are saying. Order!

There is only one candidate that has been nominated, namely hon Dr J S
Ndebele. The nomination is in order and in terms of item 5 of Schedule 3 to
the Constitution, I accordingly declare the hon Dr J S Ndebele duly elected
Rotating Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces.

On behalf of all delegates here present, I congratulate him on having been
elected as Rotating Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces
in terms of section 64(3) of the Constitution. Hon Ndebele, you may now
address the House. [Applause.]

The PREMIER OF KWAZULU-NATAL (Dr J S Ndebele): Chairperson of the NCOP, hon
Mahlangu, Deputy Chairperson, Mrs Hollander; the outgoing Rotating Deputy
Chairperson – who is not present today, hon Mbazima Shilowa; Free State
Premier, hon Beatrice Marshoff; the Premier of Mpumalanga province, Mr
Thabang Makwetla; all other Premiers present; hon members of the NCOP and
hon delegates, I would like to thank the members of the NCOP who have
elected me as Rotating Deputy Chairperson of this august Chamber. As
someone involved in provincial government since 1994, I have come to
appreciate the vital role played by provincial government in the context of
rebuilding our country.

However, let me reflect on where we have just come from. Our struggle is
also a struggle against forgetting. The year 2006 has been the year in
which we have celebrated our heroes, iNkosi Bhambatha kaMancinza Zondi who
taught us not to give up, but to go on with the struggle. We have been
celebrating Mahatma Gandhi, again someone who taught us not to give up, but
to struggle. We also remember the words of our esteemed Nkosi Albert
Luthuli, in an article that he wrote in 1962 with a very telling title,
“What I will do if I were a prime minister.”

He said that the main thing is that government and the people should be
democratic to the core. It is relatively unimportant who is in the
government. He was not opposed to the then government because it was white.
He was only opposed to it because it was undemocratic and repressive. I do
not cherish such expressions as “the old black government,” or “the African
majority”. I would like to speak about the democratic majority, which would
be a non-racial majority and so could be multiracial or not.

South Africa has evolved from an undemocratic, unequal and racially defined
society to a democratic one, which is nonracial and nonsexist. Together
with the National Assembly, the provincial legislatures and the municipal
councils, the NCOP is an important institution that ensures that we indeed
have a vibrant and participatory democracy.

It occupies a unique place in our system of co-operative governance. It
straddles the three spheres of our system of governance. It is through the
NCOP and its sister legislatures that we have succeeded to entrench
democracy in our country. Lest we forget, we are admired throughout the
world for the type of democracy that we have entrenched.

Having built and consolidated our democracy, which we must continue to
defend and entrench, the dominant challenge that must occupy the collective
mind of our movement is clearly the question of the development of our
country so that we defeat and eradicate poverty and underdevelopment. This
is not a new wish, but given the progress we’ve made in the area of
political transformation, we now have a better possibility to accelerate
our advance in the struggle against poverty and underdevelopment.

What then does democracy mean to a person at a taxi rank? Democracy means
that there should be food, shelter, clothing, education and all that is
necessary for a decent livelihood. In KwaZulu-Natal we have decided that
the entrenchment of democracy will also mean that 1,5 million people will
be literate by 2009.

We know that by 2010 those people would be able to read the scoreboards
across the country. It is opportune for us who have lived through the past
to look forward to our future. In four years’ time, the landscape of this
country will change with our hosting of the 2010 World Cup. The very
provinces represented here have a crucial role to play during those times.

Before my time expires, I must say that we see the NCOP as a vital player
in the reconstruction of our country. In my own experience as Premier of
KwaZulu-Natal, I have adopted a hands-on approach to development projects
and governance in the province. There is, of course, a fine line between
the relative autonomy of MECs, for instance at the Office of the Premier. I
have often walked that line without in any way undermining the MECs. I have
done this in the context of the fact that, at the end of the day, the buck
stops with the Office of the Premier.

In a similar vein I do not see my role as Rotating Deputy Chairperson of
the NCOP as a hands-off one. I would like to repay the confidence that you
have shown in me by actively and creatively getting involved in improving
the lines of communication between the MECs, for example, and the NCOP.
[Applause.]

At the level of the NCOP, I believe that it is crucial that as Deputy
Chairperson I meet with the leadership of the NCOP at least once every two
to three months, and we have already agreed with the Chairperson that we
are expediting this, working towards our major meeting in May. We should
meet at least once every two to three months to look at what issues are
emerging from provinces and how they could be taken further, because this
is a House of provinces.

There are many creative ways in which the NCOP can improve its mandate to
the people it serves. I think, given the talent, experience and youthful
exuberance that fill this august body, we will rise to the challenge. We
remember that midfielders are usually the engine room of any team and often
their contribution goes unrecognised. So, if we do not make headlines on a
daily basis, do not get despondent, but rather find solace and
encouragement in the work we do and the confidence that our people have
placed in us.

Again, as iNkosi Albert Luthuli said, what counts is that we should be
democratic to the core. We need to sit together and assess what issues are
emerging from the ground, from our constituencies, and from our local
municipalities which stand at the coalface of delivery. Once we understand
these needs, we put the issues on the national agenda. To use an old
cliché: If you have a beautiful roof and a beautiful ceiling, but do not
have a solid foundation, all of it will get washed away.

The foundation of real governance is that at the municipal level, that is
where the citizens meet government. We should continue to respect and
entrench the system of co-operative governance and within the context
ensure that we empower local government to discharge its development role
and service delivery obligation, drawing on the lessons provided by Project
Consolidate.

We have made major strides since 1994. South Africa is a country where, if
iNkosi Albert Luthuli were to wake up today, he would find democracy in the
Western Cape, Free State, Mpumalanga, KwaZulu-Natal, Gauteng, and it is our
task to entrench this.

Once again, let me thank the NCOP for having the confidence it has shown
and I want to assure you that I will not disappoint, and I want to thank
the support that you have given me from the province and all the provinces.
I get support from the one fan that I have. She is a fan who is here and
she is called Zama Ndebele. She is here. [Applause.] I want to thank her.
Thank you very much.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, hon Premier. I was supposed to have
given this time to the outgoing rotating deputy chairperson, but I don’t
see the outgoing rotating deputy chairperson in the House. I will give
provinces an opportunity to make two-minute speeches in response to what
the newly elected Rotating Deputy Chairperson has been saying. Brand new,
out of the box – that’s normally what we say, hon S’bu Ndebele. The Eastern
Cape.

Mr S MAZOSIWE (Eastern Cape): I didn’t think that I would come to this
podium. Chairperson of the NCOP, Premiers present here today, hon members,
I rise on behalf of the Eastern Cape to firstly congratulate the hon J S
Ndebele on his election as the Rotating Deputy Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces. We wish him well in his additional responsibility,
that is, to further strengthen the work of the NCOP. As a tried and tested
revolutionary, we are confident that he will pass this test with flying
colours. [Applause.]

Our Premier could not be here today because of some urgent business. I
wish, on her behalf, to tender her apology. Thank you very much.

The PREMIER OF THE FREE STATE (Ms B Marshoff): Hon Chairperson, Deputy
Chairperson of the NCOP, permanent delegates, members of this House, on
behalf of the Free State province, I would like to take this opportunity to
wish you everything of the best in your new role. Hon Premier, it is not
going to be an easy task, I can assure you, and the additional
responsibilities that you are taking upon yourself, you can be assured that
we will support you, together with your number one fan.

I know that you are going to be able to perform this task with the same
diligence and dignity that you have up until now. Just remember that the
challenges are ever increasing. However, I also know that you’ve got the
resilience within yourself to ensure that you get the required results at
the end. What we are always looking forward to is a job well done. All the
best of luck for the future. [Applause.]

Mr M NKOMFE (Gauteng): Hon Chairperson of the NCOP, hon Deputy Chairperson
of the NCOP, hon Premiers who are here from our beloved provinces, special
delegates and the NCOP delegates - and also extending our welcome to the
number one fan - I rise on behalf of the Premier of Gauteng and the Gauteng
province in general to congratulate the incoming Rotating Deputy
Chairperson of the NCOP, Comrade S’bu Ndebele, on his election. We believe
and hope that your Rotating Deputy Chairpersonship will further enhance the
stature and the effectiveness of the NCOP as an institution or mechanism of
our system of governance.

We are also joining you in your assertion that the NCOP is a forum for
democratic deliberation and representation. Once again, we wish you a
fruitful tenure. [Applause.]

Mr M P THOBEJANE (Limpopo): Chairperson of the NCOP, our Premier happened
to have too many irons in the fire. He remained with the hottest and he
commanded me to come here and deal with this mild one.

As Limpopo we, like our other provinces, stand to congratulate our comrade
on his nomination and election into the office of responsibility. We will
stand united behind him and our entire leadership to make sure that we
preserve the peace, national unity and indivisibility of our country, as
well as to secure the wellbeing of its people to provide effective,
transparent, accountable and coherent governance.

Lastly, as the province, alongside our other provinces, we will strive with
our collective leadership here to make sure that we are going to create a
better life for our people. Comrade S’bu, once more, congratulations. Good
luck. Thank you, Chairperson.

The PREMIER OF MPUMALANGA (Mr T Makwetla): Hon Chairperson, hon delegates
of the NCOP, allow me to convey congratulatory remarks to the Premier of
KwaZulu-Natal. In my remarks, I have to be opportunistic and say that it is
important that we as citizens must read the Constitution of the country the
same, and that we must understand what we have put into the law of the land
in the same way. I do appreciate that indeed there are many irons – very
hot ones that need to be taken care of.

It is proper that we must say in this House today that the high number of
apologies extended by our colleagues - and here I’m talking about Premiers
from the other provinces - to this sitting is indeed a notable matter for
concern. It happens when, in my view, the NCOP’s delegates have
demonstrated commendable commitment and diligence in their duties, and they
deserve that from our part as Premiers, we must match that spirit with
which they are approaching their duties.

I have high regard for the political acumen of the Premier of KwaZulu-
Natal, and I have no doubt that, in his term of duty as the Rotating Deputy
Chairperson of the NCOP, he will bring his own strengths, his own political
talents, to once again take to a higher level the quality of work that this
House is performing. I’m in no doubt that in that endeavour he will find
the co-operation and collaboration of all delegates of the House, and
Premiers included. May I once again wish him well in his duties. Thank you
very much, Chairperson.

Mr J THIBEDI (North West): Chairperson of the NCOP, Premiers present here,
delegates, all protocol observed, on behalf of the Premier of the North
West province, Ms Molewa, I hereby extend her apology; she couldn’t be here
due to an imbizo which started today. I will convey the message and concern
raised by hon Makwetla to her.

Let me also, on behalf of the province, congratulate hon S’bu Ndebele for
having been nominated and elected as the Rotating Deputy Chairperson of the
NCOP. I have noted with interest the many issues that he raised, and I also
wish him well in his endeavours, because in the provinces we do have high
expectations in as far as the role of the NCOP is concerned. It is up to
the leadership of the NCOP to ensure that our expectations are actually
matched and managed.

I was happy when he said one of his main tasks is to work towards improving
communications between the MECs and the NCOP. It is a critical area which,
if properly pursued, might actually yield some positive results. I’m making
this point because I believe that the existence of the NCOP is inextricably
linked to the existence of provinces. If provinces do not succeed, that
would be a serious indictment on the existence of the NCOP. I’m therefore
making the point that the role that you have assumed, sir, will definitely
make a valuable contribution in ensuring that there’s relevance in the
existence of this House in promoting the interests of the provinces.

I also want to make the point that in your work you must always ensure that
it is clear that the mandate of this House is different from that one of
the National Assembly. If you can drive us in that particular direction,
from provinces, your name will definitely go down in our history, and you
will also make a valuable contribution to entrenching democracy in our
provinces. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr S E BYNEVELT (Western Cape): Hon Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson,
Premiers and members. Hon Ndebele, the people of the Western Cape have
watched you, we’ve seen you move, we’ve heard you and we’ve observed your
breath. We know you, we stand confident, we stand supportive and we stand
proud. You will be able to succeed, with our support and with our efforts
as well. You are born of a great people, you were born in a great country,
you come from a great province and you are in a great province – and you
are in a great House.

We are sure that the people of South Africa will benefit from this
greatness. This moment is not cheap, this testimony is not cheap and it’s a
serious moment. Unemployment and HIV/Aids are challenges; poverty destroys;
underdevelopment destroys; gangsterism and gangs destroy; drugs and crime
destroy.

However, you are also strengthened by many achievements to date: Equal
pensions, achievements in health, education, housing and with regard to
service delivery. You can draw from these achievements – you can draw from
these strengths. We certainly do.
This House will undermine the cause that we have set ourselves to achieve
and to pursue as South Africans if we do not partner you in regard to these
challenges and processes. All of these challenges are challenges in our
respective provinces and ultimately it amounts to challenges in our
country.

Congratulations! You certainly arrive with the blessing of the people of
the Western Cape and the provincial Legislature of the Western Cape. Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members that concludes the election
proceedings. Just before I proceed with the Order Paper, may I also just
say again: Congratulations, hon Ndebele. We’ve worked very well with the
outgoing Rotating Deputy Chairperson. We’ve tried to deal with quite a
number of issues that affects this House. It’s an unfinished body of work.

I’ve already explained to you what some of the problems are that this House
has. Together with all other Premiers who are here, and those who are not
here, we are looking forward to your assistance in this House so that we
can prosper in our work on a daily basis. We rely on you. Without you, we
will not be in a position to achieve what we want to achieve.

Wherever we go, we go to our provinces to work. Whatever we do, we do it in
our provinces as part of our work. Therefore it’s very important to
maintain that relationship with the leadership of the province so that
together we can make the lives of our people better.

Ngalokho ke ngithanda ukubonga kakhulu umnumzane uMakwetla uyazi ukuthi
kunezindaba eziningi esizikhulumayo sinaye. Ezinye ngizazilahlela kuwe,
sizihlanganyele kanye, sizikhulumisane, sizwane sibone ukuthi umsebenzi
wethu uqhubekela phambili. Ngakhoke ngiyajabula kakhulu ukuthi ke
sizobambisana. Ngiyajabula futhi ukuthi wengeze isikhathi sokuthi
sihlangane. Singahlangani kanye ngonyaka. Ngoba izinto zishintsha kaningi
kulendlu. Uma singakwazi ukubonana noma kathathu noma kane nje ngonyaka
kungaba kuhle kakhulu. Sikwazi ukwazisa nabanye aboNdunakulu, azokwazi
ukulekelela ezinkingeni esinazo. Kwangathi inkosi ingakubusisa kulomsebenzi
omkhulu kangaka obhekene nawo. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiNdebele
paragraph follows.)

[With that, I would like to thank Mr Makwetla who knows that there are many
issues we are talking about, some of which I shared with him. We also work
together, we discuss, reach consensus and ensure that our work progresses.
I’m very happy that we will work together. I’m again happy that you made
more time for us to meet. We can meet once a year, because things are
changing in this House. If we can meet, it can be three or four times each
year, which I will appreciate. We must inform other Premiers who are able
to assist us in some of the problems we are faced with. Let the Lord bless
you in this mammoth task you are faced with. Thank you.]

Debate concluded.


                 PROVINCIAL VISIT TO THE FREE STATE PROVINCE


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF COUNCIL: Thank you, hon Chair, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:

    That, in terms of Rule 21(2), and in the interests of enhancing public
    participation, conducting oversight and providing a platform for
    consideration of issues affecting provinces as provided for in sections
    42 and 72(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996
    –

     1) the Council resolves to, from 6 to 10 November 2006, conduct public
        hearings, hold meetings, conduct oversight visits and sit in
        plenary in the province of Free State on 10 November 2006, at 09:30
        until the conclusion of business on that day; and


     2) the Council notes that the estimated cost of effecting the change
        in venue and maintaining it for the specified period will be R2,1
        million.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I shall now put the question. The question is
that the motion be agreed to. As the decision is dealt with in terms of
section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all
delegation heads are present in the Chamber.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province that
wants to make a declaration? We shall now proceed to the voting in
alphabetical order. Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair
whether they vote in favour or against or abstain from voting. Eastern
Cape?

Mr S MAZOSIWE (Eastern Cape): I vote in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN (Free State): Ondersteun. [Free State supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr M NKOMFE (Gauteng): On behalf of Gauteng, I vote in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

The PREMIER OF KWAZULU-NATAL (Dr J S Ndebele): KwaZulu-Natal votes in
favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Mr M THOBEJANE (Limpopo): We vote in favour.

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

The PREMIER OF MPUMALANGA (Mr T Makwetla): Chairperson, even though the
motion was only brought to our attention when presented by the Chief Whip,
I have no problem in supporting it. [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN (Northern Cape): Kapa-Bokone re a dumela. [Northern Cape
supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Mr J D THIBEDI (North West): Chairperson, we vote in favour.

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK (Western Cape): Ondersteun. [Western Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: All nine provinces have voted in favour.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

 REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF EXTENSION OF SERVICE OF MR A S MINTY
            IN TERMS OF SECTION 16(7) OF PUBLIC SERVICE ACT, 1994

    (Consideration of Report of Select Committee on Local Government and
                               Administration)

Mr D A WORTH: Chairperson, hon Premiers present here this afternoon and, in
particular, the Premier of my province the Free State - which this august
House will be visiting shortly, as we have all heard - hon members, the
Department of Foreign Affairs has made a request for Parliament to approve
the extension of the contract of employment in respect of Mr Abdul Samad
Minty for a further period of five years, in terms of section 16(7) of the
Public Service Act, Act 103 of 1994.

Mr Minty is the Chairperson of the SA Council for the Nonproliferation of
Weapons of Mass Destruction. In 1995, when South Africa resumed its seat on
the board of governors of the IAEA, the International Atomic Energy Agency,
Mr Minty was appointed as the governor for South Africa. South Africa
retains the one seat on the board that is allocated permanently for the
African country that is most advanced in terms of its nuclear facilities
and capability.

In this capacity, he participates in quarterly meetings of the board, as
well as other meetings related to the work of the agency. In addition to
the IAEA, Mr Minty also supervises and, where possible, participates in
meetings of the Nuclear Supplies Group, the Missile Technology Control
Regime, and other bodies such as the Conference on Disarmament, the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organisation, the Chemical and
Biological Arms Control Institute, as well as the Wassenaar Arrangement
that deals with conventional weapons.

For reasons of coherence, co-ordination and strategic policy
implementation, it was decided that Mr Minty would serve as Ambassador and
Special Representative for Disarmament and Nepad. In order to deal with
these issues, it is also important to follow global trends and
developments, and Mr Minty has a long and keen interest in these matters.
He is, therefore, able to assist the department in other areas as well.

With the impending membership of the UN Security Council for two years, the
experience and knowledge of Mr Minty, in relation to the UN and some of the
major issues before it, will be invaluable.

It is therefore requested that this House approve the extension of the
employment contract of Mr Minty for a period of five years, from 1 November
2006, subject to the following conditions: firstly, that the Department of
Foreign Affairs develop a coherent succession strategy plan and present it
to the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs within a period of
six months, calculated from the date of approval of this application by
Parliament; secondly, that the department include the implementation of the
succession strategy plan in their strategic plans; and, thirdly, that the
Department of Foreign Affairs report annually on progress in the
implementation of the succession strategy plan.

I therefore humbly request that this House support this proposal. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I shall now put the
question. The question is that the Report, as amended, be adopted. As the
decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall
first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the chamber to
cast their provinces’ votes. Are all delegation heads present? Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. None. We shall now proceed
to the voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per
province. Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they
vote in favour of, or against, or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Mr S MAZOSIWE (Eastern Cape): The Eastern Cape supports the motion.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

The PREMIER OF THE FREE STATE (Ms B Marshoff): The Free State also supports
the motion.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Mr N NKOMFE (Gauteng): Gauteng supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

The PREMIER OF KWAZULU-NATAL (Dr J S Ndebele): KwaZulu-Natal supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Mr M P THOBEJANE (Limpopo): Letswai nameng. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

The PREMIER OF MPUMALANGA (Mr T Makwetla): We support.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN (Northern Cape): Kapa Bokone re a dumelana. [Northern Cape
supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?

Mr J THIBEDI (North West): After thorough consultation with my colleagues,
we support. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK (Western Cape): Western Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Nine provinces voted
in favour. I therefore declare the Report, as amended, adopted in terms of
section 65 of the Constitution.

Report, as amended, accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of
the Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 14:44.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


       a) Government Notice No 1035 published in Government Gazette No
          29299 dated 13 October 2006: Third Reporting Exemption in terms
          of section 74 of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act
          No 38 of 2001).


2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


       a) Report of the Auditor-General on the summary of statements of
          monies kept in trust in the Guardian’s Funds for the year ended
          31 March 2004.


       b) Government Notice No R.605 published in Government Gazette No
          28942 dated 15 June 2006: Commission of Inquiry to conduct an
          investigation into the alleged illicit activities of certain
          South African companies or individuals relating to the United
          Nations Oil-For-Food Programme in Iraq: Extension of period to
          report, in terms of the Commissions Act, 1947 (Act No 8 of 1947).



