---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 23 May 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2006-05-23
---


                            TUESDAY, 23 MAY 2006


                                    ____





              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 10:06.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Debate on Vote No 15 – Education:

TONA YA LEFAPHA LA THUTO: Modulasetulo, ke bone nako e lo e mphileng. Ke
bone go kwadilwe tlhakanya le ntsha, go ka Seesimase go kayang gore fa
Modulasetulo a bona gore ke bua sengwe se se utlwagalang o tla oketsa nako,
fela fa ke bua dilo di sele o tla tsaya nako ya me. Ke solofela gore ke tla
bua selo se se utlwagalang.

Ke bone fa Modulasetulo a tsena, baemedi botlhe ba ema ka dinao. Ba ne ba
akanya gore go tsena wena mme e ne e le ditlhogo tsa thuto tsa diporofense
tsotlhe. [Setshego.] E rile fa ba bona gore ke ditlhogo tsa thuto ga se
wena, ba bo ba nna fatshe ka bonako. Ga ba itse gore batho ba, ba tlotlega
thata ka gonne e le bona ba tshwereng thuto. Ke a leboga Modulasetulo.
(Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, I am aware of the time allocated
to me. I saw the words “addition and subtraction” written over there, which
in English indicates that the Chairperson will extend my time if I make
sense, but reduce it if I am out of line. I hope I am going to make some
sense.

I realised that all the delegates stood up when the Chairperson entered.
They thought it was you entering but it was the provincial heads of
education. [Laughter.] When they realised it wasn’t you, they immediately
took their seats. They don’t know that these people are highly respected
because they are the ones handling education. Thank you, Chairperson.]

The education sector has made significant progress in the past year. The
huge investment that our nation makes in education compels us to
interrogate our progress constantly and to be impatient with inadequate
achievement and waste of precious national resources.

The 2006-07 budget allocation to Education increases by 12,8% from the 2005-
06 allocation. Education spending, as a percentage of government’s
spending, although relatively stable at around 20%, decreases from 20,1% in
2006-07 to 19,8% over the medium term. Education spending, as a percentage
of GDP, remains relatively stable at around 5,5% over the same period.

Now, as members know, the bulk of Education expenditure – R79 billion in
2006-07, R87 billion in 2007-08, and R94,9 billion projected for 2008-09 –
is transferred; these amounts are transferred to the provinces via the
equitable share. It is provincial executive committees that determine the
allocation to each department. We have noted over the past three years a
continuing decline in allocation relative to overall budget growth.

Provincial education expenditure is projected in the figures we have, which
slip from 45,7% of provincial expenditure in 2005-06 to 42,4% in 2008-09.
This is a very worrying trend as it indicates a continuing downgrading of
provincial education as a spending priority. This is puzzling given the
role of education in empowering people and in driving economic growth.
Education and social welfare spending need to be in sync in provincial
treasuries to improve the quality of learning and the quality of our
schools significantly.

In addition, of course, to this equitable share that provinces receive,
part of the R14 billion budget of the national Department of Education is
also transferred to the provinces in the form of three conditional grants.
The first conditional grant is for the national school nutrition programme.
The purpose of the programme is to provide school meals for children so as
to enhance active learning capacities and to improve attendance patterns at
targeted schools.

For 2006-07 we intend to provide meals to about five and a half million
learners at 17 000 schools throughout the country. The grant increases this
year to around R1,1 billion, and it is a 20,4% increase over last year.
Part of this increased funding is going to be used for a baseline study of
the primary school nutrition programme. We intend to use the results of the
study to give us information against which the programme’s implementation
and impact will be assessed in future. We want to know whether our
interventions make a difference and therefore we consistently evaluate and
measure their impact and implementation to assess this.

The second conditional grant is for the implementation of HIV/Aids
awareness and educational programmes. The purpose of the grant is to co-
ordinate and support the structured integration of life skills and HIV and
Aids programmes across all learning areas in the school curriculum to
ensure access to an integrated system of prevention, care and support for
children infected and affected by HIV and Aids, and to deliver life skills,
sexuality and HIV/Aids education programmes in primary and secondary
schools.

The grant increases this year to R144 million, a 6% increase over last
year. In this year, 600 master trainers will receive training on the
integration of life skills and HIV/Aids programmes across all learning
areas of the curriculum, and 25 000 educators will be trained to integrate
the programmes across all learning areas of the curriculum.

We intend to improve the impact of our programmes of education on HIV and
Aids. Young people must understand and practice prevention. They must have
a full understanding of the pandemic so that when they make life choices
about sexual activity they do so fully alert to the implications of their
choices and behaviour. They will be taught about the ABC campaign and they
will know that if they choose to engage in sexual activity they should
protect themselves by using condoms. But, we will not distribute condoms in
schools. We will provide the knowledge and children must make the choice
fully alert to the choice they are making. The programme will of course
benefit from recently published research, which indicates that a complete
programme of around six weeks needs to be offered in schools in order for
us to influence and change conduct.

The third conditional grant is for the FET college sector. The purpose of
this grant is to recapitalise the 50 public FET colleges to improve their
capacity to contribute to skills development training. The plans include
reskilling staff to offer responsive programmes, upgrading physical
infrastructure of FET colleges and providing relative equipment and
enhanced skills development. A total of R470 million has been allocated for
2006-07; R595 million for 2007-08, and R975 million for 2008-09, which
brings the total amount to a little over R2 billion.

I have been informed that by today not all colleges have received their
allocations, and only four provinces have acted to ensure that we do not
inhibit the ability of colleges to accelerate our recapitalisation and
skills development plans. We are two months into the financial year. MECs,
we are asking that you insist that all colleges receive their funding by
Thursday, this week, 25 May 2006, so that we do not hamper our ability to
implement this important plan.

It is clear then from these budget allocations that each province has
resources that allow it to make a difference in education.

Now, hon members, you will recall that in 2004 an undertaking was given
that we should work to build sufficient classrooms to end the phenomenon of
children being schooled under trees, and that 179 such schools were
identified in 2004. I’m glad to report that provinces have told me that as
of 30 April 2006 there should be, and will be, no child being schooled
under trees. [Applause.]
I saw a report in a daily newspaper, just yesterday, which indicated a
class that was being taught under a tree, but we did not know, because we
could see classrooms behind the children, whether it was an outcome of
overcrowding or whether it was because there was very nice weather in that
province. [Laughter.] But, clearly, we must continue to be seized with this
challenge.

This achievement is largely the result of a better working relationship
between the provincial public works and provincial education departments.
However, we are working on strengthening the relationship further; an
interministerial task team made up of Education, Public Works and National
Treasury has been established to elaborate on a multi-year budgeting and
planning framework to align planning, funding, budgeting and delivery of
projects.

Of course a range of factors impact on our ability to overcome this
problem: unpredictable migration into or out of provinces and other
unplanned events. We can neither predict population migration patterns, nor
weather catastrophes that may lead to this phenomenon of school under trees
re-emerging. However, our reporting processes have been improved so that we
are able to detect problems early and respond timeously. We also now
receive monthly reports from provinces on the number of incidents on
provincial infrastructure targets and on progress in meeting the targets.

Of course the challenge of infrastructure delivery has not ended with this
progress that we have recorded. We still have thousands of unsafe and mud
schools that we must rebuild and refurbish.
Our provinces have committed themselves to devoting intensified attention
to infrastructure provision. We also plan to focus more closely on the
maintenance of school buildings.

We have initiated a comprehensive national schools needs register survey of
over 30 000 schools. A full report with recommendations is expected at the
end of March 2007. We have visited 10 000 sites and I am expecting a mid-
term report on 15 000 sites in July of this year.

The education sector is also considering an education-renewal Expanded
Public Works Programme. This will see thousands of parents invited to
participate in school site-based skills training in painting, in the repair
of walls, in carpentry, in window replacement, in flooring, paving and
other needs in our schools. It is our hope that we could use this national
action for school reconstruction to build and strengthen links between
parents and the schools attended by their children. The outcomes of the
schools register of needs survey will be used as the base information for
the roll-out of this infrastructure renewal plan.

As I have announced previously we have taken concrete steps to improve
teacher remuneration. Two landmark agreements were signed in March this
year. They begin an important re-orientation of teacher service conditions
and it is our intention that as the agreements improve salaries, they will
also support and encourage a substantial rise in teaching quality and
learning performance. Hon members know that we are particularly worried
about the poor outcomes of learning in the majority of our schools, and
that we are taking decisive steps to address these.

The first intervention is QIDS UP, Quality Improvement and Development
Strategy, a targeted affirmative action programme for the poorer schools.
The heads of education are currently working out a detailed plan for this
intervention. An additional amount in this financial year of around R6
billion has been made available nationally for this intervention. Further
amounts are indicated for the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework period. It
is an important step by the education sector and we hope it would make a
difference to learning in poor communities in our country.

The second of our steps is a focus on improving learner attainment at Grade
12 level. Earlier this year, I asked MECs to send me copies of their
learning intervention strategies, as I intended to inform Parliament
formally of our action plan to improve learning outcomes at the senior high
school level. Unfortunately, not all provinces acted on my request and thus
I have not been able to indicate to Parliament on how nationally, as
provinces, we intend to ensure that we arrest the decline in pass levels
that we saw in 2005.

My colleagues have informed me that they all have focused learner
attainment strategies and that these are being implemented, but we have not
been able to put them in a collective synthesised document before
Parliament - and I hope we will do so soon.

On improving the education bureaucracy we face a further challenge. The
ambition of excellence that all of us share require an accountable,
responsive, and high-performing Public Service. Our provincial and district
officials must execute their mandates properly. Firstly, at the
administrative level, we are receiving more and more complaints from
retired teachers about the nonpayment or late payment of pension benefits.
No employee should have to wait for the payment of pension benefits.

I had the unpleasant task of writing to MEC Motshekga, who has assisted me
greatly with such a case only last month. All that pensioner’s policies had
lapsed, her medical aid had been cancelled, and enormous hardship was
visited on her after she had given 30 years of her life to the education of
our children and to public service in our country. I think this is
unacceptable and we will act to change such practices.

I also receive reports of rude responses over the telephone. I hear of a
total neglect of our duty to practise Batho Pele in the education sector.
The time is drawing near when I will introduce our Premiers and the media
to the most rude and unresponsive employees in educational departments
throughout our country.

Secondly, we need to ensure we provide effective support for districts in
order to promote education success. Thirdly, we need well-functioning,
informed and responsive provincial departments of education. Our provinces
cannot escape scrutiny. They play a leading and critical role in advancing
quality and performance. They are getting adequate, sufficient and large
amounts in resources for education support.

Their resource use has to make a difference. Our departments should have
the pulse of every school at their fingertips; they must be able to
anticipate failure and must be competent at promoting success. Lacklustre
attention to ensuring adequate numbers of teachers, to devising efficient
learner-teaching support delivery systems, to achieving quality and success
for all, can no longer be tolerated and excused.

I think we might need to consider a special Public Service code for those
in education; a code governing education public servants, a code governing
education Ministers and a code governing education MECs. The reason for
this is that inadequate action on our part ruins lives, so penalties in
service need to be strict and severe. All of these challenges, of course,
imply that we must be focused and carefully thoughtful about our actions to
promote and achieve quality outcomes.

My time has almost ended, but my speech certainly has not. Firstly, we must
ensure appropriate teacher development. We have to ensure that we support
teachers through a properly crafted teacher development framework. We have
almost finalised that framework and I hope that we will be able to
implement it soon.

Secondly, we will improve the provision of resources for learning to
schools. We recently launched a reading programme which has seen over 5 000
schools receive fiction books and over 700 high schools received such
material. We intend to complement this initiative by supporting the
promotion of literacy and numeracy. We will make information on expected
standards available to all schools. Many schools do meet these standards
already, but we want to ensure that all our schools meet minimum learning
standards.

Thirdly, we will focus on measuring performance through tracking learning
outcomes. Teachers in all schools will be encouraged to develop learning
strategies for each learner so as to focus on learning success. Schools
will be required to devise learning improvement strategies and to focus on
supporting learners to succeed.

Fourthly, our language in learning policy must be given attention. The role
of language in education has to be clearly communicated to parents and to
educators. Parents will be informed of the important need to support our
increased promotion of the use of mother tongue in the early phases of
schooling. Research evidence clearly shows that a strong foundation for
learning can be built through mother-tongue-based early education.

Fifthly, we intend to redouble our efforts to make parents our partners in
education. The system cannot work without active parental participation at
all levels of schooling.
Sixthly, we plan to offer new and exciting opportunities to learners
through the creation of focus schools of technology and in other
disciplines. We welcome the progress of the Western Cape and other
provinces in this area.

Seventhly, we intend to strengthen our evaluation and support structures at
the national level, so that we also have an accurate picture of school
performance, of school educational needs and the contribution of districts
and provinces to the achievement of national norms and standards.

We would also, of course, attend to the issue of school supervision. We
have to ensure that more students study maths and science, more students
pass these subjects and more students proceed to FET colleges and
universities in these critical fields. We believe our recapitalised FET
colleges are going to provide us with a pool of talented young people for
our newly capitalised FET sector.

I know we often focus our attention on quality outcomes in academic
learning and forget to attend to key nonacademic quality issues.  Few of
our schools, for example, see themselves as linked to advancing the
national project of transformation beyond the enduring legacy of apartheid
education. This year we celebrate 10 years of the adoption of our
Constitution. The principles of the Constitution and its core values still
need to be made a full part of our education institutions at all levels.

We would like our schools to ensure that they are nonsexist in practical
terms as well as in terms of their code of conduct. We would like our
schools to attend to the issue of nonracism and making democracy a reality.
I often get very concerned when I hear of schools that do not even have a
South Africa flag in any room in the school, and some schools still have
the old flag in the school and refuse to accept that there has been a
democratic change in this country. This must be stopped and it is entirely
unacceptable.

The issue of school safety is another that we must attend to. The truth is
not all our schools are safe places. Our department is committed to
promoting safety, but every stakeholder has to play a role. I believe that
in the short to medium term it may be necessary to consider appointing
safety officers in schools with the greatest number of incidents of
violence. In order to get information on the most vulnerable schools we
might have to ask our district officers to assist schools in developing an
incident register, which will assist us in pinpointing the schools that are
in greatest need of help. We shouldn’t allow the media to create the
impression that all our schools are war zones; they are not, but there are
some schools that are not safe for our teachers and for our children. We
must identify these, target them appropriately and work with the security
and safety services to ensure that, indeed, our children feel safe in our
schools.

We will also work with school governing bodies to ensure that they play an
effective role in supporting us in achieving the overall objective role of
education. School governing bodies are not in schools to make schools
exclusive zones, proprietary zones. They are there to ensure that the
principles elaborated in our various pieces of education legislation are
actually adhered to and practically observed.

We would like, therefore, and use the Act to ensure that any school
governing body that is racist in character, that excludes children and
doesn’t efficiently address the mandate of school governing bodies, is
dealt with in terms of the law. But we do thank our parents who support us
in ensuring that schools play an effective role as school governing bodies
in supporting quality teaching and learning.

In conclusion, Chairperson, allow me to thank my colleagues the MECs for
the hard work that they do in supporting education. I am sure we are very
excited to see Reverend Tselapedi with us in the House today. He has been
doing a great deal of hard work and often finds it difficult to get to the
NCOP from the North West. So, we are very pleased to see him here.
[Applause.] If I am not wrong, we also welcome MEC Motshega to the House
for the first time as the education MEC and we are most excited to have her
here. But, I would like to thank all hon members, all hon MECs for the role
that they play in education. It is hard work and it is the most difficult
of the assignments that any of us may have, and we have in this team, as
well as our heads of education, an excellent Team Education, which will
deliver on the mandate of achieving quality education for all the children
of our country. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B J TOLO: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon MECs and other special
delegates present here today, hon members, 12 years into our well-deserved
democracy and 10 years after the adoption of our Constitution, as we take
stock of our all-round achievements, especially in the field of education,
we have every reason to rejoice and celebrate.

We have every reason to rejoice and celebrate because the path travelled in
improving the quality of our education is unparalleled. For that, we want
to thank the Department of Education at the national level as well as the
nine provincial departments.

We want to reiterate what we said before, that laws and policies are in
place to put our education system on the right pedestal for us to, once and
for all, eradicate the legacy of apartheid in education, which is still
well and alive. We say, as we said before, that the task now is to improve
quality, access and equity for if this is not done, history and future
generations will judge us harshly.

We agree with the department regarding its priorities, as elaborated in the
strategic plan for 2006-10. The acid test, however, is the implementation
and realisation of all those priorities that you set for yourselves. The
Department of Education is at the cutting edge of the realisation of the
Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative of South Africa.

It is our strong belief that education is the main vehicle through which
the much-needed skills to grow the economy can be realised. Our education
system must strive to produce more skilled people than merely producing
educated people. This is in line with world trends. A person who has
received a general education only is a jobseeker, whilst one who is skilled
is himself or herself a job creator.

In the same breath, we want to welcome unreservedly the recapitalisation
programme of the FET colleges. As a committee, in the past years we visited
several FET colleges in the country. The feeling of being neglected by
government in terms of resources was a common denominator in all of them.
In this financial year, we are aware that there is money that has been set
aside for the recapitalisation of these colleges.

Amongst other things, that they are supposed to be doing is the
installation of new equipment, rehabilitation of the campuses and many
other things. But, as a committee, we already have a programme in place to
call the provinces to discuss their concrete programmes for the
recapitalisation. In our oversight function, we will pay particular
attention to and be interested in this financial year.

Today there is no child who can loiter on the streets and not go to school
under the pretence that the parents are poor, as government has introduced
different measures, including exemptions from payment of school fees and no-
fees school policies. This goes a long way in relieving parents of the
burden of school fees. The no-fees school policy, which was introduced in
many provinces as from April this year, has led to a situation where more
than 3 million children in quintile one and quintile two are not paying
school fees.

There is a revolution in our education system. But, despite the provisions
of the law, our experience tells us that some schools do not implement the
law in terms of the exemption policy. There is little if any monitoring, if
any, to see to it that our good laws we passed in this Parliament are
actually implemented.
The National Student Financial Aid Scheme, NSFAS, has been running for some
years now. This scheme has enabled students from poor families and from far-
flung rural areas who never dreamt, even in their wildest dreams, of having
access to higher education. What makes us even happier is that the scheme
is now even able to pay the registration fees of deserving students. We
applaud the Minister for the intervention in this regard. We call upon
those that must pay back loans from the scheme do to so without delay as
this will help even more students.

A worrying factor is that we read in the national newspapers over the past
weekend that the National Student Financial Aid Scheme writes off about R8
million each year due to the death of students who still owe the scheme.

We also read with interest the concern that the Minister of Education
raised on the institutions’ tuition fees, where these are raised to
unreasonable levels. We agree with the Minister that while this tendency
puts a strain on NSFAS, it also limits access to these institutions, thus
frustrating government’s aim to expand access so that education can be
within every South African’s reach, regardless of his or her social
standing.

In the last financial year, we raised concerns about adult basic education,
Abet. We said that education departments in the provinces are treating Abet
as the stepchild of the department. This year we are happy to see it being
promoted and we are happy to see that accessibility to Abet is one of the
department’s priorities. We hope that provinces will also prioritise this
and other programmes such as early childhood development.

Quality education for all seems to be the catch phrase for the Department
of Education this year. Quality education implies improving the quality of
our teachers so that they provide quality teaching. This will also involve
assessing the actual teaching in the classroom situation. Experience has
taught us that you cannot just be satisfied by seeing a teacher going into
a classroom. Sometimes there is a big difference between what a teacher
records in his or her record book and what is actually taking place in the
classroom.

We need to reintroduce class visits by inspectors of a new type -
inspectors who have nothing in common with the apartheid inspectors, who
used to leave a car some metres away from the school and tiptoe to peep
through the window whilst you were busy teaching. We now want inspectors
with positive attitudes, whose main aim is to help the teacher rather than
to find fault and punish. We are convinced that this will also help to
enhance the quality of education in our schools.

This year the department introduced the implementation of the provisions of
the new National Curriculum Statement in Grade 10. Now, while moving around
the country, what we have found as a committee is that the teachers are not
trained at the same level in our provinces. In many cases the teachers are
not confident of what they are doing. What worries us is that if the
teacher is not confident, how will he then inspire confidence in his
learners. For us, this is a worrying factor, the Saturday programmes that
we watch on the TV that are aimed at helping the teachers who are not
confident notwithstanding.

The Sunday Times of this past Sunday carried an article entitled “Drugs,
unsafe sex, teen life in South Africa.” If this article is to be believed,
then the situation is very bad among our school-going teenagers. I just
hope, as the Minister indicated, that this is not true.

According to that article, research done in KwaZulu-Natal revealed that a
high number of school-going teenagers, particularly 17-year-olds were
having unprotected sex, taking drugs, drinking alcohol and that about 12,2%
of them carried weapons to schools. It is believed that the results that
were found in KwaZulu-Natal may be the same in other parts of our country.

As a country, we need to act very urgently to address this situation before
it becomes worse. We cannot sit on the sidelines when our children are
ruining their own lives. We believe that, apart from sports, we need to
reintroduce what we call “physical exercise” in schools, which the article
also alluded to. This will help us to teach our children in their totality.
An educationist, Duminy, in his book entitled Education Methods stated that
the whole child goes to school.

The safety of our children in our schools is a priority. Of course, this
morning we listened with interest to radio SAfm during a debate on this
very matter. We want to applaud the department for acquitting itself very
well in that particular debate.

The Department of Education has been allocated R14 billion in this
financial year and this will increase to R16 billion in the MTEF, but more
than 75% of this allocation goes to higher education in the form of
transfers. The real money in education is in the provinces. In this
financial year, the provinces are sharing R91 billion amongst themselves.
In the last financial year the provinces were allocated R72,3 billion. They
could not spend all that money. All of them combined spent 99,6% of their
budget - not bad.

However, amongst the provinces, Gauteng spent 96,3% and Mpumalanga spent
97%. The question is: if these provinces could not spend all their
allocated amounts during the previous year, will they be in a position to
spend the increased amount this year? Limpopo spent 102% whilst KwaZulu-
Natal spent 101% in the previous financial year. At a glance, we might say
these provinces spent well and we are sure that they will spend the
increased amount this financial year. However, the question is, to what
extent has this spending bettered the lives of the people out there? This
is the area that needs interrogation. Regarding capital spending, all
provinces spent about 83% on average - all of them.

Mpumalanga and the Free State were the lowest-spending provinces, having
spent 54,3% and 74,7% respectively. This is unacceptable, given the fact
that there are schools there without water, without electricity or
sanitation.

All provinces put together have failed to spend R2 billion of the
conditional grants from various departments. If we can pause for a moment
and think of what R2 billion can do to better the lives of the people out
there, we will be shocked. It therefore means that the money is there. The
government has money to better the lives of our people but there is a
subjective factor that is actually responsible for this non-spending of our
funds.

Lastly, we want to talk about the teachers’ dress code in schools. It pains
us a lot when we go out there to schools to do oversight to find that some
of our teachers dress in tracksuits and tackies, in jeans and T-shirts. It
is even worse now that we even find area managers going to schools also
dressed in an unbecoming manner, as we saw in Knysna and George when we did
oversight there.

I have not seen anything in the education department policy and laws that
prescribe a dress code for teachers but there is an accepted norm in
society that says teachers must be presentable as they are role models in
society. The silence from the Department of Education is deafening
regarding this matter. We call upon the Minister and MECs, parents and all
who are interested in the education of our children to break the silence
concerning this matter.

Overall, we are convinced that the Department of Education is on the right
track towards expanding equity, access and quality of education. They have
our support as the committee. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Thank you, Chairperson. Angibingelele uNgqongqoshe
wezeMfundo, oNgqongqoshe bezifunda abakhona phakathi kwendawo, amalungu
kanye nezimenywa ezikhethekile. [I greet the Minister of Education,
provincial Ministers present here, members and distinguished guests.]

I’m delighted to pronounce that the Department of Education has committed
itself by prioritising the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for
South Africa, Asgisa, by ensuring that everyone in this country receives
quality, general education. They are therefore following the Freedom
Charter, which says that the “doors of learning shall be opened”, ensuring
access to high school, to high-cognitive-demand curricula in schools and
colleges, and ensuring participation in relevant higher education
programmes.

One of the most strategic plans for 2006 to 2010 is the quality of the
promotion and development of teachers. To me, that strategic plan is
crucial. Why? Because the country will obtain qualified and competent
teachers in all learning areas at all levels. We will be able to retain our
qualified teachers who have special skills. In that way, access to quality
education in our country will increase, especially for learners with
special needs. The other important issue is the introduction of the
inclusive education model, and this will entail incorporation in full-
service schools.

I would therefore like to commend the Department of Education for
strengthening the systems’ ability to provide professional support to
teachers based on credible and up-to-date information. When it comes to
language policy, it is exciting to hear that the language policy for
schools needs to be reviewed, and that it will help facilitate entry into
schools by all learners while strengthening the role of indigenous
languages in the education system.

Minister, during our recent “Taking Parliament to the People” visit to the
Northern Cape, we were very disappointed to discover that some learners
were struggling to learn the Afrikaans language, because not all the
teachers at these schools could teach them in Setswana. Such learners were
travelling long distances to schools, and that shows that there is a need
for schools that offer indigenous languages as part of the mandatory
curriculum in the intermediate phase. That is one of the Department of
Education’s priorities, I must say.

Coming to the Dinaledi schools, these schools were formed in 2001
specifically to improve participation and performance in mathematics,
science and technology, particularly among the previously disadvantaged
schools, and serves primarily rural areas. The number of these schools has
increased from 102 to 400. The department is aiming at increasing the
number of learners passing higher-grade maths and science from 24 000 to
50 000 by 2008. To me, that would be a good idea, especially looking into
increasing the number of girl learners. It is important for the department
urgently to identify qualified teachers for such a move, so that they can
get the necessary support.

Minister, I must mention sport. We, as the select committee are concerned
about sport in schools, particularly sport in schools in the previously
disadvantaged and rural areas. In the previous year, the select committee
was briefed that there was a signed memorandum of understanding between the
Department of Sport and Recreation and the Department of Education. We
appreciate this.

When you look at the grass-roots level, you don’t see anything happening,
but in the so-called white areas things are happening. Learners in the
previously disadvantaged areas are still idle, not participating in any
sporting code. That in itself encourages crime and drug abuse in our
communities.

Regarding scholar transport, it was clear when the select committee was
interacting with the department that scholar transport was a provincial
government competence. Much as the select committee is aware of that, we
still feel that the Department of Education should find some mechanism or
means of co-ordinating scholar transport.

If I may cite a few examples in this regard, in KwaZulu-Natal learners are
crossing rivers using self-made boats to go to school, which is a very
dangerous thing to do. In the Eastern Cape, learners are walking long,
unsafe distances, which are unsafe especially for a girl learner. Unsafe
vehicles are also used in that province. When it comes to the Northern
Cape, with reference to our recent visit, learners are walking long
distances; there is no scholar transport at all.

In Gauteng, the province I belong to, recently learners stayed away from
school for two weeks because of some corrupt practices amongst the bus
companies. The bus companies see wealth in transporting learners. We are
aware that provinces are trying to curb such challenges.

I am happy that the Minister did mention safety in schools, and the
department is looking into that. In the Northern Cape during our recent
visit, we discovered that some schools were not fenced at all, and that to
us is unsafe for teachers and learners. That means there is no security in
those schools for both the learners and teachers. We therefore hope that
the department will look into such challenges. I thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Mr M MATOMELA (Eastern Cape): Chairperson, we would love to respond as the
Eastern Cape Province to the Minister’s speech as follows. I am just going
to highlight a few points because we do not have enough time.

We would love to comment on the quality improvement and development
strategy. For us, the key benchmark that we have set ourselves is that in
this academic year we move 391 schools that attained a pass rate of 50% in
2005 to a pass rate above 50%; from this year onwards. This intervention is
in accordance with the learner attainment strategy for all underperforming
schools, as spelled out by the hon Minister.

A turnaround plan has been developed as an additional focus on about 45
failing secondary schools that attained results below 20%. We have
developed profiles for these schools, which include qualifications,
experience, training and assessment, history of the principals of such
schools, as well as compiling a list of the responsible EDOs, or circuit
managers.

In support of these initiatives, the department has elicited support from
volunteers, from nongovernmental organisations and other people, as mentors
and motivational speakers. This will also be implemented in conjunction
with the Moral Regeneration Programme that seeks to restore the fundamental
culture of teaching and learning in our schools.

The Minister mentioned district development and, as a province, we have
committed to roll out a service delivery model that is geared towards
establishing fully serviced district offices. The focus has shifted to
ensuring that district offices are adequately resourced and capacitated.
Furthermore, R60 million has been set aside for filling of corporate
services posts in the district in particular.

A groundbreaking development has also been the absorption of about 2 000
temporary educators into permanent posts, thus giving meaning to the
department’s endeavour to ensure that there is a teacher in front of each
class.

Of course, we have also advertised and appointed more than 2 000 posts for
principals, deputy principals and heads of department who have been in an
acting position in our schools for a long time.

In line with the initiative of the Ministry regarding the Dinaledi schools,
we have 55 dedicated maths, science and technology schools. They are
twinned with neighbouring schools in order to share resources and cross-
pollinate. A shortage does exist of maths and science subject advisors to
support these teachers. Beyond that, there is an acute shortage of maths
and science teachers, particularly in the rural areas.

That is why we are welcoming and supporting the initiative at the national
level to have incentives for rural educators. In further complementing the
above, the province has allocated funds for the roll-out of 94 maths and
science learnership programmes, which are spread in all local higher
education institutions.

The department also sponsors a postgraduate certificate in education. We
also realise that we had a shortage of subject advisers in other areas as
well, and when we considered the demand in our schools, early this year we
had to create about 400 posts, which will be filled during this financial
year.

We have also, as the department, responded to our policy, which is in line
with the pro-poor policy of our government. We are also of the opinion that
this programme, which we call Local Economic Development and Education
Provisioning, is going to be part and parcel of the niche in the
Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa, Asgisa, to
bridge the gap between the first and the second economies.

Social issues like poverty and unemployment significantly impact on our
learners. It is, for instance, not possible to effectively teach a hungry
or malnourished child, for her or him to do well at school, or reach her or
his full potential.

We are therefore pleased that the department has embarked on this
initiative, to make a more significant contribution towards poverty
alleviation and employment creation in the province by targeting community
co-operatives as service providers in procuring goods and services.

This initiative is also based on co-operative governance and community
public-private partnership, and it will realise the vision of schools
becoming centres of community life. That is part of our vision as a
department.

On the issue of scholar transport, indeed we do not have enough funding,
but we have spread the little funding that we have throughout the province.
We started with a few districts but we have now covered all our districts.
In addition to that, the Department of Transport is assisting us by
providing bicycles to the rural areas.

On the issue of infrastructure, despite the provincial top slicing of
R350 million from the department’s budget this financial year, the
available budget allocation made possible the following infrastructure
investment to date: 25 new schools, 45 additional classrooms, water tanks,
toilets at 120 schools and electricity at 55 schools through the Expanded
Public Works programme, and 87 schools received three additional classrooms
each, with sanitation.

Furthermore, maintenance work was done at more than 100 schools and 15 mud
schools were replaced. The department received an amount of R642,6 million
in the new financial year, and R61 million for school furniture, which is
up R54,8 million from that of the previous financial year. This means that
a minimum of R2,3 billion will be in the budget for infrastructure in the
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework cycle.

An amount of R15 billion is needed to eradicate the infrastructure backlogs
in the province and the maintenance of existing infrastructure. With
reference to the associated issue of rationalisation of primary and
secondary schools, we are taking serious cognisance in terms of identifying
sites for new schools so that we do not put schools in close proximity
when, in fact, we can put quality schools in centres that can accommodate
many learners from surrounding communities.

When we report on the recapitalisation of further education and training
colleges, the pivotal role of these institutions needs to be emphasised in
skills development, without which the country will not achieve the 6%
economic growth target proposed by Asgisa to halve poverty and unemployment
by 2014 or 2015 in terms of the Millennium Development Goals of the United
Nations.

The national Education Department will provide an amount of R250 million. I
am sure, hon Minister, we have been provided with that money, because that
is information that I was given by my officials, that the money has been
forwarded to Further Education and Training colleges.

We as a province are taking the recapitalisation of FET colleges seriously.
It is envisaged that the current enrolment of 34 854 at FET colleges has to
be scaled up to 1000 000, or 65,14% by 2014. That means an additional 6 515
enrolments annually for the next 10 years.

However, the negative attitude of the members of our society towards
technical vocational education and training poses a serious barrier to this
target.

The province will be awarding bursaries to learners who first want to
pursue their studies at FET colleges as another way of changing the mind-
set in this regard. The executive council has taken a decision to make an
allocation from the Premier’s Fund for the FET colleges, because they were
not catered for in terms of the policy. Therefore we have changed our
policy to cater for FET colleges.

Our FET colleges will also play a key role in the skills development of
members of community co-operatives and enterprises to be targeted for
procuring goods and services, in order to stimulate local economic
development and growth in the economically depressed areas of our province.

We are also looking into co-operation between the Adult Basic Education and
Training, Abet, and FET programmes to ensure that our people are equipped
with skills relevant to the growing economy.

On teacher development, we, as a province, are fully behind the Minister’s
call for a comprehensive revamp of the teacher development framework. In
response to that we have established an Education Leadership Institute that
is fundamentally geared at enhancing the capabilities of our educators who
make up school management teams. That is just one part of it. We also want
to focus on the content of what teachers are supposed to be delivering on a
daily basis in our schools.

These institutions will, in conjunction with institutions of higher
learning, also offer general refresher in-service training programmes.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]
Mr O M THETJENG: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon MECs present, hon
colleagues, the Education Vote always takes the centre stage each year
because of its nature to build and make communities and nations succeed in
their endeavour to provide for their needs.

There are a number of issues that I need to highlight to the Minister and
the MECs, and I hope that these issues will be taken into consideration so
that we correct them where they need be.

On 6 November 2005, we debated the Education Laws Amendment Bill in this
particular House. In this Bill, there was a concept of no-fee schools that
was introduced, that intended to assist the poorest schools, most of which
are found in the rural areas. My province is predominantly rural and I
think that has actually helped my province.

The department was to classify each school into a quintile ranging from 1
to 5, with 1 meaning the poorest and 5 the richest. Some of the aspects and
the criteria to be used was to check if the school, in its vicinity or at
the school, had running water – in other words whether they had flush
toilets and other things; whether there were some tarred road in its
vicinity; whether there was electricity supply in the school, etc.  I am
just mentioned these few there are there as part of the criteria.

As we were going round in the provinces we were picking up that these
criteria have some flaws, that many schools from poor communities have been
placed in higher quintiles – that is between 4 to 5 - and yet many of the
learners or parents cannot afford to pay fees due to unemployment. Running
water, electricity and a tarred road that goes past a village, like in
Limpopo where I am staying,  should not be used as a benchmark to put
schools in a specific quintile. You find that in the case of some schools
there is a tarred road passing through a village and because of that tarred
road that school is classified into quintile 4 or 5. We find this situation
not in order. Therefore, the DA is calling for the funding of learners and
not schools so that parents can decide to take their children to performing
schools.

The quintiles are designed to fund schools despite their performance. You
might, in a situation in a township like Seshego, find that there is a
tarred road but the people who are staying in the township are very poor.
The schools there are then put into quintile 5 and therefore they don’t
qualify for a no-fee school arrangement that we have in terms of this
particular new Bill. So, we have a situation there that we need to correct,
Minister, because the criteria being used to determine quintiles, we feel,
is not right because it actually put schools where they are not supposed to
be.

Teacher training colleges were rationalised particularly in all the
provinces - but I’ll speak for my province – I suspect throughout the
country to the point that there is no existing college of education to
train teachers. The hon Dr Motsoaledi, as MEC of Education, started a
college in Limpopo but that college has since been discontinued. The main
purpose of that college was to train teachers in science, mathematics and
technology education. The whole college has been shifted to the university,
but then that situation is not solving the problem that we do have.

The MEC of Education in Limpopo, Dr Motsoaledi, was on television recently,
bemoaning the shortage of teachers in critical learning areas such as
mathematics and science, and yet the training of teachers seems to have
reached a dead end. Surprisingly, lecturers that came from the rationalised
colleges have been transferred to provincial and/or regional offices and
are capturing data. We are talking of people who have a Masters degree in
mathematics and a Masters degree in science. Some have been absorbed into
other departments such as local government. We can actually pin-point them
and say here are the people with high qualifications who were supposed to
remain in education, but they have been transferred to departments where
they are not needed.

Scholar transport is a serious problem. In our oversight visit we
discovered that there is a norm that has been established about 4 km. If
you are 4 km or less away, you do not qualify to get scholar transport. But
I think we need to change this situation because you have learners that are
as young as 6 years and 7 years old who have to travel 4 km to a nearby
school and we believe that this is not really fair for these age groups.
Are there not learners travelling long distances in the various provinces?
There are. In the recent past learners were using trucks and open bakkies
to find their way to school to show that they need this service. The
provincial government moved swiftly to ban the use of bakkies as they are
not safe, without providing an alternative arrangement though. We
appreciate the cancellation of bakkies because they are not good, but the
provinces and the departments must provide alternative transport because
these learners travel long distances and they find means to get transport
to schools. There is a need to consider this  4 km norm, because we have
Grade 1, Grade 2 and Grade 3 that travel long distances, and they are very
young.

In the Western Cape, in a place called Hermon, in the Drakenstein
Municipality, learners as young as seven years old from Rondeheuwel Primary
School were forced to cross a raging river to go to school because the
provincial government could not provide scholar transport. Recently we have
heard that the department will do something about it. We want them to act
swiftly to make sure that these learners get scholar transport because
there is money.

Only this morning I learnt from SAfm that the problem that affected Gauteng
on scholar transport recently is about to hit Mpumalanga province too. I
just hope that Mpumalanga will take care of the situation so that what
happened to Gauteng doesn’t happen to them. If I only believed that the
situation would actually be resolved. The situation is that learners were
not transported. The Department of Education is failing to manage and
administer simple aspects that will make it easier for learners to go to
school. Is it a matter of a lack of capacity, sheer incompetence or
disregard of Batho Pele principles displayed by the various departments on
a daily basis?

Principals are employees of the department. We see principals who are not
performing. I want to ask the Minister: Is the department considering
giving these principals contracts so that their contracts are now based on
performance? If they don’t perform they need to be replaced because they
are earning salaries unfairly as there are other principals and teachers
who are doing a good job. So, we cannot afford to have principals that
continue not to perform while they continue to earn salaries.
[Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: Which ones?

Mr O M THETJENG: They are many. You have them on record. [Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: Gee ons een naam, Meneer. [Give us one name, sir.]

Mr O M THETJENG: Die name is daar, Meneer. Al die LUK's het die name. [The
names are there, sir. All the MECs have the names.]
The Minister has the names as well. It’s a pity if you don’t have them.
Thank you, Chairperson.

Ms M A TSOPO (Free State): Hon Chairperson of the NCOP, hon Minister of
Education, hon members of the NCOP, colleagues in education, ladies and
gentlemen, I stand to support the Budget Vote of the Department of
Education on behalf of learners, educators, the education sector and the
constituency in general in the Free State.

In celebrating the 30th anniversary of National Youth Day and 10 years of
the Constitution, our theme for this financial year in the Free State is
“Consolidating 30 Years of Youth’s Struggle Towards Education for All.” The
Free State’s allocation for 2006-07 is R5, 272 241 billion.

As the Free State's department of education, we are proud of what we have
achieved in the 2005-06 financial year. I will mention just the highlights
and not all that we have achieved. The department hosted the first
provincial education conference to strategise and consolidate implementable
programmes.

There are 50 multimedia centres at 50 schools that were fully equipped.
There are 6 375 computers that were provided to secondary schools and
installation is currently taking place, and 500 of those computers came as
a donation from the South African Receiver of Revenue Service. There are 60
schools that were provided with water; 32 with sanitation and 58 with
electricity and these schools have a total of 3 117 rural learners.

I see people who are making a lot of noise around the provinces that we are
not providing rural learners with transport to school – we are doing it. We
are inviting members of this House to visit provinces and see exactly what
is happening and not to tell us about rumours that they hear from their
colleagues.

By 1 March 2006, 352 596 learners were fed through the national school
nutrition programme. Of the total number, 134 043 learners in 209 schools
were fed with the cooked meals menu, while 218 553 learners in 1 171
schools were fed with the bread menu. The national curriculum statement was
implemented without any problems in Grade 7 and Grade 10.

One hundred incentives were awarded to performing schools, in the Free
State 50 secondary schools received R150 000 each and 50 primary schools
received R100 000 each for developmental purposes. Awards were given to 47
schools through the beautification and cleanliness project, a project that
we launched in 2005 so that we could make the environment conducive for our
learners in the province.

We also launched an extended the Dinaledi School Initiative from 6 to 30
schools. The province also developed a very progressive learner attainment
strategy, which we are currently implementing in the province in order to
improve the matric results of 2006.

We completed 6 schools and the schools that we completed are proper schools
with halls, laboratories, media and computer centres. There are 588 schools
that were renovated through additional funding that we got from Treasury in
the 2005-2006 financial year, through the Expanded Public Works Programme
using local contractors.

We have also provided uniforms to vulnerable children in the province,
totalling 33 885 learners in number, through partnerships with our local
private sector.

With regard to the financial year of 2006-07, I would also like to give
some highlights. The skills levy will be utilised for full-time and part-
time bursaries for educators and public servants, various reskilling
courses, including the reskilling of principals, and assessor training for
institution-based educators and learnerships will be undertaken this year.

In support of our educators, the department has earmarked R4 million for
educators' development. This is meant to address in-service training
focused on improving reading, writing and numeracy as well as the
improvement of mathematics, science and technology in the new curriculum.

A total of 1 000 bursaries will be allocated this financial year, as
follows: 129 for under-qualified educators; 72 for unqualified educators;
340 for reskilling educators; 206 for the enhancement of educators; 157 for
lower level public servants; and 96 for higher level public servants.

This year we shall give effect to education for all and have already
declared no-fee schools in 1 163 schools in quintile 1 in the Free State at
the cost of R158,7 million. We will be expanding this programme in January
2007 to quintile 2 in 203 schools.

The department will also focus on the implementation of the National
Curriculum Statement with learner and teaching support material supplied to
all our schools for both section 21 and non-section 21 schools.

Management and governance in schools will receive priority in 2006-2007.
Seven million rand have been earmarked for the training of school governing
bodies, RCLs and other governance structures in the province so that they
do exactly what is supposed to be happening in schools. Because when it is
conducive, the opposition is able to make a lot of noise. When it is not
conducive they put the blame on the ANC. That is why we are making sure
that we train our school governing bodies so that they do exactly what they
are meant to do and not run schools in our province.

We have also rationalised schools because in our province where the learner
numbers are declining we are closing schools but in consultation with the
school governing bodies so that we do not build white elephants for which
the ANC is going to be blamed in the long run.

With regard to safety in schools, a safer school project has been launched
in conjunction with the department of public safety and liaison. The
department has further entered into partnership with business against crime
in this financial year. Fifty secondary schools have been targeted. We will
spend R1,7 million, which came as a donation and more funds will be
allocated by both departments to fight crime and bring safety into our
schools. We are also making sure that we have a focus programme of fencing
of schools in the province.

Regarding the infrastructure development in the 2006-07 financial year, I
must indicate that we are also currently busy with the construction of more
new schools, which will be completed in 2006-07. Two new schools will be
built in this financial year, Kopanong Secondary in Bloemfontein and Mautse
Primary School in Rosendal.

Concerning Further Education and Training, the Department of Education was
allocated R30 million for recapitalisation of FET colleges. I must
indicate, Minister, through the Chairperson, that we did have a thorough
debate yesterday with the provincial treasury of the Free State.

There will be an increase in the allocation because they increased by only
R3 million and we queried this yesterday, since R155 million will not be
enough, especially when looking at the budget of last year, which was R152
million.

We are also giving particular attention to Adult Basic Education and
Training. We also increased our budget by 47% for early childhood
development in this financial year to make sure that we also reach out to
our one-year-olds and prepare them for schooling and 2007.

Regarding the learner support programme, the Free State is continuing with
the hostel project and we have now extended 7 hostels to 12 in the 2006-07
budget. We are also going to be able to feed all our primary schoolchildren
this year, because Treasury was able to give us additional money to that
which was given to the Minister.

I also want to correct what the national chairperson indicated. In the past
financial year the Free State spent 92% of our capital budget. We have
since conveyed the message to the national Department of Education and the
National Treasury. Our budget is shared between us and the Department of
Public Works for the provision of roads and transport and it was not
correctly allocated when the expenditure was finalised at the end of March.
So, we spent 92%.

In conclusion, the priorities that I have outlined will be the foundation
for our work. With all the strategies and interventions, we are clearly on
the right path to overcoming the mammoth and daunting tasks we are faced
with.

We shall continue with our endeavours to improve the quality of education
and the lives of our people, operate an efficient, effective provincial
department that works towards the overall development of the citizens of
the Free State in a dedicated and professional manner.

I therefore support the Budget Vote speech of hon Minister Pandor, and also
would like to invite members to come and see how the schools operate on the
ground; and what the whole country looks like, including the way the
teachers are dressed. I thank you. [Applause.]

Nkk J N VILAKAZI: Sihlalo ohloniphekileyo, mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe noMnyango
wakho, malungu ahloniphekile akule Ndlu, imfundo iyisikhali esiyonqoba
ngaso. Isabelomali yiso esiyokwenza kube lula ukubhekana nezinselelo
eziningi ezikulo Mnyango.

Amalungu ahloniphekileyo asekhulumile. Okwami ngukugcizelela asebekushilo
nokukha amanqampunqampu lapha nalaphaya. Mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe,
isabelomali esibekiwe sibhekene nalezi zidingo ezilandelayo. Esokuqala
isidingo, esokuphepha ezikoleni, okungekho mpela mpela. Othisha nabantwana
bayahlaselwa ezikoleni kulahleke imiphefumulo engenacala. Kudingeka
abaqaphi ezikoleni.

Sebeshilo ozakwethu ukuthi ezikoleni kudingeka abaqaphi abaqeqeshiwe kulo
msebenzi ukuze indawo ibe nesithunzi, kungagcakagcwa noma yikanjani kuyona.
Umqaphi usebenza endaweni ebiyelwe ukuze agade ukungena nokuphuma kwabantu.
Ongena nesikhali kufuneka asheshe abanjwe engakenzi umonakalo; odayisa
izidakamizwa nokunye abanjwe. Indawo yemfundo ayibe ngephephile.

Okwesibili, ibanga elide lokuya nokubuya esikoleni aliqedwe. Kukhona
abantwana abahamba ibanga elide ukuya ezikoleni, abanye banqamule imifula
eba yingozi kubo uma igcwele, kulahleke imiphefumulo engenacala. Abanye
banqamula emahlathini angafanele ukuhamba abantwana besikole. Inkinga le
ekhungethe izifunda eziningi, hhayi iKwaZulu-Natali kuphela. Abantwana
abafundi kahle kulesi simo.

Okwesithathu, amanzi ahlanzekile okuphuza ayisidingo esimangalisayo.
Izindlu zangasese ezisesimweni esigculisayo azibe khona. Abanamanzi
abasebenzise amanzi. Konke lokhu kudinga isabelomali esithe xaxa kunalesi
esibekiwe. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and your department, hon
members present in this House, education is a weapon to achieve victory.
The budget will make it easy to address the challenges that are facing this
department.

Hon members have spoken. My words are to emphasise what they have  said  and
to touch on something here and there. Hon Minister, the budget  is  for  the
following demands:  Safety  at  schools,  which  is  lacking.  Teachers  and
children are attacked and innocent people die. Security  guards  are  needed
in schools.

My colleagues said that we needed trained security guards  in  this  job  so
that schools would be respected. The guard is working in a fenced place.  He
is monitoring the movement of people who are going in and  out.  Anyone  who
comes with weapons should be arrested before doing any harm. Anyone  who  is
selling drugs should be arrested. Places of education must be safe.

Secondly,  the  issue  of  long  distances  to  and  from  schools  must  be
addressed. Some children travel long  distances  to  schools.  Others  cross
rivers that are in flood, which is  dangerous  and  innocent  children  die.
Others walk  through  forests  that  are  not  supposed  to  be  crossed  by
schoolchildren. These are problems that are faced  in  many  provinces,  not
only  KwaZulu-Natal.  Children  are  not  being  educated  well   in   these
conditions.

Thirdly, clean, potable water is a basic need. Bathrooms that  are  in  good
condition are needed. Those who have water must use  it.  All  these  things
require extra money.]

A sum of R14,1 billion for 11,9 million pupils in 26 840 public and
independent schools is just a drop in the ocean. It definitely won’t be
able to cater for the demands that I have just mentioned.

The aim of the department is to develop, maintain and support a South
African education and training system for the 21st Free State century, as
mentioned.

Okwesine, mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe, kumaqondana nolimi lwesintu. UMnyango
wezeMfundo awubhekisise ontamolukhuni abafundisayo abenza ulimi lwendabuko
lube sengathi into engadingekile. Kukhona izaba abazibekayo, kuthiwe
abazali bathe, nokunye nokunye. Uma ulandelisisa kahle kuyavela ukuthi yibo
kanye abanyathela ulimi lwethu ukuze kugqame olwabo. Akwande imitapo
yezincwadi esikoleni, igcwale umtapo wolwazi lolimi lwendabuko oludingekayo
ezifundweni zonke.

Okwesihlanu, akuncishiswe othisha besikhashana kodwa abaqeqeshwe ukuze
kunciphe isibalo sezingane esibhekana nothisha oyedwa ekilasini. Konke
lokhu kudinga imali ethe xaxa. Okwesithupha, akwande izikole ezinezingadi.
Sekuqalile khona kodwa makwande, khona kuyosizakala abantwana ekutholeni
umsoco ongcono.
Kulabo thisha abasashaya izingane, abakuyeke lokho. Ingadi iyindlela
engcono kakhulu yokujezisa ingane eyonile, hhayi ukuxosha ingane ekilasini
ilahlekelwe yisifundo. Hhayi futhi le ndlela okuthiwa yi-detention ngoba
ingane ichitha isikhathi sayo esengeziwe esikoleni uma sekuvalwa. Indlela
enjalo ijezisa umzali kanye nengane. Ukujezisa makube okwakhayo.

Sengikukhulumile lokho engikushilo. Mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe  noMyango  wakho,
ngicela ukusho ukuthi thina beqembu  lami  le-IFP  siyasivuma  lesi  sabelo.
[Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Fourthly, hon Minister, concerning indigenous languages, the Department  of
Education must monitor white teachers who are reducing indigenous  languages
to something that is not needed. They are giving all sorts  of  reasons.  If
you investigate, you will find that they are  the  ones  who  undermine  our
languages and push their language forward.  Libraries  in  schools  must  be
increased and filled with books in the indigenous language that is  used  in
the province.

Fifthly, the number of temporary teachers must be reduced and they  must  be
trained in order to reduce  the  number  of  children  who  are  facing  one
teacher in the class. All these things require more money. Sixthly,  gardens
at schools must be expanded. They are doing something, but  more  should  be
done in that regard so that children would be able to get better nutrition.

To those teachers who are still using corporal punishment,  they  must  stop
doing that. The garden is a better way of punishing a child, not  dismissing
a child from the class, who then misses the subject. Detention is  not  good
either, because the child spends extra time at school while  the  school  is
already out. This way means punishing the child and the  parent.  Punishment
must be constructive.

I have spoken. Hon Minister and your department, I would like to say that
the IFP supports this budget. [Applause.]]

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Dankie, mevrou die Voorsitter. Ek sal gehoor gee aan
die agb mnr Tolo se versoek dat ek mooi moet praat. Ek sal baie mooi praat!

Wat indrukwekkend was in vandag se debat sover, is dat die Voorsitter
ingekom het en in sy taal gevra het vir ’n oomblik van stilte. Die Minister
het in haar taal gepraat en baie van die ander kollegas het ook in hul eie
taal gepraat en ek sal derhalwe ook my kort bydrae in die twee minute wat
oorbly in Afrikaans lewer.

Naskoolse opleiding raak ál duurder en dikwels ook ’n luukse in hierdie
verband, en daar’s ’n groot tekort aan vaardigheid in Suid-Afrika. Ekonome
bereken reeds dat daar 300 000 vakatures is wat weens ’n tekort aan
vaardighede nie gevul kán word nie. Met swart opheffing as ’n doelwit – en
daarmee is niks fout nie; inteendeel die VF Plus steun dit – het die
regering onderwys en opleiding dikwels ondeurdag getransformeer en die
slagoffers hiervan was heel dikwels doeltreffendheid en ook
moedertaalonderrig.

Suksesvolle lande soos Japan en China, en ook Amerika, is lande waar
moedertaalonderrig en –opleiding gedoen word. ’n Verdere eienskap van
suksesvolle lande is dat die stryd teen armoede en werkloosheid ook die
stryd om gehalteonderwys en opleiding is. Die armblankevraagstuk gedurende
die laat twintiger- en vroeë dertigerjare is juis in ’n groot mate met
goeie onderwys en opleiding oorkom. Die getal Afrikaanse enkelmediumskole
het verminder van ongeveer 3 400 in 1994 tot net sowat 800 tans. Dis ’n
vermindering van 75%.

Die Minister het inderdaad in die vierde punt in haar toespraak gesê:
“Parents will be informed of the important need to support our increased
promotion of the use of mother tongue in the early phases of schooling.”
Een van die sterk punte van Suid-Afrika is juis die kwessie van
veeltaligheid.

Ek het oor die verskillende kanale geluister na die bydraes van kollegas
wat in hul eie taal gepraat het, en dit is baie goed om te hoor dat die
diens beskikbaar is. Met respek meen ek dat dit dienstig sal wees as daar
eerder aansporings kan kom om meertaligheid en ook die multikulturele
fasette van Suid-Afrika te bevorder as om dit te probeer afskaal en
eenvoudig ’n klein Engeland aan die suidpunt van Afrika te skep.

Die universiteite is vandag onder geweldige druk om te verengels en die
meeste van hulle swig onder hierdie druk, en die paar wat nog vasskop,
stuur af op moeilikheid. Dubbelmedium-onderrig is ook nie die oplossing
nie. Mnr De Klerk het dit oor die naweek, as ek reg is, in Nederland gesê.
Dubbelmedium-onderrig ... [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I shall comply with the
hon Mr Tolo’s request that I should speak nicely. I shall speak very
nicely.

What is impressive in today’s debate so far is that the Chairperson came in
and asked in his own language for a moment of silence. The Minister spoke
her language and many of the other colleagues also spoke in their own
languages and I shall therefore also make my short contribution, in the two
minutes remaining, in Afrikaans.

Tertiary training is becoming increasingly expensive and often also a
luxury in this regard, and there is a tremendous lack of skills in South
Africa. Economists have already calculated that there are 300 000 vacancies
that cannot be filled owing to a lack of skills. With black upliftment as a
goal – and there is nothing wrong with that; on the contrary, the FF Plus
supports it – the government often transformed education and training at
random and, as a result, efficiency and mother-tongue education often
suffered.
Successful countries such as Japan and China, and also America, are
countries where mother-tongue education and training take place. A further
characteristic of successful countries is that the struggle against poverty
and unemployment is also the struggle for quality education and training.
The poor white question during the late twenties and early thirties was
overcome to a large extent by good education and training. The number of
Afrikaans single-medium schools has decreased from approximately 3 400 in
1994 to only about 800 at present. That is a decrease of 75%.

The Minister in fact said in the fourth point in her speech: “Parents will
be informed of the important need to support our increased promotion of the
use of mother tongue in the early phases of schooling.”  One of South
Africa’s strong points is in fact the question of multilingualism.

I listened on the various channels to the contributions of colleagues who
spoke in their own languages, and it is very good to hear that the service
is available. With respect, I am of the opinion that it will be expedient
if there can be incentives to promote multilinguism and also the
multicultural facets of South Africa, rather than trying to scale this down
and simply creating a small England at the southern tip of Africa.

At present the universities are under tremendous pressure to Anglicise and
most of them yield to this pressure, and the few who still object are
heading for trouble. Neither is dual-medium education the solution. Mr De
Klerk said this over the weekend, if I am correct, in the Netherlands. Dual-
medium education ...[Time expired.]]

Mrs A N D QIKANI: Mhlalingaphambili obekekileyo, abaPhathiswa abakhoyo,
namalungu onke ale Ndlu, mandiqale ngokulincoma iSebe lezeMfundo
ngezicwangciso ezibonakalisa ukuzimisela okungathethekiyo. Olu
Hlahlolwabiwo-mali luphambi kwethu ngokwenene zizigidi zezigidi zeerandi
njengokuba sele kukhanyanyiwe. Kufuneka zisetyenziswe ngobunono ukwandisa
amathuba kwiinkalo zonke zezemfundo. Ukuqeshwa kootitshala abanobuchule,
ulwazi oluphangaleleyo, namava ezifundo zezibalo nezobugcisa kuya
kusisebenzela sililizwe, kodwa oko kufuneka kukhatshwe nazizixhobo
zokuncedisa kwezi zifundo.

Indlala egqubayo kubantwana abahlelelekileyo nengxaki yezikolo ezikude
kakhulu ezilalini ayika sonjululwa. Nalo umcimbi kufuneka uthatyathwe
njengondoqo ekuphuculeni umgangatho wezemfundo. Inkxaso-mali kubafundi
bemfundo ephakamileyo ukuba ingongezwa kunalo mlinganiselo ikuwo ngoku
kungangcono, ngoba baninzi abafundi abangathathi ntweni, abadinga amalizo
alolu hlobo. Mandilincome ilinge lokuguqula amaqumrhu e-FET colleges zibe
ngamaziko emfundo okuqeqesha abafundi kwinqanaba lokungenela umsebenzi. Eli
nyathelo libonakalisa ukuba umkhondo ukhona kwezemfundo.

Iikholeji zabantu abadala mazingabi yingcinga esacetywayo, koko mazibekhona
ukwenzela ukuba bakwazi nabo ukungena kumaziko aphezulu. Olu Hlalolwabiwo-
mali luphambi kwethu oluzizigidi zezigidi zeerandi kucace mhlophe ukuba
luyinxalenye enkulu kwinkcitho kazwelonke, into ebonakalisa ukubaluleka
kwemfundo kwilizwe lethu, kunye nokuzimisela kukarhulumente ukuphucula
umgangatho wezemfundo. Langa icandelo lemfundo linganyathelela phezulu
ekwabeleni imivuzo eyamkelwa ngootitshala inyuke, ukuze nabo banike
iziphumo ezincumisayo. Kwezinye iindawo bayazishiya izikolo baye kuba
ngoonoteksi, nto leyo eyenza imfundo yabantwana iqhwalele.

Ndiyavuya kuba uMphathiswa wase Mpuma Koloni ukhona apha ngoba kusekho
abantwana abafuna uncedo kakhulu, abahamba imigama emide phaya ezantsi
eNgqeleni(Port St Johns), banqumla phakathi kwamahlathi, bawele nemilambo.
UmPhathiswa uthethile ngokhuseleko lwabantwana. Ndivuya kakhulu xa ndimbona
kuba isikolo sithi sisihle siqhekezwe zizigebenga kubiwe nezo khompyutha
kuba kungekho lucingo lusibiyeleyo. Ukuqukumbela ingxoxo mandithi, huntshu!
kumPhathiswa weZemfundo obekekileyo ngokubonisa ukuhoya ingxaki
zabangathathi ntweni kuHlalolwabiwo-mali. Kwaye simnqwenelela impumelelo
ukuze konke oko akucebayo nesebe lakhe kwenzeke. I-UDM iyaluxhasa ulwabiwo
lwakhe. Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa speech follows.)

[Mrs A N D QIKANI: Hon Chairperson, Ministers present and the members of
the National Assembly, let me applaud the Department of Education for their
plans with regards to commitment. The budget before us amounts to millions
of rands, as has been stated. The money must be spent wisely by widening
the scope in all areas of education. The employment of teachers with skills
and profound knowledge in maths and science would be an advantage in this
country. But that must be accompanied by teaching resources in these
fields.

Besides the problem of poverty that learners are faced with, they travel
long distances between the schools and the residential areas and this issue
has not yet been resolved. This matter must be taken up as a priority in
improving the standard of education. An increase in the subsidy of higher
education would be appreciated, as there are too many students who are in
need and who will benefit from this assistance. Let me applaud the
department for the efforts of converting the FET colleges into technical
skills training centres. This step shows that there is a way forward in
education.

Adult colleges must not end in thoughts but be put in place to help adults
to study further. This budget in front of us is part of the whole
expenditure for the country; this shows how important education is, and the
government’s willingness to raise the standard of education. I wish the
Department of Education would speed up the process of revising salary
increases for teachers as motivation. Teachers in other areas leave this
career and become taxi owners and that is unfortunate for the education of
our children.
I am happy that the Minister of Education from the Eastern Cape is here
because in that province there are learners who need help. In Port St Johns
learners walk long distances to reach schools. They walk and cross a forest
and rivers in order to get to school. The Minister has spoken about
learners’ safety. I am happy to see him here because beautiful schools are
broken into and computers are stolen because there is no proper fencing.

In concluding my speech I must applaud the hon Minister of Education for
showing an interest in the problems of the disadvantaged in this budget. We
wish her success in all her endeavours. The UDM supports this budget. Thank
you. [Applause.]]

Ms A MOTSHEKGA (Gauteng): Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members of the
NCOP, heads of departments and senior officials from the department,
distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, this year is a particularly
important milestone in our struggle for democracy. It is the 10th
anniversary of the Constitution, and the 30th anniversary of the 1976
uprisings.

I believe that this opportunity to address the NCOP is an ideal opportunity
to review our progress made in realising the vision of our Constitution. It
is also an opportunity to ensure that the successes in education go a long
way to realising the struggles of the 1970s, and to make sure that the
youth who died during those uprisings are celebrated for putting us on
course to realise a true system that promotes a people’s education for
people’s power.

The Constitution guarantees the right to education. This is a social right
that not only guarantees access, but also demands that it is quality
education. We do welcome, as a province, the Minister’s declaration of a
commitment to tackle quality through intensive and directed initiatives and
programmes over the next Medium-Term Expenditure Framework.

We have, over the past 12 years, travelled far in transforming the
education system in our country to honour the rights of the Constitution.
While there are numerous challenges facing education, we have achieved a
level of stability in education that has not been seen in the 20 years
before democracy, and that is across all communities and not just in the
disadvantaged communities.

We have achieved an access rate in education that equals many developed
countries and surpasses a number of developing countries. We have actually
simply outdone ourselves. Our retention in schools in the past 10 years,
unlike before we got into government, was that only one third of learners
registered in Grade 1 were able to reach matric.

Under this government we have more than two thirds of learners who have
registered in Grade 1, reaching matric, which, in a way, does put pressure
on our school system, especially the infrastructure system.

We have put in place a social security package whereby we not only give
grants and nutrition, but also provide a scholar transport service, which I
will come back to, and provide preferential education funding that is both
pro-poor and equitable. One must not omit the recently passed legislation
introducing the free schooling in the most needy communities. Our
communities are very excited about this and are looking forward to our
implementing the policy.

In addition, we are progressively increasing access to Grade R; we have
improved school infrastructure, including renovations to school buildings,
facilitating electrification and provision of telephone lines to schools,
and notable, introduced the roll-out of the Gauteng online in schools in
Gauteng, with the aim of having a functional computer lab in all our
schools.

We now deploy educators in an equitable way in a pro-poor manner. The
increased investments in personnel, and specifically an increasing number
of educators in the system, have ensured that we have manageable class
sizes across all communities, which was not seen before 1994.

We have invested substantial funds over the past few years to
institutionalise governance, and a school management system, and are
marvelled at by most developing countries. Like the Free State province, we
will be running an intensive training programme for our governing bodies.
We have developed modules, and we will exchange with other provinces to
make sure that we also learn from them.

Despite all these successes, one must always reflect and ask a question:
“Has the quality of education improved over the last 12 years?” Sometimes
the answer to this cannot be a full yes. Despite the improved resource
levels and the need to continue and intensify the adequate resource of
learning, a lot still remains to be done. While the flow rates are
increasing in all phases across schools, the quality of education does not
always equal the resources that have been invested in education.

The general performance of the system, in respect of matric examinations,
learner achievements, testing and the review of internal class assessment
outcomes, shows gains in the quality of learning but has not been
sufficient to ensure a sustainable improvement in the quality of learning
across the system.

In support of the national thrust of our Minister in education, as a
province, we have put into place a number of provincial programmes to
address the quality of teaching and learning, also in support of the
national priorities. We are very excited about the Quality Improvement and
Development Strategy programme announced by the Minister. We have also put
plans in place to respond to the Joint Initiative on Priority Skills
Acquisition and the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South
Africa.

As a province, we have also drawn up plans to respond in terms of skills
and education to our Gauteng Growth and Development Strategy, our Social
Development Strategy and our emerging Gauteng Human Resource Development
Strategy.

The following targets underpin our provincial programmes: to increase
access to Early Childhood Development by investing in our youngest
citizens; to consolidate and strengthen public education; to increase the
general levels of learner attainment; to ensure that all learners complete
the foundation phase; to ensure that all learners perform more than
satisfactory in completing the general education and training and the
further education bands.

Other targets are: to improve our curriculum delivery, and to promote and
improve teacher performance and professionalism. Hence I agree with the
Chair, hon member Tolo, when he says that the dress code is part of
professionalism. We have to inculcate this in our educators, hoping that we
are not talking about stockings that, as young teachers, we used to be
forced to wear to school because it was seen as part of the dress code. But
I agree with you that teachers in dreadlocks are just a put-off. We should
be able to address the dress code of teachers.

We need to build the skills of our young people through strengthening our
Further Education and Training and Abet sectors, to improve on the
transition from school to workplace. Finally, and most importantly, we need
to affirm our mother tongue instruction and promote African languages and
cultures in our schools. In this regard, the June 16 generation deserves
praise for highlighting the issues relating to language and culture, and
the injustices of the apartheid education.

Furthermore, our fast-growing economy, especially our fast-urbanising
landscape in Gauteng, demands us to be always on the lookout to make sure
that our children are not marginalised by the fast rate of urbanisation, or
by the fast economy.

On the question of safety, which has been raised repeatedly, I think we as
a province agree that our schools should be places of safety where parents
can feel it is quite safe to send their learners. This morning in Gauteng
we just lost a case, where youngsters were playing a dangerous game,
flipping each other in the air, and one of them had a fatal fall when he
landed on his head.

We have had series of children killing each other in the schools, but
during the investigation when we visited the family, we found one learner,
who was a teenager, staying with another teenager, without parents at home,
and the mother stays in the Transkei and the father works in Natal.

The issue of school safety is not only an educational responsibility, but a
communal responsibility. Parents have the responsibility to protect their
children emotionally, guide them and support them at all times. The very
learner whose parents live in the Transkei had a knife hidden outside the
schoolyard. And there was nothing that the school could have done to
protect the child. It is a question of socialisation, and a question of
parents taking responsibility for their children, socialising and
protecting them adequately.

The other issue that I want to respond to, or just talk about in relation
to school safety, is that I think members of the House, as community
members, are equally responsible. We will welcome their participation, as
the Department of Education, to join us in the fight against drugs, teenage
pregnancy, and against all the various social ills. The point is, it takes
a village to bring up a child, so it will take all of us to take full
responsibility on issues relating to the safety of our children.

I also want to respond to the issue of scholar transport. We accept the
value of scholar transport, but we also have to admit to the limitations of
what the state can do and should do. We should not encourage our kids not
to walk if they can walk for three kilometres, which has been a problem in
some instances. We fully accept that the state has to make sure that it
improves access.

I really want to respond to the issues that have been raised around scholar
transport in Gauteng. I think members have the right to access information,
and if you have information it will help you to respond adequately. If you
don’t have information you are going to argue on the basis of rumours,
which becomes unfortunate for hon members of this prestigious House. I
would really like to encourage members to read and request information so
that they can respond appropriately and adequately.

I want to stop at that and say that we, as Gauteng, really do welcome the
Minister’s initiatives in her budget speech, and we throw our full weight
behind her to make sure that we succeed as a state and as a nation. We
fully agree that education is just one of the key important factors for our
country and our developing nation. For me it is one key instrument that can
really make sure that as a country we become a winning nation and a winning
country. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr K PANDAY (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, firstly I would like to thank you
for having given me the opportunity to address this august House. As a
special delegate I bring to you greetings from the ``kingdom’’.

South Africa is undergoing a catharsis. We are most certainly making
tremendous strides in education in this country. Madam Minister, we must
commend you, the national Department of Education, the various MECs and
their respective provincial departments for being on top of the various
tasks that are facing us. There are many problems, and some of them appear
to give some of us sleepless nights.

HIV/Aids and its effects are frightening. With all that is being done
towards curbing this disease, we are not in a position to eradicate the
scourge from the face of this world. This is one of such challenges facing
the various departments.

The matter of criminal elements; I wish to belabour this particular point.
What has happened to the mutual respect of our teachers and our children?
Today some teachers are ill-treating our children with impunity, and they
appear to have forgotten that they are the custodians and guardians of our
loved ones. These pupils are in their care; hence it is their duty to
ensure that our children are safe.

On the other hand, some of the pupils are assaulting our teachers. Have
these children gone mad? Teachers are gods and they must be respected as
such. All of us who are here owe our academic growth to our teachers. All
of us without fail remember our teachers with fond memories and many of us
show them great respect.

When I meet one of my former teachers, although I am a member of the
provincial parliament, I refer to them as sir or madam. Some tell me most
certainly that I should not greet them as madam and sir because they feel
uncomfortable, but that does not disturb me and I continue to do so. That
is primarily because of our upbringing, that kind of respect that we have
for our teacher. As Hindus, we hold a belief, and this shows our hierarchy
of respect – Mata, Pita, Guru, Devata, and that is respect in this
particular order: you respect your mother, then you respect your father,
then you respect your teacher and then God. So, really, teacher is even
above God.

So, Madam Minister, is there a way to prevent children from ill-treating,
demeaning or assaulting our teachers? Yes, I know that we do address these
issues, but only after the act. The challenges that we face, can we remove
them permanently? I know it is a Herculean task. With all humility, I don’t
have the wisdom to offer solutions. But as a suggestion, have a look at
models that have worked elsewhere in the world and brainstorm them.
Remember nothing is impossible. Some 100 years ago, if anyone had a heart
attack, it led to death. Today we have heart transplants. At the beginning
of this century we could make a contribution and be remembered for
posterity to record what we have left behind for generations to come.

KwaZulu-Natal is doing an excellent piece of work in promoting education.
We have addressed a number of problems and with the plans for the future we
are sure to become the leader in the advancement of education.

The hon Mr Tolo, the chairperson of the Select Committee on Education, this
morning acknowleded the good work done in our province and mentioned that
we have spent 101% of our allocation.

Admittedly, there are problems such as the one mentioned by the hon Madlala-
Magubane, where children have to cross dangerous rives. This becomes a
challenge and in time our department should find permanent solutions. No
one in life, no matter what field, can say that we have achieved a 100%.
You solve the 100% and another one crops up.

However, one measures success by progress, never get despondent. The
English saying that comes to mind is that the more you learn, the more you
realise how little you know.

For the sake of our children, for the sake of our country, and for the sake
of humanity, all of us will have to put our shoulders to the wheel and
fight all the evils and ills in education. And we must ensure that
education in all facets improves by leaps and bounds. Thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]

Dr A M MOTSOALEDI (Limpopo): Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members of
the House, I wish to join the other provinces to support the Minister
wholeheartedly with the initiatives she has come up with in improving our
education system.

Firstly, I would like to mention that the primary school nutrition
programme is an extremely important programme in Limpopo because every
single primary school that is not a former model C school, is under this
programme. Since Limpopo is 99% rural, we are feeding 1,4 million
schoolgoing learners out of a total of 1,9 million.

For this reason, we always appeal that if resources allow, this should be
increased. We often have an anomalous situation, which Members of
Parliament always complain about, that you have children who come from the
same family but with the one being in primary school and the other in
secondary school. We will be very happy if in due course this problem could
be solved because it will help rural provinces like ours.

The second area that is very important for Limpopo is the issue of
infrastructure. Seeing that the highest number of learners who learn under
trees come from Limpopo, we are happy, as the Minister has announced, that
we have completed this programme, especially with the help of mobile
classrooms. Our biggest problem is something that I always mention, namely
the issue of schools which communities built for themselves before our
democratic elections in 1994.

Many members here do not know that in rural areas the government never
built schools. It was something that had to be done by the communities
together with their chiefs. Because they were using meagre resources, those
schools are collapsing and in Limpopo, as I am speaking, some 237 of them
had this to say: Minister, I am happy to announce that we have started the
programme of rebuilding them.

This year we have started a three-phase programme and the first phase this
year will cost us R272 million. We are giving them all the classrooms that
they require.

The second phase will start next year when we give them an administration
block, a computer laboratory and a science laboratory. The last phase will
be in 2008, when we will give them a school hall, a library and sports
facilities. So in three years’ time we shall have 237 brand new schools
with all the facilities, including facilities for sports. We are trying to
run away from the trap in which, I must confess, we were continuing with
the apartheid mode of infrastructure provisioning where we thought the only
thing you needed to do in a black rural school is to give them classrooms
and classrooms only. From this year we are running away from that type of
thing.

We have also started a programme of building 20 brand new schools because
we have discovered that in some instances in Limpopo learners were not
under trees because the government did not build schools, but we have
discovered that there are schools where classrooms are provided for every
year, but there will always be learners under trees because there is a
settlement - an RDP settlement or a squatter settlement - that is growing
very fast. However, the planning was not done very well between local
government and us. This year we are bringing that to an end by building
these 20 brand new schools in growth areas where we believe it will relieve
the issue of children having to study under trees.

Lastly, as part of this programme we have been negotiating with farmers
year in and year out. Last year you saw on TV how we fought with the farmer
who went to the extent of burning down a school. We are not sure whether we
will win this battle on section 14 agreements. We have therefore decided to
build schools on government land and this year we are building schools on
government land which will serve the surrounding farms in that area, so
that we can actually abolish those farm schools and the learners can go to
that one school which has all the facilities I have mentioned – a library,
a computer centre and others. Because, we believe that farm learners also
deserve the type of facilities, which will not only provide for any farm
anywhere; we think building these central schools will help us a lot.

An HON MEMBER: Is the DA supporting you?

Dr A M MOTSOALEDI: No, of course they won’t, because they believe we are
interfering with their farmers. They won’t.

The other issue is the issue of no-fee schools. I do not know, Minister,
whether members here can imagine the profound changes that this programme
is going to bring to rural provinces such as Limpopo. I am happy to
announce that in Limpopo in this financial year we are declaring 2 300
schools in both quintile 1 and quintile 2 no-fee schools. That will be a
total of close to 1 million children, 53% of the total schools in Limpopo.
Only 300 schools in Limpopo out of a total of 4 200 will be in quintile 5.
It shows the level of poverty within the province that only 300 schools out
of 4 200 could be regarded as schools which are in quintile 5.

This programme will go a long way to helping because we are going to spend
R273 466 000 on these 2 300 schools and some of these things would seem
very unimportant – like just providing a fence to a school.

We have taken a decision in Limpopo that each one of the 2 300 schools must
definitely have a fence if they do not have it already. We will be
conveying this message to principals because we were informed that it would
make a huge difference even in improving the matric results. Because, in
some schools results do not improve because learners just go wild since
they can move in any direction or appear from all directions in the morning
when they are late and the teachers are unable to protect them. So, we are
going to make use of the issue of no-fee schools to make sure that we
provide fencing for each and every school in Limpopo so that none of the
2 300 will go without one.

On the Dinaledi schools, I do not know whether we would be boasting a lot,
but Limpopo prides itself on the fact that we are one province which
produces the highest number of learners in matric higher grade mathematics
and science, and we want to maintain that standard. So, apart from that we
have increased our Dinaledi schools from 23 to 50 this year and apart from
the R150 000 given by the national Ministry, as a province we are adding
R80 000 to each and every one of those schools to enhance the teaching of
mathematics, science and technology.

This year in Limpopo we are declaring the year of hiring to try and bring
an end to the shortages that have existed for a long time in Limpopo in
terms of our staffing. So, we are busy and about to complete the programme
of absorbing 8 651 temporary teachers this year, some of whom have been
temporary teachers for a period of 10 years and we are happy to announce
that they are being absorbed in a permanent capacity. Quite a number of
them are maths and science teachers whom we need very much in the system
and, unfortunately, because of this temporary status Limpopo had lost them
to Gauteng and Mpumalanga.

Hon Motshekga, most of the teachers who teach maths and science in Gauteng
are from Limpopo and the day we call them to come back home Gauteng might
be in big trouble. [Laughter.]

We are also completing the process of filling 5 000 posts of principals,
deputies and heads of department who were in an acting capacity. We are
also in a process of absorbing 500 former lecturers to be subject advisers.
The member of the DA has missed a point.

What he has said here is outdated: the lecturers are no longer going to
other departments, they are now going to be our curriculum specialists and
we are busy with that process.

About the issue of excellence, Minister - and I have read the Minister’s
budget speech - you mentioned thousands of teachers who are very dedicated,
but thousands again who are still found wanting. I am happy to announce
that we in Limpopo are very proud to find some teachers really exert
themselves, like Mr Moyo of Moses Monisi High School in the Botlhabelo
district around Bushbuckridge.

He is the principal of the school that got the prize as the most improved
school in the whole of South Africa. They moved their exemptions up from 17
to 90. When we called together, two weeks ago, the principals of all the
schools that got less than 50%, I asked him to address them and it was a
marvel to listen to him.

He told them that he wakes up at 4 o’clock every morning, travels 45 km on
a gravel road, starts morning studies at 6:30 before the school starts,
conducts and teaches lessons. As a principal, he also conducts lessons and
he makes sure that staff meetings take place only after hours. He says
sometimes they knock off at midnight. While some principals cheered, some
grumbled very openly in the meeting and we had to reprimand them, as they
said: No, this man wants to turn us into slaves. [Laughter.]

So, we have different types of principals and if we are moving into a
programme in which principals are rewarded according to their performance,
people like Mr Moyo would be rewarded accordingly, because we need that
type of principal in the country. What shocked us is that when the school
was visited ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Hon Chair, hon Minister and hon members, there are
indeed serious challenges facing the education sector. The first is that
outcomes-based education is not achieving the desired results due to poor
training on the implementation of the system and the inability of teachers
in some schools who lack the necessary skills to teach basic methodology.
Recent studies have shown that the reading capabilities of Grade 8s are far
below par, and in fact the director-general in his report also admitted
that.

In rural areas and in the townships where pupils do not have access to the
Internet for project purposes, they have a problem in coping. Teachers are
overburdened with administrative work, leaving less time for actual
teaching. I wonder whether we should not bring in administrative staff to
help them cope because some of them are leaving the teaching fraternity
just because they cannot cope with the administrative work.

Whilst we understand the need to review the powers of school governing
bodies we have a problem with the interference of the state. You know that
the previous regime gave us a hard time when we appointed teachers and they
interfered. So I will just say: let us tread softly there with whatever
policy we come up with as far as the school governing bodies are concerned.

Transfers to the National Student Financial Aid Scheme must be supported
but access criteria must be more stringent, given ability to pay and an
academic record should be submitted and progress monitored after the first
year.

The focus on increasing remuneration and support for scarce skills’
teachers in mathematics and science is supported wholeheartedly. It would
be appropriate for the Minister to liaise with universities to lower
intakes for humanities and arts for example, and focus on areas where
graduates are more likely to be employed. Very seriously, we need to think
of reintroducing social workers to schools. We did have them in the late
1980s and they did a good job. There are such a lot of problems in schools
right now so I think we need to think of that very carefully.

The budget is developmental in approach, regarding addressing the needs of
the sector and, therefore, the UIF supports it wholeheartedly. Thank you,
sir. [Applause.]

Rev O J TSELAPEDI (North West): Chairperson, it seems as though it is wrong
to be an MEC and to come here and then not speak.

I believe that in the North West we agree and support the budget of the hon
Minister, Naledi Pandor. We believe that it is relevant and that it will
meet some of the greatest challenges that we are facing at this point in
time. Regardless of what the media has said – too little too late - in
terms of the money to try to help and enhance the salaries of teachers, we
believe that it will go a long way in meeting the needs of reasonable
people. We are aware that we have a very long road ahead of us,
particularly in getting good teachers to the rural areas. We are suffering
in one region, the Bophirima region, as it is very difficult to get
teachers there.

I hope that the experience of the Health department will not happen to us
too in terms of trying to woo health practitioners to the rural areas and
the budget not being utilised, because the people are still refusing to go
there in spite of the money that has been made available. We hope that we
will be able to deal with this in a more effective way.

I would not like to go into all the issues that have been raised. We are
like all the other provinces; we are doing what they are doing. We are not
a federal state; we are part of the South African scenario. We deal with
all those issues every month at the CEM – Council of Education Ministers -
level.

I would just like to conclude with the emphasis that we have in the North
West. In the North West we have realised one thing, that there is a problem
in terms of what is happening in our schools. My esteemed colleagues have
already pointed out that in the past government did not build schools in
the rural areas and they are falling down because most of them are mud
schools.

In the Taung area, which is prone to storms and rain, we are having
problems with these old schools, which are in their forties and fifties,
and they are really collapsing. This is straining our budget. But many a
time we are caught napping by the media who, when they have no stories or
there is a thirst for new stories, just go to one of the schools and come
up with a new thing to hit us. And every time we are caught like we are
napping; caught napping here. [Laughter.]

There is a chain of command in the field of education starting with the
teacher in class, who to me in particular is the chief foot soldier in
education. From there you have the principals, the ISCs, and the ICSs. You
have the upper managers to the regional leaders, the district leaders. Yet
many a time we get information from the media rather than from the
particular people.

There is a problem somewhere in the pipeline in that the foot soldiers are
not doing their jobs. We in the North West have decided to crack the whip,
following the Free State route of saying that some of our principals are
part of the problem because of their longevity in those areas. We need to
deal with these issues.

We need to fill posts particularly around ISCs, the institutional support
co-ordinators, in terms of the former inspectors that are taking care of
clusters of schools. We need to fill the posts, and we have been
concentrating on filling those particular posts so that schools will be
visited regularly, and so that we will have adequate and up-to-date
information from those schools. Also, we must demand and insist that the
foot soldiers do the obvious things.

Many a time when even the children have no furniture, you find that the
upper manager does not know. Then, when you want the reasons, the ISC will
say that the principal did not order furniture in spite of both of them
having four pairs of eyes; yet they didn’t see the lack of furniture.
[Laughter.]

We as the North West are saying that the foot soldier is very important. If
we can get things right with the foot soldier, the ISCs and the ICSs, we
will have dealt with the problem quite successfully. We are very impressed
with the career pathing that is coming our way this time, in that we can
promote them without taking them out of class. Chairperson, let me stop
there. [Applause.]

Mr G A LUCAS (Northern Cape): Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon MECs and
special delegates, hon Chairperson of the Select Committee on Education and
Recreation, hon members of the NCOP, ladies and gentlemen, my foot soldier
has laid the ground. We will continue to proceed where my foot soldier
ended. I want to mention that education in the Northern Cape continues to
receive the greatest of the provincial equitable share, thus ensuring that
quality education and access to it reaches the majority of our people.

Inclusive of the conditional grant, education in the province will receive
up to 36% of the total allocations. This places a huge and immense
responsibility on the education sector and its leadership to deliver
quality education to all our people. I can also say that we have noted with
keen interest that, over the past four years, learners entering our school
system have increased. We are thus creating opportunities for our children
to enter our school system and we will continue to nurture the young
people.

It is encouraging to realise that many of our children are responding
positively to the call to seize opportunities presented to them by our
democracy and, accordingly, the right to basic education is being firmly
entrenched in many of our communities.
As a further entrenchment of this basic right to education, I also want to
mention that nearly 70 000 children in our province will be beneficiaries
of the no-fee school policy. This translates into 162 schools in our
province that have voluntarily indicated their willingness not to levy any
school fees any longer. This is truly a remarkable movement forward in
advancing our cause of providing education, especially to the marginalised.

It is a truly humbling experience to realise that the ideals fought for by
the youth generation of 1976 are beginning to bear fruit in a massive way,
and thus clearly demonstrating that theirs was not a struggle in vain.
Through our performance and practical actions, we are determined to ensure
that those calls of the young people of 1976, who refused to accept the
subservient education that was designed to make them permanent drawers of
water and hewers of wood, are answered in the most vocal of responses.

Indeed, it is not possible to eradicate a legacy of centuries of apartheid
education within the short space of 12 years. However, it is heartening to
note that, steadily but surely, we are winning the battle to create a more
equal and quality education system. In 12 short years we have managed to
integrate a fragmented and unequal education system into a single
department with a new and exciting curriculum that offers equal
opportunities and quality education to all South Africans. Our curriculum
has been modernised to become more relevant and responsive to the needs of
our economy, and is also creating a more humane and caring society.

The resultant increase in our learner enrolment should also be attributed
to our successful school nutrition programme as a means of fighting
poverty. It has enabled us to improve access and enhance the performance of
many of our learners. I wish to inform this august House that primary
schoolchildren are provided with cooked nutritional meals five days a week,
whilst some of our high schools are provided with meals three times a week.
In this nutrition programme we have more than 1 500 parents cooking for our
children, and that is part of the Expanded Public Works Programme in our
province.

As part of the success story, we have entered into a partnership with Absa,
the Department of Agriculture and the Department of Social Development.
Through this partnership 80 schools have developed viable vegetable
gardens. In some of these schools, during school holidays learners take
food parcels home in order to be able to be fed during those school
holidays. That shows an integrated approach towards service delivery and
not operating as silos, as other people want us to do.

We are also mindful that quantitative increase without quality improvement
might result in poor service delivery. Accordingly, as a provincial
department, we have presented to the Minister a programme on learner
achievements. So, we are amongst those four provinces that did indeed
respond to the Minister’s call, which essentially asserted that all
learners are equal and accordingly can all achieve equally. This strategy
is premised on three pillars, namely school, learner and educator
development.

Thus far, 425 of our schools have developed improvement plans and all four
our districts have improvement plans in place. What is also exciting about
this programme is that – since Northern Cape was the first province to have
been involved - we have the computerised learner-tracking system in place
and the names of 80% of our learners from Grade R to Grade 11 have already
been captured on the system.

This programme has targets for each individual school and learning area,
thus making sure that the targets that we set from Grade R to Grade 11 are
realistic, measurable and achievable. Accordingly, we will be able to
monitor the performance of our educators and learners. We will be able to
set targets for each school from Grade R to Grade 11. It is quite an
exciting process that is being implemented.

Part of this strategy also calls upon our officials not to act like the
previous Bantustan inspectors who came to schools and pushed educators and
principals around without giving them the necessary developmental support
that our schools and principals require. This strategy says that our
officials must become developmental in their nature and approach. They must
not be confrontational or come and peep through the windows while not
assisting our educators to deliver quality service in our schools.

We are also glad that our 14 Dinaledi schools that have been identified
will be receiving additional support. We have received commitment from the
private sector also to assist in making sure that our Dinaledi schools
become centres of excellence.

We are glad that, as a province, we are making steady progress in
implementing many of the things that we are supposed to. As part of these
particular things that we are doing, just recently the Premier announced
that, as far as all the small infrastructure projects in the province are
concerned, those functions must be delegated to the schools so that the
school governing bodies, SGBs, themselves can construct and build
classrooms, administration blocks, science laboratories and other
facilities, and in this way respond to the Minister’s call for the
reconstruction of our schools, and for the taking of ownership of our
schools by communities and parents.

Through this initiative, we have delegated R14 million to our SGBs in order
to build smaller projects that are manageable. In that way, we are also
building local economies because we realise that some of the projects
cannot be completed on time, primarily because one contractor has too many
projects at hand. Through this initiative, we are giving all our people in
all the communities an opportunity to construct schools of high quality. In
that way, we will be able to change the lives of our people. [Applause.]

Hon Magubane, I must also say that the area you visited is a rural area,
which requires a special kind of intervention. That kind of special
intervention can’t be the challenge of education alone. Accordingly, as a
province, we are in the process of developing a rural strategy. Kgalagadi
is a rural nodal point that will respond comprehensively to the needs of
the people.

Yes, indeed, it is a reality that some of those children travel long
kilometres when they go to school. Some of them are in the further
education and training sector and do not have birth certificates. Some of
those areas do not have access roads. So, even if we provide learner
transport, they might not be able to access those particular facilities.
But, through our intervention, we will be able to turn the situation around
in an integrated way, in order to be able to provide quality education to
our people.

The Minister asked: “Are we ready to excel?” I wish to say, yes, I am ready
and that all of us are ready to excel. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr C M DUGMORE (Western Cape): Thank you, Chairperson. National Minister,
MECs, officials, when the President opened the National Assembly, he talked
about us as a country being in the Age of Hope. I think, through the
leadership of our Minister and the education team and what we have heard in
our Minister’s speech and again here today, we are proud to say that the
education family from our province shares in this Age of Hope and we agree
with our Premier in the province who has argued that we are also on the
threshold of prosperity. Minister, your insistence on quality – and I would
like to join MEC Lucas in saying that ...

... ja, ek is ook gereed om uit te blink. Ek is gereed, saam met die Noord-
Kaap en die ander provinsies. [... yes, I am also ready to excel. I am
ready, together with the Northern Cape and the other provinces.]

Minister and members, I think it is important that we should be accurate
and specific when we participate in these discussions.

Kufuneka ukuba siwakhankanye amagama abantu. Ayifuneki into yokuba abantu
baphakame bathethe nje. [We have to identify people. We do not just allow
people to stand up and talk.]

As daar ’n skoolhoof is wat ’n probleem is, moet daardie persoon se naam
genoem word. [If there is a principal who is a problem, that person's name
should be divulged.]

Let’s not talk in generalisations because this is a place where we can take
up issues and try to deal with them. Ndiyanixelela, man.
[Kwahlekwa.] [I am telling you, man. [Laughter.]]

Minister, I am proud to say that in our province we have a budget of R6,988
billion and that in 2005-06 this constituted 30,4% of the provincial
budget. This year, 2006-07, it constitutes 38% of the entire provincial
government budget. I would also like to say that since 2004 there has been
a growth of 22,8% in our Western Cape education budget and that of 11%
since last year’s appropriation. I would like to indicate that we are very
pleased that there is movement in regard to the finalisation of the Abet
norms and standards. We believe that this will significantly assist in
stabilising the sector.

There are 99 centres and 1 855 candidates registered with Abet in our
province. We have increased the number of centres participating by 11% and
we’ve increased the numbers by 9,9%.

Ek wil ook net sê daar is nie ’n enkele amptenaar van die
gesondheidsdepartement in die Wes-Kaap ... [I would also like to say that
there is not a single official of the Department of Health in the Western
Cape ... ]

... who cannot read and write, because our Abet team and other departments
have been working on that. I would like to further indicate that we have
determined six key priorities in the province and these are as follows:
firstly, numeracy and literacy; secondly, FET both in our schools and
colleges; thirdly, school safety; fourthly, infrastructure; fifthly, the re-
design of our department; and, sixthly, the building of social capital in
education.

We believe that the absolutely central challenge is literacy and numeracy
and I think that possibly the most complex and difficult task we face is to
ensure that all of our learners achieve the outcomes required by the
national curriculum, especially in our poorest schools. We have to start at
the beginning with reading, writing and calculating in the foundation and
intermediate phases from Grades R to 6. Our study of Grade 3 learners in
2004 indicated that 39,5% of our learners passed the literacy test compared
to 35% in 2002. An average of 37,3% passed the numeracy test compared to
36% in 2002. Our studies have shown that we do not believe that there’s a
quick fix to this problem. We have to deal very systemically with a wide
range of issues to turn this situation around.

Minister, last year in your budget speech you indicated that this education
system that we’ve inherited is as tough as a crocodile's skin. And yet,
when we see curriculum stabilisation we see teacher development coming to
the fore. We see progress. It is some members in this House who want to
create a perception of chaos and crisis whereas everyday we see the gains
that are being made.
We are setting a target of achieving 50% in literacy and numeracy and we
are also getting each school to set individual targets to which they will
be held accountable. I believe that we should increase those targets to
more than 50%. A task team led by one of our officials has been appointed
to upscale our numeracy and literacy intervention and focusing on teacher
training, development of materials, special interventions and diagnostic
testing will continue while the basic strategies are in place. We believe
that we have to achieve, as you have indicated, much greater co-ordination,
monitoring and evaluation.

A total of 510 teaching assistants have been appointed to support
foundation phase teachers at poor schools, which, Minister, is one of the
interventions you were pushing for. They are helping our teachers to
improve literacy and numeracy, listening to learners reading, working with
groups and individuals to improve word skills, developing number concept
skills, and assisting teachers with classroom organisation, and this
involves 163 schools.

There is an exciting innovation that we want to consider when we hopefully
continue the scheme next year and that is to expand the contractual
obligations of these teaching assistants so that, amongst other things,
they adopt 30 families of learners they are teaching, go to the families,
check if the mother or father, aunt or uncle can read and organise an Abet
course. We call that the family literacy strategy.

We are very happy with the support for FET colleges but they would need to
be adequately funded or a national students’ financial aid type of scheme
would need to be established if we wanted them to take more numbers. I’m
not necessarily suggesting that school fees should not be paid to colleges.

Minister, I would also like to make an appeal to you and to this House. I
believe that central to any school’s success is the quality of leadership.
Therefore, the appointment of principals is absolutely critical. As things
stand now governing bodies nominate three names. I would like to propose
that the procedure continues as normal but that the head of department and
the MEC should then forward the proposed name to you as the national
Minister to take a final decision on the appointment because of the
importance of principals in the 30 000 schools that we have in the
province. This will mean that not anyone simply applies to become a
principal. It will also mean that the governing body doesn’t accept bribes
and that you would make the appointments. We know how serious and harsh you
can be.  This, I think, would elevate the importance of this matter and I’m
raising it for debate.

I also want to welcome the announcement of our school nutrition programme.
On 1 June we will be visiting the Northern Cape. Our province is sending a
delegation to the Northern Cape to learn how they have done with safety
offices. There are 100 schools with the Bambanani safety in schools
programme and one of the five volunteers is a parent who was nominated by
the SGB. I want to then say to hon member Thetjeng ... Uphi uThetjeng?
Ukhona? O, nankuya. [Kwahlekwa.] [Where is Mr Thetjeng? Is he here? Oh!
There he is. [Laughter.]]

I would like to tell you that we are going to the Broadcasting Complaints
Commission because the SABC went to that school and asked the children to
cross the river. It is true. The children live next to the river and they
can walk to school. But children are children. They have two and a half
kilometres to walk to school. They were told to cross the river when it was
ankle deep. But now ... kambe ngenxa yokuba ine gqitha iBolandi kule veki
iphelileyo. [the Boland received a heavy rainfall last week.]

They took photos. We have affidavits. Minister, we have affidavits that
certain members of the community got children to walk across that river. We
are looking at the matter of children who have to cross the N2 in
Riversdale and we have already made some exceptions for less than five
kilometres. It is a lie to suggest that children have to cross the river.

Die name gaan uitkom en die mense wat verantwoordelik is daarvoor gaan
gekap word. [Tussenwerpsels.] [The names will come out and those
responsible for that will be hammered. [Interjections.]]

I also would like to appeal to member Tolo ... [Time expired.][Applause.]

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, hon Minister, MECs present here today,
comrades and colleagues, the Budget Vote before us here today is very
important. It reminds us of what happened 30 years ago with the Soweto
uprising. I think we need to keep that in our minds whilst dealing with
this particular Budget Vote here.

This Budget Vote, in actual fact, is right in place at the right time. The
policies have been put in place by the ANC and the Minister, as the captain
of this particular ship, is doing a wonderful job. I think we must praise
her for that. Thank you, Minister, for doing the right job. Well done!

After having listened to many of the hon members in this House, I want to
start with the hon member Mr Thetjeng, who spoke about the quintiles and
scholar transport. But I must say you are very selective in your approach
and you failed to say that there are schools that provide transport for our
learners. You deliberately kept quiet.

If there is a problem with the quintile system, then let’s revisit it, let
us not use this platform as a complaint session. My understanding of a
Budget Vote is that it is a policy Budget Vote debate. Here we’re dealing
with policy matters and not to raise complaints. And you want to portray a
picture as if the education system is on the verge of collapse. It is not
true.

I want to point out a few things about what is happening in some of our
institutions, especially here in the Western Cape. The principal in
Bonteheuwel, who is a DA councillor, is absent from school attending
council meetings most of the time. The question that I’m asking myself is
... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Sorry, hon member, can I draw the
attention of members to the fact that heckling up to a certain level is
acceptable, but it should not be disruptive. You may continue, hon member.

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Thank you, Chairperson. The principal of the Bonteheuwel
High School is a DA councillor who is absent from school, attending council
meetings most of the time. The question that I’m asking is why the DA is so
quiet about it? And, Helen Zille was a former MEC of Education. She is
quite aware of these things, but the DA decides to be very quiet about
this.

The DA again is quiet when some former model C schools refuse to play
sports in the townships. They are quiet about it. They don’t say anything
about it but they refuse to play sports in the townships. You look at the
school governing bodies where the DA is in charge. They refuse point blank
to appoint black teachers in those schools. The DA is quiet about these
things. Why are they quiet about these things? They do not say anything.

Coming to the school governing bodies, some of our schools in our townships
don’t have all the facilities. We all know that because of the legacy that
we have inherited. If those poor schools want to hire the halls of those
former model C schools, they charge a very poor school up to R1 000. Are
they serious? Do they really want to build a nation? But the DA is quiet
about this. They are not serious. They are very quiet about this thing.
That is the reason I’m doing this deliberately; because these things are
happening.

In De Aar, where I come from, at a high school there, a black teacher was
appointed, and they made 100% sure that they got rid of her. She was forced
to move form that school. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T Setona): Order! What is the point there, hon
Thetjeng? Hon Lamoela, I think you are not the spokesperson. It’s Mr
Thetjeng who is on the platform and I must listen to him.
Mr O M THETJENG:  Yes, Chairperson, I would really request to put a
question to the hon member as to whether this is a complaint forum or the
discussion of a Budget Vote.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T Setona): Hon member, you are out of order. I
must first establish whether the member is willing to take a question or
not. Are you willing to take a question, hon member?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, yes, I am willing to take a question. I will
respond to the question. I have already indicated to this august House that
this is a policy debate. I think the hon member was fast asleep when I said
that. [Laughter.]

These are some of the things that happen in our schools. And with our
select committee, we are going to make it a point that we visit all these
former model C schools throughout South Africa and we are going to explain
the policies of this government to them.

It is like when we visited the school in Kgalagadi. That school took us to
court. The principal of that particular school was not even aware of
certain things, but he is supposed to be the manager of the school. These
are the kinds of things that are happening. And if you look at it from a
political point of view, you’ll find that it does not come from members of
the majority party. It comes from people who belong to the so-called
official opposition. They call themselves opposition, yet they are not an
opposition, they are the largest minority party, as far as I’m concerned –
the largest minority party. They don’t deserve to be called the official
opposition.

Allow me to say that now is the time for the school governing bodies to go
for elections. And I want to make use of this opportunity to congratulate
those SGB members who did very well in their respective schools, because
not all of them will return to these positions. And we want to say to the
incoming new members that a foundation has been laid and that they should
please build on that foundation and carry on with the good work. I’m doing
this deliberately because they’re doing this job voluntarily. They are not
being paid for serving in school governing bodies. Phambili ngamavolontiya!
Phambili! [Forward with volunteerism!] That is what we are going to do in
the new South Africa.

The nutrition programme in our schools is a wonderful idea. We know our
people, the poorest of the poor. They do not even have food at home at
times. But now here’s a golden opportunity. Food is being provided at our
schools. The learners can go to school and learn. And if we look at some
things, street children are not that many anymore because they are going to
school. There’s food there for them and at the same time there’s an
opportunity for them to go to school and to get educated. Minister, we
thank you very much, that was a clever move!

Minister, let me deal with no-fee schools. The concept of so-called no-fee
schools should be welcomed. As I have already said earlier on, people are
poor and they can’t afford school fees. However, we do have some teething
problems in this regard. But I’m sure that all these challenges can be
sorted out at provincial level. There are towns, for instance, where the
primary school is on the one side of the road and the high school is on the
opposite side. The one is a no-fee school and the other one is not. And
they are serving the same community. We are not complaining about this.
These are challenges and we will deal with them at provincial level. This
is how we need to deal with things, and not be destructive but
constructive.

Let me come back to the DA again. [Laughter.] I think it’s nice to be in
the opposition. But there’s a difference: are you constructive or
destructive? The DA knows where they are. Take the FF Plus, for example,
they are not part of the ANC ...

... maar hulle lewer opbouende kritiek, nie afbrekende kritiek nie. En dit
is gesond. Dit is hoe ons hierdie land en sy nasie wil bou. Ons kan nie nou
vandag in 2006 hier staan asof ons nog voor 1994 is nie. Baie van ons in
hierdie Huis, veral die DA-lede, het nog nie wakker geskrik nie. Hulle
slaap nog in die ou Suid-Afrika.

Ter afsluiting, die boodskap van hoop is baie duidelik. En ek dink die LUKs
en die Minister gaan met ons saamstem as ons gaan sê dat ... (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[... but they give constructive criticism, not destructive criticism! And
that is healthy! That is how we wish to build this country and its nation.
We cannot today, in 2006, stand here as if we are still in the time before
1994. Many of us in this House, especially the DA members, have not yet
woken up. They are still asleep in the old South Africa.

In conclusion, the message of hope is very clear. And I think the MPs and
the Minister will agree with us when we say that ... ]

“Today is better than yesterday and tomorrow will be better than today.”
We support this Budget Vote. Thank you very much, Chairperson. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, I thank the hon members for their
contribution to the debate. I apologise to MEC Motshekga; I understand that
it was not her maiden speech. She has been here before. I also would like
to, once more, acknowledge the role that the hon Tolo and the members of
the select committee play in assisting and supporting us in achieving our
objectives with respect to education. I think we need to also thank the hon
Ralane and the finance committee for, sometimes, keeping us on our toes –
sometimes too much on our toes. When he does that, we do tiptoe to him for
help and rescue. [Laughter.]

Chairperson, we used to have a song in the ANC: Angiyamona. Anginanzondo.
Ngikhokele-ANC. I have no envy for anyone, I have no sins that I commit,
but all I do is love the ANC and I work within it. I think hon members who
fail to understand this old, mature and wonderful organisation are members
who would come to this House and raise issues that really do not serve to
enhance what should happen in the education sector. The ANC as the oldest
and most forward-thinking organisation of all progressive movements of the
world, always have responses to these matters. Indeed, we don’t stand
challenged but ready to respond and react.

Let me assure the hon Thetjeng, we certainly are attending to any anomalies
that might exist due to current formulations in legislation with respect to
the declaration of quintiles. We will attend to matters we have identified
to formulations in the school funding norms, which do not correlate
sufficiently with formulations in the amended Act. It is a matter that we
are alert to and we will ensure, as hon members have indicated, that indeed
those who are poor do benefit from our no-fee schools policy.

I would like to come to something that has been raised by the hon members
concerning the levels of debt among students who are recipients of the
NSFAS grants in higher education institutions. Hon members, I wish you to
just remember that grantees begin to repay their loans when they have
employment and are earning at a particular level. If they are not employed
and are not earning at that level that has been determined by the board,
clearly they are not repaying. They continue to owe the money. All the
students who are studying and are loanees do not pay at this time but they
continue to owe us money. Let us not take the totality of what is owed,
which includes all loanees, and say that that is the outstanding amount
that is owed to NSFAS. It is a misreading of the true picture that exists.
It absolutely comes back to the point that my hon colleagues have raised
and that is the way that the media sometimes reports on education.

I have heard of this practice of going to communities, taking groups of
children and making them cross a river or do something. The hon member was
very vociferous in her response to MEC Dugmore, as though she has read the
affidavits. I am not sure if she has had access to them. My understanding
was that none of us has seen the content of the affidavits and therefore we
cannot seem to assert that the hon MEC is misleading the House. We will all
be able to check as to whether there are indeed affidavits and whether
there is truth in the matter that the MEC has put before us. To heckle when
we are given a report seems to me to be a peculiar way of reacting, almost
as if one is saying that the media is truthful and the MEC is not. I find
that quite problematic. It is absolutely vital that all of us go out and
make sure that when we speak, we know exactly what it is we are talking
about. We should avoid this tendency to be populists rather than
factualists, rather than intellectual debaters and contributors to
education, which we all should become.

Hon members have raised a numbers of issues that certainly we are attending
to. Each area referred to by members is an area that we are attempting to
respond to. I particularly welcome the comments of the hon member of the FF
Plus concerning multilingualism. I hope by that that we don’t mean one
language but that we are referring to all languages recognised as official
languages in our country. Many people, when they talk about
multilingualism, are referring to one language only. I believe we cannot
accept the Anglicisation of South Africa. It is not a picture that is a
contribution to the objectives and the principles elaborated in section 6
of the Constitution. It is vitally important that we promote
multilingualism through education, but that means the utilisation of all 11
languages in our country.

There are languages that have been neglected entirely, so multilingualism
and a commitment to it would mean, if I am in a school where the language
of learning and teaching is Afrikaans, I do not only have English as the
other language, but that I also have IsiXhosa or Setswana or Sesotho or
IsiZulu or Tshivenda or Xitsonga, so that then I become multilingual both
in orientation and in practice. Often when we are talking about
multilingualism, many of us seem to mean English and Afrikaans only. That
is not the case. I would like to remind the public out there and especially
our governing bodies that there is no compulsion that we should study just
one language in the country. We would like you to encourage our children to
learn several languages, to be able to talk to each other in a range of
languages wherever they meet.

Our duty as the Department of Education, as has been shown by Limpopo in
its practice, is to ensure that there are teachers competent to teach the
other neglected languages in our country. We should say to schools: be
multilingual but we must support that teacher of Setswana, MEC Lucas, or
that teacher of IsiXhosa, MEC Matomela, or that teacher, MEC Motshekga – I
don’t know which language you will choose in Gauteng. We must ensure that
we have teachers that can offer these languages. In fact Gauteng would be
most exciting because Gauteng would become the province where all the
previously neglected languages would be studied. You could lead the way in
the promotion of multilingualism.

I thank the hon MECs who have, as members have seen today, acted on scholar
transport. I would have been more excited if the hon members had spoken
here in criticism of the crooks that have tried to abuse our policy of
providing school transport for children. But nobody from the opposition or
governing party has mentioned the cheats that there are and who attempt to
steal money from the departments. They also did not mention the officials
who collude with these crooks in cheating our children in this way. They
must be fired. We cannot tolerate abuse of public finances nor tolerate
abuse of our children.

I am very excited that many of our schools and provinces in addressing
infrastructure will ensure that we address the issue of school fencing. It
can no longer be acceptable that where a black child goes to school there
is no water, no toilet, no fence, no administration block, no computer,
inadequate teachers, no classrooms, etc. That kind of scenario cannot be
tolerated. So we have to target the evidence of poverty and
underdevelopment that exists in many of our schools in the country. We must
acknowledge and thank the national government for having accepted that we
should have a quality improvement and development strategy and for putting
money behind accepting that particular strategy, which the Department of
Education proposed to them. We are very excited that at last we will be
able to directly confront the legacy of underdevelopment in education
because of apartheid and fight with it and win the day on behalf of our
children.

With respect to Dinaledi schools, certainly, we believe we must address the
issue of maths teachers. All of us must ensure that we have maths teachers
in every school in the country. More and more of our children should, as a
natural phenomenon, study the subject of mathematics. I cannot agree more
with my colleagues when we say: we need to see diversity in our staffing
complements. I find it very peculiar that we acknowledge and acclaim that
many of our schools have transformed to become more reflective of the
society in terms of the make-up of scholars. None of us are prepared to
assert that the make-up of teachers needs to change as well in all the
schools in the country. I am not just talking about ex-model C schools, all
of them. We want diversity to be reflected in the entire education system.
All of us know that role modelling is an important part of building a new
adult. For a young person to be in school for many years and not see a
reflection of her in the school is not building a positive character.
Absolute diversity in the teaching corps needs to be addressed.

Hon members have been very supportive. We are addressing the national
curriculum statement training. We are excited that in a few years we are
going to have, throughout all grades in the country, the national
curriculum being implemented. We are bedding down introduction of a
national curriculum in South Africa and ensuring that at last, we have a
curriculum beyond the apartheid design.

Finally, let me say, Chairperson, I believe the FET college sector is going
to introduce what we have called the skills revolution in South Africa. We
need to support them appropriately. We should stop having them as the
Cinderella of education in our country. We need to ensure that the FET
colleges really deliver on this Asgisa in South Africa. Give us the skills
that can respond to the gaps that we have in skills in the country.

On the matter of councillors, I am quite amazed that hon Sulliman said that
there was a school principal who attended meetings and was not at school
for much of the day. I have to indicate to hon Sulliman that all political
parties are guilty in this regard. Many political parties have teachers as
councillors, have principals as mayors, HODs as mayors. It is a very
worrying phenomenon. How do we improve quality when those who should be
teaching are not in school? This is something that certainly this Council
needs to debate and guide us on, so that we in fact make appropriate
decisions as to how we handle the participation of educators in structures
of governance in the country. While we worry, we worry about all political
parties and their utilisation of teachers. We know some parties abuse it
more than others. We must guard against that.

I see my time is up. I should say that it is indeed the intention of this
team of political heads in education to ensure that teachers know that we
see them as the frontline in delivering quality education to our country
and that we have, through our efforts to improve their conditions,
indicated that we pose a great deal of trust in their ability to ensure
that we succeed in changing the character of education in South Africa. To
our teachers out there, to the learners out there, to the parents, to South
Africa in its totality, we are saying: are you ready to join us in
excelling in education? We are ready and we have put all the mechanisms out
there.

Support us and let us make education and its experience different for the
children of our country. I thank hon members and the MECs for taking time
out to be with us today. I thank the hon members for the support that you
have given to us in this debate. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Business suspended at 13:00 and resumed at 14:07.

                              Afternoon Sitting

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon members, you would remember that we
had a session this morning. That’s why I’m not calling for a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation. This is a continuation of the sitting. I
see people look surprised, so I’m just reminding them that this is a
continuation of the sitting.

Our session this afternoon deals with questions. The Deputy President will
answer questions, and the Ministers will also take their questions. Before
I go to the questions, I was advised that three girl-children – or four,
but I don’t see the other one – are at work in the Office of the Deputy
President. That is why we have seated them there in the official bay. Don’t
be surprised. They are working today. [Laughter.] [Applause.] I want to
recognise them. They can stand up. Let’s see them. You are in the National
Council of Provinces. One day one of you might be the Chairperson of the
National Council of Provinces.

An HON MEMBER: [Inaudible.] ... take follow-up questions?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: And they will take follow-up questions, but
not today. Okay, you can sit down. Thank you very much.

An Official from the Deputy President’s office has also requested to take
some photos. I’ve given permission for him to take photos up in the
gallery. But no flash, please, because that normally distracts the sitting.
So you can continue taking the photos.




QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY


                            THE DEPUTY PRESIDENT


               Effect of appointment of professionals to Jipsa


1.    Mr C J van Rooyen asked the Deputy President:


      (a) What direct impact will the 90 professionals to be appointed as
      part of the Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition (Jipsa),
      as referred to in the President’s state of the nation address on 3
      February 2006, have on the economic growth of the country, especially
      in addressing the lack of skills and (b) how will municipalities
      benefit from the Jipsa?
                       C26E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon Chairperson. Hon members, the answer
to the question is as follows. The appointment of professionals focuses on
addressing the skills problem through Project Consolidate, which has a
common purpose with the Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition.

The aim is to focus on addressing the skills problem facing municipalities.
Project Consolidate has identified serious capacity constraints in many of
our municipalities, arising from shortages of properly qualified managers,
professionals and technical personnel.
The Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa has also
mandated the Department of Provincial and Local Government, in consultation
with the Department of Trade and Industry, to improve the capacity of local
government to support local economic development.

Many municipalities have very poor citizens who depend on grants.
Municipalities need to engage in the creation of jobs and sustainable
economic development, which impact on growth and sharing within
municipalities.

Municipalities need skills to achieve this so that they can support small
and medium enterprises, as well as attract investors. Economic development
in any municipality will flourish when a municipality is well run, hence
the importance of these skills.

The project is managed by the Development Bank of Southern Africa. It will
deploy 90 expert staff, and the first tranche of those deployed started on
2 May 2006. The skills that we have targeted in this regard are financial
and economic skills, and skills in technical and engineering-related
fields.

With regard to the Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition,
discussions with various departments, including the Department of Labour
and, of course, labour itself, the private sector and state-owned
enterprises, are in place. We have been able to work with them to identify
and begin to attract priority and required skills for the acceleration of
growth. This will improve the outputs of the further education and training
colleges and other tertiary institutions in order to prepare young people
to work more rapidly and to ensure that the national skills development
strategy works more effectively to support more economic activity.

Some of the Jipsa initiatives within the municipalities include the fact
that in Jipsa we have identified city engineering and town planning as
priority and scarce skills. We have identified planning skills and skills
required for local economic development as priority and scarce skills.
Jipsa also focuses on intermediate artisanal and technical skills, which
are also crucial for rolling out and maintaining municipal infrastructure
and ensuring service delivery.

We have another initiative we are launching soon that is a partnership
between Old Mutual and Samdi. Through this programme we will train 100
municipal project managers. We are launching this initiative on 1 June next
week. Thank you, Chair.

Mnu M A MZIZI: Sihlalo ohloniphekileyo, ngiyabonga ePhinini likaMongameli
ngempendulo ecace kahle yokuthi kubhekwephi ngalokhu kusizwa komnotho
ukuthi uthuthuke. Nakhu-ke okuncane okungethusayo futhi okuvuka
empendulweni yakho Phini likaMongameli: Maqondana nalolu lwazi
oluzodingeka, ubunyoninco kanye nakho konke kokuthi sikwazi ukuthuthukiswa,
ngakube empeleni inqubomgomo kahulumeni imi kuphi ngoba phela uvalo lwethu
lusekuthini njengoba uCosatu eseke washo ukuthi iGear ayizange iphumelele,
ngakube i-Asgisa ayikho yini nayo engozini yokuthi izoba inyumba na?
Ngiyabonga.

IPHINI LIKAMONGAMELI: Baba uMzizi, yize noma esidlangalaleni sibonakala
sengathi sinenkulumo-mpikiswano noCosatu ngalolu daba lwe-Asgisa,
ekusebenzeni siyasebenzelana. Ake ngithathe nje i-Jipsa le ehambelana
namakhono kakhulu, usihlalo wekomidi lezobuchwepheshe kwiJipsa uMnu Gwede
Mantashe, onguNobhala Jikelele we-National Union of Mineworkers. Phela
ipolitiki iyasivumela ukuthi kwezinye izindawo sivivinyane kodwa kwezinye
izindawo sisebenze ngokubambisana. Ngakho-ke anginalo ixhala kakhulu.

Uma ngabe ukhala ngokuthi mhlawumbe iJipsa ngeke izale lutho, phela
isibazalile manje ochwepheshe abangama-90 esibathumela komasipala ukuthi
bayosebenza. Ngakho-ke siyayibona leyo nto yenzeka. Kanti futhi kungekudala
nje kakhulu sizobona kwakhiwa isizindangqangi ezindaweni ngezindawo lezi
esizikhethile, njengeziteshi zakwa-Eskom zamandla kagesi. Uzozibona
zizosukuma futhi bazobe bekhona abasebenzi besebenza. Ngakho-ke wena baba
ungathatheli kakhulu phezulu yonke into, ungaphakami amaphaphu. Siyabonga.
[Ihlombe.]

Mnu S SHICEKA: Sihlalo, ngizobuza ngilandele izindawo ezintathu. Owokuqala
umbuzo uthi ngabe lukhona yini uhlelo lokuthuthukisa umhlahlandlela
kwezomnotho kohulumeni basekhaya, omasipala, omasipala bezifunda
nakomasipala bamadolobha amakhulu ngoba uma ngabe sikhuluma ngokuthi
kufuneka kube khona ukuthuthukiswa kwezindawo, kufuneka lokho kube
nesizinda esihambisana nomhlahlandlela futhi esiqondene nomnotho nje
kuphela, ngaphandle kwezinhlelo zokuthuthukisa ngendlela ehlanganisayo?
Ingabe kukhona yini ukugqugquzela omasipala kuzwelonke ukuthi bakwenze
lokho ukuze kuhlangane ezingeni lezifunda nakuzwelonke?

Okwesibili wudaba lokuthi ngabe kukhona yini ukugqugquzeleka komasipala
ukuthi babheke ukuthi imiphakathi yakheke kanjani ohlangothini lwamakhono
akhona kubo bonke omasipala kuzwelonke ukuze umasipala ngamunye azi ukuthi
nhloboni yamakhono akhona kwizakhamuzi zawo? Lokhu kusho ukuthi kubhekwe
kusukela ezingeni lesigceme kuya phezulu.

Umbuzo wokugcina umaqondana nezizinda zemfundo ephakeme. Ngabe kukhona yini
ukuvumelana nazo ukuthi abantu ezibaqeqeshayo baphelelaphi? Lukhona uhlelo
lokubalandela ukuze kwaziwe ukuthi bayasebenza yini, bahlezi nje dekle
abenzi lutho noma kukhona yini okuthile abakwenzayo kokuthuthukisa izwe
lakithi? Ngiyabonga, Sihlalo. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr M A MZIZI: Hon Chairperson, I thank the Deputy President for her clear
answer as to where are we going with helping this economy to develop, but
what frightens me from your response, Deputy President, is this: With
regard to knowledge that will be necessary, expertise and everything else
that would enable us to develop, where does government’s policy stand,
because our fear is that, as Cosatu has already said, Gear did not succeed?
Is Asgisa not in danger of being unsuccessful as well? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Mr Mzizi, although out there we are seen as debating
with Cosatu about this issue of Asgisa, we work together. Let me take Jipsa
as example - which has a lot to do with skills - whose chairperson of the
committee on technology is Mr Gwede Mantashe, the Secretary-General of the
National Union of Mineworkers. Politics allows us to test one another in
some cases and in others we work together, so I don’t have that much of a
problem.

If perhaps you are complaining about Jipsa not achieving anything, it has
already given birth to 90 technicians, whom we have sent to work at
municipalities. Therefore, we also see that happening. In the near future
we will see infrastructure being built in areas that we have identified,
such as Eskom power stations. You will see them being erected and there
will be workers working, so do not rush things. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S SHICEKA: Chair, I’m going to ask three questions. The first one is: Is
there a programme for developing economic frameworks in local government,
municipalities, district municipalities and big metropolitan
municipalities, because if we talk about the fact that there must be
development, there must be a centre which goes hand in hand with the
guideline and this should be relevant to the economy despite programmes
that are meant to develop in an integrated manner. Is there some kind of
encouragement of municipalities nationally to do that so that this also
works at regional and national levels?

The second question is: Are municipalities encouraged to see to it that
communities have skills that are already available in all municipalities
nationally so that each municipality understands what kinds of skills are
available in the ranks of its citizens? It means that this is expected from
wards upwards.

The last question concerns itself with higher education institutions. Is
there an agreement with them as to what happens to people that they train?
Is there a programme in place to check whether they are working and doing
something to develop our country or they are not doing anything? Thank you,
Chairperson.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, Chair, and thanks, hon member, for the
questions. The first question is to do with whether we have a programme for
the economic development of municipalities to ensure that the growth we are
talking about can also happen in the local areas.

The local economic development plans are supposed to play that role, but
I’m sure the comrade and I would be the first to know that that is one area
in which we are still very weak. Therefore, in terms of our work in Asgisa,
that is the area to focus on. You mustn’t try to do many things at local
level. If we can crack that area, that would be a major achievement.

That is why, in the identification of scarce and priority skills, we have
identified skills that have to do with local economic development as
crucial skills. However, I would suspect that we will not be able to
attract enough people to work as economists and with other related skills
at local level. That is why we have taken these 100 people from
municipalities to train as project managers, so that, even though they may
not be economic experts, with support and the proper skills in project
management, we will still be able to use them. I’m keeping my fingers
crossed that that would also give us the kind of edge that we want.

In fact, as I indicated, that is a joint programme between Old Mutual and
us. I wanted it to have this private-sector edge to it, because these are
the people that we want to position strategically for local economic
development.

Again, as I normally do when I come to this House, I need you, members, in
your constituencies to be partners – to assist – because your leadership
capabilities would also go a long way in facilitating effectiveness. I
think what we could do is share with you where the people we are training
are coming from, so that if they are in your constituencies you can also
give them support.
In answer to the second question on developing community profiles so that
in each municipality we can see what kind of skills exist in those
municipalities: I don’t think that is happening, hon member. But I also
suspect that this would be a tall order for most municipalities. This is
not an idea we will throw away. Let me interrogate it and see if this is
something that we can work with.

This may be an interesting project also for constituency offices – for us
actually to reach out. I think we can generate resources to assist you in
your constituencies. You can take young people and students to do
fieldwork. So maybe this could be an interesting assignment for the NCOP,
with which we as the Presidency will gladly collaborate. So let’s talk
about it.

On the issue of the response of higher education institutions on what
happens to the graduates that come out of those universities: yes, hon
member, we are trying to establish that. In the work we have been doing
about the plight of unemployed graduates, one of the things that has come
out clearly is that there are certain universities whose graduates are most
likely to be unemployed. There are certain universities that therefore have
a bigger challenge about the kind of graduates they produce.

We’ve commissioned a thorough study to track this phenomenon
 so that when we work on placing and assisting those graduates that are
already out there and unemployed, we engage, at the same time, with the
institutions that are training the graduates, so that we can see why we
continue to have so many unemployed graduates from particular universities
and also in general.

In fact, there may just be an opportunity for that study also to be
presented to the members of the NCOP. We commissioned UCT to do that study,
and they’ve just completed it. They will be presenting the study to the
President. So I don’t want to say too much and take away the punch of the
presentation when it is given, but this is something that the members may
really find interesting as a piece of information. This is because when you
deal with and call institutions of higher learning to speak to you here,
you will know some of the sharp questions that you need to raise with them.
Thank you.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Thank you, Chairperson. Madam Deputy President, you
indicated that you have started already appointing, on 2 May this year,
some of the 90 people. Is the number 90 cast in stone, or will you go
beyond that until such time as other people are also properly trained, or
is this just the number of people identified at this stage? Thank you,
Chairperson.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thanks, Chair. No, hon member, the number 90 is not
cast in stone. It’s just the number of people that we have been able to
screen thoroughly. We have actually engaged them and told them that they
have been appointed. In fact, I think that to date the number is even 150.

There is also a need for us, before we deploy the people, to make sure that
the receiving institutions are ready to receive and to utilise these people
effectively. So, we certainly will be guided by demand and supply. Ninety
is not a magic figure.

    Role of private sector in Asgisa, shared economic growth and benefits

2.    Mr V V Z Windvoël asked the Deputy President:

      With reference to the Government’s Accelerated and Shared Growth
      Initiative of South Africa (Asgisa), (a) what measures will be put in
      place to ensure shared economic growth by small, medium and micro
      enterprises (SMMEs) and black economic empowerment (BEE) companies,
      (b) what is the role of the private sector and the three spheres of
      government in Asgisa’s implementation, (c) how will Asgisa benefit (i)
      women, (ii) the youth, (iii) people with disabilities and (iv) the
      rural communities and (d) what is its interface with the Expanded
      Public Works Programme?
      C27E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chair, the answer to this question is that there are
several interventions that are designed to support small business. One of
them is the acceleration of the Apex and Mafisa micro loan programmes.

Another is a new product developed by Khula for entrepreneurs that are
looking for loans of between R10 000 and R250 000. So the one intervention
is in the issue of access to finance because, as you know, that’s a big
challenge for small business. Another is through support for co-operatives,
especially in rural areas, through an initiative we call “Jobs for growth”.

Yet another one is the rolling out of centres in different localities. This
initiative is driven by the Small Enterprise Development Agency, Sieda. It
is in these centres that people are able to get information about business
plans, business opportunities, product development mechanisms, and so on.

The National African Chamber of Commerce, Nafcoc, also has an initiative
that is aimed at creating 100 000 SMMEs every year. We are supporting
Nafcoc in this initiative and we hope that if it is successful, it will add
a lot of impetus to the small business environment.

Also regarding small business, it is important for hon members to note that
Cabinet has already adopted a plan to remove unnecessary regulatory
obstacles that make the work of SMMEs either cumbersome or expensive. These
include the tax burden - and you would have noticed that during the Budget
Vote debate the Minister of Finance announced some of those measures - and
poorly designed or implemented labour regulations.

Again, hon members would note that sometimes our own regulations, the way
they are structured and the way we implement them, are just so difficult
that they actually make the work of small business harder. So there’s a
process in DTI to simplify the registration that includes, among other
things, using a lot of the electronic facilities to engage small business,
which is done on time, efficiently and cheaply so that people don’t spend a
lot of time posting and receiving forms, or standing in queues.

Of course, that presupposes that they have access to computers and things.
So that’s yet another challenge. We need to keep up with regard to the
challenge of access.

We’ve also paid particular attention to the unfavourable municipal, legal
environment - the many bylaws that you find in our municipalities that make
it difficult for small business to do trade - starting with some of the
challenges of those who are trading in the streets. We have to strike a
balance between allowing them to remain informal, but at the same time make
sure that we do not have a proliferation of entities in every corner
selling amagwinya [fat cakes] or ikhanda lengulube [pig’s head] and so on,
which in itself can create problems. So that is a very tricky balance that
we have to strike.

We have therefore pushed in the direction of the simplification of
resources, improving access to finance and improving the support system for
product development.

The initiative on co-operatives is going quite well. We are now in a phase
where we are training the trainers. At least 70 of them are in training as
we speak. We have collaborated with an institution in India, which has a
track record of training micro entrepreneurs to become productive.

Again, I need to say to the comrade who was talking about Cosatu that
amongst the 70 are comrades from Cosatu and the SACP. You know, Cosatu
really believes in co-operatives. So they’ve sent people to participate in
our training, and they are very good. And very soon I’ll be travelling with
them to India for exposure and for us to look at how the skills that we are
imparting to them have been applied in that environment, as well as how
successful they have worked. In that way we are then able to reach out to
this particular crucial constituency of SMMEs.

Asgisa is also a national initiative; it’s not just about government. We
are co-operating with all spheres of government, business and civil
society. In fact, one of the cornerstones of Asgisa is to make sure that
the social partners are active and that they commit both energy and
resources in this regard.

For instance, Jipsa, the Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition,
is hosted by the national business initiative. This business organisation
has provided offices and part of the personnel, and we have joint working
fora that include government, business and labour, as well as professionals
and educational experts. All of us are working together.

We are doing work on business processing, outsourcing and tourism as a
sector. Again, business institutions are playing a very big role in making
sure that those two strategies are moving forward.

As I indicated earlier, Mr Gwede Mantashe is also participating. He is the
chairperson of the technical task team, and I must say that he does a
fantastic job; he keeps everybody on his or her toes in that committee.
Business and labour were also consulted at the time we were developing
Asgisa, and so was civil society.

At provincial level we have provincial initiatives that are flagships of
the provinces, which are also part of Asgisa. For instance, in the Eastern
Cape you have the Umzimvubu catchment area, and with that initiative we are
trying to build a dam in order for us to move forward with developing a
robust forestry industry, which then will have other downstream benefits
such as power and paper. This will go a long way towards creating
employment in that area, which is very depressed, as many of you would
know.

We have, for instance in Mpumalanga, the Moloto Corridor, which is
addressing the improvement of the roads there and, to have it aligned,
articulates much better with rail. I think we all know that that remains a
very challenging road. We have accidents there, but there’s also a lot of
congestion because the traffic, people moving up and down, has increased
phenomenally.

The Northern Cape has its own initiative, a diamond and general mineral
beneficiation, which is part of Asgisa. Salga also sits on the task team
that is responsible for Jipsa, and so do national Ministers and Premiers.
So it is integrated in that manner; you have intergovernmental
participation and different members of society from outside of government
participating.

The second economy interventions also seek to draw women, and the youth in
particular, as well as people with disabilities and people in rural
communities out of poverty. Asgisa programmes support the integration of
the second economy and ultimately seeks to eliminate it from the broader
economy, so that you do not have people who are destined for poverty and
people who are destined to getting richer and richer.

One of the ways in which we are doing that is accelerating infrastructure
investment and development. For instance, if you talk about roads, that is
one aspect that will hamper the movement of goods and services in the rural
areas. As you will see in the Extended Public Works Programme’s budget for
this year, there’s a lot of emphasis on providing funds for roads.

Of course, we are also targeting women. I’ve mentioned the co-ops. We also
have the National Youth Service, another initiative that is targeting young
people. The National Youth Service will be relaunched this year as part of
our 30th youth anniversary celebrations. We are targeting 100 000 young
people, as the President indicated, as a core of what we will be bringing
to the National Youth Service.

However, our intention is to have the National Youth Service, within the
next two to three years, as one of our biggest programmes in government,
through which we take young people who drop out of society, and engage them
actively in responsible activities where they will acquire skills; they
will be involved in providing community service and will also undergo self-
development.

So on the Expanded Public Works Programme, which is a key second economy
intervention, the mandate has been expanded to include roads. This will
entail funds over the coming Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, targeting
about 60 000 more people maintaining roads and about 100 000 additional
people in jobs, averaging six months in road-building and training.

A thousand more small black contractors will be developed. New access roads
will have a significant impact on the conditions and opportunities in some
poor and rural areas.

Plans for a new approach to the maintenance of public infrastructure are
also part of Asgisa, and they will be linked to the Extended Public Works
Programme. The Extended Public Works Programme is ahead of its target. At
the end of 2005 it had 223 000 unemployed people, who had been brought into
the service of public works, with income coming out of 3 400 projects
around the country.

In future expanded public works will include home-based care and early
childhood development, and that should benefit a lot of women and young
people. Thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, thanks to the hon Deputy
President for - I’m not sure whether or not I’m out of order, I see a hand
there – such a very informative and detailed response. My only request, if
possible, is whether the hon Deputy President can share with us a copy of
her response. It would be quite useful to take it to the constituencies.

I was trying, with my shorthand skills, to follow all the details and I
couldn’t cope in the end. That is my request to the Deputy President. Thank
you very much.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: That is not a question; it’s a request for a
copy of the reply.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Yes, if it is possible for her to share a
copy with us.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: With pleasure, Chair. [Laughter.]

Nksk N D NTWANAMBI: Mhlalingaphambili, njengombuzo wokulandelisa kale
mpendulo kaSekela-Mongameli, bendifuna ukuqonda kuye ukuba ngaba le mibono
mihle kangaka iza kuhla na iye koomasipala basemakhaya, nanjengoko kufuneka
ibe ngabo abaza kuqhuba le nqwelo, ukwenzela ukuba bobathathu oorhulumente
sibeve bengqisha ngesingqi esinye. Enkosi. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraph follows.)

[Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Chairperson, this is a follow-up question to the reply
by the Deputy President. I want to know if these good ideas will filter
through to the local municipalities, as they are a driving force for better
co-operation among the three tiers of government. Thank you.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chair, the answer is yes, we will be working with
municipalities. In fact, it’s almost impossible to do some of this work
without the municipalities. If you think about home-based care and
recruiting people for extended public works, you need the municipalities
and councillors.

I think you and I know how, in Gugulethu, when there are opportunities like
these, the house of every councillor has people knocking at the door
because people know that the councillors are the ones who will register the
names and make sure that there’s a process that is followed. So,
definitely, there will be that collaboration with them.

Of course, you also need the municipalities as collaborators. You use their
venues and in some cases you bring in their expertise to provide training
and manage some of the programmes.

But in the case, for instance, of the National Youth Service,
municipalities have undertaken the best of the pilot national youth
services that we have had. The municipality that comes to mind is the Moses
Kotane Municipality in the North West. They have brought in young people to
work in their housing programmes and they have done fantastic work. We are
calling on other municipalities to become partners in the implementation of
the National Youth Service and provide opportunities for young people
actually to come and do even refuse collection. Our young people are so
sophisticated that maybe they won’t like that one too much. But still,
there’s an art in collecting refuse. So we can position that as a
particular task. So, definitely, there will be collaboration. Thanks,
Chair.

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, my question relates to Asgisa. Asgisa is our
South African programme. However, we also form part of the SADC family. I
would like to know from the Deputy President whether this particular
programme of ours will have positive spin-offs for SADC countries as well.
Thank you, Chair.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, the approach we have taken in relation
to SADC and how we will collaborate with the neighbouring countries is to
say that we are going to grow the sectors that we have identified as growth
factors, for instance, within the context of a larger Southern African
market, because then we all benefit.

For instance, tourism is a key sector. We are pushing for the uni-visa,
which will allow people to go into any country in Southern Africa; they can
come to South Africa, go to Lesotho or Mozambique, but will need one visa
to visit all these countries. So you simplify the logistics of movement for
the tourists. In that way you create possibilities.

Coming to infrastructure, some of our infrastructure, as you know, is cross-
border; it is not just infrastructure that will benefit South Africa, but
it will ease trade in the whole region. So it is more at that level we are
able to take on board common needs.

In the area of skills, we’d also like to share some of our initiatives
around training with our SADC partners and in fact have them participate.
Just to give you an example, there is one institution that I have been
speaking with, which wants to invest in the expansion of provision of
technical skills for young people. We have made it a precondition that the
composition of the students that we will take into that training facility
must not just be South African, it must also include students from other
African states. So we try and do it that way. Thanks.

Mr O M THETJENG: Chairperson, I just want to ask the Deputy President a
question, which has to do with the implementation of Asgisa. Deputy
President, you made mention of the fact that there is a need to look at
some of the factors that might actually impede the implementation of some
labour regulations. The question is: Is there now a consideration of the
need to review the labour laws or is the intention to look at them in
relation to the SMMEs? In your response you mentioned that there are some
laws that are difficult to implement. Thank you, Chairperson.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: There is still a problem with our sound
system. I don’t know whether I’m the only one experiencing it. I think that
needs attention. People do speak into the microphone but one can’t hear
them properly.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, I said earlier in my reply that we’ve
undertaken a review of some of our regulations that impact negatively on
small business. So, yes, we have identified those regulations that hamper
small business development and we’ve tried to simplify them. Some of them
are tax-related, and we’ve simplified them. And this is an ongoing task.

In the Presidency itself we are going to establish a unit that will
specialise continuously. Sometimes you remove regulations and introduce
others, and maybe in the new regulation bring back some of the problems you
were trying to solve. So that unit will continuously monitor that you don’t
give with one hand, and take away with the other.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, you are aware that there are four
follow-up questions per question. I see hands shooting up.  I’ve already
allowed four follow-up questions. Anyway, the Chief Whip of the Council
didn’t ask a follow-up question. I’ll allow one person to ask a follow-up
question, and that is Mrs Mchunu. That is the last follow-up question.

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Hon Chairperson, I would like to know from the hon Deputy
President how the youth service core will be identified and how the pool of
100 000 will be built up from the various communities. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, the pool of 10 000 has already been
identified, mainly in the nodes in the poorest municipalities. These will
be people, in the main, who come from indigent families. So you already
have a database of those people because some of them receive free basic
services. So it’s easy to identify those kinds of families. That’s the
information most municipalities have used.

I don’t think that we have fully established a method that will be the only
method in the long term, because you don’t want to identify only those
young people that come from the poorest families. A young person can come
from a family that can be described as the “poorest” but as a young person
may be very poor and disadvantaged because he or she dropped out of school,
and so on. If you don’t bring him or her in you then risk perpetuating
hardship for that young person.

So we’re not on top of the detail as yet. We’ll just deal with this first
lot in order to test that the programmes that we are introducing work. The
criteria, etc, we are going to fine-tune. The criteria will be advertised
in newspapers and government information resources, and I think there will
be opportunities for members to actually engage in the process. Probably at
some point the National Youth Commission and Umsobomvu will even come and
brief you here, as they are the ones driving this process, under Minister
Essop Pahad.

              Civil society participation in roll-out of Asgisa

3.    Mr N D Hendrickse asked the Deputy President:

      (a) What is being done to encourage more civil society participation
      in the rolling out of the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative of
      South Africa (Asgisa) and (b) how will this programme stimulate the
      small, medium and micro enterprises (SMME) sector?
                  C40E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, the answer to this question is that many
elements of civil society were consulted in the formulation of the
Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa. That also
includes business and labour, women’s groups and representatives of youth
formations.

This helped to shape Asgisa, not as a government initiative, but rather as
a national initiative. Many of these groups are also involved in the
implementation of Asgisa projects, even though I think we can improve on
how we continuously engage these constituencies.

Of course, that means that we have to have effective communication, which
will be important to consolidate and develop further relationships between
the state and civil society. Civil society has a particular interest in
matters relating to the second economy, and in all our interactions that is
what has come out very clearly.

Nongovernmental organisations are already playing a key role in co-
operatives, supporting youth and small, medium and micro enterprise
development.

When we engage in local economic development activities, which is the next
phase of our activity, I am sure we will depend a lot on collaboration with
civil society. Thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: There are no follow-up questions.

Now, with regard to question 4, in agreement with Mr Watson, the question
will be withdrawn for now.


                             PEACE AND SECURITY

                                  Cluster 1

MINISTERS:

  Temporary employment of staff in Department of Justice and Constitutional
                                 Development

9.    Mr O M Thetjeng asked the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
      Development:
      (a) What percentage of staff in her department has been employed on
      temporary employment contracts, (b) what is the longest period that a
      staff member has been employed in a temporary capacity and (c) what
      staff establishment levels do these temporary staff members occupy?
                       C70E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chairperson, the reply is that we currently have 11,76% of our total staff
complement on temporary employment contracts. This is calculated as
follows: the total staff complement, excluding judges and magistrates who,
of course, are independent from our department, is 13 005; total staff on
temporary employment contract is 1 529 and that gives you a percentage of
11,76%.

The longest period that a staff member has been employed in a temporary
capacity is 10 years. The levels of employees in question are as follows:
in salary level 1 there are 24 employees; salary level 2 has 79 employees;
salary level 3 has 734 employees; salary level 4 has 269 employees; in
salary level 5 there are 89 employees; salary level 6 has 35 employees;
salary level 7 has 179 employees; salary level 8 has 29 employees; in
salary level 9 there are 22 employees; in salary level 10 there are 32
employees; in salary level 11 there are 21 employees; in salary level 12
there are 6 employees; in salary level 13 there are 5 employees; in salary
level 14 there are 4 employees; and in salary level 15 there is one
employee. That gives you a total of 1 529.

It should be noted that the percentages are calculated according to the
salary level in relation to the staff complement. Obviously we are,
together with the Department of Public Service and Administration, trying
to convert as many of these temporary and these contractual employment
situations into permanent positions.

Mr O M THETJENG: Chairperson, I just want to check the following with the
Deputy Minister. Seeing he has indicated that they are busy, together with
the Department of Public Service and Administration, converting the
temporary staff into permanent, what is the timeframe in terms of
finalising the process to make these temporary staff members permanent?

Secondly, will this take the entire staff that are temporary or a certain
percentage of staff that are temporary and make them permanent?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Well, you could never make all of them permanent. With the department of
ours that works with many professionals, particularly lawyers, clearly,
with many of them you contract their service as you need it. So that can’t
be one of those, particularly regarding those at the higher levels.
Obviously, at the lower levels, those positions should clearly not be
contractual and should not be temporary. If those posts are available, they
should be dealt with.

We have a particular problem, historically, and I do not know what the
reasons for this are. For some reason, in the Master’s Office, where there
are a lot of vacancies, instead of employing people at a permanent level,
the practice has developed that we have temporary staff there. So, clearly,
in those areas where there are posts available, those posts will,
hopefully, be filled as they go. But you will never be able to get rid of
temporary staff and contractual staff completely.

Clearly, concerning the vast majority of them, particularly where there are
vacancies, you should not have the anomaly that exists. That is what we are
working on and it’s an issue which was raised at the last Cabinet lekgotla
as something that should be dealt with quite expediently. Obviously, in
terms of timeframes, we want to do it as quickly as possible but I can’t
give you specific timeframes. Thank you.

Mr O M THETJENG: Chairperson, I just want to make a request to Deputy
Minister: Is it possible to have the response that he has just given in
writing? Is it possible to have the response he has given in a written
form? Thank you, Chairperson.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Service delivery, Chair. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: You could even actually access it from the
Hansard - even if you had not asked for it.


         Charges against constable for acts committed while on duty


10.   Ms D Robinson asked the Minister of Safety and Security:

      (1)   Whether, in light of the fact that a number of charges,
           including assault, have been laid against a certain constable
           (details furnished) for acts committed while on duty, he has
           been suspended pending the outcome of the investigation of these
           charges; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details;

      (2)   (a) how many charges have been laid against the said constable
           and (b) what were the findings of the investigations into these
           charges;

      (3)   whether any investigation is being carried out into allegations
           that colleagues of the said constable either (a) assisted the
           said constable in assaulting detainees or (b) failed to prevent
           the said constable from assaulting detainees; if not, why not;
           if so, what are the relevant details?
                                  C56E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, we investigated three
cases of alleged assault against the member. Unfortunately, in building up
our case we could not generate incontrovertible evidence of wrongdoing.
Nonetheless, we decided to subject the matter to disciplinary inquiry. As a
consequence of that a report has now been handed to the discipline section
of the SA Police Service.

The member was obviously not suspended, because there was no prima facie
evidence against him. What we did, given the fact that we were inquiring
into what actually happened, is that we placed him under supervision at a
community service centre. Thank you.

Ms D ROBINSON: Thank you, Chair. Thank you for your answer, Minister. I am
still very concerned about the levels of violence that do exist within our
society as a whole, and then obviously also within the police force,
whether this has been proved or not. We know that many cases similar to
this are alleged to have taken place.

I think we can link this to the stress levels under which police work. What
is being done in order to assist policemen who have this very difficult job
to do to cope with the anger and the violence in their stress? Could you
perhaps just elaborate on that, to assist as you have done with the
supervision? I think that is a useful way of dealing with it, but what
about the others in general? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Well, I don’t know what reasons the
hon member would have to connect this particular matter to the question of
stress levels, because we do not have that evidence. As I say, we have
investigated this matter and as far as we are concerned there was no prima
facie evidence that this person actually committed the offences that he
allegedly committed. So, I don’t understand why she is making a connection
between the two.

Nonetheless, we are on record over a number of years now as indicating the
programmes that we have to deal with matters that relate to stress levels
in the SA Police Service. We built up a section and that section is
growing. In fact, it is a full division as we speak, which is referred to
as the employee assistance services. It is those services, which are
comprised of social workers, psychiatrists and religious leaders who are
responsible for the counselling of the members that we have, to try and
deal with those matters.

We are aware that one aspect of the problems that our people experience has
to do with conditions of service. But I am sure many of us who are seated
here are aware of the changes we have made relevant to the conditions of
service for the better with respect to our members in the SA Police Service
– much better than the case has been in the past to try and address some of
the problems that they have.

In terms of workload, we have also addressed the matter. There are more
police officials in South Africa today than there have ever been in the
past. In fact, by the end of the 2007-08 financial year we shall have in
excess of 165 000 members of the SA Police Service. When I became Minister
of Safety and Security in 2002, there were 130 000 members.

Now, the growth therefore, in terms of the numbers of the complement of the
SA Police Service, has to do with the fact that we are trying to lessen the
burden that the members of the SA Police Service have in terms of the work
that they do. Thank you very much.

Mr D A WORTH: Thank you, Chairperson. The Independent Complaints
Directorate investigated 4 083 complaints of alleged police misconduct
between April and December 2005. Of these complaints, 482 related to deaths
and of these 227 were directly as a result of police action. Does the
Minister agree with the National Police Commissioner that the Independent
Complaints Directorate has outlived its usefulness? Thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I don’t like to direct actually to the
Ministers, but I am not sure whether that is not a new question altogether
that should be asked separately. But, normally if the Minister is in a
position to shed light on it, with pleasure Minister. However, I think that
that is a new question altogether and not a follow-up question to this
question. Is there any follow-up question? No follow-up questions.

                           Metro Police functions

11.   Mr M A Mzizi asked the Minister of Safety and Security:

      (1)   Whether it is within the jurisdiction of the Metro Police to
          carry out the function of arrest and detention of suspects; if
          not, what is the position in this regard; if so, what are the
          relevant details;

      (2)   whether the line function of the SA Police Service, namely of
           executing warrants of arrest issued by the courts, has changed
           to be the line function of the Metro Police, thus giving more
           authority over to the Metro Police; if not, what is the position
           in this regard; if so, what are the relevant details;

      (3)   whether his department is considering placing the Metro Police
           function under the supervision of the Provincial Commissioner;
           if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                        C60E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, he indicated to me
earlier on that he had an interest in joining the Metro Police, but he
wants to be the chief without any training. [Laughter.]

Members of the Metro Police Service are peace officers and, as such, they
have all the powers that the police have. That means they have the power,
for instance, to serve warrants of arrest and they have the power to
arrest. But they do not have detention facilities, as the police have, and
therefore as soon as they have effected an arrest they must then hand over
the suspect to the police, who have detention facilities.

Of course, the matter of the police and how they are structured in South
Africa is indicated in the Constitution. Section 199 of the Constitution
defines the SA Police Service as a “single police service”. In fact,
section 205 of the Constitution goes further to define the work of this
single police service and says that the national Commissioner exercises -
that is not the exact words but this is the effect – command and control of
every police person in South Africa at national, provincial and, where
appropriate, local government level.

As a consequence of that, there is a discussion and consultations are
happening in order for us to implement the Constitution correctly and
therefore bring every police officer into this single police service, but
that matter has not been finalised yet. It will be finalised when, in the
first instance, there is full agreement that will be endorsed by Cabinet,
and we will come back to Parliament for the final endorsement. The
orientation is towards the consolidation of the Police Service in terms of
the stipulations of the Constitution. Thank you.

Mnu M A MZIZI: Sihlalo, cha uNgqongqoshe uyasho khona ukuthi mhlawumbe
ngabe benginalo ihaba lokuthi ngifuna ukuya kwaMetro.

Ngizwile futhi uchaze kwezwakala. Okusempeleni, okwenza ukuthi lo mbuzo
uvele yingoba kuyabonakala ekusebenzeni kwabo laba beMetro ukuthi
abehlukile kangako kumatshigogo, uma ngabe uNgqongqoshe uyawazi
amatshigogo.

Inkinga esiba nayo ukuthi uma befika nencwadi ebagunyaza ukubopha umuntu,
akubi nankulumo bakukhahlela bakwenze zonke izinto ezingenziwa amaphoyisa.
Yingakho-ke size sibuze ukuthi ngabe umsebenzi abaphezu kwawo uyafana
ncamashi yini nowamaphoyisa. Ngiyezwa-ke lapho Ngqongqoshe njengoba
empendulweni yakho uthi banalo ilungelo lokukwenza konke; kodwa kuvuka
imibuzo.

Maduzane nje kuke kwaba necala lena kwaZulu-Natali, noma uNatali ngifuna
ukumlahla eceleni nje, lapho kwatholakala khona ukuthi wona lawa matshigogo
anawo amaseli lapho ebopha khona abantu. Kuthe-ke ijaji lomthetho enkantolo
enkulu lathi uma ngabe uboshwe yitshigogo laze lakuvalela, kufanele
kuthathwe ngokuthi ubanjwe ngendluzula. Uma ungayifunda nje iCitizen yakho
yayizolo, kukhona Lokho, Ngqongqoshe.

Ngabe uNgqongqoshe uthini kule mpendulo yejaji ethi cha abanalo ilungelo
lokubopha – ngoba, ngempela bakushaya kangangokuthi ungagijima uyongena
evenini uma kufike bona engakafiki amaphoyisa. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, no, the Minister has indicated that perhaps I
was extraordinary in wanting to go to Metro. I did hear and was satisfied
with her explanation. In essence, what brought about this question is the
realization that the work that the Metro does is no different from that of
the “matshigogo”, if the Minister is familiar with that concept.

The problem we often encounter is that each time they bring along with them
a warrant of arrest, they engage in many forms of harassment, which
policemen don’t engage in. This is the basis of the question we are asking,
which is whether their work is similar in nature to that of policemen. I
accordingly hear the Minister and it is very clear from your explanation
that they can do just about everything that the police can do. This,
however, raises questions.

Recently there was a court case in KwaZulu-Natal, although I want to avoid
Natal, and in the course of things it was discovered that these
“matshigogos” have their private jail cells, where they put arrested
people. The Judge of the Supreme Court stated that if you had been arrested
by the “tshigogos”, and you were going to be held in custody, it could only
be concluded under the circumstances that you had been forcibly arrested.
If you could read the article in the Citizen, hon Minister, it is what I am
referring to here.

What then is the implication of the Minister’s response as opposed to the
Judge’s pronouncement on the matter? The Judge stated that they didn’t have
the right to make arrests. This is so because these people could assault
you seriously, to the point where you really would choose to run and get to
a police van before the police have even arrived on the scene.]

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Well, I am sure it is obvious to you
that I am not trained legally, but I understand the law the way that I have
explained it.

Once you become a peace officer, you have the right and the power to serve
a warrant of arrest and to arrest. And, if they had detention facilities -
I am saying they don’t have detention facilities - they would also have the
right to take you into their detention facilities, because they are peace
officers and they are able to do the work that police do. That is how I
understand the law. I do not know the circumstances that led to the
honourable Judge in Durban making the remarks he did.

With regard to the question of the standing of the Metro Police and some of
the problems that attend to their functions, I want to say that it is on
the back of those problems that we decided we needed one line of command so
that we would not have a situation in which there are people established in
ways that place themselves – whereas they are police officers - outside of
the jurisdiction of the police.

We want to attend to some of the difficulties that relate to the
implementation, by these other police structures, of our programme of
policing in South Africa. That is why we say, let’s follow the
Constitution, because when we have consolidated all policing in South
Africa under the SA Police Service, we will not have some of the problems
that we have as we speak.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: The next question is Question 13, by Mr Van
Rooyen to the Minister of Safety and Security. Hon Minister, you are a
hardworking Minister today. All the questions are directed to you.

          Police recruits deployed to Free State and crime figures

13.   Mr C J van Rooyen asked the Minister of Safety and Security:
      (1)   (a) How many new police recruits were deployed to the Free State
           during 2005 and (b) to which areas were they deployed;
      (2)   whether there was any decline in crime figures in these areas as
           a result of these deployments; if not, what is the position in
           this regard; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                             C67E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: I am surprised that it is only three
questions. I usually get a lot of questions from this House.

There are 210 police officers that were deployed to the Free State in 2005.
Seventy of them were sent to Northern Free State; 55 were sent to the
Eastern Free State, and the Southern Free State was given 85.
Unfortunately, we are not in a position to indicate what happened in terms
of statistics regarding their involvement in these areas.

But we would really want to believe that, as the general trend is
indicating a downward slope with respect to crime in South Africa, the Free
State surely must also have benefited from the additions that were made in
the province relevant to the deployment of new police officers.

Mr D A WORTH: In view of the reply, this question is also with regard to
the Free State. Minister, I am sure that you would agree that the best
deterrent to would-be criminals is what Justice Fagan refers to as ``the
certainty of detection and punishment’’.

In view of this, how did the Free State detective services reach an over 8%
vacancy level, and how does your department plan to deal with this issue?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: In response to an earlier question, I
did say that we are increasing the contingency of our police officers
everywhere in South Africa. We also believe that, with time, every vacancy
that we have is going to be filled.

But there is something that we also do when we deploy people. We do a
profile of the places where they are going to be deployed. It is on the
basis of the needs for that area that, in the end, we allocate members.
Therefore, at times, you will see that there seems to be some kind of
lopsidedness with respect to our deployment of people.

But, as the English people would say, there is actually method to that kind
of madness. It has to do with the fact that we are looking at the profiles
of the various places where we deploy police. It is our intention finally
that indeed we will attend to this matter of staff shortages, wherever they
arise in the SA Police Service, whether it is the functional police members
that we have or administrative staff who are a support network to the
functional police in the service.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.
The Council adjourned at 15:10.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                             MONDAY, 22 MAY 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


          a) Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision of
             Communication-related Information Amendment Bill [B 9 – 2006]
             (National Assembly – sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 28807 of 5 May 2006.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
         and Constitutional Development of the National Assembly, as well
         as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 23 May 2006.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.


2.    Draft Bill submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      1) The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


         (a)     Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision
             of Communication-related Information Amendment Bill, 2006,
             submitted by the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
             Development 8 May 2006. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
             Justice and Constitutional Development and the Select
             Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Transport


     a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Transport for 2006 to 2009.

2.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration
     a) Medium-term Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Service and
        Administration for 2006 to 2011.


                            TUESDAY, 23 MAY 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS



National Council of Provinces


1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Economic and Foreign Affairs for consideration:

          a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Foreign Affairs for 2006 to
             2009.


    2.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Public Services for consideration and report:

          a) Convention on International Interests in Mobile Equipment,
             tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


          b) Protocol to the Convention on International Interests in Mobile
             Equipment on Matters Specific to Aircraft Equipment, tabled in
             terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.
          c) Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention on International
             Interests in Mobile Equipment and the Protocol to the
             Convention on International Interests in Mobile Equipment on
             Matters Specific to Aircraft Equipment.
    3.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:


          a) Draft Practical Guidelines for Employees in terms of section 10
             of the Protected Disclosures Act, 2000.

    4.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration:

          a) Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
             the Presidents’ Fund for 2003-2004 [RP 229-2005].

    5.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs:

        (a)      Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD) for
            January 2003 to December 2003, in terms of section 18(5)(c) of
            the Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act No 116 of 1998).

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Judicial Service
            Commission for 2005.


        (c)      Proclamation No R.3 published in Government Gazette No
             28528 dated 17 February 2006: Commission of inquiry to conduct
             an investigation into alleged illicit activities of certain
             South African Companies or Individuals relating to the United
             Nations Oil-For-Food Programme in Iraq, in terms of the
             Commissions Act, 1947 (Act No 8 of 1947).

        (d)      Government Notice No R.159 published in Government Gazette
             No 28528 dated 17 February 2006: Terms of Reference of the
             President of the Republic of South Africa for the establishment
             of a Commission of inquiry to conduct an investigation into
             alleged illicit activities of certain South African Companies
             or individuals relating to the Oil-For-Food Programme in Iraq,
             in terms of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,
             1996.

    6.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration:


          a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Education for 2006 to 2010.


          b) Strategic Plan of Sport and Recreation South Africa for 2006 to
             2010.

    7.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance and the Joint Budget Committee for consideration and
        report:

          a) Submission of the Financial and Fiscal Commission on the
             Division of Revenue Bill for 2007-2008, tabled in terms of
             section 9(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act,
             1997 (Act No 97 of 1997).


    8.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance:
          a) Report of the Registrar of Long-term Insurance for 2004.


          b) Report of the Registrar of Short-term Insurance for 2004.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services
             Board on the Registrar of Friendly Societies for 2004.


          d) Government Notice No 317 published in Government Gazette No
             28699 dated 31 March 2006: Adjusted allocations in terms of
             the Division of Revenue Act, 2005 (Act No 1 of 2005).


          e) Proclamation No R.16 published in Government Gazette No 28675
             dated 29 March 2006: Fixing of date on which certain sections
             respectively must come into operation, in terms of the Revenue
             Laws Amendment Act, 2005 (Act No 31 of 2005) and Revenue Laws
             Second Amendment Act, 2005 (Act No 32 of 2005).


          f) Proclamation No R.17 published in Government Gazette No 28675
             dated 29 March 2006: Fixing of date on which section 103(1)
             shall come into operation, in terms of the Revenue Laws
             Amendment Act, 2002 (Act No 74 of 2002).


          g) Government Notice No 316 published in Government Gazette No
             28698 dated 31 March 2006: Commencement of the provisions in
             terms of the Auditing Profession Act, 2005 (Act No 26 of
             2005).


          h) Government Notice No R.238 published in Government Gazette No
             28627 dated 17 March 2006: Determination of fees payable to
             the Registrar of Securities Services in terms of the
             Securities Services Act, 2004 (Act No 36 of 2004).


          i) Government Notice No R.239 published in Government Gazette No
             28627 dated 17 March 2006: Determination of fees payable to
             the Registrar of Friendly Societies in terms of the Friendly
             Societies Act, 1956 (Act No 25 of 1956).


          j) Government Notice No R.240 published in Government Gazette No
             28627 dated 17 March 2006: Determination of fees payable to
             the Registrar of Financial Services Providers in terms of the
             Financial Advisory and Intermediary Services Act, 2002 (Act No
             37 of 2002).


          k) Agreement between the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany and the Government of the Republic of South Africa
             concerning Financial Cooperation in 2004, tabled in terms of
             section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


          l) Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Government
             of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Government of the
             Republic of South Africa concerning Financial Cooperation in
             2004.


          m) Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
             Republic of South Africa concerning Support to the Risk
             Capital Facility (SA/007/04), tabled in terms of section
             231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


          n) Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the European
             Community and the Republic of South Africa concerning Support
             to the Risk Capital Facility (SA/007/04).


          o) Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
             Republic of South Africa concerning EPRD Audit/Evaluation
             Facility (SA/006/05), tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996.


          p) Explanatory Memorandum on the Financing Agreement between the
             European Community and the Republic of South Africa concerning
             EPRD Audit/Evaluation Facility (SA/006/05).

    9.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance and the Select Committee on Social Services:


          a) Project Agreement between the Government of South Africa and
             the Government of Ireland on a Project for Supporting the
             Prevention, Care and Support of HIV and AIDS and the reduction
             of its impact in the Limpopo Province, through the Provincial
             Department of Health, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996.


        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum on the Project Agreement between
             the Government of South Africa and the Government of Ireland
             on a Project for Supporting the Prevention, Care and Support
             of HIV and AIDS and the reduction of its impact in the Limpopo
             Province.


        (c)      Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
             Republic of South Africa concerning Programme of Assistance to
             the Victim Empowerment Programme of the Department of Social
             Development in the South African Government (SA/003/05),
             tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (d)      Explanatory Memorandum on the Financing Agreement between
             the European Community and the Republic of South Africa
             concerning Programme of Assistance to the Victim Empowerment
             Programme of the Department of Social Development in the South
             African Government (SA/003/05).


    10.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance and the Select Committee on Local Government and
        Administration:

          a) Strategic Objective Grant Agreement No. 674-0332 between the
             United States of America and the Republic of South Africa for
             Increased Sustainable Local Government Service Delivery, tabled
             in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

          b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Strategic Objective Grant
             Agreement No. 674-0332 between the United States of America and
             the Republic of South Africa for Increased Sustainable Local
             Government Service Delivery.

          c) Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
             Republic of South Africa concerning Support to Urban Renewal
             Programme in the Eastern Cape (SA/001/05), tabled in terms of
             section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.
          d) Explanatory Memorandum on the Financing Agreement between the
             European Community and the Republic of South Africa concerning
             Support to Urban Renewal Programme in the Eastern Cape
             (SA/001/05).


    11.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance and the Select Committee on Education and Recreation:

          a) Strategic Objective Grant Agreement No. 674-0328 between the
             United States of America and the Republic of South Africa for
             Increased Access to Quality Education and Training, tabled in
             terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

          b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Strategic Objective Grant
             Agreement No. 674-0328 between the United States of America and
             the Republic of South Africa for Increased Access to Quality
             Education and Training.

    12.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance and the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs:
        a) Amendment number five to the Grant Agreement between the
           Government of the United States of America acting through the
           United States Agency for International Development and the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa for the Increased
           Commercial Viability of Existing Small and Medium Agribusiness,
           tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


        b) Explanatory Memorandum on Amendment number five to the Grant
           Agreement between the Government of the United States of America
           acting through the United States Agency for International
           Development and the Government of the Republic of South Africa
           for the Increased Commercial Viability of Existing Small and
           Medium Agribusiness.


        c) Letter of Agreement for the Provision of Funds from the National
           Forest Programme Facility, through the Food and Agricultural
           Organization of the United Nations to Department of Water
           Affairs and Forestry of the Government of the Republic of South
           Africa, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
           1996.


        d) Explanatory Memorandum on the Letter of Agreement for the
           Provision of Funds from the National Forest Programme Facility,
           through the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United
           Nations to Department of Water Affairs and Forestry of the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa.


        e) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
           and the Government of the Kingdom of Denmark regarding the Urban
           Environmental Management Programme in South Africa (2006-2010),
           tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


        f) Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Government
           of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the
           Kingdom of Denmark regarding the Urban Environmental Management
           Programme in South Africa (2006-2010).


    13.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance, the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
        Affairs and the Select Committee on Local Government and
        Administration:


          a) Strategic Objective Grant Agreement No 674-0330 between the
             United States of America and the Republic of South Africa for
             Democratic Consolidation Advanced, tabled in terms of section
             231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


          b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Strategic Objective Grant
             Agreement No 674-0330 between the United States of America and
             the Republic of South Africa for Democratic Consolidation
             Advanced.

    14.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance and the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs:


        a) Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
           Republic of South Africa concerning Economic Development Support
           Programme in the Eastern Cape (SA/003/04), tabled in terms of
           section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.
        b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Financing Agreement between the
           European Community and the Republic of South Africa concerning
           Economic Development Support Programme in the Eastern Cape
           (SA/003/04).


        c) Strategic Objective Grant Agreement No 674-0331 between the
           United States of America and the Republic of South Africa for
           Support for Economic Growth and Analysis, tabled in terms of
           section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.
        d) Explanatory Memorandum on the Strategic Objective Grant
           Agreement No 674-0331 between the United States of America and
           the Republic of South Africa for Support for Economic Growth and
           Analysis.


    15.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance, the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs and
        the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration:

        a) Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
           Republic of South Africa concerning African Union/Nepad Capacity
           Building in Governance and Public Administration (SA/006/04),
           tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


        b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Financing Agreement between the
           European Community and the Republic of South Africa concerning
           African Union/Nepad Capacity Building in Governance and Public
           Administration (SA/006/04).

    16.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
        Affairs:

        a) Agreement between the Government of the Swiss Confederation and
           the Government of the Republic of South Africa concerning
           Operational Police Commanders Training in the Democratic
           Republic of Congo, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
           Constitution, 1996.


        b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Government
           of the Swiss Confederation and the Government of the Republic of
           South Africa concerning Operational Police Commanders Training
           in the Democratic Republic of Congo.

    17.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance, the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs and
        the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration:


        a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
           through its National Department of Water Affairs and Forestry,
           and the Government of Switzerland through its Swiss Agency for
           Development and Cooperation concerning the Masibambane – ‘Local
           Government Capacity Building through Knowledge Sharing’ Project
           (01.04.2005-31.03.2008), tabled in terms of section 231(3) of
           the Constitution, 1996.


        b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Government
           of the Republic of South Africa through its National Department
           of Water Affairs and Forestry, and the Government of Switzerland
           through its Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation
           concerning the Masibambane – ‘Local Government Capacity Building
           through Knowledge Sharing’ Project (01.04.2005-31.03.2008).

    18.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration:


          a) Preliminary Annual Report of the Department of Labour for 2005-
             2006 [RP 45-2006].
    19.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration:


          a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Correctional Services for
             2006/07 to 2010/11.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Home Affairs


        1) Strategic Plan of the Department of Home Affairs for 2006/07 to
           2008/09.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Joint Monitoring Committee on Ethics and Members’
     Interests on Investigation regarding the Auditor-General’s Report on
     the Alleged Non-disclosure of Ministers and Deputy Ministers.

     Background


     The Auditor-General had on 15 September 2005 requested information
     regarding the disclosure of interests of the following Members of the
     Executive.
     The Office of the Registrar checked the disclosures and forwarded the
     following table to reflect the disclosure status of the member
     concerned. The Registrar also indicated to the Office of the Auditor-
     General that she would seek the responses from the Members concerned
     regarding the alleged non-disclosure.

|Enterprise name            |Name                       |Disclosed in the|
|                           |                           |Register        |
|Votani Mawethu             |Nqakula C                  |No              |
|Raffles Health and Fitness |Padayachie RL              |Yes             |
|Club                       |                           |                |
|Casbah Cinema              |Surty ME                   |Yes             |
|Hectaris and Hectaris      |Surty  ME                  |Yes             |
|Go Ja Beng                 |Surty ME                   |No              |
|Happy Developers           |Surty ME                   |No              |
|Luthando Investments       |Pandor GNM                 |No              |
|Luthando Investment        |Pandor GNM                 |No              |
|Holdings                   |                           |                |
|All Pay Western Cape       |Hangana N                  |Yes             |
|Balsas Management          |Hangana N                  |Yes             |
|Momentum Oil Refinery      |Oosthuizen GC              |No              |
|Thaba Drank Kelders        |Oosthuizen GC              |No              |
|Development Enterprise for |Gigaba MKN                 |No              |
|Management and Strategic   |                           |                |
|Services                   |                           |                |
|Lesila                     |Mlambo Ngcuka P            |No              |
|CityCat Trading 54         |Xingwana L                 |Resigned from CC|
|Jongilizwe Investment      |Sigcau SN                  |No              |
|Holding                    |                           |                |
|Jongilizwe Medical         |Sigcau SN                  |No              |



     Close Corporations

|Enterprise name            |Name                       |Disclosed in the|
|                           |                           |Register        |
|Vintria Investments and    |Padayachie RL              |Yes             |
|Property Development       |                           |                |
|Vintria International      |Padayachie RL              |Yes             |
|Enterprises                |                           |                |
|Treveni Property Investment|Padayachie RL              |Yes             |
|Tregoyd                    |Hanekom DA                 |Yes             |
|Stand 1993 Houghton        |Radebe JT                  |Yes             |
|Zinrus Developers          |Surty ME                   |Yes             |
|Western Oceans Investments |Shabangu S                 |Resigned from CC|
|Braai Spot                 |Oosthuizen GC              |No              |
|Hoewe 114 Lyttleton        |Skweyiya ZST               |No              |
|Landbouhoewes              |                           |                |


     Section 21 Companies
|Enterprise name            |Name                       |Disclosed in the|
|                           |                           |Register        |
|The Tertiary Education Fund|Pandor GNM                 |No              |
|of South Africa            |                           |                |
|Black South African Freedom|Sisulu Guma LN             |No              |
|Songs and Poems            |                           |                |
|Community Peace Foundation |Mabandla B                 |No              |
|Community Peace Foundation |Mlambo Ngcuka P            |No              |
|Creative Housing Utility   |Oosthuizen GC              |No              |
|JobCo                      |Didiza AT                  |No              |
|Biz Africa 1477            |Malusi G                   |No              |
|Land and Agriculture Centre|Hanekom DA                 |No              |
|SA National NGO Coalition  |Padayachie RL              |Resigned        |


     All Members had responded to the Registrar’s request for clarification
     and amendments.


     Following the publication of the “Auditor-General’s Report on the
     Declarations of Interests by Ministers, Deputy Ministers and Government
     employees” in January 2006, the Chairperson of the Joint Committee on
     Ethics and Members’ Interests requested that the Registrar obtain from
     the Auditor-General further information regarding the alleged non-
     disclosure of Members.


     The Registrar established that the Auditor-General’s Report was report
     was based on the 15 September 2005 request for information.



     The Joint Committee on Ethics and Members’ Interests met on the 5 April
     2006 to consider the Auditor-Generals’ Report.






     In order to obtain background information regarding the completeness
     and accuracy of Company and Intellectual Property Rights Organisation’s
     database, the Committee requested that the Chief Executive Officer of
     CIPRO brief it on the above matters as well as the process to resign as
     a director of a company.



1.    Briefing by the Company and Intellectual Property Rights Organisation
    (CIPRO).

Mr Modiba (Deputy Registrar of Companies), Mr Voller and Mr Ali attended on
behalf of CIPRO. They indicated that the Registrar of Companies had
suddenly taken ill and was unable to attend.

The Committee was informed that Mr Modiba would respond to queries from the
Committee on behalf of the Registrar of Companies. The Committee expressed
its displeasure that the Registrar of Companies was not available to attend
the Committee meeting.

The Committee expressed concerns on the accuracy and completeness of the
database. In his response to this, Mr Modiba indicated that the database
was audited and it was their view that the information was accurate. He
conceded that while there are no backlogs some data may have been
incorrectly captured and further that there was some information missing.
Mr Modiba informed the Committee that the current e-lodgement system allows
for the client to update the information electronically, thus reducing the
margin for error. CIPRO had also offered to address any issues related to
errors on their system on a case-by-case basis.
In his input to the Committee, Mr Modiba stated that the Companies Act
prescribes the process to follow when a director resigns from a company.
The Act also prescribes the process to deregister a company. He agreed that
CIPRO was constrained by the prescribed processes in the Companies Act.

The Committee recommended that should CIPRO find their work constrained by
the Companies Act they should table amendments for Parliament’s
consideration. The Committee also recommended that CIPRO improve
communication with its clients.

The Committee agreed that it will hold a follow-up meeting with the
Accounting Officer of CIPRO.

Briefing by the Auditor-General.

In his briefing to the Committee, the Auditor-General stated that his
Office had received numerous requests to investigate alleged irregularities
by government employees and had, on that basis, carried a transversal audit
of 142 departments. The purpose of the audit was to ensure that public
officials declare their interests appropriately.

The CIPRO databases were compared to the PERSAL database. When the list was
scrutinised, Ministers and Deputy Ministers were included on the list. The
Auditor-General reported that the Minister for the Public Service and
Administration had indicated that she would issue a letter to all other
Ministers informing them about the audit investigation with a request to
cooperate with the Auditor-General.

The Registrar had been sent correspondence from the Auditor-General on the
disclosure status of the Members. The Registrar responded with the
information table above.

The Auditor-General indicated that the Ministers and Deputy Ministers had
an opportunity to respond to the report before it was finalised.

The Committee asked the Auditor-General whether he had verified the
accuracy of the CIPRO database. The Auditor-General said that he could not
verify the completeness of the CIPRO database.

The Auditor-General in response to a question by a Member, indicated that
there was direct engagement with individual Members and the Minister for
the Public Service and Administration.

The Committee agreed that in similar cases related to Members of Parliament
there should be communication between the Auditor-General, the Office of
the Registrar and CIPRO. In this regard the Auditor-General should engage
the Registrar to ascertain all the information before any report related to
Members is published.

The Chairperson thanked the Auditor-General for the report and agreed that
the process assisted in improving awareness and would aid in ensuring
compliance with the requirements of the Code of Conduct.

The Committee then considered the Report of the Registrar and agreed to the
following;


1. Minister C Nqakula

On 3 October 2005, the Registrar requested in writing details of the
Minister’s interests in Votani Mawethu.

The Minister responded on 13 October 2006 that Votani Mawethu was an NGO
which was established to assist people to obtain identity documents for the
1999 election.  The directors shut down the programme of the organisation
in 2000.

The Minister was not aware that the organisation was not formally
disbanded, but has now taken steps to disband the organisation.

Findings


The Committee found that the entity was a not-for-profit organisation and
therefore did not need to be disclosed.





The Committee noted that the House had adopted a Committee Report on 11
November 2005, ATC number 1262, which states that Members need not disclose
not-for-profit entities.





2. Deputy Minister Padayachie


The Deputy Minister has disclosed his interests in Raffles Health and
Fitness Club, Vintria Investments and Property Development, Triveni
Property Enterpises, he also advised the Registrar of his resignation from
the SANGO Coalition.





Findings

The Member complied with the requirements of the Code,  accordingly there
is no breach of the Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament.


3. Deputy Minister ME Surty

On 3 October 2005, the Registrar requested in writing details of the Deputy
Minister’s interests in Go Ja Beng Fast Foods and Happy Developers.
The Deputy Minister had disclosed his interests in Casbah Cinema, Hectaris
and Hectaris and Zinrus Developers.

The Deputy Minister advised that Go Ja Beng Foods and Happy Developers were
deregistered on 27-06-2001. The de-registration was published in the
Government Gazette of 22 June 2001, Gazette number 22372, notice number
129785.


Findings

The Committee ruled that as these companies are formally deregistered there
is no breach of the Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament.


4. Minister GNM Pandor

On 3 October 2005, the Registrar requested in writing details of the
Minister’s interest in Luthando and The Tertiary Education Funds of South
Africa.

Minister Pandor indicated in her response on 18 October 2005 that she had
disclosed her interests in Luthando in 2003 and 2004 . In 2005 she resigned
her directorships in Luthando and therefore did not deem it necessary to
disclose.

She also indicated that the section 21 company Tertiary Education Fund of
South Africa no longer existed.


Findings

There is no breach regarding the Tertiary Education Fund as Members are not
required to disclose directorships in section 21 companies. Refer to (ATC
of 11 November 2005 number 1262).

The Committee found that on the matter of Luthando, the Member had
disclosed in 2004. With regard to her directorship in Luthando the
Committee accepts the Minister’s undertaking that she had resigned her
directorship.

The Committee finds that there is no breach of the Code.


5. Deputy Minister N Hangana


Deputy Minister N Hangana has disclosed her interests in Balsas Management
and All Pay.


Findings


There is no breach of the Code as the Member disclosed her interests as
required.




6. Deputy Minister GC Oosthuizen


On the 3 October 2005, the Registrar requested in writing details of
interests in companies in Momentum Oil Refinery Explorations, Thaba Drank
Kelders, Braai Spot CC and section 21 company Creative Housing Utility.

The Deputy Minister Oosthuizen produced documents which show that he
resigned as director of Momentum Oil refinery on the 1 January 1985.
Deputy Minister produced documents that shows that he resigned from
Creative Housing Untility on 20 June 1987.

The Deputy Minister indicated that Thaba Drank Kelders and Braai Spot CC
were dormant and were deregistered in November 2005. The Deputy Minister
had also shown that the companies had not traded for more than 10 years and
that Thaba Drank Winkel was established in 1986 and the Deputy Minister was
unaware that he was connected to the entities.


Findings



The Committee finds that there is no breach of the Code of Conduct for
Members of Parliament.





7. Deputy Minister MKN Gigaba


On 3 October 2005, the Registrar requested in writing details of the  Deputy
Minister’s interests in Development Enterprise for Management and  Strategic
Services as well as Biz Africa.

In his response on 11 October 2005 the Deputy Minister submitted a  copy  of
his letter of resignation from Development  Enterprise  for  Management  and
Strategic Services. The Deputy Minister advised that  his  participation  in
Biz Africa was in his capacity as the President of the ANC Youth League,  he
relinquished the Presidency  on  14  August  2004  and,  automatically,  all
interests in Biz Africa.


Findings


There is no breach of the Code of Conduct for  Members  of  Parliament.  The
Committee  notes  that  Deputy  Minister  Gigaba  had  disclosed  both   the
interests in his 2004 disclosure, this gives credence to his  response  that
he is in the process of resigning the interests.


8. Deputy President P Mlambo-Ngcuka



 On 3 October 2005, the Registrar requested in writing details of the
Deputy President’s interests in Lesila (burial society) and The Community
Peace Foundation, a section 21 company.


The Deputy President responded on the 14 November  2005  that  in  1997  the
University of the Western Cape deregistered the Community Peace Foundation.

The Deputy President indicated that  Lesila  was  established  in  1999,  in
response to frequent requests for assistance with burials by members of  the
community.

The Deputy President  further  indicated  that  Lesila  was  established  to
provide financial support to needy families  who  could  not  afford  burial
expenses. Lesila was therefore an  organisation  for  which  no  benefit  or
remuneration  could  be  accrued.  In  any  event  the  organisation   never
operated.


Findings


Based on the information received the Committee finds that as there  was  no
intention of financial gain  in  the  establishment  of  the  Lesila  Burial
Society, there is no breach of the Code of Conduct.


9. Deputy Minister L Xingwana


Deputy Minister Xingwana had advised the Registrar of her  resignation  from
City Cat after the matter was considered by the  Committee  on  11  November
2005.




Findings


The Committee finds that there is no breach  of  the  Code  of  Conduct  for
Members of Parliament.


10. Minister SN Sigcau (Deceased)


11. Deputy Minister DA Hanekom

On 3 October 2005, the Registrar requested the Deputy  Minister  in  writing
to submit details of his interests  in  the  Land  and  Agricultural  Policy
Centre. The Deputy Minister has disclosed his interests in Tregoyd.

Deputy Minister Hanekom, in his response, confirmed that  he  resigned  from
the Land and Agricultural Policy Centre 10 years ago. He contacted the  Land
and Agricultural Policy Centre in order to ensure that  his  resignation  is
formalised.


Findings


Tregoyd  has  been  disclosed,  so  there  is  no  breach.  The   Land   and
Agricultural Policy Centre is a not-for-profit  organisation  and  therefore
there is no breach of the Code of Conduct.

12. Minister JT Radebe

Minister Radebe declared his interest under Land and Property, he has a  50%
interest in Stand 1993 in Houghton.


Findings


There is no breach of the Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament.

13. Minister ZST Skweyiya

The CC Hoewe 114 Lyttleton was a property-holding CC that owned two  holiday
flats in Port Edward, which were sold in 2005.  The  flats  were  previously
disclosed in the 2003, 2004 register. The  Minister  has  also  subsequently
signed papers to be excluded from the CC.


Findings


There is no breach of the Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament.

14. Minister L Sisulu-Guma

On  3 October 2005, the Registrar  requested  the  Minister  in  writing  to
submit details of her association with Black South Africa Freedom  Songs,  a
section 21 company.  The  Minister  indicated  that  the  entity  had  never
operated.


Findings


Members  are  not  required  to   disclose   interests   in   not-for-profit
organisations. There is no breach of the Code  of  Conduct  for  Members  of
Parliament.

15. Deputy Minister S Shabangu
On 3 October 2005, the Registrar requested the  Deputy  Minister  to  advise
the status of her resignation from Western Ocean. The  Deputy  Minister  had
informed the Registrar that she had resigned her interests in Western  Ocean
38.  She  submitted  proof  of  resignation.  (This  matter  was  previously
considered by the Committee.) Refer to ATC  11  November  2005  page  number
1262.


Findings


There is no breach of the Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament.

16. Minister AT Didiza

On 3 October 2005, the Registrar requested the Minister  to  submit  details
of her association with Jobco, a section 21 company.

The Minister  indicated  that  the  Directorship  arose  from  her  role  as
government trustee on the Business Trust. The  programmes  included  Tourism
and Education. The Minister updated her record accordingly.


Findings


As this is a section 21 company  directly  associated  with  the  Minister’s
executive role, there is no breach of the Code of  Conduct  for  Members  of
Parliament.

17. Minister B Mabandla

On  3 October 2005, the Registrar  requested  the  Minister  in  writing  to
submit details of her association with The Community Peace Foundation.
The Minister  advised  she  was  never  a  Member  of  the  Community  Peace
Foundation and in any event it was deregistered in 1997.


Findings


The Company was deregistered. There is no breach of the Code of Conduct  for
Members of Parliament.


Conclusion


In its  consideration  of  the  alleged  non-disclosure  of  interests,  the
Committee noted that there is no conflict of interests.  There  is  also  no
evidence that any member named above  has  promoted  his  or  her  financial
interest.

The Committee notes that the purpose of the  Code  is  to  ensure  that  the
member discloses his or her financial or pecuniary interest.  In  the  cases
outlines above there are no current active  financial  interests  that  have
not been disclosed. The Committee is also mindful that the  purpose  of  the
Code is to promote ethical conduct.

In its consideration of these matters, the Committee has concluded  that  it
must  develop  further  guidelines  to  assist  members.  To  this  end  the
Committee hopes to host a series of workshops within Parliament  to  promote
debate on the issue of ethics and examine various systems of  accountability
for elected representatives. The Committee will also host  a  conference  on
ethics in public life to obtain expert view and  facilitate  public  comment
on the issues.

The report was adopted by the Committee on the 23 May 2006.

Signed


_______________________                 _____________________
Mr L Landers                                 Date
Chairperson of the Joint Committee
on Ethics and Members’ Interests


______________________       _____________________
Mr AL Moseki                                 Date
Deputy Chairperson of the Joint Committee
on Ethics and Members’ Interests


