---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 31 May 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2006-05-31
---

WEDNESDAY, 31 MAY 2006
                                    ____




              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:00.

House Chairperson Mr T S Setona took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


              REQUEST FOR INCREASE IN POLICE PRESENCE ALONG N2


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:

  That the Council -

  (1) notes the reoccurrence of stone throwing at motorists along sections
        of the N2 in Cape Town over the past weekend, during which two
        persons were seriously injured; and


  (2) therefore requests the executive mayor of Cape Town urgently to
        implement measures to increase the metro police presence and patrols
        in order to provide safe driving conditions for motorists on the N2.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


              ACCEPTANCE OF BUDGET DRAWN UP BY ANC-LED COUNCIL


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr F ADAMS: Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis:

  Dat die Raad kennis neem dat –


  (1) die DA-veelpartystadsregering van die Stad Kaapstad die begroting
        steun, wat opgestel is deur die vorige ANC-beheerde stadsraad;


  (2) dit ’n begroting is vir die armes wat onder meer die skepping van
        geïntegreerde menslike nedersettings, ekonomiese groei en
        werkskepping, sterk gemeenskappe, billike dienslewering en
        finansiële volhoubaarheid ten doel het; en


  (3) dit dus bewys dat die ANC Suid-Afrika, insluitend Kaapstad, op die
        regte pad plaas.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr F Adams: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council notes that -

   (1)      the DA multiparty city authority of the City of Cape Town
        supports the budget drawn up by the previous ANC-led city council;

   (2)      it is a budget for the poor, which inter alia aims for the
        creation of integrated human settlements, economic growth and job
        creation, strong communities, fair service delivery and financial
        sustainability; and


   (3)      it therefore proves that the ANC is placing South Africa,
        including Cape Town, on the right track.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                         ATTACK ON MEMBER OF COUNCIL




                             (Draft Resolution)

SOSISWEBHU WEMKHANDLU WEMAPROVINSI: Sihlalo, ngitsandza kuphakamisa
lesishukumiso lesingakabikwa ngaphambili:

   Kutsi Lendlu -


   (1)      ivakalise buhlungu nekuvelana nelilunga leMkhandlu, uMhlon
        Juanita Terblanche;


   (2)      ivile kutsi ugetjengiwe, wabuye walinyatwa itolo ngesikhatsi
        basemkhankhasweni eTafelsig;


   (3)      yetsemba kutsi nebemtsetfo batawutsatsa tinyatselo
        letiphutfumako; futsi


     4) ifisa kutsi labo labente lesento lesibi batfolakale ngekuphutfuma
        lokukhulu.


Ngiyabonga. (Translation of Siswati draft resolution follows.)
[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I would like to move without
notice:

   That the Council -


     1) declares its heartfelt sympathy to a member of the Council, Ms
        Juanita Terblanche;


     2) notes that she was viciously attacked and bruised yesterday during
        their campaign at Tafelsig;


     3) hopes that the law will take urgent steps to bring those thugs to
        book soon; and

     4) urges that those criminals who did this barbaric act be dealt with
        immediately.

Thank you.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, I am aware that there
was a problem with the interpreting service. I personally could not
understand the motion well but it basically expressed sympathy regarding an
unfortunate incident, if I am not wrong. Could you repeat it in English,
hon Chief Whip, so that everybody can hear?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I will try to interpret, but I
have to say I am not a professional interpreter. I was expecting our
professional parliamentary interpreters to render a quality service to all
our members in this House in terms of transmitting and interpreting our
speeches from our indigenous languages.

In summary, I moved a motion without notice that this House expresses its
sympathy regarding one of our colleagues, the hon Juanita Terblanche, who
was involved in an incident of robbery and was also injured yesterday
during her activities relating to campaigning in Tafelsig; and that we
would also like to appeal to the law-enforcement agencies to see to it that
the perpetrators are brought to justice. I thank you.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                               (Policy debate)

Debate on Vote No 33 – Transport:

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chairperson of the NCOP, hon members, yesterday
I addressed myself to the Budget Vote for transport in the National
Assembly. Copies of that address and some additional information have
already been distributed to members of the NCOP.

Basically I indicated yesterday that the department’s timeframes, targets
and programmes aim to secure cost-efficient, poverty-breaking integration
across the transport system, by entrenching innovation, reprioritising
budgets and reinvigorating the department’s skills base and those of the
agencies that report to us.

We looked at the three critical areas of public transport, freight
logistics and safety and security in the transport environment. I want to
change my focus this afternoon. Our main concern is with the department’s
development of policies, programmes and initiatives that provide an overall
framework in which co-ordinated, integrated and targeted transport activity
takes place in our country.

Our Constitution defines transport as the responsibility that cuts across
all spheres of government. This requires consistent intergovernmental co-
operation and co-ordination. The development of institutional arrangements
such as transport authorities to co-ordinate transport planning and
implementation at the local, regional and metro levels, requires the
development of shared understandings, attitudes and customs that serve to
benefit from spatial and localised tensions rather than being paralysed by
rival interests. Cities and metros are the instruments which drive policies
to alleviate congestion on our roads by developing models that are most
suited to local conditions.

I am aware that there have been some problems in establishing transport
authorities around the country, after the good start by the eThekwini
Municipality. It has been some time now that we have been calling for the
establishment of these institutions at local level because we believe that
their existence will go a long way to overcoming many of the impediments to
integrated planning. We should really try to avoid translating political
boundaries that find geographic expression in the structure of
municipalities and metros, for example, into barriers to economic
integration and the movement of our people.

Each local authority is not an island cut off from the economic activity of
neighbouring areas. At the end of the day, I am less bothered about the
precise shape that the institution of transport authority takes as I am
about delaying the implementation of integrated transport activities across
the country as a whole.

There are a range of important activities that serve to integrate and
transform the relationship between the first and the second economies.
There should be no inherent structural contradiction between reducing the
cost of doing business in South Africa on the one hand, and on the other,
the imperative of improving people’s lives; especially those who are
marginalised in what is called the economic and social mainstream.

The enormous challenge that we face is to implement programmes that are
informed by the social conditions of our people and understand that
economic benefit for the few is morally, politically and economically
unsustainable if the majority of our people, who are the poor, are excluded
from reaping the promises of political liberation.

The tasks of the present include the need to use the power of the
developmental state to transform our transport system, from merely being
the heartbeat of the economy to being the backbone of development itself.

May I just update members on where we are right now with the Taxi
Recapitalisation Programme. The Cabinet, this morning, agreed that a great
deal of progress has been made and we want to congratulate all taxi owners
and operators who have come in their thousands to convert their permits
into operating licences. As of this morning, about 86% of taxi operators
have done so. [Applause.]

This morning the Cabinet agreed that the taxi operators who have been
unable to submit their applications by the end of business today, that is
31 May, and who still wish to apply for new licences can still submit
applications after this date, as long as they provide written reasons for
not being able to meet the deadline of 31 May.

Operating licensing boards are instructed to continue to receive
applications for the conversion of permits to operating licences beyond the
cut-off date of 31 May. This is on condition that the applicants provide
written explanations for reasons beyond their control, which resulted in
them being unable to apply on time.

Law enforcement agencies will cease to enforce the requirements for valid
operating licenses contained in current legislation. In particular, law
enforcement agencies will cease to engage in activities such as impounding
vehicles and Operation Bambi iSkorokoro, in KwaZulu-Natal, which may unduly
prejudice taxi operators whose applications have not been received through
no fault of the operator, or which have not been appropriately processed by
the Operating Licensing Boards.

These details will be gazetted immediately by the Minister of Transport and
the Minister of Safety and Security. I trust that this will put the issues
to rest at last.

The provision of public transport, especially bus transport, is implemented
at local and metro levels as well. As we review the operation of the
current system towards a more equitable one, where the commuter is
paramount, we will be sensitive to current needs and structures of all
operators.

It is not our intention to favour one or the other mode of public transport
over another, but we want to see better co-ordination of routes and the
integration of fare and ticketing systems - to mention but one or two.
Preparatory work for the review of the subsidy system included the auditing
of the whole system of bus subsidies.

Unfortunately, this audit revealed apparently fraudulent operations,
particularly in relation to interim contracts. In some cases we have
instituted legal action to correct the situation, but as the investigations
continue I trust that clarity will emerge to support the view that the
fraud is less prevalent than initially contemplated.

We hope that the relevant authorities will speed up their work so that we
can move on with the implementation of the new model tender contracts.
Incidentally, we are very delighted with reports that Limpopo’s Great North
Transport is about to get 200 new busses, worth around R250 million, in a
major effort to improve services in that province. This seems a very
worthwhile example for other companies to follow.

The newly-merged SSRC Metro Rail will rationalise administrative
structures, primarily to deliver its co-mandate more clearly, speedily and
with no confusion about where responsibility lies for the provision of a
cost-effective, regular, safe and secure rail public transport system at
the end of the day.

Wide-ranging upgrading work on stations, rail-track signalling and rolling
stock is proceeding in all SRCC areas of responsibility. Here in the
Western Cape the R200-million extension to the Khayelitsha line is
proceeding. The planning for the upgrading and refurbishment of the Cape
Town station is nearly ready, and this project will be the largest single
upgrade of a public facility since the Johannesburg Park Station
development last year.

Parliament has also been fully briefed about the national freight logistics
strategy. Two ongoing projects emphasise the importance of provincially
based and supported initiatives because these link regional and even local
economies to the national economic framework.

The Douglas-Belmont project in the Northern Cape will keep open a line that
has not been financially viable but which has enormous economic potential.
Closing the line would have raised freight pricing, increased noxious
emissions, road degradation, road maintenance budgets and resulted in job
losses in the area. The introduction of this project by the DOT and the
Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism will result in an increase
in safety on the line; prevent increases in noxious emissions; reduce
freight pricing, transit time, the operational cost of rail services;
increase the validity and viability of farming in the area; and employ in
the region of 800 people for a year in Douglas and Stormberg in the Eastern
Cape where the rail material is being sourced.

A similar project in Nkwaleni in KwaZulu-Natal will allow significant
traffic to move from the road back onto the rail. The customers have agreed
to build rail-compliant facilities for their products and move some track
back to rail. The imminent maturation of standing timber in the surrounding
forests will ensure more traffic going to the rail line. The environmental
and traffic-congestion savings resulting from this project are huge and
will contribute to the viability of a tourism strategy for the area that is
currently in development.

Targeted investments are required in many of these rural and second economy
interventions. We need to seize the opportunities for integrating first and
second economic transport networks and not timidly let them pass by. Recent
investments in the forestry industry in the former Transkei have come their
way only because we have provided road access from Ugi-Langeni, upgraded
the rail facility at Mtata, and upgraded the Mtata-Amabele railway line to
East London.

Many deep rural areas of South Africa are isolated from major roads and
rail routes; they are serviced overwhelmingly by poorly managed and short-
lived rural access roads; and the modes of transport available to our
people for their own access to medical centres, schools or villages are
limited.

Our rural transport strategy is a central element of the Integrated Rural
Mobility and Access demonstration projects, three of which are up and
running at the moment: Sekhukhune, a cross-boundary development in Limpopo
and Mpumalanga; in OR Tambo in the Eastern Cape; and Umkhanyakude in
KwaZulu-Natal. Once again, these are small budget operations, but the
benefit to local communities is great.

In the OR Tambo Municipality we have targeted Tombo and Qaukeni as focus
areas of a range of nonmotorised transport initiatives, including freight
and logistics co-ordination through a multipurpose centre. In Qaukeni,
Lusikisiki is a hub for the Mtata-Port-St-Johns-Lusisiki Corridor.

We will link up with health and other programmes run by the province. The
initial cost of the freight facilities, health transport, the school
learner cycle project, the Umzimvubu safe-river-crossing project and common-
use infrastructure will be R11,5 million. Again, this is a small budget for
a massive result.

Turning back to the economic heartland of our country, I want to alert
members to a special case. There is a crisis facing a significant part of
the road network in Mpumalanga that produces extraordinary maintenance
requirements for the road system as a result of the necessary
overexploitation of road use by coal trucks moving between coal mines and
power stations in Mpumalanga.

Working together with the provincial government and Eskom, we have outlined
a plan to build a new rail line in the area to take pressure off the roads,
to identify alternative methods of maintenance and to transfer sections of
the provincial network to the SA National Roads Agency. The damage to roads
is obvious, and motorists have, quite frankly, become deeply fed up with
this situation. I believe that we will resolve this problem shortly, using
both short-term and long-term plans.

Two other areas of transport activities that I would like to mention
briefly relate to aviation and maritime matters. We are currently putting
the final touches to a national airlift strategy that seeks to address
developmental requirements down the line, particularly as they relate to
the role that aviation plays to boost tourism, promote business travel,
extend the role of general aviation and low-cost airlines and also to
promote suitable air-freight capacity.

Aside from the major projects that affect all Acsa airports around the
country, we are looking more closely than before at the condition and role
of aerodromes and other airports in the country that can serve both as a
basis for expanded passenger and freight services in the country.

There are hundreds of aerodromes scattered around the country and many of
these, for example, on the Wild Coast, in Mpumalanga and the Karoo, are
well situated for tourist traffic. Other airports, such as the airports at
Mtata, at Bisho and at Upington and others, are located in areas which lend
themselves to greater use as freight nodes. Provinces and local authorities
will need to be part of this roll-out plan.

The maritime industry is often thought of as being of interest only to
coastal provinces. Nothing could be further from the truth. South Africa
and the region depend on a safe and secure maritime environment for our
economic livelihood. Our port operations have to be efficient. As the
region develops its capacity through ports in Angola, Namibia, Mozambique
and Tanzania, so the need for South African ports to improve their services
if they are to remain in the game becomes critical. Gone are the days when
we could have used tariffs or sanctions to block development elsewhere.

At the beginning of May this year the Alexandros T sank off the southeast
coast of South Africa. Only seven crew members were rescued, and we think
that the other 33 souls perished when the ship went down. Last year the
fishing vessel Lindsay sank after colliding with another vessel just off
Mossel Bay. Both of these tragedies serve to highlight the dangers of life
at sea.

I am currently awaiting the report from SA Maritime Safety Authority on the
sinking of the Alexandros T. With reference to the Lindsay, the Court of
Marine Enquiry has completed its work and we are instructing them to await
the recommendations, and those that particularly relate to improving safety
in the fishing fleet context must be fast-tracked. I do hope that these
actions will bring some comfort to the thousands of mariners who ply our
seas for a living.

I have touched on a few issues in the complex portfolio of Transport. I do
look forward to this debate and will respond accordingly to other issues in
my closing remarks. With these words, I would like to thank all members for
their undivided attention. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr R J TAU: Hon Chair, hon Minister, MECs present, officials from the
department and comrades, I want to state from the outset that our approach
as a committee to this debate should be seen within the context of the ANC
policy evolution. I say this because this is one of the most interesting
policy trajectories that the people’s movement finds itself in; and that is
with regard to policy development in response to the needs of our people.

Not so long ago the movement met at Stellenbosch at a historic conference.
As it is the tradition, it made some reflections on whether we are still on
track in terms of the reconstruction and development of the lives of our
people. It was at that conference where, out of our resolutions, we said we
believed that, and I quote:

   The national democratic revolution challenges us to focus infrastructure
   development towards achieving the integration of our communities through
   spatial development and the ongoing deracialisation of our country. This
   includes bridging the technology, production and infrastructure divide
   between rural and urban areas. It also requires greater co-ordination and
   planning for infrastructure to support the growth and development
   strategy implemented through all spheres of government.


The reason why we believe what is quoted above, is precisely because, as
the ANC, it is our understanding that infrastructure provision should be
understood in a broader context and that is to include economic, social,
institutional and municipal infrastructure. By implication, that means
funding will be made available for the development for capital works,
institutional development and processes that capture our capacity as South
Africans.

Two years ago, we went on a door-to-door campaign asking our people to vote
for their movement in order to allow it to continue doing what it knows
best. We did this with our most important theme foremost in our minds, that
is, a people’s contract to create work and fight poverty.

Some of the fundamental questions that made us of course go out and do
exactly that, were actually related to the following: Can we build a better
life for our people if our provincial road infrastructure is in a poor
condition? Can we create work and fight poverty if our people continue to
die on our roads? Can we build a better life for our people if the trains
they use to travel to work continue to be death traps? Can we build a
better life for our people when our road network makes it difficult to take
their goods that they produce to the nearest market in order to live?

Obviously, the answer to all these questions and many others that were
asked during that process is a big no! The reason I proudly say no is
because as the ANC, consistent with our resolve at Stellenbosch, we have
seen a consistent commitment as displayed by the department over the years
to improving the skewed road infrastructure problems we inherited from the
old order.

We have seen new roads being built over the past ten years with billions of
rands being invested in such massive road infrastructure programmes.
Coupled with that has been the construction of roads through the Expanded
Public Works Programme in provinces such as Limpopo and Kwazulu-Natal and a
typical example is the Gundulashu Project that was able to empower
particularly women and young people.

During our provincial visits, we noted with delight the kind of programmes
that provinces have put in place. New bridges have been built in rural
areas that make it easy for people to travel to their areas of work with
great ease. Linked to all these programmes has been the extent to which the
departmental programmes have been linked to skills development. While our
people have been constructing these roads, they have also been left with
key and critical skills that enable them to live with those skills beyond
the lives of the projects themselves.

Noting that transport is a cornerstone of economic development, and as we
stated we believed in Stellenbosch, ours is to ensure that the road network
contributes to the development of our economy by linking the key centres of
our economy and, most importantly, reviving some areas that have been
rendered ghost towns such as Noupoort and De Aar in the Northern Cape,
therefore by so doing integrating the first and second economies. I
couldn’t suppress the joy I felt at the Minister’s announcement of Douglas.

The committee has also noted with great concern the extent to which in some
areas roads are badly constructed. Whilst we recognise the important work
that has been done, it is quite clear that in some areas contractors are
just interested in completing the job with an objective of take the cash
and go, in actual fact reminding us of the President’s characterising the
present state of our municipalities as ``cash cows’’. And I must say there
are those contractors that make our transport department also a ``cash
cow’’.

Having observed these tendencies, it is the view of the committee that a
system must be worked out in order to allow the national departments to
have a more direct role in monitoring projects that fall under provinces
and municipalities; because those are the areas where these people find it
much easier to do the kind of shabby work that they render to our people.

The committee has also noted the interdepartmental approach the department
has adopted. It is through such efforts that we have seen a reduction in
criminal incidents on trains, except for the recent violent activities that
led to some people dying on trains.

We appreciate the collaboration between the justice and the police
departments during the peak traffic seasons and welcome the move towards
strengthening the regional transportation management centres in order to
deal with law enforcement and attitudes of most of us as road users. We
also welcome the operation of Arrive Alive beyond peak seasons in the
country.

Our recent visit to the Northern Cape reminded us that a lot still needs to
be done in order for the motivating forces, as characterised by our
movement, to benefit from your department’s infrastructure development and
the transformation of the public transport transformation programme. As a
Presidential nodal point, the public hearings at Kgalagadi were dominated
by road infrastructure development problems. For example, members
experienced a process wherein they got stuck on one of the roads whilst
they were travelling to some projects. So, the whole parliamentary
delegation could not travel to that area and members had to travel by foot.

These are some of the challenges that we have been able to learn from
through our Taking Parliament to the People, and it is important that we
highlight them.

I would be failing in my responsibility if I avoided actually to execute
the mandate that I was given by the committee. As a committee, in
appreciating the transformation of the public transport system in our
country, which in fact is in the best interests of the workers and the
poor, we call upon all taxi owners to participate in the Taxi
Recapitalisation Programme. We do this because we believe that such a
programme will benefit our people in many ways. I believe that through the
active participation of taxi associations, be it Santaco or the NTA, we
call upon them to unite because it is only through such effort that
together with the department, we can build a better public transport system
that is beneficial to all.

Let me thank the department under the stewardship of Mrs Mpofu for its co-
operation, and we hope to continue building on this relationship. And that
should be seen within the context in which they have been consistent and
resolute in ensuring that as a committee we are clear on issues that the
department is engaged with. On those bases, as a committee we are satisfied
that the department is a department at work; it is a department that will
ensure that South Africans travel from one point to the other safely and
will also contribute towards their own economic development. I thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Chairperson, hon Minister and the officials of the
department, I start my speech today with a message that I was told to
deliver to the Department of Transport. It says that we will be happy if
next time when the officials accompany the Minister we will not see all the
men that are here, but that there must be a mixture to ensure that women
are fully represented.
We are on course, in this year of hope, to ensure that the contract we
signed with the people of South Africa in 2004 is honoured. We are on
course to deliver public transport to the people of South Africa, the
transport that is going to lead also to the rural poor being able to move
from their homes to cities for economic activities.
The previous regime, with its apartheid policies, moved the poor away from
job opportunities and access to amenities. This has burdened the workforce
with enormous travel distances to their places of employment and commercial
centres, with excessive costs.

Our democratic government, in an effort to undo the effects of apartheid
policies referred to above, has policies, strategies and programmes in
place to eradicate the legacy of long-distance travelling. This policy has
its integral part in the National Strategy on Rural Transport and
infrastructure development and services; it has rural nodes and
intermediate transport.

The national strategy is meant to deliver to the rural masses transport
infrastructure and services. The infrastructure’s concern is underpinned by
construction of access roads, district roads, public transport interchanges
and nonmotorised transport. The envisaged transport as an effort of
government through the Department of Transport will include a number of
modes such as LDVs, taxis, busses, bicycles and nonmotorised transport.

The top priority in this regard is to overcome the big jump in access
opportunities from the village to the nearest town centre. Coupled with
that is the regulation of rural transport operations and safety as well as
institutionalisation of alignment and transformation in the rural road
sector.

As the ANC we support the Budget Vote of the department. The overall
expenditure of the department is expected to continue to increase rapidly,
rising from R5,7 billion in 2003-04 to the baseline of R12,8 billion for
the 2006-07 financial year, increasing further to R15,5 billion in 2008-09
at an average annual rate of 18,1%.

Subsidies for public transport, including a grant of R3,2 billion for the
Gautrain and funding for road infrastructure continue to drive the
expenditure upwards. The public transport programme which funds bus and
rail subsidies, including capital expenditure on rail, is expected to grow
at an average rate of 20,1% between 2005-06 and 2008-09 compared to 9,9%
previously.

The delivery of rural transport infrastructure and services will continue
to include the following, and the delivery thereof will increasingly be a
local government responsibility; rural transport infrastructure; access
roads; district roads; public transport interchanges in villages; and even
transportation where communities particularly and farmers themselves
provide services to involve herd-loading as well as the use of nonmotorised
transport.

Mokgatlo wa ANC o thekga le go amogela ditekanyetšo tsa Kgoro ya Dinamelwa.
Se se dira gore kgoro e kgone go tšweletša maikaelelo a yona a go bona gore
dinamelwa tša bohle di a tshepega, di bolokegile e bile di kgona gore
bašomiši ba tšona ba ditsela ba kgone go fokotša sephethephethe mebileng.
Se se tlile go dira gore ba fihle ka nako mešomong le go phetha mabaka a
mangwe ao ba tlago be ba a yetše ditoropong.

Go a thabiša go bona gore le diporofense tša magaeng, go swana bo Limpopo,
di fiwa monyetla wa go šomiša dibene go sepediša batho le tše dingwe ke
Kgoro ya Dinamelwa. Se se hlohleletšwa ke ge mmušo o lemogile gore
diporofense tšeo di na le tlhokego ye kgolo ya dinamelwa tša bohle. Bjale
ge motho a na le benenyana a ka kgona go thuša go fokotša maeto ao a dirago
gore batho ba sepele nako ye telele. Efela re re le tšona go nyakege gore
di be molaong gore badiriši ba tšona ba kgone go šireletšega le go bolokega
ge ba sepela ka tšona. Se se ka dirwa ka go bona gore diporiki le ditulo di
seemong seo se loketšego go sepediša badiriši gore ba kgone go sepela ba
lokologile ba bile ba šireletšegile. Le gona gantši ditsela tša magaeng ga
di hlohleletše gore bao ba nago le dithekesi le dipase ba fihle.

Ke ka moo re amogelago lenaneo la phetošo ya dithekesi leo le bitšwago taxi
recapitalisation. Gape re amogela le ka moo lenaneo le le sepelago ka gona.
Go nyakega gore re kgone go sepediša ka lenaneo le le phakiše gore bohle ba
kgone go ba molaong. Lehono ke letšatši la mafelelo la go dira dikgopelo
tša go fetolela diphemiti go dilaesense. Ke kgale go bolelwa ka lenaneo
lekhwi eupša go se nko yeo e tšwago lemina. Bjale e re mola go bonala
lesedi mafelelong, go a nyamiša go bona ge batho ba bangwe ba nyaka gore go
no binwabinwa felogotee. Re swanetše go gatelela le go kgopela batho bao ba
sego ba dira dikgopelo re ba botše gore tlogatloga e tloga kgale, modiša wa
kgomo o tšwa nayo šakeng. Gape Mopedi o re: kolobe ya morago mampša a e
bona. Ba tla bonwa ke mampša. (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[The ANC supports and accepts the budget allocated to the Department of
Transport. It will assist the department to reach its objectives of
ensuring that public transport is roadworthy and safe, and this will also
decrease the traffic on the road. As a result, commuters can be on time for
work and will be able to run their personal errands in town.

It is a pleasure to see that the Department of Transport has given
provinces such as Limpopo the opportunity to use vans to transport people
and goods. This is motivated by the government’s realisation that those
provinces have a problem with public transport. A person who owns a van can
help others by minimising their long trips. However, we insist that the
vans should be registered so that the drivers and passengers are protected
and safe. We do this by ensuring that those vans’ brakes and seats are in a
good and roadworthy condition to carry passengers, also by ensuring that
the passengers are comfortable and safe, especially because the taxis and
buses prefer not to use the roads in the rural areas.

It is for that reason that we accept the transformation of taxis called
“taxi recapitalisation”. We accept the way this programme works. We need to
ensure a speedy implementation of this programme so that every taxi is
registered on time. Today is the last day for submissions of applications
to change from permits to licences. We have been talking about this
programme, but not much has been done yet. It is sad though, that there are
people who will pull us down just as we begin to make some progress. We
must emphasise to people who have not yet sent in their applications that
it is better for them to make a greater effort. The earliest bird catches
the fattest worm.]

Some of the rural road networks are in a shocking state.

Ke be ke le ofising ya ka ka Feberewari kua gaMmalebogo moo pula e bego e
tšhologa. Ke šomela karolokgetho ya Eldorado gaMmalebogo. [I was in my
office at gaMmalebogo in February and it was raining heavily. I work for
the Eldorado constituency in gaMmalebogo.]

The road was in such a state that even an ambulance got stuck. Even the tow
car that was supposed to pull the cars that were stuck got stuck itself.
That was a terrible situation. And that meant that delivery of services to
the people on that day and during that week got stuck.

Motlhomphegi Tona mo go lego ofisi ya ka go na le moago wa maphodisa le
moago wa senthara ya tsa maphelo. Ge pula e e na ka moka di a ema. Feela ke
thaba go go tsebiša gore ge ke bolela ke itšalo ba gare ba katana le go e
lokiša.

Se se dirwago ke mmušo ke gore batho ka moka, go akaretšwa bao ba lego
diporofenseng tša magaeng, ba kgone go šireletšege gomme ba sepele ka
tokologo. (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Minister, there is a police station and a medical centre next to my
office. Everything comes to a standstill when it rains. It is my pleasure
though, to inform you now that people are working to fix it at this moment.

What the government does is to ensure that all the people, including those
in the rural areas, are protected and are able to travel comfortably.]

It is also encouraging that the taxi industry, which transports the poorest
of our people, is going to be regulated through the taxi recapitalisation
process. This industry, which was met by violence and fighting over
lucrative routes, also creates jobs for most of the people who were not
able to find employment. It is also being part of South Africans who are
actively contributing to the economy of South Africa. Thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]
Mr O M THETJENG: Chairperson, the DA is going to highlight quite a number
of issues that we feel the department has to carry out or make sure are
implemented.

We are quite aware that the responsibilities of the Department of Transport
are, according to its mission statement, and I quote:


  ... to provide safe, reliable, effective, efficient and fully integrated
  transport operations and infrastructure which will best meet the needs of
  freight and passenger customers at improving levels of service and cost
  in a fashion which supports government strategies for economic and social
  development whilst being environmentally and economically sustainable.


There are quite a number of issues that the department, in terms of its
mandate, has to take care of, and it must ensure that they are realised.

Road accidents account for an ever-increasing proportion of unnatural
deaths in South Africa. According to the National Injury Mortality
Surveillance Systems report released in November last year, in 2004,
accidents and road accidents in particular, were the leading cause of
unnatural deaths. Another report, the Road Traffic and Fatal Crash
statistics of 2003-04 reported an increase in road fatalities of 40%
between 1998 and 2004.

South Africa’s maintenance of its road network is unsatisfactory. Not only
are 106 000 km of road in need of rehabilitation, but poor planning has
resulted in increased congestion in all major South Africa cities, as we
can see. What is the Minister doing to improve this particular situation?

The Road Accident Fund is in a perpetual state of crisis. The DA is fully
in support of the appropriation of R2,7 billion to meet claims that are in
arrears, and to set the fund back on a sound financial footing. However,
the bail-out will not solve the fund’s insurmountable problems unless the
Road Accident Fund Act is reviewed. It may restrict claims, by virtue of
its caps, and prevent foreign claims, but what it won’t do is reduce the
number of accident claims which have increased by 9% since 1999, neither
will it help to resolve the pressure from the estimated 20% increase in the
number of new car registrations taking place annually.

The bottom line is that South Africa has one of the highest traffic
accident rates in the world, and unless we can bring this down, the fund’s
liabilities will continue to exceed its assets, rendering it technically
insolvent. Coupled to this is the serious threat of continued
constitutional challenges coming from claimants whose common law rights
have been removed and who will, no doubt, contest whatever definition comes
out of regulating what is classified as a ``serious injury’’.

The Minister needs to assist the new CEO and board as well as the Road
Traffic Management Corporation to work out how best to take the RAF forward
towards an accident-free South Africa.

There are a number of other problems bedevilling the portfolio. Our
airports are still suffering from passenger bottlenecks and through-flows,
which will require a major streamlining effort before the Soccer World Cup,
if we are to cope with the thousands of visitors that we are expecting.

Security at both the aircraft site and the passenger site needs serious
investigation, as do suspected inside information leaks, and the role of
private security contractors and the SA Police Service at these facilities.

The Gautrain project, for its part, has question marks all over it.
Although this was originally a provincial initiative, it became a national
issue when Finance Minister Trevor Manuel announced that the project’s cost
had increased from R7 billion to R20 billion, and would need to be financed
from the National Treasury.

Although Gauteng is in desperate need of increased transport capacity,
particularly on the Pretoria-Johannesburg route, it is not clear that the
R20 billion could not be spent more effectively elsewhere. This is also a
project that is expected to benefit the well-off disproportionately, a
questionable decision given that the poor suffer on a day-to-day basis from
the underfunding of their transport needs in rural areas.

The Gautrain project has many bridges still to cross, and I would like the
Minister to be aware of the concerns raised about the proposed routing of
the train through AECI property. I would also like him to be aware of the
more recent decision to go above ground through those parts of Centurion
that utilise viaducts, due to problems with underlying rock conditions.
This is a total abuse of the rights of the residents of Centurion, and will
have major environmental and property implications if they push ahead
without proper consultation, which seems to be the norm with the Gautrain
project team.

Finally, the Taxi Recapitalisation Programme is behind schedule. The plan
is now six years old, and only a small number of an estimated 90 000
existing taxis have been replaced. In the City Press dated 23 April 2006,
the Minister is quoted as saying that only 10 000 taxis will be scrapped in
this financial year. The delays have also resulted in an increase in the
scrapping fee from R10 000 to R50 000. The cost of the new taxi vehicle has
also nearly doubled, from the original estimated price of R120 000 for an
18-seater unit to over R250 000 per unit.

This has major ramifications for taxi owners in terms of affordability and
viability. The delays have resulted in the already aging taxi fleet
becoming even older, and in many cases they are unroadworthy and unsafe for
public use. The once-off capital subsidy does not take into account the
future subsidisation of the taxi industry, which is the largest of our
public transporters.

Nearly R4,7 billion, the majority of the national Department of Transport’s
budget, goes to the bus and rail industry. Yet it is still not known
whether taxis can qualify for bus subsidies. Clearly, like so many other
areas of the portfolio, the Taxi Recapitalisation Programme needs urgent
attention and reconsideration.

I trust that the Minister will implement the drastic changes required to
turn this situation around and ensure that the Department of Transport will
fulfil its mandate for the benefit of all South Africans who are dependent
on the national transport network.

Let me take the minutes I have remaining to thank the Limpopo province for
the purchase of the buses that we just mentioned. As I come from Limpopo, I
believe that those buses will go a long way to addressing the transport
shortages in the rural areas.

But those buses are not sufficient. Limpopo is one of the provinces where
we have a shortage of tarred roads. The roads are gravel ones, and are not
properly maintained. De-bushing along the road is not happening. You will
find there is tall grass and trees in areas where you are not supposed to
have them. This means that the provincial department or the municipality
concerned needs to take this situation very seriously.

I thank Limpopo for the manner in which they’ve done this, but we still
need our roads to be properly maintained so that we can have a good
transport system to take our people where they are needed in good time.
Thank you. [Applause.]
Mr M A MZIZI: Voorsitter, Minister, LUR’e teenwoordig en lede van hierdie
Huis, ek groet u almal. [Chairperson, Minister, MECs present and members of
the House, I greet you all.]

Chairperson, the transport sector is an industry that has changed the lives
of every single South African. It has allowed our country to grow and
prosper like few others on the African continent. Our roads, railways,
ports and airports provide us with the necessary infrastructure to compete
in the world economy.

The IFP believes that the Minister and the Department of Transport have
created good policies and have done reasonably well on implementation. But
I am sure that the Minister would agree with me, modern transport is a much
more complicated matter than ever before.

The IFP supports the 2006-07 transport budget, but there are concerns and
unresolved issues that we have to raise. The Taxi Recapitalisation
Programme is an unresolved issue. Government may think that all is ready
and in place, but the feeling on the ground, among taxi owners and
operators, is not optimistic. Already we hear grumbling about the scrapping
allowances and other measures shortly to be implemented.
The Minister should always remember that the taxi industry is a highly
volatile industry, and one misstep or a slight miscalculation will cause
chaos for the millions of South Africans who rely on taxis for transport to
and from work and otherwise.

Yet again, we have now raised concerns about the high number of road deaths
in our country. Despite the best efforts by almost all stakeholders, more
than 12 000 people die on our roads every year. The cost to the country is
astronomical – about R40 billion.

It is high time that one of the most important stakeholders, drivers, take
responsibility for their actions. Speeding, alcohol use and unroadworthy
vehicles cause many thousands of accidents with horrific consequences. Yet
everyone drives as if there are no rules and laws, and no consequences. It
is time that drivers realise that the laws and rules are in place for a
good reason. If we do not convince them of this, our road accident and
death statistics will continue to read like a horror novel. With the few
minutes that I have ...

Ake ngiphindele laphayana kuNgqongqoshe. Ngqongqoshe uma sikhuluma
ngokuhlelwa kabusha kwemboni yamatekisi akungoba siyigxeka. Uma ngabe
ngempela singalubheki lolu daba ngeso elibanzi, kuyoba ngukuthi impela
sidlala ngezimpilo ngoba sikhuluma nabantu abangabanikazi bamatekisi kanye
nabashayeli. Abantu laba empeleni bangakhulumi, bakhuluma ngenduku yegwala.
Uma kufikwa kwangqingetshe kusuka induku yegwala kusuke uthuli lwezichwe
lubheke phezulu kufe abantu.

Yilokhu ke sithi uma impela lolu daba lungaphathwa njengezikhali
zamantungwa kungase impela kuchitheke utshwala bugayiwe. Empeleni
asikhulumi nje ngoba sincela izithupha. Uthi uma uhlala phansi
nezinhlangano zamatekisi uthi uyabuza, bathi chabo bo, uSantaco lo ubani?
Wayekhethwe ubani? Ngangithi mina  kuyeziswisa  uSantaco ukuthi kuyiwa
ngakuphi kodwa hhayi engathi uhele nje. Nguye manje uSantaco esingazi
ukuthi uyibhekisaphi noma usina yiphi ingoma. Azibhemi nganqawe yinye futhi
kufuneka sibuye sibuyekeze ukuze sonke sibe ndawonye.

Ngiyethemba Ngqongqoshe ukuthi njengoba sisho nje akungoba sigxeka kodwa
yingoba sifuna ukwakha ukuze impumelelo ibe khona nabantu bathole ukusinda
kulesi simo esibhekene naso ngoba ezokuthutha zingumgogodla wakho konke.
Ngeke ufike ndawo uma zingekho. Sesingaphephela ekubuyeleni lapho
sasigibela amahhashi khona. Okumhlophe kodwa. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Let me go back to the Minister. Minister, when we talk about taxi
recapitalisation, we do not do so to criticise the taxi industry. If we do
not take this matter seriously, we will definitely be putting lives in
danger because here we are talking about taxi owners and drivers. These are
people who do not talk, but simply use a gun. If they reach a deadlock,
they just use a gun, a fight begins and then people die.

That is why we are saying that if we do not handle such matters carefully,
worse is yet to come. Here we are talking about something we know very
well. If you sit down with these taxi organisations, trying to get
information from them, they simply ask you who this Santaco is and who
elected it. I thought this Santaco knew where they were going, but now it
looks as if they have no direction. We are not all in the same boat and we
need to revise this matter so that we all have the same understanding.

I just hope, Minister, that you will realise that, as we have said, we are
not merely criticising, but we are being constructive so that there will be
success and people will be saved from the situation we are faced with,
because the transport industry is the backbone of everything. One can never
reach any place without transport, unless we want to go back to those times
when we used to ride horses.
I wish you all the best.]

Mr M L FRANSMAN (Western Cape): Chairperson, members of the NCOP, Minister,
I am encouraged by and give my full support to the goals and objectives
that the hon Minister has highlighted in this speech. The department of
transport and public works in the Western Cape has aligned its strategic
plan for the year ahead to achieve the objective of building bridges
between the first and the second economies.

We have communities in the Western Cape that are seeing many of the
opportunities that came with the excellent growth our provincial and
national economies achieved in the past year pass them by. These
communities struggle with accessing the opportunities that are created far
from where the townships have been located.

The design of these dormitory townships were, in the past, part of the
apartheid grand plan, which would have our communities feeding the economy
with cheap labour during the day and then returning at night to the
township behind the hill to be out of sight and, many a time, out of mind.

The Minister has addressed this. I believe that your focus on the urban
poor and rural marginalised will help to address those imbalances that were
caused through the lack of mobility and access that our communities have
suffered from for so long.

In this regard, the proposed review of the public transport subsidy system,
the rationalisation of routes and the introduction of different and
innovative products will go a long way in making public transport more
accessible to our poorest communities. This is especially critical for us
in the Western Cape, because we are quite advanced with the design of a
restructured public transport system, which has a strong focus on
integrating the different modes of public transport: taxi, bus and rail.

I am encouraged by the support that my department has been receiving from
the national department in designing a truly integrated public transport
system, and the expansion of the subsidy system to accommodate all the
public transport modes. An integrated system is a critical element in the
redesign of the public transport system.

I am also grateful to the Minister and the department for the guidance and
assistance in the development of norms and standards for electronic fare
collection as an integral part of a restructured, integrated system of
public transport. Within the next three weeks, I will be announcing the
list of pre-qualifying groups that will tender for the Western Cape
electronic fare collection system.

Public transport should not be limited to moving people from their homes to
work and back, but should afford our people the mobility that they require
also to access social and cultural events and centres throughout the city
and the province. By establishing such a public transport system, we will
have established a viable alternative to the use of private vehicles for
all travellers, including tourists.

One is also quite encouraged by the commitment to the upgrading of rail
lines and rolling stock in Cape Town, Durban and Gauteng, including the
upgrade of the Cape Town station. Rail forms the backbone of the system in
the Western Cape, with some 55% of peak-period commuters using rail as
their preferred mode of transport.

But the rail system has, as we now know, been dogged by violence, theft and
vandalism. The Minister’s commitment to improving safety and security on
the rail system through the deployment of the rail police, the
refurbishment of rolling stock and the installation of cameras is greatly
welcomed.

Also, just commenting on what the speakers from the DA and the IFP said: it
is true that there are many challenges in the taxi industry, but this is
precisely because, historically, it hasn’t been regulated. Therefore the
announcements made in the budget policy address speak to regulation,
legalisation and, in a sense, to a new vision and a new process for getting
this industry right. Instability and violence in this particular industry
and threats against officials cannot and should not be tolerated.

The Minister has the Western Cape’s full support for the Taxi
Recapitalisation Programme, and one is pleased to report that the Western
Cape, as of this morning, in terms of analysis has managed to convert 98%
of its taxi permits to operating licences. [Applause.] That means 7 529
applications have been lodged; and 7 081 conversion licences have been
uplifted, meaning that they have been handed back to operators.

Also, regarding the analysis of law enforcement, we have been able in the
past month only to stop and search  approximately 4 000 taxis and to make
sure that we are bringing about a much more reliable and much safer
process, as indicated in this budget address. I therefore believe that the
budget, in fact, speaks to a much more reliable and much safer future for
public transportation vis-à-vis the taxi industry.

I also want, again, to thank the Minister for his support at the launch of
the Arrive Alive programme for the Easter period. We actually saw a marked
reduction in the number of fatal accidents over that period compared to
previous years. We know that the challenge that you have thrown out is to
make sure that this is not only for the Easter period, but in fact
throughout the year. So we will continue with those efforts.

Lastly, one is encouraged by the increased allocation for the maintenance
and upgrade of road infrastructure. This much-needed boost in funding will
go a long way towards addressing the backlogs in the maintenance of our
existing road network and in providing the new infrastructure that the
economy requires to grow and to invest in our people. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson, hon Minister, representatives of the
department, MECs present here and hon colleagues, it is easy to say a lot
of words but to do things is another matter. I am saying we are supposed to
start from a positive angle and recognise the achievement that this
government has made up to this point. Within a short space of time of 12
years, what this government has done is beyond imagination. [Applause.]
Therefore it is easy to say a lot of things, some of which are correct.

If you realise that some people are unable to resolve the mere naming of a
street and that the mere naming of a street creates a crack within an
alliance, then you realise there is something that doesn’t work. The ANC
never came into power and acquitted all those who were not ANC members in
different departments and different areas of work. But there are some who
cannot work with members of the ANC but just acquit them right from the
outset. They even go to court and even go to the Supreme Court of Appeal.
This has been ongoing but it does not work like that.

However, the ANC indicated it’s maturity when it accepted all the people of
South Africa as equal, and complied totally with what they had inscribed in
the Freedom Charter, that the “people of South Africa shall be equal.” That
is the point of departure of the ANC. It is highly mature in its way of
doing things.

It is only the ANC that has a plan for this country. That’s why the hopes
of the people of South Africa are pinned on this giant of our era. The plan
of the department is in place. This budget wants to address exactly that,
which is outstanding. This budget, which we have to support even though
some may tend not to support it, is a step towards achieving that. Every
budget, every year, is building up towards changing the scenario in our
transport system. Therefore many people have to learn and understand the
modus operandi of the ANC in this government.

While transport is an important sector of economic activity in its own
right, as the Minister has rightfully said - and other colleagues have
already elaborated on this issue - of even greater importance is its role
as a facilitator that enables people and goods to move freely and
efficiently from one place to another. This is essential for achieving a
wide range of more fundamental economic and social objectives.

The way in which people and things are moved also has environmental
consequences. We need a transport system that responds to the needs of both
the first and second economies and is an instrument that enables our
economy to grow. Social inclusion, poverty alleviation and transport are
important to the development of South Africa. This budget addresses exactly
that – a free transport system that is efficient and enables people to
participate in the socioeconomic activities of this country.

Road network integration is being intensified in accordance with the
strategic framework for roads and its action plan. Over 300 000 km of
provincial roads were transferred to the SA National Roads Agency Limited
in 2005 for incorporation into the strategic national road system. An
additional allocation of R1,9 billion has been made over the 2006 MTEF
period to enable better maintenance of the new national toll network.
Processes are under way to ensure integration of the proposed Sanral’s toll
schemes with broader transport planning. Specific road clusters, including
access roads, the strategic public transport network and strategic
secondary road network have been prioritised for improvement.

Successful initiatives that promote job creation and skills development in
the provincial road sector such as Zibambele in KwaZulu-Natal, Gundulashu
in Limpopo and Siyakha in Gauteng will be replicated and extended through a
partnership with the Department of Public Works to strengthen the Expanded
Public Works Programme.

The Arrive Alive road safety campaign was initiated as a short-term
initiative to reduce the carnage on South African roads. That is why it was
brought into life. The first campaign ran from 1 October 1997 to the end of
January 1998. The second campaign focused on the Easter holidays in 1998.

This year’s campaign is said to be in an advanced planning stage to reduce
the carnage on our roads. [Interjections.] You must listen, hon Thetjeng.
This will be an ongoing campaign. It can only be conducted in phases and
will be expanded according to the ability to raise funds. Regarding “Don’t
Risk It,” hon Thetjeng, local young people, Andrew Strano and Mikaela
Smith, will lead the project “Don’t Risk It” in conjunction with the RYPT,
using a multimedia performance to explore the issues related to risk-
taking, peer pressure, self-worth and respect within the local community.

The Arrive Alive grant will be used to educate young people about the risks
associated with drinking and driving while also promoting the use of seat
belts by young people. There will also be a multimedia performance at the
Generation Youth Arts Festival at the Riverina Playhouse in July. A focus
on road safety issues including speeding, drinking and driving when
fatigued, passenger behaviour and the nonuse of seat belts should be
carefully attended to. The Arrive Alive grant will be also used to run a 10-
week graffiti artwork programme.

Volgens Elna Fourie, ontwikkelingsbeplanningspesialis van die SA Nasionale
Padagentskap Bpk, is daar vyf breë kategorieë van gemeenskapsontwikkeling
waarop die SANPB fokus. Daar word brûe gebou om toegang te verbeter. Daar
word voetgangersfasiliteite voorsien. [Tussenwerpsels.] Padveiligheid word
bevorder. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[According to Elna Fourie, the development planning specialist of the SA
National Road Agency Ltd, there are five broad categories of community
development on which Sanral focuses. Bridges are being built to improve
access. Facilities for pedestrians are provided. [Interjections.] Road
safety is being promoted.]

Are you listening? [Laughter.]

Paaie en die dreinering van paaie word opgegradeer en indringerplante word
verwyder, merendeels om werk in arm woongebiede te skep. [Roads and road
drainage are being upgraded and alien vegetation cleared; mostly for job
creation in poor residential areas.]
A good example of the kind of community development projects that Sanral
endorses is the community bridge that is currently being built over the
White Mfolozi River in the municipal district of Ulundi, in northern
KwaZulu-Natal. Therefore this illustrates what this department is doing to
better the lives of our people and to give this country – as beautiful as
it is – a better shape so that the people of the world shall come to South
Africa in 2010 to see what we are doing as we upgrade our airports, our
stadiums and our roads. We are on course in doing this.

Ka lebaka Leo Modulasetilo ke re a ntlo eno kgotsa Khansele eno ya
boditšhaba ya diporofense e amogele tekanyetso kabo ya Lefapha e e leng fa
Pele ga ntlo e. Re e sutise, re e kgatlhametse, re tsetsepele mme re re
kodumela moepa thutsi, ga go Na lehumo le le tswang gaufi.
Ke a leboga. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, for that reason I  am  saying  this  House,  or  the  National
Council of Provinces, should support the department’s budget that is  before
this House. We must move it, push it, be determined and  say:  “Dig  deeply,
because treasures cannot be reached on the surface.”
Thank you.]

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chairperson, I think the debate has been very
constructive. I would like to respond to some of the issues that have been
raised.

Regarding the issue raised by the hon Tau concerning the good projects of
Zibambele and Gundulashu, those are very important projects that empower
our people in the rural areas of South Africa, especially African women.

Concerning the Expanded Public Works Programme, I do believe that we can
attain all its objectives if there is closer collaboration with the
Department of Transport. If you take Zibambele and the Limpopo projects, so
long as there is a road there is always a need to maintain that road. So
the sustainability of those job opportunities is assured.

Regarding the empowerment of African women, I have seen them in KwaZulu-
Natal and you can see from their faces that this has changed their lives
for the better. They are able to feed their families, to send their
children to school and even invest this money by forming co-operatives. I
have also indicated to the brand-new Minister of Public Works, Thoko
Didiza, that we need to sit down so that we can be able to inject a lot of
life into the Expanded Public Works Programme and focus on the roads
sector. I do appreciate hon Tau for having highlighted this important
project.

Hon Thetjeng; where is he? My advise to him is that when he writes his
speech he should not be near one Mr Farrow of the National Assembly.
[Interjections.] I was in the National Assembly yesterday and he said
exactly what was said by him yesterday. I am not sure who copied whom.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order!

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Coming to the issue of the Gautrain, Gautrain is
on track. We have ensured, as the national Department of Transport, that
the Gautrain will be properly integrated into public transport networks,
Metrorail, buses and taxis. We have done a lot of work with the provincial
government there to ensure that the Gautrain will really become a mass
mover of people in that part of the world. So I want to assure hon members
that this project is proceeding properly and I am sure, as time goes on, we
will be making a lot of announcements in so far as that is concerned.

Concerning the issue of road safety, we agree with hon members that the
situation is dreadful. However, the issue of policing and law enforcement
is very critical for us to improve safety on our roads. That is the
responsibility of all law-enforcement officers. The Easter operation,
Emisa, which was co-ordinated by the Road Traffic Management Corporation,
together with the provinces and metro police, has done a lot of service for
our people. We do believe that if we can really intensify law enforcement
we can bring about change in South Africa.

Having said that, the responsibility of drivers and other road users is
very critical for us. It is for you and me to have a duty and
responsibility not to drink and drive. It is our responsibility that we
should wear our seatbelts. It is our responsibility to ensure that we do
not jaywalk and to ensure that we always abide by traffic rules and
regulations. Experience has shown that almost all accidents are always
preceded by a violation of a law or regulation. Therefore that is the
responsibility of South Africans in order to improve driver behaviour.

We have started a programme, in conjunction with the Department of
Education, to provide a curriculum for Grade 0 to Grade 8 in order to
promote traffic education in our schools. I think this will go a long way
to improve the situation.

Concerning the issue of road development and planning and the issues of
funding, hon members should be aware that the challenges that we are facing
today arise from the previous system of apartheid when, between 1975 and
1990, the investment in our road infrastructure was halved. It is only the
democratic government that has ensured that, since 2000 in particular, the
increase in our road infrastructure investment is actually moving from
strength to strength.

As you saw on Budget day when the Minister of Finance made his
presentation, the road investment in the next three years for all three
spheres of government will be R63 billion. This is a major improvement from
the previous year. Our responsibility is to ensure that that money is spent
well and a proper programme of maintenance developed.

Regarding congestions, the Department of Transport is busy finalising a
policy on travel demand management with a special focus on the major
metropolitan areas of South Africa, that is Tshwane, Johannesburg, Cape
Town and Durban. The processing of passengers is done jointly by the
airports company and the Department of Home Affairs. Acsa, in particular,
focuses on infrastructure - which we believe is in place and is going to
continue to be improved with these major investments in infrastructure
upgrades that Acsa has announced. The investment in these upgrades will be
more than R6 billion in the next three years.

Concerning security measures, Acsa has ensured that we will do everything
we can in order to improve the situation. I am satisfied that we are in
line with international standards, as promulgated by the International
Civil Aviation Organisation.

Coming to the issue of the Road Accident Fund, since I became the Minister
of Transport in 2004, whenever I interacted with the Road Accident Fund
people I could never hear precisely what they were telling me. So I also
nearly became confused until I changed the board and management there. I
want to assure you now that when the new board, led by Danisa Baloi, and
the new executive, led by Jacob Modise speak, I listen more. [Laughter.]
[Applause.] For the first time they show what needs to be done.

Yesterday, for the first time since I started in Transport, the ANC and the
DA spoke the same language regarding the Road Accident Fund. But I think a
tribute must be paid to both Houses of Parliament in terms of the
legislation that was passed, which is going to improve the situation.

The regulations were published on Monday, 29 May 2006 and these are going
to be debated and amended so that we can move forward. But critically, the
issue of solving the problems of the Road Accident Fund lies in the new
policy that will be based on a no-fault principle. The White Paper is being
developed, which we are going to share with the NCOP so that we can ensure
that we do things for the better.

With those few words I would like to take this opportunity to thank my
MECs, all of them, the director-general and all officials of the Department
of Transport for the sterling work that they are doing in steering this
ship forward to create a better life for all our people. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): We want to thank our
national Minister of Transport for his informative input in the debate. It
is highly appreciated. We thank you, hon Minister.

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 15:30.
                                 __________




                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS




ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bill


     (1)    The Minister of Health


          a) Health Professions Amendment Bill [B 10 – 2006] (National
             Assembly – sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
             notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
             28754 of 28 April 2006.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Health of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         31 May 2006.
         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

2.    Bills passed – to be submitted to President for assent
     (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 30 May 2006:


          a) Independent Communications Authority of South Africa Amendment
             Bill [B 32F - 2005] (National Assembly - art 75).

National Council of Provinces

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Local Government and Administration for consideration and report:

a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Local Government
  Association (SALGA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
  General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 21-2006].


    (2)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration:

a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Arts and Culture for 1 April 2006 to
  31 March 2009.

    (3)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration:


a) Strategic Plan of the South African Police Service (SAPS) for 2006 to
  2007 [RP 42-2006].

    (4)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Public Services for consideration:

a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Transport for 2006 to 2009.

    (5)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Local Government and Administration for consideration:

a) Medium Term Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Service and
  Administration for 2006 to 2011.

    (6)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Social Services for consideration:


a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Home Affairs for 2006/07 to 2008/09.
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      1) Government Notice No 362 published in Government Gazette No 28740
         dated 13 April 2006: Publication of Local Government allocations
         and frameworks, in terms of the Division of Revenue Act, 2006 (Act
         No 2 of 2006).


      2) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
         concerning the Project: Learnership Training System Programme,
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      3) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
         the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Project: Learnership
         Training System Programme.

      4) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
         concerning the Project: Legislative Drafting Programme, tabled in
         terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      5) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
         the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Project: Legislative
         Drafting Programme.

      6) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
         concerning the Project: Mpumalanga Rural Development Programme,
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      7) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
         the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Project: Mpumalanga
         Rural Development Programme.

      8) Agreement between the Government of the Kingdom of Belgium and the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa on Technology-Aided
         Distance Self Learning in the South African Police Service, tabled
         in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      9) Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Government of
         the Kingdom of Belgium and the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa on Technology-Aided Distance Self Learning in the South
         African Police Service.

     10) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
         concerning the Project: Technology Diffusion through Technikons,
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

     11) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
         the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Project: Technology
         Diffusion through Technikons.

     12)  Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
         South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
         concerning the Project: Peace and Development Project, tabled in
         terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

     13) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
         the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Project: Peace and
         Development Project.

     14) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
         concerning the Project: Programme to Develop Markets for Business
         Development Services, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.
     15) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
         the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Project: Programme
         to Develop Markets for Business Development Services.
     16) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
         concerning the Project: Skills Development Strategy Initiative
         (SDSI), tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.

     17) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
         the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Project: Skills
         Development Strategy Initiative (SDSI).

     18) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
         concerning Financial Cooperation in 2005, tabled in terms of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

     19) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
         the Federal Republic of Germany concerning Financial Cooperation in
         2005.

2.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

    (1)    Report and Financial Statements of the Commission on Restitution
         of Land Rights for 2005-2006 [RP 54-2006].


3.    The Minister of Safety and Security
    (1)    Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD) for
         January 2005 to December 2005, in terms of section 18(5)(c) of the
         Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act No 116 of 1998) [RP 56-2006].


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces


1. Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on the
  Annual Report and Financial Statements for 2004/2005 of the Department of
  Environmental Affairs and Tourism, dated 26 May 2006:

      The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having been
      briefed by the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism on its
      Annual Report and Financial Statements of Vote 27 for 2004-2005,
      including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements of Vote 27 for 2004-2005, referred to it, reports that it
      has concluded its deliberations thereon.

2. Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the International
   Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Customs Matters, dated
   31 May 2006:

      The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the request for
      approval by Parliament of the International Convention on Mutual
      Administrative Assistance in Customs Matters adopted in Brussels on 27
      June 2003: Your Customs Johannesburg Convention dated 13 July 2004,
      referred to it, recommends that the Council, in terms of Section 231
      (2) of the Constitution, approve the said Convention.

Report to be considered.

