---
title: 'National Assembly - 07 November 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-11-07
---

TUESDAY, 7 NOVEMBER 2006
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move the
following motion:

  That the House debate the issue of losses of ammunition, arms and other
  military equipment in SA National Defence Force military bases in South
  Africa and in peace support operations abroad, allowing the Minister of
  Defence to hear the views of Parliament so that this problem may be dealt
  with effectively with the support of this legislature.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.
   SUSPENSION OF RULE 253(1) IN RESPECT OF FURTHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING
                                COLLEGES BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the
motion as it is printed on the Order Paper in the name of the Chief Whip of
the Majority Party, as follows:

  That Rule 253(1), which provides inter alia that the debate on the Second
  Reading of a Bill may not commence before at least three working days
  have elapsed since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended for
  the purposes of conducting the Second Reading debate on the Further
  Education and Training Colleges Bill [B23D – 2006] (National Council of
  Provinces – sec 76) today.


Agreed to.

 SUSPENSION OF RULE 253(1) IN RESPECT OF REVENUE LAWS SECOND AMENDMENT BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the
second motion, as it stands printed on the Order Paper in the name of the
Chief Whip of the Majority Party, as follows:
  That Rule 253(1), which provides inter alia that the debate on the Second
  Reading of a Bill may not commence before at least three working days
  have elapsed since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended for
  the purposes of conducting the Second Reading debate on the Revenue Laws
  Second Amendment Bill [B34 – 2006] (National Assembly – proposed sec 75)
  tomorrow.

Agreed to.

  PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN GOVERNMENT AND CIVIL SOCIETY IN FIGHT AGAINST HIV AND
                                    AIDS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M M MADUMISE (ANC): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The ANC would like to
applaud the Deputy President, Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, in her capacity as
the chairperson of Sanac, for her determination in deliberating on issues
of HIV and Aids. We would also like to commend the civil society
organisations for the strides they have taken in the fight against HIV and
Aids.

The invitation extended to the Deputy President to address the civil
society congress delegates on the action plan to save lives was indeed a
timely gesture to endorse this partnership initiated between the government
and all role-players. This congress was the best platform for showing a
sense of solidarity, collectivity and unity by all stakeholders.

The ANC acknowledges the fact that the battle against HIV and Aids is
continuous and can only be defeated by working together. The ANC-led
government has always been a strong believer that no single sector,
Ministry, department or organisation can in isolation be responsible for
addressing the HIV and Aids epidemic. We note daily with great concern the
increasing number of orphans and vulnerable children due to HIV and Aids.

The Deputy President emphasised the importance of unity in fighting against
HIV and Aids. We, the ANC, concur with the other stakeholders who also
backed the Deputy President, by saying there should be unity between
government and civil society so as to combat HIV. The Deputy President
spoke of strengthening the national partnership against Aids through unity
of purpose and action. The ANC supports the call for partnership between
the government and civil society to fight Aids. Social and economic
inequalities, gender inequality and violence drive the epidemic. The
comprehensive plan put in place ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]


                      LAUNCH OF HUMAN TRAFFICKING WEEK


                            (Member’s Statement)
Ms J A SEMPLE (DA): Madam Speaker, the DA supports the launch of Human
Trafficking Week by the International Organisation for Migration, together
with other NGOs and the media. The week runs from 4 to 11 November to raise
awareness of human trafficking in South Africa, and various events have
been planned to raise awareness and to publicise IOM’s toll-free line: 0800
555999.

Research has revealed that trafficking in human beings for sexual
exploitation is flourishing in South Africa, with women being trafficked to
our country from South-East Asia, Eastern Europe as well as other African
countries. There is also evidence that growing numbers of South African
women and children are being trafficked both internally and to Europe and
Asia for sexual exploitation.

Although South Africa is a signatory to international conventions against
human trafficking, the only legislation currently in place making this
practice a crime is the Children’s Bill. What about women and men who are
also being trafficked? It is deplorable that this government is taking so
long to pass the necessary legislation.


       HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES SUFFERED BY WOMEN IN SOUTH AFRICAN PRISONS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr H J BEKKER (IFP): Madam Speaker, the Jali Commission has shone a brutal
light on violence and sexual abuse in South African prisons. However, the
investigation has largely focused on the experience of male inmates and its
findings said very little about female prisoners, who are faced with
serious challenges of human rights abuses.

One ex-inmate of the female wing of Johannesburg Central Prison reported
that women inmates are abused and beaten by female warders, who would take
advantage of the culture of silence which is an integral part of prison
life. Female inmates are often ignorant of their rights and reluctant to
challenge Correctional Services. She claimed prisoners are often denied
their rights under section 44 of the Correctional Services Act.

It is totally unacceptable that violence against women is also perpetuated
and magnified behind bars. If inmates petition or protest for recourse to
their rights, the officials should not intimidate prisoners or blemish
their permanent record in a bid to keep them docile. As we are approaching
the 16 days of activism, it is of vital importance that the Department of
Correctional Services treat female prisoners with care and dignity, in line
with the requirements of the Constitution, as well as the notion of
restorative justice in order to ensure successful rehabilitation. I thank
you.


           SADC SUMMIT ON REGIONAL INTEGRATION IN SOUTHERN AFRICA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S J NJIKELANA (ANC): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The democratic South
Africa under the ANC-led government is continuously working to strengthen
regional unity and Pan-African unity in all social endeavours.

Last month the SA Development Community, or SADC, held an extraordinary
summit on regional integration. The theme of the summit was the Economic
Integration of SADC. The summit was attended by heads of state and
government from the region. They met and discussed, amongst other things,
the reviewing of progress and the proposal of measures for scaling up
implementation of regional integration; the assessment of the current
status of implementation of the free-trade area in terms of activities
required to complete it by 2008, as contained in the regionally indicated
strategic development plan; and the analysis of progress on the milestones
for achieving the free-trade area and the SADC Customs Union, as well as
the macroeconomic convergence in the region.

This development is an important part of the shared objective by the SADC
member states to reduce poverty and underdevelopment. It also forms a very
solid and strong basis for the enhancement of South-South co-operation, as
well as the advancement of the Ipsa co-operation, with particular reference
to the recent summit between China and Africa. Such an economic integration
within SADC would form a very good basis for ensuring the sustainable
implementation of the deal between China and Africa. I thank you.


       INTERNATIONAL LIFE CHAIN SUNDAY AND THE FIGHT AGAINST ABORTION


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs C DUDLEY (ACDP): Madam Speaker, Sunday, 1 October was International
Life Chain Sunday, and an estimated one million men and women over 900
locations worldwide stood for the right to life of the preborn baby.

The ACDP commends South Africans who have been faithful in standing for the
rights of the most vulnerable in our society. The most dangerous place in
the world today is not Iraq, Afghanistan, Sudan or the Congo. The most
dangerous place in the world today is the womb. Preborn babies are being
killed in their mothers’ wombs at a greater rate than any other section of
society. The mortality rate of preborn babies varies from one in three to
one in four. A growing number of people worldwide are beginning to
recognise the abortion holocaust as the greatest crime being committed in
the world today.

This war against children made in the image of God must be exposed and
opposed. The preborn baby is genetically, physiologically and organically a
distinct person from the time it is conceived. At about three weeks after
conception the baby’s heartbeat can be detected. Six weeks after conception
the baby has its own lifelong brainwave. If the absence of a brainwave is
considered the sign of death, why then is the presence of this brainwave
not accepted as a confirmation of life?

Birth does not turn a nonhuman into a person. Birth is only a change in
environment for a life that began many months before. Every abortion stops
a beating heart. Every abortion ends a brainwave. Every abortion is the
murder of a helpless and innocent human being.

  For You created my innermost being; You knit me together in my mother’s
  womb. My frame was not hidden from You when I was made in the secret
  place, when I was woven together in the depth of the earth. Your eyes saw
  my unformed body.

We know that abortion kills babies and that over 600 000 babies’ lives have
been taken legally through abortion since 1997 in South Africa. We know
that women are exploited and deceived into thinking that abortion will
solve their problems and improve their lives. We know that abortion harms
women and places them at risk physically. We know that legalising murder
does not exempt women and girls from unbearable suffering from guilt,
grief, nightmares, depression and suicidal tendencies. We know that health
workers and professionals are intimidated and discriminated against. These
shocking realities cannot go unchallenged. I thank you.


                 WATER AND SANITATION CHALLENGES AT SCHOOLS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L W GREYLING (ID): Madam Speaker, many schools in South Africa do not
have the basic requirements to provide an acceptable level of education.
Over 4 000 schools do not have access to electricity, and over 2 500 do not
have water and sanitation.

Despite these figures, only 29 schools had been electrified by August this
year. If we are going to bridge the divides in this country, the government
has to give greater priority to the provision of infrastructure at schools.

The ID also believes that we need to do more in terms of the provision of
libraries at schools. Currently, only one out of every five public schools
has a library. The provision of libraries at all schools is now more
important than ever if we are going to truly equip our children with proper
literacy skills. The stimulation of reading enables our children to gain an
equal footing in life. The eradication of basic problems, such as the
provision of libraries, will also help in the abolition of future, more
complex, difficulties.

The ID would therefore like to call upon the Minister of Education to make
the installation of libraries at all schools a priority. To provide books
to all our children will help us to bridge the educational divide in South
Africa. I thank you.


                           NATIONAL CHILDREN’S DAY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs W S NEWHOUDT-DRUCHEN (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC notes that this past
Saturday, 4 November, was National Children’s Day. We applaud and support
the initiatives taken by the ANC government to mark and honour this day for
the children of South Africa. Poverty, substance abuse, neglect and HIV and
Aids are some of the factors that lead to larger numbers of children being
in distress. HIV and Aids also result in many children being orphaned and
in child-headed families.

The ANC-led government has put in place measures to address the challenges
that face our children. The government has developed and continues to
formulate transformative legislation and policies that obligate all
government departments, in all three spheres of governance, to integrate
constitutional rights into all aspects of child welfare, health, education
and their general care and livelihood. I thank you. [Applause.]




                      ROADS IN THE NORTH WEST PROVINCE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B E PULE (UCDP): Madam Speaker, South Africa is bracing herself for the
2010 Fifa World Cup, which has become a household event for both young and
old, government and nongovernmental organisations, private sector and civil
society. Transport, which is the heartbeat of the country and therefore a
focus area, has to determine whether people will really arrive alive owing
to the condition of our roads.

Roads in the North West province are a real catastrophe. Travelling from
Ottoshoop, Lichtenburg and Ottosdal up to Wolmaransstad is a nightmare. A
difference will only come about when you join roads in the Free State, that
is, across the Vaal River. Another road that has become a killer road is
the one between Koster and Lichtenburg. It needs upgrading because it has
become the bypass of the N4 tollgate, that is, the road between Zeerust and
Swartruggens. Intervention by the national Department of Transport would be
appreciated. Thank you.


           TV PROGRAMME EXPOSES CORRUPTION AT HOME AFFAIRS OFFICES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N M MDAKA (UIF): Madam Speaker, the UIF is shocked by the rampant
corruption that was recently exposed by the SABC’s Special Assignment team
at the Department of Home Affairs. The revelation is cause for serious
concern.
It is quite surprising to acknowledge how quick it is for illegal
immigrants in this country to obtain South African citizenship by buying
genuine identity documents, while a huge number of eligible South Africans
do not have access to social grants owing to long delays in the issuing of
IDs.

It is an indictment of government that up to a quarter of the identity
documents issued in this country may be fraudulent. The whole saga makes
one wonder how many dangerous criminals and foreign nationals have
fraudulently obtained South African passports in order to commit crime and
cause havoc throughout the country. Thank you.


                     SAA SUSPENSION OF FLIGHTS TO GEORGE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M SWART (DA): Madam Speaker, opportunity knocks but once and, when it
does, it should be exploited to full advantage. SA Airways seems to have
difficulty in understanding this principle. Air traffic in South Africa is
growing at double the rate of the gross domestic product. Most airports in
South Africa will have to double up on capacity every nine years, and some
airports even more so.

The chief executive officer of Acsa states that air traffic to George and
East London, on the other hand, grows by approximately 30% per annum, which
is more than double the growth at our international airports.

But what does SAA do? They stop flying to George, leaving a gap for other
airlines to fill. They have now gone even further and decided to retrench
all their ground staff at George airport. They will be starting up a low-
cost airfare line shortly. By virtue of this move, they should be able to
compete with other airlines on the lucrative George route. This seems to
have escaped SAA. Surely they need to rethink their business strategies?

I call on the Minister for Public Enterprises to convince SAA of their
short-sighted approach in respect of flights to and from George. Surely
they should reinstate the flights and retain the jobs of SAA staff at
George?


                          WOMEN IN SENIOR POSITIONS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N P KHUNOU (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC’s vision has always been the
creation of a prosperous, equitable, stable and democratic society. In an
economic sense, our vision is one of decent work and living standards for
all in the context of qualitatively improved equity in ownership,
management skills and access to opportunities.

The SA government has consistently pushed all sectors to ensure both racial
and gender equity at all levels of business. However, a new study of 50 of
some of the largest and most influential listed companies in South Africa
shows that little has changed at the top.

The study reveals that 66% of directors are white and only 34% are black.
Most of the executives are still white and male; earn an average of R15
million a year, more than 700 times more than that of the average worker
who happens to be black and female.

While women make up 52% of the adult population, they comprise only 41% of
the working South African population and only constitute 14,7% of all
executive managers. An added dimension to this is that at the last count
only about 2% of top executives in this country were female.

The ANC calls on business to accelerate training and management skills
development programmes aimed at bringing about racial and gender equity in
all levels of the workplace. I thank you. [Applause.]


       THE CHALLENGE TO UPROOT THE CULTURE OF VIOLENCE IN OUR SCHOOLS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R P Z VAN DEN HEEVER (ANC): Madam Speaker, the aim of education is to
teach the youth to love their people and culture and to honour human
solidarity, freedom, liberty and peace.

The recent violent incidents in our schools highlight the challenge we face
to uproot the culture of violence in our society. Regulations for safety in
public schools provide for a police officer, principal or their delegate to
search any person on school premises for weapons or drugs and seize them
without a warrant should there be a reasonable suspicion to that effect.
Principals would also have the right to stop any person from entering
school premises without their permission.

The ANC urges all our communities, business and civil society to assist
school authorities to maintain in our schools conditions that are conducive
for learners to enjoy their right to education. I thank you. [Applause.]


              LAND RIGHTS FOR THE DESCENDANTS OF COENRAAD BUYS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr S E OPPERMAN (DA): Speaker, daar is min dinge wat so ’n wrang smaak
laat as die georkestreerde onteiening wat die Kempton Park-komplot ten
opsigte van grondregte van bruinmense teweeg gebring het. Die eiendomsreg
van die bruin nasate van Coenraad Buys in die noorde van die land word deur
’n grondeis bedreig.

Hierdie reg van die Buyse, wat reeds in die 1800s bevestig is, kan nou deur
’n tegniese vertolking van die huidige wet nietig verklaar word. Die 1913-
afsnypunt ten opsigte van grondregte het van die belangrikste
aanspraakmakers doelbewus onteien; hulle wat in hulle bloed die gene dra
van die Hessaqua, Attaqua, Namaqua, Griqua, Chochoqua en al die ander
stamme van die Quena of Ottentotu.

Hulle was ons voorouers en het baie honderde jare gelede dié deel van die
kontinent wat vandag as Suid-Afrika bekendstaan huis genoem. Die waarheid
word in die argiewe van hierdie Parlement bevestig. Nasate van die vroegste
inwoners is deur die gruwelike miskenning van die geskiedenis skaamteloos
beroof.

Hierdie situasie is onaanvaarbaar. Die aanspraak deur dié bruin mense op
grond en vergoeding móét erken word sonder dat ons daarvoor bakhand hoef te
staan. Dankie. [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans member’s
statement follows.)

[Mr S E OPPERMAN (DA): Hon Speaker, there are few things that leave such a
bitter taste in one’s mouth as the orchestrated dispossession caused by the
Kempton Park plot with regard to the land rights of the coloured people.
The right of possession of the coloured descendants of Coenraad Buys in the
northern part of the country is threatened by a land claim.

This right of the Buys family that was already confirmed in the 1800s, can
now be annulled due to a technical interpretation of the current Act. The
1913 cut-off date with regard to land rights purposefully dispossessed some
of the most important claimants; those who are carrying the genes of the
Hessequa, Attaqua, Namaqua, Griqua, Chochoqua and all the other tribes of
the Quena or Ottentotu in their blood.

They were our ancestors, and many hundreds of years ago they called this
part of the continent, that is known as South Africa today, their home. The
truth can be found in the archives of this Parliament. Descendants of the
earliest residents were shamelessly dispossessed as a result of the
abominable disregard for history.

This situation is unacceptable. The claim of these coloured people with
regard to land and compensation must be acknowledged without us having to
beg for it. Thank you. [Interjections.]]

                        TENTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE CCMA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr T G ANTHONY (ANC): Madam Speaker, the Constitution and the democratic
government have brought about a vast improvement in labour rights and
dispute settlement systems in the country. South African workers and
employers will celebrate improved relations when the Commission for
Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration marks its 10th anniversary on 11
November.

The CCMA is one of the first major institutions established by the new ANC-
led democratic government to promote social justice and equality in the
workplace. Its establishment has engendered significant changes in dispute
resolution processes. The CCMA receives a daily average of 500 new
referrals and processes approximately 10 000 cases a month. It has handled
more than one million cases since its establishment. The CCMA promotes
social justice and economic growth for the labour market through dispute
resolution, dispute prevention and institution-building.

The ANC wishes the CCMA a happy 10th anniversary on 11 November 2006. I
thank you.


                ESTABLISHMENT OF CLEAN DEVELOPMENT MECHANISM


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms P BHENGU (ANC): Madam Speaker, the World Summit on Sustainable
Development, WSSD, in Johannesburg provided a unique opportunity for
governments, United Nations bodies, business communities, civil societies
and the development finance institutions to agree on the mechanism and
resources required to meet the sustainable development targets at global,
regional, national and local levels.

The ANC commends our government on developing a mechanism to ensure that
industrial developments do not lead to the erosion of the country’s natural
resources. This has found expression in the establishment of the clean
development mechanism, the CDM, developed by the Department of Minerals and
Energy in an effort to cut carbon emissions while ensuring economic growth
in the country. The CDM projects function in line with the Kyoto Protocol.
The projects will create more employment in the farming industry without
causing harm to the environment.

Today is better than yesterday, tomorrow will be better than today.
Ngiyabonga. [I thank you.]


                 WATER AND SANITATION CHALLENGES AT SCHOOLS


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Madam Speaker, I would like
to respond to the points made by the hon member Lance Greyling, Comrade
Lance Greyling from the ID Party ... [Interjections.] Absolutely.
I just want to respond to one part of it, and that is his reference to the
water and sanitation challenges at schools in our country. He’s
highlighting a very real problem, and we appreciate that. I must say that
the Department of Education is acutely aware of the problem, and is doing
something about it.

But, yet again, it is one of the great legacy projects, if you like. This
is what we inherited. This is after decades of apartheid rule, and the
disparities that we inherited. These are some of our challenges, Comrade
Lance, that we have to address jointly. It is not easy to address them.

It is true that a number of schools do not have adequate sanitation, but we
believe that we are starting to address this in quite an innovative way.
Thousands of schools have pit latrines as we speak; that is what they were
offered, that’s all they have. A number of these pit latrines – Lance, it
gets worse – are full, so these schools are registered as having toilets,
but they are nonfunctional toilets because the pits are full.

So, the Department of Science and Technology, together with the Department
of Education, has found an innovative way of addressing this, and that is
through owner-operated pumps. These are small pumps; the owners operate
them, and are able to empty these pits in a sustainable way. So, they will
empty these pits, but at the same time, a number of households are faced
with the very same problem in that vicinity. So, similarly, as the owner
operators, they would be able to provide this service to local households.

It’s a pilot project at the moment with the Eastern Cape government, and we
think that we will learn our lessons through this pilot. We think, hon
member, that we will able to expand on it, and address the much larger
problem, in addition, of course, to the further infrastructure that needs
to be provided. The Department of Education’s infrastructure unit is
engaging with the provincial departments. The problem is that the funds are
located within the provinces, not with the national Department of
Education.

So it isn’t easy, but we would ask hon members to support us in this
endeavour to ensure that all learners have decent sanitation facilities at
their places of learning. Thanks, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

                          WOMEN IN SENIOR POSITIONS
           SADC SUMMIT ON REGIONAL INTEGRATION IN SOUTHERN AFRICA

                            (Minister’s Response)

Dr R H DAVIES: Madam Speaker, I would like to just respond briefly to the
statements by the members Khunou and Njikelana.

I just want to say that the figures that the hon member Khunou has given,
are broadly in line with the figures that the department has available on
the extent of black and women management control. The figures that we have
indicate that although the number of black executives has doubled since the
year 2003, it still remains a paltry 12,8% while the number of black women
executive directors remains even lower at 1,9%.

I think the point is that black economic empowerment, up to now, has
focused almost exclusively on share transactions. However, the codes of
conduct, which will be emerging soon, attribute points for ownership,
management control, employment equity, skills development, preferential
procurement, enterprise development and contribution to socioeconomic
development.

We believe that these codes, when they come out in the very near future,
will contribute to broadening the scope of black economic empowerment.

The hon Njikelana was quite right to highlight the SADC summit. This
extraordinary summit has put the issue of regional integration much more
onto the front burner than it has been up to now. The immediate focus will
be on the steps to put in place the free trade area agreement, but we
should also note that there are highly ambitious plans to establish the
SADC Customs Union still by the year 2010.

I think that these issues need much more debate and discussion and
engagement, including by parliamentarians, and including institutions like
the SADC Parliamentary Forum. There was one point which was made by the
summit which I think we need to take very much into account.

The summit called for there to be a greater alignment of the integration
agenda, and the processes of establishing free trade and customs unions - a
greater alignment of these processes with the poverty-reduction programme
and also with programmes to address issues of real economy development,
infrastructure development and co-operation in the areas of agricultural
and industrial policy.

I think these are the issues we are going to have to grapple with as time
runs ahead, but the SADC summit was indeed a very historic event. Thank
you. [Applause.]


       HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES SUFFERED BY WOMEN IN SOUTH AFRICAN PRISONS


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Deputy Speaker, I am
responding to the statement made by the hon Hennie Bekker on the situation
of female inmates.

I think, as the Department of Correctional Services, we are absolutely
committed to the 16 days of activism against violence against women and
children, and the 365 days of activism against violence against women and
children.

I think it would be more helpful for the hon member Bekker to supply us
with details of such incidents. Indeed, inmates are entitled to certain
rights under the Correctional Services Act, and they should be granted
those rights. If we can be provided with those details, then we can
respond, because it doesn’t help us very much if you make general sweeping
statements about correctional service officials. I believe the majority of
them are not corrupt, and do not subscribe to the culture of silence around
what happens to inmates in correctional services.

We would be very grateful if the member could provide us with those
details, and we could follow that up as the Department of Correctional
Services. Thank you very much. [Applause.]


                       SUSPENSION OF FLIGHTS TO GEORGE

                      ROADS IN THE NORTH WEST PROVINCE
       THE CHALLENGE TO UPROOT THE CULTURE OF NATIONAL CHILDREN’S DAY

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I think on the matter of
small towns and flights to those towns, all of us would support greater
service being provided. I personally believe we should have greater
competition in that area. So, it might be that that is the service that low-
cost airlines should really be given the space to address. It is not just
George. My hon colleague at the back indicated Port Elizabeth, another
colleague spoke of Richards Bay, several small towns which we want to
reach, and find difficulty in reaching. They require improved service.

With respect to the need to transform senior levels of appointment in our
country, we would agree with the hon member of the ANC that certainly we
should ensure more opportunities for training and then advancement to
executive level within the private sector and in certain departments within
the public sector as well. So we would agree that we all need to do much
more to ensure the transformation of our institutions in the country, both
to more adequately reflect both the population of the country, and to
ensure that the potential which exists is fully attended to and given the
chance to succeed.

I agree with the hon member of the ID. Hon Hanekom responded partially. We
should have a library at every school. It is an absolute necessity, and
should be addressed. But, again, if one chases the rand, it goes somewhere
where we do not have control of it, so perhaps we should be monitoring and
asking, as Parliament, is the way we are allocating funding the most
appropriate to give us the results that we desire, or should we be looking
at different models where targeted interventions are supported in a rather
different way? This is something members certainly could assist us in.

On the matter of the rights of children, absolutely, our country has tried
to do a great deal. I find that while indeed we have had International
Children’s Day, and we pay attention to children on that day, we have had,
recently, much conversation about leave for teenagers who become pregnant
while at school. We’ve talked about these teenagers but not the babies that
they bear. Regarding this leave that people are proposing, once these
teenagers go back to school, who’s going to take care of the children?

Let us not have rights competing against each other. Let us work to
encourage young people not to have babies when they’re too young to have
children. [Applause.]

On the matter of violence, certainly, our regulations have been published
again. These are old regulations; they are not new regulations. We are
saying that certainly we will support schools, but we are encouraging
leadership in schools, principals and our schoolteachers to assist us in
countering ill-discipline and bad conduct in our schools.

I cannot understand how a school principal is unable to say to a person,
``What are you doing here?’’, and to use the telephone to call the police
to assist where necessary. We should be alerted to these problems. Anybody
who enjoys a position of authority in a school should be able to exercise
that authority, and our regulations grant them that space.

Finally, if I could say, certainly, ...

... mo go ntate wa UCDP, ke dumalana le ena gore ditsela tsa rona di
tshwanetse gore di nne dintle. Ke ile ka kgweetsa mo tseleng ya Zeerust le
ya Koster, le nna ga ke a itumela ke bona koloi ya me e tsena mo tseleng e
e ntseng jana. Ke dumela gore re tshwanetse re bone gore ditsela tsa rona
tsotlhe di dintle, mme Lefapha la Ditsela la Bokone Bophirima le setse le
tshwaragane le ntlha eo. Fa o ka tsamaya mo tseleng ya Zeerust gompieno, o
tla fitlhela gore e setse e baakantswe. Ga e sa tshwana le pele ga nako ya
ditlhopho tsa Mopitlwe 2005. Re dumalana le wena.

Re le Lefapha la Ditsela, re a e dire tiro ya rona. Re a di baakanya
ditsela tseo. Fa ke dumalana le wena ke re: E, a re ba kope gore ditsela di
baakangwe le rona fa re bona tsela e dirilwe e le botoka e phala ya maloba,
re tshwanetse gore re ba bolelele gore ba dira tiro e ntle. Ka jalo, re
dumalana le wena mme tiro e a dirwa. Ditsela di ntse di baakanngwa. Ke a
leboga. [Legofi.] (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)
[... to the UCDP representative that we agree with him that our roads
should be in good condition. I once drove on the Zeerust and Koster roadS,
and I was not happy to see the condition of the road. However, we are
working to improve our roads, and the Department of Public Works, Roads and
Transport in the North West province is presently doing just that. Should
you decide to use the Zeerust road today, you will notice that it has been
improved. I agree with you in that regard, that it looks completely
different to the one of March 2005 before the elections.

As the department responsible for roads, we do our best to improve the
conditions of the roads. Furthermore, I agree with you that we should
continue to request them to improve our roads but we should also compliment
them when we notice improvements. Therefore, we agree with you that there
is an improvement done on our roads. Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon Minister. I was thinking that I was
still in Africa, where ubuntu reigns supreme, and that someone was going to
welcome me back to the House after such an absence. [Applause.] But, having
not done that, I welcome myself back. [Laughter.] There is another slot for
a Minister, if you would like to take that. Deputy Ministers Hangana and
Shabangu, there is a
slot. Okay. We will then come to the first Order of the Day.


                FURTHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING COLLEGES BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)
The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Allow me, Madam
Deputy Speaker, to be the first one to welcome you back. O amogetswe
[Welcome.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ke a leboga, Mma. [Thank you, Minister.]

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Welcome back home.

I would like to recognise the provincial heads of the FET college sector
who are present in the public gallery. I am most happy to see them here,
and I hope that they will ensure that the Bill is properly implemented once
it has been passed, and that our recapitalisation programme for the
colleges succeeds. I hope that is the reason you are here. [Applause.]

Allow me, as well, to welcome the future of South Africa. Hello, the future
of South Africa. [Applause.] We are very pleased to see these young people
present in the House today.

Let me begin by thanking the members of the portfolio committee for the
work that they have done with respect to this piece of legislation.
Particular thanks go to Prof Mayatula and his team for the work that they
have done.
We have had public hearings led by the committee, committee consultations
with various stakeholders, and I believe that this has been very important
in assisting us to draft a Bill that will have a positive impact on the FET
college sector. The Bill achieves several important objectives. It sets out
a specific statutory framework for colleges; it creates the basis for
addressing the current shortage of skills that confronts our country; and
also gives concrete shape to the necessary skills revolution that has to
get under way in South Africa.

Our Deputy President, the Minister of Finance, and the Minister of Labour,
Minister Mdladlana, have all stressed the importance of FET colleges in
meeting government’s goal of increasing the pool of skilled and semiskilled
workers. We have a national shortage of skilled and semiskilled workers in
our country. This shortage has serious consequences for our ability to
complete large-scale projects like the Gautrain, and to prepare to host the
2010 Fifa World Cup. So, it must be addressed.

The Bill has to be understood against this backdrop and in relation to the
skills training regime that we have in South Africa today. We have many
institutions that offer training in our country. The private sector does
its own training, individuals run training programmes, we have the Setas
and, of course, we have some of the FET colleges offering programmes.
However, generally, none of the providers in our country work in a co-
ordinated and coherent fashion.

Despite the many excellent efforts, we still have massive skills gaps in
our country, and trainees fail to secure jobs in sectors that critically
need skilled practitioners. In fact, recently an academic presented a
paper, which indicated that in directing our interests at graduates who are
unemployed in South Africa, we have failed to attend to semiskilled
persons, artisans and intermediate skilled persons from the college sector
who do not enjoy employment opportunities in South Africa. We need to close
these gaps.

We are all doing training, but our trainees are not responding to the
economic demands of our country. So, there is something wrong and we need
to correct it. We have, currently in our country, about 400 000 students
that attend FET colleges, and around 700 000 that are in our universities
and our universities of technology. Given the human resource requirements
of South Africa and the current trajectory of our economy, our numbers
should look very different. The greater number of young people should be in
our colleges of further education and training.

It is important to point out that the skills revolution that we are setting
in motion is not one that is solely concentrated in the FET colleges. The
Asgisa and Jipsa initiatives have had important impacts on our
universities, which also have a role to play in the provision of skills. In
the coming period there can be little doubt that the shape and functions of
higher education institutions and, in particular, universities of
technology, will be influenced by the maturing FET college sector, with the
progressive introduction of responsive and modernised programme offerings.

Several important developments are linked to the passage of this Bill.
Firstly, we have developed norms and standards for funding public colleges.
These are currently in the public domain for public comment. Secondly, we
have agreed that we will establish a student loan and bursary scheme for
young people in the FET college sector. The Bill provides the framework to
strengthen responsiveness, co-ordination and quality of programmes.

We have been restructuring the colleges in the past six years, but we have
not consolidated this restructuring in a specific college focus law. The
aim of this Bill is to achieve this consolidation. We have recapitalised
the college sector. From next year they will offer intermediate and high-
level skills to students in the age range of 16 through to mature adults
who would be able to enter our colleges.

We will be able to give effect to the long-held desire of the ANC of
providing lifelong learning for the people of our country. Achieving this
goal means that our colleges have to be distinct from schools in South
Africa. It is important to state that the Bill protects educators who are
currently employed in the college sector. This was a major concern that
emerged in the public hearings.

We have, through changes initiated by the portfolio committee, ensured that
protections exist for employees in the college sector. The Bill does make
some changes with respect to the employment of management staff. We have
ensured, I think, that we have addressed these major labour concerns.

To those who fear that we are deviating from our promise to create
different types of high schools in South Africa, I wish to confirm today
that this objective remains part of our planning. The plan to have focus
schools remains as part of the plans of the national Department of
Education.

We will create different types of focus schools. We will have technical
schools. We will have schools that focus on technology training. We will
have schools that focus on theatre and drama and other core disciplines.
These are plans that provinces are working on currently, and we will be
announcing the changes and the schools identified as focus schools.

We have to have more artisans in all economic sectors in South Africa. We
believe that colleges are best placed to teach these skills alongside
industry and other partners. The time for the college sector has come. Now
is the time for employers to look to the college for those critical skills
they need in the immediate future.

I must thank industry for the very exciting role they have played in
shaping our curriculum and in ensuring that our curriculum and programmes
are fully responsive to the interests of the employer and the growing
economy of South Africa.

The major developments in the college sector in the next three years will
be the teaching of new modernised programmes. The new programmes have been
developed in full consultation with stakeholders. They are grouped into 13
key fields, and comprise 52 core subjects, and many more additional
specialisations and electives. These have the possibility and flexibility
to be extended where necessary.

Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon members. A great deal of work has been
done to lay the basis for us to develop the human resources we need to
support our economy and the development programmes of South Africa. Thank
you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Prof S M MAYATULA: I would also like to welcome back our Deputy Speaker.
Hon members, the first question we need to address is the significance and
importance of passing this Bill. Are Further Education and Training
colleges not part of the FET band? Why do they need a special Bill?
The ANC-led government was mandated in 2004 to halve poverty and
unemployment by 2014. According to Asgisa documents, the Accelerated Shared
Growth Initiative for South Africa, and I quote:


  For both the public infrastructure and the private investment programmes
  the single greatest impediment is shortage of skills, including
  professional skills such as engineers and scientists, and skilled
  technical employees such as artisans and IT technicians.

If we agree that we have thousands of unemployed and unemployable youth
with irrelevant degrees and diplomas roaming our streets, it cannot be
business as usual. We need to do something; we need to do it now.

The best way to do that is to turn our FET colleges upside down. The
Further Education and Training Colleges Bill is meant to do just that. But
– and a big “but” – this cannot and will not be done at the expense of the
educators. It is with that in mind that the portfolio committee conducted
public hearings, where we received 15 regional submissions, of which seven
appeared before the committee for oral presentations.

The committee would like to thank each and every one of them for their
submissions, which gave us a better understanding of the Bill and enhanced
it. I’m happy to report that all the proposed amendments, which are
technical in nature, were unanimously agreed to by all the parties in the
committee.

All the submissions were unanimous that this Bill is long overdue. However,
we were concerned about the following, amongst other things, which the
members will respond to: One, chapter 4 of the Bill, which deals with the
appointment of management staff by the MEC and the employment of FET
college staff by college councils.

It is important to remember that even as we speak, over 1 800 of the staff
are in the employ of college councils;

Two, the protection of the workers under the Education Labour Relations
Council would be threatened. The committee took this seriously and amended
the Bill accordingly. I refer hon members to the proposed amendment in
clause 54(2), which explicitly states that, and I quote: “Section 197 of
the Labour Relations Act applies to the appointment or transfer as
contemplated in subsection 1.”

Ndifuna ukubaqinisekisa abasebenzi ukuba mabangabi naxhala: Ezi kholeji
ziya kuhlala ziphantsi kolawulo lukarhulumente, ngesandla soMphathiswa
wezeMfundo wephondo. Yiyo loo nto inqununu yesikolo iza kuqashwa
nguMphathiswa. Yiyo loo nto uMphathiswa enegunya lokuwunqumla umthombo
wemali ukuba inqununu okanye isigqeba esilawulayo asihambi ngemigaqo
ayibekileyo uMphathiswa kwiBinzana 26.
Iimali zabasebenzi zomhlala-phantsi nezoncedo lwezonyango, i-medical aid,
zikhuselekile. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[I want to assure the employees that there is no need to be apprehensive.
These colleges will remain under the control of government and will be
managed by the MEC for Education. This is the reason why the Minister will
appoint the rector. The Minister will therefore have a right to terminate
financial support when the rector or the management council of the
institution does not follow the regulations set by the Minister in Clause
26.

Pension fund benefits and medical aid subsidies are protected.]

In actual fact, this Bill will create more opportunities for them. Through
the funding norms, the FET colleges will be recapitalised and well-
equipped, and their workshops will be accredited. The lecturing staff is
offered R10 000 each to improve their qualifications in order to adapt to
the new, improved college system.

As part of its oversight responsibility, the Portfolio Committee on
Education visited FET colleges in Limpopo, Gauteng, Eastern Cape and
KwaZulu-Natal from 15 to 19 August 2005. Our report and recommendations
were approved and adopted by this House.

The Bill will go a long way in the implementation of those recommendations.
The following were some of the colleges’ concerns.
In many instances these concerns were presented by speakers on behalf of
college rectors. One of their major concerns was that, and I quote: “The
use of the Employment of Educators Act of 1998 for post provisioning in FET
colleges was problematic.”

To name but a few of those who made these claims, one was Dr Motsoaledi,
the MEC for education in Limpopo; Mr M H Mnisi, the CEO of Vhembe FET
College; Mr T J Kekana, the CEO of Seshego campus in the Capricorn FET
College. Mr Abe Mashele, the Chief Executive Officer of Sedibeng FET
College put it more dramatically when he said:


  The limitations of the Employment of Educators Act of 1998, in relation
  to inflexible leave arrangements, impacted negatively on the working
  hours of educators. The regulations governing the workload of educators
  do not recognise relevant and essential occupation acquired technical
  competence and experience of artisans.

The committee also made the following observations: One, some colleges had
workshops and others did not. The existing workshops were generally located
in old, dilapidated buildings. Most equipment used for both management and
learning aids was obsolete.

Two, the machinery in most of the workshops at FET colleges, especially in
Limpopo, was archaic, a health hazard, rusty and in some cases nonexistent.
Colleges lacked accredited workshops. Through this Bill and the norms and
standards of funding, as contained in chapter 5 of the Bill, all these
concerns will be addressed.

The Bill allows for the development of a legislative framework that is
separate and unique from other educational frameworks, such as schools and
universities. This is also a very laudable approach, and will go a long way
in strengthening the already existing two pathways under legislation, of
learnerships and apprenticeships. This move, with added workplace learning
and collaboration with Setas, will create opportunities for learning that
will allow our young people to develop skills that are much more aligned to
the world of work.

A very important consideration of this piece of legislation is that it will
position the colleges to take their place in delivering the skills that are
clearly recognised and identified in Asgisa and Jipsa, the Joint Initiative
for Priority Skills Acquisition.

The colleges will now be in a position to begin to develop as a sector that
has its own specific role, function and identity. All indicators of
economic growth and development in South Africa point to the critical need
for skilled artisans in a range of economic sectors.

The FET college sector has been identified as a sector that is best placed
to deliver these skills. The Bill will enable FET colleges to be
sufficiently flexible to respond to the changing needs of local, provincial
and national drivers without having to go to the MEC. The employment of
college staff by the college councils is meant to facilitate and ensure
this flexibility.

Madam Speaker, the future of FET colleges is bright, and the commitment of
the ANC-led government is reflected in the following programmes: One, the
allocation of institutional support for management and governance
development through the college collaboration fund, the National Business
Initiative, NBI; two, the allocation of close to R2 billion to upgrade the
facilities, retrain lecturers and position the colleges for the anticipated
growth; three, the development of a modern and appropriate curriculum,
which will provide both the high-level fundamental skills and the specific
technical skills required for employment and economic growth. These skills
have been widely consulted on, with both business and industry.

I would like to take this time to thank both the Minister and Deputy
Minister for the good working relations, the officials of the department
for their support, the state law advisers for their guidance and the
members of the committee for their commitment. The ANC supports the Bill. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mr G G BOINAMO: Madam Deputy Speaker, allow me also to welcome you to the
House.

The DA supports the principle of the Further Education and Training Bill.
However, we have strong reservations about certain clauses. There is an
enormous deficiency in our education system, which leaves many of our
citizens without an opportunity to use their talents, which is depriving
our economy of essential skills. This deficiency is our inability, up until
now, to provide young South Africans with marketable skills. It is our
success in addressing this weakness on which, more than anything else, our
future economic growth depends.

The current average age of a qualified South African artisan is 54 years.
What this means is that by 2015, unless there is radical action, there will
be a massive shortage of artisans to supply South Africans with commercial
and industrial sectors, and a growth rate of 6% will become a pipe dream.

The system for further training and colleges was created several years ago
in an effort to resolve this problem and plug our skills gap. The Bill we
are voting on today will make some significant changes to this current
system. The biggest change is a shift from institution-based funding to
programme-based funding. The objective of this change is to enable
situations in this band to become responsive to the needs of the labour
market, and to be more flexible in an environment when the needs of these
markets change, which can virtually change from day to day.

The DA is in full support of this objective but we are concerned that the
practical reality, once this Bill is implemented, is that this change will
not allow us to deliver the skills the economy needs. This change in
approach means that the Department of Education will only fund and support
13 FET vocational programmes.

A range of organisations have expressed their doubts as to whether the
vocational programmes that the FET will fund will in fact deliver the
skills that the economy needs. For example, the National Association of
Professional Teachers of SA has raised concerns about an apparent non-
alignment of qualifications that the department will support and fund with
skills needed to find employment.

We may well find ourselves in a situation where learners will not come
flooding into these FET colleges to obtain these newly created vocational
qualifications because they know that the skills they acquire in these
colleges will not give them entry into the workplace. This could see the
demise of FET colleges because of the low uptake, and it could also mean
that skills shortages in our economy persist.
We are also concerned about the way that the money allocated will be spent
and whether sufficient provision will be made within the broad budget
allocations to allow these colleges to operate effectively. Will budgets be
adequate to redesign and equip laboratories and workshops to comply with
the new curriculum? Will bursaries be adequate? There are also still
questions, for example, about who is going to administer and pay salaries,
pensions, medical aid and housing benefits. Another source of concern is
that there is no provision for the fate of college staff who will not be
included within the 13 departmentally approved programmes.

Finally, we welcome the provision for the registration of private further
education and training centres. The important job of skills development
cannot be done by the state alone, and we need to harness the resources of
the private sector. The DA supports the view of the ANC that partnerships
with the private sector in skills development should be required and
encouraged.

We hope that, once this Bill is implemented, the Department of Education
will be embarking on a drive to forge partnerships for skills development
and will conduct an intensive campaign to harness the resources of the
private sector for this purpose. I thank you, Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Hon Madam Deputy Speaker, Minister, colleagues, this
Further Education and Training Colleges Bill, like most of the education
Bills that have passed through this House, contains good intentions, which
the IFP supports. Let me mention two of these. Firstly, the Bill provides
an opportunity to colleges to develop flexible programmes and shorter
courses that are in line with the principle of supply and demand. Secondly,
it provides for improved government structures and colleges in the form of
college councils and SRCs.

However, like other Bills that we have passed, the greatest test of this
Bill is in the implementation. Let me mention three issues which I think
are examples of what I call implementation failure related to education
generally and to this Bill in particular.

Firstly, schools, especially those in rural areas, remain with a shortage
of qualified teachers in spite of us having passed the enabling Bill about
three years ago.

Secondly, the college recapitalisation programme is moving at a snail’s
pace. Thirdly, in ANC style, education MECs went about announcing with pomp
the names of schools that were to become no-fee schools. But today, these
schools have as yet to receive these funds. These are but a few examples of
what I call implementation failure. Therefore, hon Minister, the IFP,
whilst it is in support of the spirit of this Bill, urges you and the
department to pay singular attention to the issues of capacity of these
colleges.

Other issues, like quality and access, which are in themselves a sine qua
non for the success of colleges, are in our view dependent on the capacity
of colleges or college councils to implement the requirements of this Bill.

Ukuba benginesikhathi esanele mhlonishwa uNggqongqoshe, bengizokuxoxela
indaba yamakolishi lawa okwakungawothisha kodwa asephenduke amakolishi
okuqeqesha ezindaweni zangakithi. Uma udlula ngakuwo lawa makolishi, uma
ngingakubeka ngesiNgisi ngingathi ... it is as if they are haunted. Umuntu
akaboni lutho kulawo makolishi.

Ngqongqoshe, sengathi kungaba khona into ethize eyenziwayo ukuze nawo
abekwe ezingeni elifanele. Siyethemba ukuthi ngalo Mthethosivivinywa,
maqondana nezezimali nokuqasha ngoba imikhandlu izonikwa ithuba lokuthi
iqashe ngokwayo ...

IPHINI LIKASOMLOMO: Asisekho isikhathi, baba. Siyaxolisa.

Mnu A M MPONTSHANE: Angizwanga mhlonishwa?

IPHINI LIKASOMLOMO: Asisekho isikhathi.

Mnu A M MPONTSHANE: Bengingezwanga mhlonishwa. Nakhu phela sengithathekile
lapha ukuxoxela umhlonishwa ngendaba yamakolishi lawo okusengathi asefana
nezipoki ezindaweni zethu. Ngiyabonga mhlonishwa. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)
[If I had enough time, hon Minister, I would tell you a very sad story
about the former teacher training colleges which are now used as colleges
for further education and training in our areas. If you drive past these
colleges, they look as if they are haunted, to put it in proper English.
There is nothing positive that one sees from these colleges.

How I wish, Madam Minister, that something could be done about these
colleges so that they, too, could be placed in a position that they
deserve. We hope that this Bill will empower the colleges in terms of
finances and give the councils powers to employ educators on their own ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, I regret your time has expired.

Mr A M MPONSTHANE: I beg your pardon, Madam?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your time has expired.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: I am sorry, Madam Deputy Speaker, I did not hear that. I
was just hooked on telling the hon Minister about the conditions of
colleges which now look like ghosts in our areas. I thank you, hon Madam
Deputy Speaker.]

Ms S N SIGCAU: Deputy Speaker and hon members, the skills shortage in our
economy has often been described as an inhibiting factor for economic
growth and a contributor to the high rate of unemployment. Of particular
importance in these circumstances is the level of vocational and further
training between levels two to four in the National Qualifications
Framework. This is what the Bill proposes to address, essentially by
repealing the Further Education and Training Act of 1998.

Whilst we fully support the need to strengthen this vital area of education
and skills development, we are concerned that an Act that is barely eight
years old is being entirely repealed.

We welcome the introduction of a standard statute for colleges. Hopefully,
this will ensure greater conformity among colleges as far as governance,
administration and standards are concerned, and thereby ensure that
students can expect the same level of training and education irrespective
of the college they attend. The UDM supports the Bill. I thank you.

Adv A H GAUM: Hon Deputy Speaker, this Bill will make a major contribution
towards changing the face of vocational education and training for the
better forever.

Viewed alongside the government’s recapitalisation programme of FET
colleges, the new funding framework and the programmes framework for these
colleges, the Further Education and Training Colleges Bill provides the
tools we need to do the job. This is the job of kick-starting the South
African skills revolution that will catapult thousands, no, hopefully
hundreds of thousands, of South Africans out of the second economy into the
first economy, out of a world of poverty and misery into a world of
opportunity and success.

This Bill and the process of aligning the programmes these colleges offer
with the world of work, deserves the support of all of us. We are launching
a new skills development initiative that will correspond with the needs of
our economy. We will make sure, and we are making sure, that the programmes
of our FET colleges are relevant, responsive and flexible.

On a continual basis we need to establish in which areas we require skills
and we have to respond to these needs. We know, for example, that we need
15 000 engineers. These colleges must make their contribution to satisfy
this need, and we are now empowering them to do just that. The days when
courses did not cater for the demands of the economy are over.

This Bill, unlike its predecessor, provides the flexibility that the FET
sector requires to modernise, to be relevant and to be responsive. The
colleges are currently restrained by legislation to draw on educators as
their only source of employment. During the redeployment process, colleges
had to draw from the redeployment lists.

This meant that they had to settle for a biology or languages teacher, for
example, when they actually required lecturers with technical drawing
skills. This Bill will now enable college councils to employ people with
the necessary skills to do the job.

No more will these colleges be constrained by the Employment of Educators
Act, disallowing them to make use of the expertise of highly skilled
individuals like Patrice Motsepe. They will be free to appoint him to offer
business fundamentals or any other course relevant to his expertise and
experience. No more will the Boland College be prohibited from acquiring
the services of Prof Roux de Villiers, former Dean of Engineering at the
University of Stellenbosch, who is currently doing the noble job of
assisting poor Stellenbosch schoolchildren with their mathematics.

This is the kind of flexibility that this Bill will provide, flexibility
that will turn colleges into vibrant institutions at the cutting edge of
the ever-changing economy and its needs. Without flexibility, Asgisa and
Jipsa will have little meaning. We operate in a modern industrial society
and we simply have to respond to this reality if we are serious about
economic growth and creating employment opportunities.

En dit is juis omdat ons die kolleges buigsamer, relevant en responsief wil
maak dat ons deur middel van hierdie wetsontwerp ’n groter rol aan die
kollegerade gee. Hulle is ten beste geplaas om die regte mense met die
nodige vaardighede in diens te neem sodat daar op die ekonomiese behoeftes
in die kollege se onmiddellike omgewing gefokus kan word.

Diegene wat dit as ’n soort privatisering wil veroordeel, sit die pot mis.
Die kolleges bly openbare instellings wat deur die staat gefinansier word
en aan die staat verantwoording moet doen. Die bestuurspan van die kolleges
word deur die LUR’e vir onderwys in die onderskeie provinsies aangestel.
Die wetsontwerp gee ook ’n duidelike rol aan die Minister van Onderwys en
die LUR’e om die kolleges so te rig dat hulle responsief bly ten opsigte
van ons ekonomiese behoeftes.

Vir te lank was ons kolleges die stiefkinders van onderwys. Op sy eie sou
die wet nie hierdie situasie fundamenteel reggestel het nie. Gelukkig staan
die wet nie op sy eie nie, maar word dit onder andere gerugsteun, agb
Boinamo, deur ’n rekapitalisasieprogram van R1,9 miljard - met ander
woorde, genoeg geld om te doen presies wat ons wil doen deur middel van
hierdie wetsontwerp. Dit beteken dat die kolleges nie slegs groter
outonomie kry nie, maar ook die nodige kursusse, infrastruktuur en
toerusting om aan die eise van ons tyd te voldoen. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[And it is precisely because we wish to make the colleges more flexible,
relevant and responsive that we are giving, through this Bill, a bigger
role to college councils. They are best suited to employ the right people
with the necessary skills to focus on the economic needs in the immediate
vicinity of the college.

Those people who wish to condemn this as a type of privatisation, have the
wrong end of the stick. The colleges will remain public institutions that
are financed by and accountable to the state. The management team of the
colleges is appointed by the MECs for education in the respective
provinces. The Bill also provides a clear role for the Minister of
Education and the MECs to guide the colleges in such a way that they remain
responsive to our economic needs.

Our colleges have been the stepchildren of education for too long.  The Act
in itself would not have rectified this situation fundamentally.
Fortunately, the Act does not stand alone, but it is supported, amongst
other things, hon Boinamo, by a recapitalisation programme of R1,9 billion
– in other words, enough money to do precisely what we intended with this
Bill. This implies that the colleges not only gain greater autonomy, but
also the necessary courses, infrastructure and equipment to comply with the
requirements of our time.]

They also get the tools to do the job.

The Department of Education undertook extensive research, hon Boinamo, in
developing a plan for the recapitalisation of the colleges. They did their
homework. The programmes offered and the numbers of learners enrolled in
these programmes were reviewed, an infrastructure audit was undertaken,
population figures per province and migration trends were obtained, and an
international literature survey and labour market surveys were undertaken.

Colleges were required to develop draft operational plans, which were
submitted in January this year, and recapitalisation funds were
subsequently allocated on the approved operational plans. It’s clear,
therefore, that there was a thorough process.

The funds will be used for infrastructure development, including the
development of sites and buildings and the refurbishment of workshops,
classrooms and simulation rooms; the acquisition of modern equipment for
training and IT; the training of lecturers for new modern programmes; and
the improvement of administration systems and material to deliver the
programmes. It is therefore clear, hon Boinamo, that the DA’s concern is
without any basis.

On the Minister’s invitation, business has entered into a partnership with
government to assist with the recapitalisation process and to help ensure
that colleges become high-quality, responsive providers of education and
training in order to meet the needs of industry and the world of work, as
well as the wider needs of society.

Asgisa identified the need for priority skills development as a key
enabling factor for meeting the 6% growth target so critical to
government’s goal of halving poverty and unemployment by 2014. In keeping
with this, particular colleges will be developed as centres of excellence
in specific technical and vocational fields.

It is of paramount importance that business will continue to assist with
this endeavour in concrete and practical ways, for example through staff
secondments and industry engagement with the FET college curriculum.

Once again, the Bill before this House today will make these kinds of
exciting public-private partnerships possible. Through these relationships,
colleges and industry will be able to partner like never before to ensure
the modernisation, responsiveness and effectiveness of the colleges sector
as a key provider of intermediate to higher-level education and training to
meet the needs of society and the economy now and in the future.

A new era has dawned on the vocational education and training sector and on
our FET colleges. [Interjections.] Our colleges are being moved from the
wings to centre stage. It will be the colleges’ responsibility to drive the
skills revolution. We have given them the tools and now it is up to the
colleges to finish the job.

In conclusion, I would also like to refer to another one of the hon
Boinamo’s numerous concerns. He referred to the benefits: he said that
there was a concern that the employees would not get the benefits that they
have at the moment. We indicated to him and to the DA in the portfolio
committee that that was indeed not the case - that the Bill refers to
section 197 of the Labour Relations Act in particular - and our other
colleagues will also refer to this matter – and that it is very clearly
saying here that the new employer is automatically substitute in the place
of the old employer in respect of all contracts of employment in existence
immediately before the date of transfer. All the rights and obligations
between the old employer and an employee at the time of the transfer
continue to be in force as if they had been rights and obligations between
the new employer and the employee.

So it is very clear that all of the concerns of the DA and the hon Boinamo
have been addressed by this Bill, and we really count on the support of
every party in this House. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L W GREYLING: Deputy Speaker, let me first welcome you back to the
House, officially. The FET Colleges Bill was not a particularly
controversial piece of legislation. All parties can agree on the need for
this sector of our educational system to be encouraged and supported. South
Africa as a country is in dire need of skills and it is hoped that with the
passing of this Bill, we can take another step closer towards giving South
Africans the practical skills needed to take up a productive role in our
economy.

The ID urges the department to use this piece of legislation to fast-track
the establishment of FET colleges throughout the country and, in
particular, in the underserviced rural areas, where youth are in desperate
need of these educational services. The ID would certainly support this
Bill. I hope that it equips many people with the skills needed to help my
so-called comrade Derek to deal with sanitation problems at our schools.
Thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Deputy Speaker and hon Minister, the ACDP welcomes the
Minister’s efforts to improve the FET sector and ensure relevance and
results. The education and training focus of the FET Colleges is an area of
national priority because of the skills deficit that the country faces.
Implementation, however, is the key to this Bill and the capacity of
provinces in this regard is a concern. Hon Minister, are you confident that
the objectives will be achieved without additional national support?

While the main objective of the Bill is to repeal the Further Education and
Training Act of 1998 and to ensure that all issues relating to FET Colleges
are dealt with in one Act of Parliament, large sections of the FET Act, as
it is now, appear unchanged, aligning with the assessment in the
memorandum, which states:


   Seeing that the Bill is merely a refinement of the current FET Act, no
   additional costs are foreseen.


Some significant changes are, nevertheless, evident. Changes to staffing
and funding arrangements, for instance, are a significant departure from
current practice. These may present colleges and provinces with challenges,
especially during the changeover period, and the ACDP echoes concerns about
capacity and calls on the department to make adequate support available and
not to let the process flounder.

During the hearings, stakeholders expressed concerns that the call for
input on this FET Colleges Bill was unfortunately rather late, considering
the advanced state of the Bill’s progress at the time. General lack of
awareness of the existence and content of the Bill amongst public FET
college staff was disappointing, considering that informed participation of
relevant stakeholders should have been a priority. This sector, like many
others, struggles to maintain staff morale, and the fears and uncertainties
which a Bill like this would naturally evoke, could have been lessened had
the department managed to bring the relevant stakeholders into the process
earlier.

The ACDP supports this Bill, which holds promise in terms of stimulating
skills development in South Africa. Thank you.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Deputy Speaker and hon members, the Bill is in keeping
with the ideal of transforming education and aligning it to the present day
needs, by providing regulation to education and training and for the
registration of Private Further Education and Training Colleges, among
others.

I will dwell mostly on the question of the Private Further Education and
Training Colleges. For the record, the UCDP appreciates that government is
considering restoring historic church schools that produced many African
leaders, among them, Hiltown, St Peters and Wilberforce.

It will be highly appreciated if the department can facilitate the
registration of the Private Further Education and Training Colleges and
save the applicants the frustration of sending them from Spenlow to Jorkins
by provisional registration since the year 2000.

A college that has fallen victim of this treatment is the Wilberforce
College in Evaton. The plea is that all colleges in a similar situation be
registered, mainly for Wilberforce, because it is the brainchild of the
legendary Charlotte Maxeke and houses what is now called the Charlotte
Maxeke Renaissance Building. It is currently assisting in upgrading Grade
12 students who did not make the grade to university through specialised
teletuition using the latest IT equipment from the mother institution,
Wilberforce University in Cincinnati, Ohio. To this end, a good number of
products of this institution are furthering their studies in accountancy,
science and commerce at universities.

Wilberforce is situated in Sedibeng District Municipality in Gauteng and is
accessible to most people and should therefore not be begging, as it boasts
state-of-the-art infrastructure, laboratories and everything.

A similar school with which it applied for registration, the St Augustine
College in the heart of the city of Johannesburg, has been functioning for
the past five years without any problem. We are happy for them, but request
that a black-run independent church institution should not be given a wide
berth regarding its registration. The UCDP supports the Further Education
and Training Colleges Bill.

Mme M P MENTOR: Motlatsa-Modulasetulo, maloko a a tlotlegang le baeng mo
Ntlong, ga ke itse gore rre Boinamo ke motho yo o robalang ka mpa efe gonne
re ne re dutse rotlhe mo tshekatshekong ya Molao o re o beileng fa gore re
o mametlelele gompieno. O ne a dumalana le rona. Le gale, ke batho ba ba
ntseng jalo. Lekoko la gagwe ke la bonkgate-ke-tlhaname. O dumalana le ena
ka sengwe gona jaanong mme fa a fitlha kwa go, ga ke itse gore a ke ba ba
golo mo go ena, ke a bona ba mo soka letsogo, mme fa a ema mo, ga a sa
tlhola a dumalana le rona jaaka re ne re dumalana fa re le mmogo. Ke ne ke
re mo go rre Boinamo, botshepegi bo a tlhokagala, o nne monna wa lefoko la
gago. O seke wa nna o ntse o le nkgate-ke-tlhaname jalo. (Translation of
Setswana paragraph follows.)

[Ms M P MENTOR: Deputy Chairperson, hon members and guests present in this
House. I don’t know what kind of a person hon Boinamo is. He has been part
of a debate which discussed this Bill so that amendments could be made. He
was in accord with us. Anyway, this is what we expect from people like him.
This is typical of people belonging to his political party, as they like to
renege on their promises. You agree with him on something but when we are
supposed to conclude, I don’t know whether it is his leaders who influence
him to change his mind. I just want to say to Mr Boinamo, trust is
essential; you must be a man of your word.]

Hon Dudley, I welcome the positive spirit from you and your party in
engaging in the Portfolio Committee of Education through this process. You
actually went out to support the Minister, particularly, to acknowledge her
good leadership insofar as matters of education are concerned. We look
forward to working with you very harmoniously in matters of education.

I need to ask this question first of hon Dudley, and then the labour
movement, as much as I welcome the positive spirit in which she works with
us. “How early is early?” Hon Dudley is reaffirming the claim, that I think
is baseless, on the part of labour that the department consulted them not
early enough. I hope you could qualify this “not early enough”.

It is a fact that most of the issues that were raised throughout the
process by the labour movement, across the board, were taken into
consideration, so much so that this Bill had to be redrafted over and over
again to accommodate many critical issues that labour raised. I don’t know
if they had wanted to be consulted even before the Bill was conceptualised.
I think they were engaged relatively at the right time by means of which it
could have been possible to allow them to participate in the process.

The first thing that I want to engage labour on is the right of this
Parliament to freely, without undue pressure, be allowed to pass
legislations. There should be no unreasonable demands such as that before
we passed this legislation, the department, which is the employer, should
have entered into particular agreements by means of negotiation within the
negotiation chambers, the ELRC and the PSCBC. It is incomprehensible and
unacceptable that Parliament should be expected to be bound by matters of
negotiations between the employer and the employee and only heed whatever
agreement is reached. That would be usurping the sovereign right of
Parliament to pass legislation. [Applause.]

The same kind of demand is emerging from labour. A few weeks ago when the
issue of Regional Economic Integration was being considered, the issue of
the need to extend from two years to four years the work permits for
workers that come from the SADC region to work in South Africa, again
Cosatu in particular made the following deman:. “No, before we amend
legislation to extend that period, Parliament must wait for the
negotiations within Nedlac with the state before we can pass legislations.”


I am saying that this is out of order. It is incorrect and unacceptable.
There is no way in which this Parliament can be expected to wait until it
passes legislation for processes that are happening outside Parliament,
irrespective of between who these processes are. This is the first thing I
had wanted to raise.

Earlier on I spoke about consultation. It is not true that there was no
consultation. There was sufficient consultation and I think the labour
movement will agree that we have considered, as the committee and as the
department, all the issues of critical importance that they raised. It is
the right, but also the obligation of this Parliament to respect the pieces
of legislation that it passed before, legislation that protected and
continues to protect the rights of workers.

The issue of labour, namely the fear that the rights of workers would be
trampled upon, has been addressed, and we have redrafted the Bill in a way
that allays all fears that could have amounted to suggestions that we were
trampling on the rights of workers. I must remember to speak a bit of
Setswana again, Comrade Naledi.

Molawana o re o mametlelelang o, ke ona fela o o fang batho ba ba tlileng
go ruta kwa dikholejeng madi a a kana ka R10 000, mongwe le mongwe, go ya
go ikatisa seša. [This Bill amendment is the only one that would give the
people who will be lecturing at colleges an amount of R10 000 each to
improve their qualifications.]

I am saying that this is the only piece of legislation, amongst many pieces
of legislation that we have passed, that paves the way for an allocation of
R10 000 to every college lecturer that will be appointed, as a result of
this initiative, to go and take up studies or make an effort to improve
their qualifications in any field of their choice. Therefore, the amount of
money that we have put aside is in addition to recapitalisation of
colleges. We are giving every lecturer R10 000 to decide at any time, at
his or her own pace, to pursue any field to improve their studies.

The other thing that we are doing with this legislation is to put in place
public colleges that will be funded by the state, whose programmes will be
influenced by the state. We are doing this deliberately in order to rise to
the demands of the economy, because Minister, if you can remember, when we
were passing the Education Budget Vote, I lamented our spending of a
significant percentage of the GDP on education whilst we still remained
wanting in terms of the skills that the economy is demanding.

This piece of legislation that we are passing today, is addressing exactly
that concern by opening up the bottlenecks that were there in terms of
programmes, qualifications and skills that are offered at the level of
colleges. As you know, colleges lie in the middle of the GET band, the
General Education and Training Band, as well as Higher Education, which are
universities and technikons.

To address the shortage of artisans and engineers, we cannot only bank on
the Jipsa and Asgisa initiatives. We have to put into place institutions
that will fast-track, by way of intervention and direction by the state,
the process of identifying these 13 programmes and more. It is not only 13
programmes, but there are 13 programmes specifically identified together
with business as programmes that are necessary, crucial and urgent for this
economy to realise 6% growth.

These are the things that we said we would need to do. This is long
overdue, as Sasco said to us, in that this piece of legislation is long
overdue and we hope that we will put it in place together with the
governance mechanisms that will ensure inclusivity. Maybe I must speak
Setswana again.

Go laola dikholeje tse ke ka tsela ya go akaretsa botlhe ba ba nang le
karolo mo dikholejeng tse, e leng baithuti le batlhatlheledi. Botlhe ba tla
nna le seabe mo tsamaisong ya dikholeje tse. [These colleges can be managed
by including all stakeholders, namely students and lecturers. All of them
will have a say in the administration of these colleges.]

The issues of quality promotion and assurance are also addressed in this
piece of legislation so that it is not only the programmes that are
relevant to the economy, but the issues of quality are also ensured to be
brought along. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Chairman, the PAC supports the Further Education and
Training Colleges Bill. The Bill states, as one of its purposes, the
funding of public further education and training colleges. The preamble to
the Bill refers to redressing past discrimination and ensuring equal access
for people such as women and the disabled, and this complements the
National Skills Development Strategy in co-operation with the Department of
Labour.

Indeed, education must be accessible to all citizens of our country. The
vast majority of this nation lives in dire poverty. One of the reasons that
has been given for the high dropout rate by students in the African
communities is that they have no financial means of continuing with their
education. This country needs to do much more in education if we are to
build a nation that can run its own affairs unhindered.

No nation can depend on borrowed skills forever. Education is a weapon for
economic development, for technological advancement, for retrieving African
epistemology and for mental decolonisation. No soldier can go to war
without weapons. Equally, no nation can succeed in life without a weapon
called education. This is why the PAC will always insist on free education
for the poor. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B G MOSALA: Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Ministers, guests,
comrades and friends, the ANC supports this Bill. It is very important for
us to note the background provided so eloquently in the formulation of this
groundbreaking piece of legislation.

Firstly, it is in pursuance of its passion for relevant and quality
education for the people of South Africa that the Department of Education
felt a pressing need to table this Bill. It is a Bill that endeavours to
provide a public college system of education that will produce skilful,
productive and employable young South Africans.

In order to achieve the goal stated above, the system that is envisaged
must be underpinned by very good, realistic and relevant programmes for the
achievement of excellence. Clause 43, subclauses (1),(2),(3) and (4),
ensures that the Bill achieves this reality. This clause attests fully to
the seriousness with which the Department of Education views the selection
of programmes. Nothing is left to chance.

The Minister’s involvement in the prescription of minimum norms and
standards for further education and training programmes that are offered at
public colleges and the role of Umalusi to conduct quality assurance
according to the relevant Act are but two examples that demonstrate the
seriousness of the Department of Education.

I wish to quote Mariétta van Rooyen, from an article entitled “What is in
the FET Colleges Bill?” posted on a website on 2 August 2006:

  The Department of Education is clearly taking their work seriously and
  are beginning to show the results of hard work to set up a quality system
  of education and training for South Africa. The latest in a series of
  legislative documents put out for comment is the FET Colleges Bill.

It is very refreshing to listen to such appreciation for a job well done.
Van Rooyen goes further to observe that, “It is clear that a lot of thought
went into the planning for this legislation.”


We agree, because the Department of Education conducted a number of studies
in relation to FET colleges and their programmes. These studies yielded the
following, amongst other things: that there has been an explosion of
programme offerings at FET colleges in recent years; that there are a
number of accrediting bodies with differing and sometimes conflicting
criteria; that some programmes are of high quality and attract many
participants; that a number of programmes are outdated and of poor quality;
and that there are duplications and inefficiencies in the programme
offerings. It is also apparent that the majority of the courses are the N
courses, and the majority of the students who complete these courses are
unemployed.

In view of the above, it then became very obvious that intervention was of
the essence, and intervention has come in the form of this Bill.

In 2005 the Department of Education began the process of developing new
curricula to replace the current N1 to N3 courses. International best
practice was sought, including wide-ranging consultations resulting in the
following stages being embarked upon: researching the design of the
programmes to replace the N1 programmes and considering the design of the
qualification; and choosing the fields or sectors in which the
qualification would be offered. In this regard, labour market surveys and
the skills needs identified by Asgisa informed decisions to choose various
fields from engineering to primary agriculture.

Thereafter the process of curriculum writing followed, which involved
workshops attended and/or conducted by college experts, writing teams
instructed by Seta and industry players and a variety of professional
organisations. Comments were requested for the final writing session in mid-
June 2006 and, currently, programmes comprising 52 subjects are ready for
implementation at NQF levels 2, 3 and 4.

The kinds of processes I have sketched above are indicative of a government
that cares for the progress of a nation. This is the government led by the
ANC.

Mmuso wa rona o ikemiseditse ho fana ka thuto e phedisang, e ntshetsang
pele, e hlabollang, e seng thuto e fanang ka mangolo a se nang thuso, a
siyang bana ba rona ba diila mebileng ba hloka mesebetsi empa re re ba
rutehile. Bana ba tswang dikoletjheng tsa rona ba tla tswa ba butswitse, ba
betletswe ho kallana le diphepetso tsa bophelo.

Re thoholetsa Lefapha la Thuto ka molawana ona. Ke a leboha. (Translation
of Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[Our government is committed to providing quality education that is
progressive and well balanced, and not the kind of education that issues
useless certificates that will cause our children to be unemployable and to
loiter in the streets, even though they claim that they are educated.
Students from our colleges will be qualified and ready to face life’s
challenges.
We applaud the Department of Education for this Bill. I thank you.]

I thank you very much. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, in view of the transition the education sector
has undergone, this Bill certainly shall suffice in co-ordinating FET
institutes and other learning facilities that also endorse FET programmes.

In view of the Bill’s ends, the MF welcomes the provisions that verify the
identification of FET institutes and the management of their staff and
finances. It is indeed necessary that legal verification be made as to the
employment of staff, and their benefits and terms. This will allow greater
clarity for both management and staff. We find the provisions in terms of
standard college statutes for public colleges extremely beneficial to their
governance.

The Bill provides well for the management of finances, and it appears that
it will greatly benefit the management and operation of all FET institutes,
and their staff and finances. Hon Minister, the MF wishes you well in all
your endeavours. The MF supports the Further Education and Training
Colleges Bill. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr R P Z VAN DEN HEEVER: Chairperson, the Freedom Charter envisaged an
education system where the doors of learning will be opened to all. One of
the key areas of learning that the ANC has identified has been the
development of skills to serve a widely diverse labour market and expanding
economy. This is clearly set out in the goals of Asgisa and Jipsa.

In following after the ANC speakers who spoke before me, I am mindful of
the broad overview given by our chairperson, Prof Mayatula; the
recapitalisation process outlined by hon Andre Gaum; Comrade Vytjie
Mentor’s eloquent outline of the role of Parliament in passing legislation;
and the incisive analysis made by comrade Godfrey Mosala on quality
education.

I will, therefore, concentrate on the additional aspect of the Bill, namely
chapter 4 that deals with the appointment of staff and merging of public
institutions, and how the ANC has structured its approach to these
important areas in our educational landscape.

Die wetsontwerp maak voorsiening vir drie kategorieë personeel wat by
openbare kolleges sal werk, naamlik die bestuur, die dosente en die
ondersteuningspersoneel. Die bestuurspersoneel word deur die LUR vir
onderwys in die provinsie aangestel. Die prinsipaal as die hoof uitvoerende
beampte van die kollege, moet verantwoordbaar bly teenoor beide die hoof
van die department, sowel as die LUR.

Die lektore en die personeel word deur die kollege aangestel sodat die
inrigting oor die vermoë sal beskik om vinnig en effektief te reageer op
die behoeftes van die samelewing. Indien ’n fabriek byvoorbeeld vir die
kollege vra om die fabriek van ’n elektrisiën te voorsien, moet die kollege
onmiddellik bekwame elektrisiëns kan aanstel, sodat sodanige mense by die
kollege voorberei kan word.

Sodanige staf sal aangestel word uit fondse wat deur die Departement van
Onderwys voorsien word, en insinuasies dat kolleges hulle studentegeld sal
moet verhoog vir so ’n inisiatief, is natuurlik van alle waarheid ontbloot.

Op dieselfde manier is kwaadwillige gerugte dat lektore en
ondersteuningspersoneel hul voordele soos pensioene, behuisingsubsidies en
verlof sal inboet, totaal ongegrond. Al hierdie dinge word gedek deur
artikel 197 van die Wet op Arbeidsverhoudinge van 1995.

Die ANC het seker gemaak dat alle personeel wat oorgeplaas word, gedek word
deur artikel 197 van die Wet op Arbeidsverhoudinge, waarvolgens hulle
oorgeplaas word met behoud van alle voordele wat hulle onder hul vorige
wetgewer geniet het. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The Bill makes provision for three categories of staff that will be
employed at public colleges, namely management, lecturers and support
staff. Management staff will be appointed by the MEC for Education in the
province. The principal, as the chief executive officer of the college,
will have to remain accountable to both the head of the department, as well
as the MEC.

The lecturers and staff are appointed by the college so that the
institution can by, all means, respond quickly and effectively to the needs
of the community. If, for example, a college were asked to provide a
factory with an electrician, the college would be able to appoint a
competent electrician immediately, so that such individuals could be
prepared at the college.

Such staff will be appointed from funds provided by the Department of
Education and insinuations that colleges will have to increase their
student fees for such an initiative, are, of course, devoid of any truth.

Similarly, malicious rumours that lecturers and support staff will forfeit
their benefits, such as pensions, housing subsidies and leave, are totally
unfounded. All these matters are covered by section 197 of the Labour
Relations Act of 1995.

The ANC made sure that all staff transfers are covered by section 197 of
the Labour Relations Act of 1995, whereby they will retain all the benefits
that they enjoyed under their previous employer when they are transferred.]
During the public hearings held by the education portfolio committee, all
teacher unions raised their main concern about issues regarding the
appointment of staff, as stated in chapter 4 and clause 54 of the Bill.
Sadtu argued that subclause 13 of the Bill, which dealt with
rationalisation of the workforce, should be deleted from the Bill since it
is dealt with in the Labour Relations Act itself. The ANC, in the
deliberations of its study group, considered this matter and through the
education portfolio committee, have deleted subclause 13 from the Bill.

Naptosa, on the other hand, raised the concern that clause 54 did not go
far enough in order to ensure that section 197 of the Labour Relations Act
is a driving principle behind the consequence caused by the change of
employment status. In response to that concern, the ANC initiated the
redrafting of the original clause 54 in the portfolio committee and entered
an additional subclause which unequivocally states that, and I quote:


  Section 195 of the Labour Relations Act applies to the appointment of the
  principal, vice-principal, lecturers and support staff at the college.

In these instances, the ANC redrafted the legislation in accordance with
the very vehement principled objections of the teachers’ unions. The ANC
has followed that approach because it recognises unions as a fundamental
role-player in the finalisation of the education policy and respects organs
of civil society as institutions that should be consulted in a democratic
manner.

The ANC could, however, not be persuaded by the equally eloquent
submissions of the unions that collective agreement should automatically
form the basis of legislation and that such collective agreement should be
endorsed by Parliament without question. As Comrade Vytjie Mentor has
pointed out, it is an undeniable fact that the status of employment in the
public sector, and in particular public education institutions, is not
determined by collective agreements but is prescribed by legislation.
Legislation prescribes the specific responsibilities, powers and functions
assigned to the employer.

It was, therefore, incorrect of the unions to allege that the department
was unilaterally amending the status of the employer, as it is Parliament
that originally assigned that status through legislation to the department.
And it is only Parliament that can amend or change the status of the
employer through an Act of Parliament.

Parliament has the constitutional obligation to make laws that reflect the
government’s policies and must engage during this process with the broader
public. Parliament does have a very democratic process by which to take
into consideration the legitimate concerns of the unions and other members
of civil society. It is for this reason that the education portfolio
committee should hold public hearings in order to provide organs of civil
society with an opportunity to formally address the portfolio committee
about the various concerns and objections.

Even though not every phrase and comma proposed by the various
organisations have been agreed to, the ANC feels satisfied that it has
addressed the major concerns raised with regard to the appointment of staff
at colleges. The Further Education and Training Colleges Bill was
unanimously agreed to by all parties within the education portfolio
committee, on 3 November 2006. I therefore listened carefully to the input
of hon Boinamo to ascertain whether the DA would stick to this expression
of support of the Bill in the portfolio committee. I must submit that I was
pleasantly surprised by the more constructive and progressive input by hon
Boinamo on behalf of the DA.

The DA’s view that it supports the principle of the Bill, but has strong
reservations on certain clauses, is understandable. Let us just hope that
when it comes to voting for the Bill, the DA will not get cold feet and
turn its back on the positive steps that it took here today.

I agree that there is a historically biased view of learners to technical
and vocational education. Learners often view vocational education as for
those who work with their hands, and that those who want to work with their
heads have to receive a university education. I agree with hon Gaum that
legislation alone will not fix this problem. It will be up to all of us to
turn around this negative perception by dynamic marketing programmes and
persuasive systems of conviction.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasise that the FET college sector is
crucial in promoting educational and socioeconomic transformation. They
straddle macroeconomic, labour market and human resource development. The
FET colleges are crucial to the economy. They facilitate the critical
junction between general education and training, and higher education and
training.

It is for this reason that it has been crucial to have this process of
recapitalisation of colleges. It represents the most meaningful policy
initiative to realise the goals of an FET college system that is
educationally responsible in providing a holistic educational experience
grounded in strong content knowledge and the fundamentals, as well as being
responsive to the needs of industry. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, I think the hon members are
applauding members very quietly. It is perhaps because they don’t
appreciate the importance of this piece of legislation. We have said: Let
the skills revolution begin. Now is the time for the skills revolution for
the young people of our country. [Applause.]
Let us not forget that many young people in South Africa were denied the
opportunity to acquire intermediate skills training, access to high-level
technology and a place in the economy of our country. This legislation
creates that opportunity and should be welcomed purely on that basis.

Another matter, however, is the intervention that hon members have referred
to concerning the R1,9 billion recapitalisation of the FET college sector.
Hon members, before the recapitalisation, our colleges did not have access
to information technology. They were not all networked; today they are.
They didn’t have proper financial management systems; today they do.
[Applause.] They didn’t have proper human resource procedures; today they
do. They were training young people on the wrong equipment, eg a mechanical
engineer for BMW, Mazda or even Nissan. Today they have the most up-to-date
equipment for the mechanical engineering programmes. [Applause.] That’s the
kind of recapitalisation that has occurred.

That change was necessary. It is now in place. It’s not been a careless
process. It’s a process that began a long time ago. I keep reminding hon
members that what we are doing is strengthening, consolidating and
enhancing quality, because many of these processes have been part of the
ANC’s agenda anyway. But the rot that we had to deal with was so deep that
it will take a long time to get to the point where we are able to
implement.

Former Ministers of Education have begun the process of putting in place
the matters we are concluding today. These have been necessary processes.
But they do confirm that we are indeed able to set about producing the
nature of human resource skills that South Africa requires. We are doing
that and any person who votes against this legislation is against young
people in South Africa having access to information and communications
technology training. That person is against young people in South Africa
having access to a broad range of engineering programmes, and is against
young people in South Africa having access to construction programmes
across the board.

Hon members keep referring to 13 programmes. Hon Boinamo, it is 13 cognate
economic disciplines that have 52 programmes within them. So the amount of
13 is a bit of a misnomer. If you have construction as a macro framing
programme name, under it there may be 23 different skills areas in which
you get training. So let’s not talk of 13 as a small number of programmes.
It is merely a framing nomenclature. There is a great deal of detail
embedded under that. I think that’s what we all must accept. [Applause.]

I am very pleased that, for the first time, it’s possible that the hon
Boinamo will support a piece of legislation that I have brought to the
House. I am excited at that possibility. However, we’ll see in a few
moments whether my excitement is worthy of the name.

I must thank hon members again for the work that they have clearly done.
They have understood our intentions and have clearly elaborated them to
this House and to the members who may not be part of the education
portfolio committee. These are public colleges that we are dealing with.
They will be publicly funded. The fact of the change of governance and
employment arrangements doesn’t mean we are abrogating government’s
responsibility to continue to provide funding.

Hon Pheko, we address the matter of poverty by, for the first time, as from
2007, having a bursary scheme which is state-supported regarding the FET
colleges sector. I hope your support for students who are poor is going to
cause you tonight to go into the Internet to the Department of Education’s
website to download the norms and standards for FET college funding that we
published some months ago; and will cause you to write a comment to me to
say you support those norms and standards because they address the needs of
poor students, specifically. So I hope your support for the poor will
result in action in commenting on steps that government intends to take in
order to address these very areas. I really urge hon members and the public
that we should not, when legislation is published for public comment,
neglect to comment and then, down the line, when we wish to frame an Act,
say, “We were not consulted”, when in fact, there were eight months or
longer for you to actually state your viewpoints.

Hon Mpontshane, we have taken a look at all the colleges. You will be
surprised at how many I have visited. We are aware of some of the
inadequacies on a number of them. This is what the recapitalisation seeks
to achieve. So we are attending to those colleges that might be weak. And
we are looking at how we can actually achieve this important thing I keep
talking about, which is the differentiation of programme offerings.

There are certain of our colleges in some of our rural areas which cannot
do all 52 programmes. We need to allow them to specialise. We have
identified these and we say we will strengthen in this particular area.
This Bill, again, will allow us to achieve that level of niche excellence
and programme differentiation but, certainly, we will address these areas.

I disagree with you fundamentally in your view that the recapitalisation is
moving at a snail’s pace. You are absolutely wrong. You have not been fully
briefed and I think you haven’t been attending the briefings we have been
giving to the portfolio committee. I will certainly ask my department to
provide you with some information.

However, I fully heard you when you said we must watch the implementation.
You are absolutely correct because it is between policy and implementation
that we sometimes trip up. Therefore it is a matter that we are paying
close attention to. It is for that reason that once we had got to the point
where we agreed to support specific college plans, I established an
independent monitoring committee to visit each one of the 50 colleges to
assist me in understanding whether indeed they are able to execute as we
require.
As some members have said, one of the weak points was the fact that not all
our colleges have financial managers within them. So the receipt of a large
amount of money is an area that we have to actually look at fairly
carefully in ensuring that they can administer and manage the funds as we
would desire. So we are paying attention to each of these areas because,
hon members, we can no longer afford to fail to succeed to provide South
Africa with the growth and expansion in the intermediate skills that this
country requires.

There is a large number of jobs available out there but young people are
not trained in those fields. The reason that young persons who are emerging
from colleges have not been taken into employment or entrepreneurship
opportunity is because the training was not relevant to the demand. So
training and jobs must in some way speak to each other. Our processes begin
to achieve just that.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order, hon Minister, I regret that
your time has expired.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, in conclusion, let me thank
members. I am very happy that the members generally appear to support our
legislation. I thank the portfolio committee for the serious piece of work
it has done and I thank the stakeholders for the commentary and support
that they gave to the process. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): That concludes the debate. Are
there any objections to the Bill being read a second time?

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, despite the extraordinary attempts on the part
of the Minister of Education and the hon Mr Randall van den Heever, I have
to inform the House that the DA will not be opposing the Bill. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Thank you, Mr Ellis.

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.


     SIXTEEN DAYS OF ACTIVISM FOR NO VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND CHILDREN


                          (Subject for Discussion)

Mr M WATERS: Chairperson and hon members, the 16 Days for No Violence
Against Women and children starts on Saturday, 25 November. While it is
important that we debate such issues in forums such as this one, we should
not fall into the trap of believing that we can solve the problem with an
annual debate. We, as parliamentarians, have a responsibility to ensure
that the state agencies set up to help victims and bring perpetrators to
book are resourced sufficiently in order to fulfil their mandates.

The crime stats speak for themselves. There were 54 926 reported rapes last
year, and 23 453 of these victims were children. That, hon members, is more
than 64 children raped per day. The ANC in its 1999, 2004 and 2006 election
manifestos stated that crimes against women and children were a top
priority and, given the frequency with which the ruling party makes this
promise, one would expect them to actually keep it. The DA has found that
this is not the case.

The family violence, child protection and sexual offences units, or the FCS
units, were established so that these heinous crimes could be investigated
by dedicated officers with empathy for victims. But in October this year
the government began dispersing the members of these units to ordinary
police stations. Police Commissioner Selby Bokaba assured South Africans
that: “We are not closing them down, we are migrating these skills and
expertise to station level.”

Recently, I personally conducted a station-by-station investigation of the
new locations of the FCS offices or units in Gauteng to see whether the
commissioner was being honest. Unfortunately, I found the answer to be no.
There are 36 cluster stations across Gauteng to which FCS cases must now be
referred. I found that in only three of these stations could FCS officers
still do their jobs properly. The DA’s investigation exposed the fact that
far from expanding access to these services, this new policy makes it more
difficult for women and children to get help and protection from the
police.

In theory, each of the 36 cluster stations is supposed to have an allocated
group of FSC-trained officers. So, did this happen? The reality is that 11
cluster stations out of 36, almost one third, have no FCS units at all. In
the cluster stations where there are FCS officers, there’s an extremely
high level of dissatisfaction. We were told that not one police officer had
been consulted as to which cluster station he or she was to be moved to.

Some officers complained of being treated “like criminals” during the
moving process. At one station, we were told that they could not see how
SAPS could say that crimes against women and children were a top priority
when so little consideration had been given to the restructuring.

The Minister of Safety and Security made a promise that FCS officers would
be able to focus on FCS cases and would not be expected to take on ordinary
police cases. However, we found in at least two police stations - Sebokeng
and Katlehong - that FCS police officers were now expected to investigate
general crimes.

As far as the distribution of policing resources is concerned, FCS officers
need much the same equipment and resources that ordinary police officers
need. It is also critical that they have a lockable cupboard where dockets
and evidence can be kept safe.

However, we found that at only three cluster stations - Hillbrow,
Johannesburg Central and Sophiatown - were FCS officers provided with all
or almost all of the necessary police resources to allow them to do their
jobs. But it was easy to see why this was the case. These three units were
not moved from their combined Braamfontein offices, and have simply
retained all their resources, unlike the other units.

On the other hand, units that were previously well resourced with
playrooms, interviewing rooms, offices and telephones, such as Pretoria and
Soweto, were now forced to move. These premises now stand empty.

During our investigation a problem that was repeatedly raised by FCS
officers was the lack of office space. In most of the stations, one office
was being shared between many people. In 16 cluster stations, FCS officers
had neither sufficient office space nor telephone lines and many officers
were using their own cars as an office.

Some examples of the trying circumstances officers found themselves in
include the following. At Moroka station in Soweto, which has the highest
number of reported FCS crimes in Gauteng, they were not given one single
office to sit in – so the police members were physically forced to carry
their dockets with them at all times.

In Katlehong, we were told that, owing to the lack of private office space,
the suspect and the victim sometimes had to sit together in the same
office, and that there was no such thing as a “private statement”.
[Interjections.] I’ll take it that the Deputy Minister has been to all
these FCS units, and that’s why she is howling from the sides. In Sebokeng,
the 19 FCS officers were given no office space at all and the one inspector
is now using the broom cupboard as his office.

In Soshanguve, the FCS officers were crammed four into an office with no
phones. In Daveyton, we found FCS officers using “zozo” huts at the side of
the police station, and three of these huts did not have locks – so they
couldn’t lock away the dockets. In Tembisa, 10 officers were sharing one
“zozo” hut with no phone.

In Germiston, five FCS officers were sharing one office containing two
desks, three chairs and one phone line. Their dockets were lying all over
the floor. In Springs, FCS officers were given office space in an old
building, which looked more like old cells, and had to go to the main
building to make telephone calls.

In Mamelodi East, FCS officers had to use their own private cellphones to
make calls. In Pretoria Central there were no offices at all - four FCS
officers were in a hall while others were squatting with other police
members.

It is outrageous for this government to pretend that crimes against women
and children are a top priority when it cannot even ensure that FCS police
officers have office space where they can store dockets and investigate
cases. How difficult is it to plan ahead to ensure that phone lines are
actually installed?

Crime kits and lock-up facilities for evidence are both crucial to building
up a case. But during our visit we found that 19 of the 25 cluster stations
did not have crime kits at all. This means that DNA evidence cannot be
collected and attending a crime scene is virtually pointless.

Furthermore, we found that only seven stations had adequate lock-up
facilities for dockets and evidence, and that dockets were frequently
stored on desks, on floors and in cars and often in full public view. In
Vereeniging, firearms that were part of the evidence in a particular case
were lying on the floor.

A critical part of the FCS officer’s job is to provide a supportive and
secure environment for victims of social violence. Social workers need to
be available to counsel and assess victims and prepare them for court
appearances, and they need quiet, private space in which victims will not
feel intimidated in which to do this. It is also important to have a
victims’ room where traumatised victims of abuse and violence can be
attended to far away from the general rush of ordinary police business.

Our survey showed that not one of the new cluster stations had been
supplied with the full range of forensic support facilities. Only eight had
forensic social workers and very few of these social workers had an office
in which to sit down and actually assess the victims. This means that where
children or victims of assault must be interviewed, the forensic social
worker now has to negotiate for office space, or do it in public view.
There is not a single cluster station in the whole of Gauteng that has a
separate FCS victims’ room where FCS police officers can take a victim’s
statement.

Many officers reported that their new offices were intimidating to
children. In Mamelodi East, the FCS officers were stationed in the parade
room and there was a constant flow of police officers through this room,
because they had to go to the adjacent balcony to smoke, as it was a
smoking balcony. So the children had no privacy at all in which to give
statements.

In Atteridgeville, the entrance to the FCS office was blocked by officers
certifying documents. This meant that there was usually a large crowd of
people around the entrance. Again, this was reported to be intimidating to
the victims, particularly children.

We were often told that this situation was worse than the previous
circumstances. Meadowlands officers in Soweto, for example, reported that
they had previously been stationed at the IKhaya Lethemba Centre in Soweto
where they and the FCS officers from the other three Soweto units had all
the facilities they needed. These offices were now standing empty.

The Minister of Safety and Security stated in a reply to a parliamentary
question of mine that the migration was undertaken in terms of the
principles contained in a business plan and with attention to the social
crime rates in the areas of the different clusters.

However, when one compares the crime rates at the various cluster stations
to the available resources; it is difficult to understand the rational
basis for the decisions made. It is clear from my investigation that
resources are available to FCS officers on a highly uneven basis and that
there is little correlation between the need for an FCS service and the
resources made available to it.

Hillbrow, Johannesburg Central and Sophiatown are all fortunate to be
relatively well equipped with resources, although not one of them ranks at
the top of the scale in terms of social crime rates. On the other hand,
there are many stations which have serious crime problems, but which do not
have the resources that more peaceful stations do. For example, Moroka in
Soweto shares joint first place with Meadowlands for crimes reported during
the last financial year, but it is ranked 24th out of 25 in terms of
availability of resources. Sebokeng is number 6 in terms of crimes
reported, but only number 20 in availability of resources.

Even if it is necessary to accept an environment of scarce resources, every
effort should be made to ensure that the cluster stations that have the
greatest need for FCS services are the best equipped with the tools they
need to do the job. Unfortunately, this is not the case.

It is clear from the DA’s investigation that the overwhelming majority of
FCS cluster stations have nothing close to what is needed to provide a
proper investigation and support service for victims of sexual assault and
family violence. In fact, the migration of skills has been retrogressive as
far as the availability of an FCS service is concerned.

Prior to the migration, every FCS case was at least investigated by an FCS
officer. Sadly, today this is not the case. In fact, 22 200 cases will not
be investigated by an FCS officer now in Gauteng. Most of the FCS officers
we spoke to said the change had had an immediate and negative effect on
their ability to handle cases relating to children.

KwaZulu-Natal is the next province that will be facing the migration of FCS
officers to cluster police stations. The DA sincerely hopes that the ANC
will not strip them bare of their resources as in Gauteng, but rather give
effect to their election promise that crimes against women and children are
indeed a top priority.

Today is no better than yesterday, and tomorrow can only be worse. I thank
you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, hon
members of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen, unfortunately, I am not going
to respond to the previous speaker, because I am not the Minister of Safety
and Security and I’m leading an awareness campaign, I don’t deal with
statistics on police stations.

The only thing that I am thinking is that it is a pity I didn’t hear him
saying, “I also took the media along to see these police stations”. I am
really very disappointed because that seems to be the style of the DA
lately, taking the media along with them. Maybe he is trying to outsmart
the hon Mr Douglas Gibson. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Please proceed, hon Deputy
Minister.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, I
would first like to thank the Presidency for entrusting me with this huge
responsibility. The responsibility, as I have made clear from the onset, is
not going to be mine alone. In fact, I think all the citizens of this
country, black, white, young and old, are equally responsible for making
sure that the protection of women and children is realised.

I would also like to thank my predecessor for having done such outstanding
work in leading the previous campaign, and, because of this stunning work,
raising awareness. The issue of women’s protection is now firmly on the
national agenda. As a result, I have not changed anything she has done, but
only added a few dimensions to the campaign.

It is sad that in this day and age, in our twelfth year of democracy, we
are still standing here debating the issue of women and children’s
protection. For me - and I hope all women feel the same – women, having
been part and parcel of the struggle for freedom, should be free today like
they were when we went to the voting stations.

With this in mind, you will realise that women and children are still not
free to walk in the streets at any given time at night, and you will
equally realise that this is not in line with the vision of those women who
marched to the Union Buildings 50 years ago, which you know nothing of.
[Interjections.]

If women still have to mind how short and revealing their skirts and pants
are for fear of being misconstrued as applying for rape, you will agree
with me that this is not being free. If women still have to mind how much
alcohol their drinks contain when in the company of men for fear of getting
drunk and thereby justifying that they can be raped, you will agree with me
that this is not being free.

What is painful is that the most vulnerable women are those who stay in the
informal settlements and rural areas. This is why I have asked all those
involved that the campaign takes a different turn this time around. There
is no better way of doing this than to take it to the local government
spheres.

In this regard, I have written to all the Premiers so that they can ensure
that the campaign has meaning and is visible to ordinary women of this
country. I am glad to report to you, hon members, that the Premiers’
responses were very enthusiastic.

It is when the issue of women’s protection remains on the daily agenda of
all municipalities and is spoken about at ward committee level that we
stand a chance of ending this violence. It is when ordinary women know what
to do and where to go when faced with this scourge that we shall say that
we are now on the right path to ending this violence.

As I said, this campaign is not mine. I have approached the traditional
leaders, through their structures, to come on board and help us demystify
some of the bizarre cultural claims that the perpetrators usually use to
justify their behaviour. I am glad to report that the traditional leaders
are all on board and that their programmes will run parallel with this
campaign.

The women who work and stay on the farms are by far the most vulnerable.
They normally suffer what I can call double abuse, from the farm owners
themselves as well as from their husbands or partners. This is why the
campaign has included the farmworkers awareness programme. In this
programme, we challenge the farm owners to partner with government in
fighting this scourge. I am once again happy to report to this House that
we have been to Ladysmith in KwaZulu-Natal to launch the programme last
month, on 15 October, and I may add that it was a huge success.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the local municipality of
Umnambithi, the office of the Premier in KwaZulu-Natal and all the
departments that participated in this programme. May I also add that the
event was not only about raising awareness, but it was also linked to the
notion of bringing government to the people.
The departments that were in attendance provided free service to people. I
would like specifically to thank the farming associations of Ladysmith for
their co-operation and participation, but most importantly, for their
commitment to ending this violence against women and children. We would
indeed like to see this programme infiltrating all the farming communities.

A problem of this nature, with such complexities, cannot be the
responsibility of government alone. In this regard, we have called upon the
private sector, sister departments, NGOs and CBOs, including men’s
organisations, to partner with the government in fighting this scourge. All
of these have registered their undying commitment and support for the
campaign.

This is indeed promising, because it is when we employ these
multidimensional approaches that women and children can look forward with
the greatest hope to their total safety in this age of hope. Yes, we have
galvanised support from the stakeholders I have just mentioned, but the
most important partners in this campaign are the communities. If
communities were to realise that the issue of women’s and children’s
protection is equally their business, I guarantee hon members that we could
arrive at our destination sooner than we think.

An offence to a woman should be regarded as an offence to that community
and therefore needs to be reported. I am glad that the law enforcement
agencies are now treating the issue of violence against women and children
seriously and that, as we speak, the Sexual Offences Bill is with the
Justice Portfolio Committee, which, I am told, is viewing the results of
the public hearings process. We hope that this Bill will give effect to the
declaration we made at the Kopanong conference in May 2006, and that is
that it is time for our progressive Constitution to work hard to protect
our women and children.

As we are about to embark on our traditional 16 Dys of Activism campaign,
activities starting on 25 November 2006 in Limpopo and ending in the
Northern Cape on 10 December 2006, I appeal to all those who haven’t
formally approached us to consider themselves partners of the campaign and
to commit themselves to doing something in their own individual capacities
to end violence against women and children.

To the perpetrators, it does not mean that after 10 December you can start
abusing women and children. I further call upon the media, especially women
reporters, to remain vigilant on this matter. Most importantly, I challenge
all political parties in this House to ensure that they have programmes
that are aimed at ending violence against women and children. That way,
we’d be likely to win this battle. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA: Hon Chairperson, the 16 Days of Activism for No Violence
Against Women and Children has been an annual and endorsed campaign since
1998. It was practised then and continues up to today. It commences on 25
November and runs on until 10 December each year.

The objective of this campaign is to raise awareness of the violence
perpetrated against women and children. In addition to breaking the silence
amongst women and children who are always victims of the situation, we need
to empower and assure them that they are not alone but someone out there
hears their cries.

There are programmes which are designed especially to deal with these
issues of domestic violence, women and children abuse in any form. Such
programmes are funded by the government to help our communities. These
programmes provide counselling and shelter for the abused women and
children.

The IFP hopes that the 16 Days of Activism will bring a change of heart to
those men who continually believe that womenfolk are there for their sexual
desires, and who believe that they can rape and beat them for fulfilment of
their desires. In most cases which are reported, the victims know their
attackers, since in most incidences perpetrators are brothers, fathers,
uncles, neighbours and relatives.

However, in order to deal with these issues, women have to speak out about
their lived experiences. They must break the silence. But children are the
responsibility of society and they must be cared for. Women, as adults,
have rights and deserve the right to their bodily self-determination. Women
need to be empowered on what is actually violence against them.

Seemingly, other women out there do not understand what abuse is all about,
unfortunately. They need to be empowered and educated because for them
abuse is all about being beaten or sexually abused, whereas there are many
forms for abusive behaviour they encounter in their lives which they do not
report. They should report every cruelty they encounter, whether it be
sexually or otherwise.

Bomama, madodakazi, musani ukubhala nibuye nicime. Akufuneki nincengwe uma
senifake isimmangalo. Akufuneki ukuthi nibuye niye kocima amacala, nibuyele
khona kwaGenesisi. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraph
follows.)

[To the mothers and daughters out there, we say please, just do one thing
at a time. Do not allow yourselves to be cajoled into withdrawing cases
after laying charges against the perpetrators. It is not good for you to go
back to the police stations to withdraw the complaints filed against the
perpetrators and go back to square one. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Ms N C NKABINDE: Hon Chairperson, hon members, today, in the Johannesburg
High Court, each of the 261 charges are read out to an accused man. Amongst
these charges are several dozens of alleged rapes as well as kidnapping and
other acts of violence and abuse aimed at women. What these cases highlight
is that in our society, there are people who hate women and who will not
hesitate to inflict violence and abuse upon them.

We will never dispute the necessity or correctness of the 16 Days of
Activism campaign. But, simultaneously, we should ask whether this campaign
and other efforts are succeeding. We must not delude ourselves that because
we are expending a great deal of energy on a campaign, it will necessarily
be successful. The time has come for the 16 Days of Activism campaign to
become a time not only of heightened awareness but also of heightened
public debates and discussions about how we as society can respond to the
murderers, abusive and violent people who have no regard or respect for
fellow citizens.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, your time has expired.
[Applause.]

Mr L W GREYLING: Chairperson, former President Nelson Mandela once said,
“The children who sleep in the street, reduced to begging to make a living,
are testimony to an unfinished job.”

As we see in another 16 Days of Activism, we should all be ashamed that we
have not yet finished the job. We should also be ashamed that this
government is only meeting 3% of the funding required to fulfil its
constitutional obligations to meet the needs of children. This lack of
funding is felt most acutely by those children who line up on the streets
as a result of abusive and poverty-stricken home environments.

There is no such thing as street children. There are only children who are
in desperate need of care and healing for the abuse they have suffered.
Last Thursday night, I was at the Caledon street police station where five
children had been rounded up by the local police. They did not know where
to take these kids, as there’s currently no sustainable solution for them.

Why is it that we leave the police and private security companies to deal
with the problem that should be dealt with by social services? In all of
the different round-ups of these children that I had to intervene in,
there’s not been a single social worker inside. We need to urgently rethink
the manner in which we treat abused children in this country. They need our
support and healing ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr L W GREYLING: We as a society must build such facilities urgently.

Nkskz X C MAKASI: Mhlalingaphambili, kungovuyo kuthi kulo nyaka ukuba
iintsuku ezili-16 zemigushuzo yokulwela amalungelo abafazi nabantwana
zifike ngexesha lezikhumbuzo ezibaluleke kakhulu kwimizabalazo yethu
yokulwela umasilingane nenkululeko yeli lizwe. Sikhumbula umngcelele
owawubanjwe ngamakhosikazi angama-20 000 esiya kwiZakhiwo zoMdibaniso, ii-
Union Buildings, kwiminyaka engama-50 eyadlulayo, ngomhla we-9 kuAgasti ka-
1956.

Sikhumbula kananjalo abafundi abaphumela ezitalatweni besilwela ukuba
banganyanzeliswa ngeBantu Education neAfrikaans ngoJuni ka-1976. Kwakhona
sikhumbula iminyaka eli-10 yoMgaqo-siseko woMzantsi Afrika kwakunye
nokumiselwa kwe-Progressive Women’s Movement ngoAgasti ka-2006.

Xa sisithi asibufuni ubundlobongela obujoliswe kumakhosikazi nabantwana
asibhekisi kwezi ntsuku zili-16 kuphela. Sithi ubundlobongela mabungenziwa
iintsuku ezingama-365, njengoko watshoyo uMongameli wethu weli lizwe,
uThabo Mbeki.

Urhulumente uzimisele ukuqwalasela zonke iinkxalabo zamakhosikazi kuwo onke
amaphulo awenzayo. Ubundlobongela obuchaphazela amakhosikazi nabantwana
asingomgushuzo kwaye ingengombhiyozo wosuku olunye. Kufuneka sibulwe
sibuncothule neengcambu kwiindawo esihlala kuzo.

Kule minyaka ili-12 sikhululekile urhulumente uyenzile imithetho ekhusela
amalungelo amakhosikazi kunye nabantwana, imithetho efana neDomestic
Violence Act, iMaintenance Act nokuhlonitshwa kwemitshato yesiNtu.

Kananjalo lo rhulumente uqeqeshe abantu ukuze baphume iphulo bafundise
abantu ngamalungelo abo ekuhlaleni. Le mithetho ikhona nabantu bafundisiwe
ngayo kodwa kukhona baxhatshwazwayo.

Besiye emaphondweni sifuna ukuqonda ukuba ngaba ingxaki ilele phi kwaye
iyintoni eyenza ukuba kungapheli ukuxhatshazwa kwamakhosikazi nabantwana.
Sifumanise ukuba ubukhulu becala oomama abaphangeli, ngoko amakhosikazi
athi akuxhatshazwa avule amatyala, aphinde athi sele ewavulile awacime
esithi: “Xa ndimbambile lo myeni wam ndiza kutya ntoni nabantwana bam?”
Kufuneka siqwalasele ukuba loo nto singayilungisa njani na. Kumele sijonge
ukuba angavuleka njani amathuba emisebenzi alungiselelwe amakhosikazi.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs X C MAKASI: Chairperson, it is a great pleasure for us that the 16
Days of Activism for No Violence Against Women and Children corresponds
with the celebrations for equal rights and freedom in South Africa. We
remember the protest march of 20 000 women who, on 9 August 1956, 50 years
ago, marched to the Union Buildings.

We are reminded of learners who went to the streets fighting against Bantu
Education and Afrikaans in June 1976. We are once more reminded of the 10
years of the recognition of the Constitution of South Africa and the
establishment of the Progressive Women’s Movement in August 2006.

When we pronounce that we are against women and children abuse we are not
referring to the 16 Days of Activism only. We say the protest against abuse
of women and children must be observed for 365 days as stated by our
President, Thabo Mbeki.

The government is prepared to look at problems encountered by women in all
their endeavours. The activism against women and children abuse should not
be a once-off activity. We must fight and eliminate abuse in our
communities.

In these 12 years of freedom government has passed laws that protect women
and children’s rights such as the Domestic Violence Act and the respect of
customary marriages.

Furthermore, this government has started a plan that promotes human rights
in the communities. These laws are in place, and people are made aware of
them, but the abuse is still prevailing.
We visited the provinces trying to ascertain where the problem lies and
what perpetuates it in our communities. We discovered that most women are
unemployed; therefore they open cases and withdraw them because they is in
prison. We must look at how we can rectify that. We need to see how we can
provide employment opportunities for women.]

We will not be shy to boast about achievements made by our government, but
we will also not be naïve in our boasting. Thanks to the foundational
National Crime Prevention Strategy, we have continued to witness, since 12
years ago, the establishment, development and related implementation of
various strategies and programmes to correct the imbalances of the past. We
have provided for the delivery of quality and professional services to our
women and children in a manner that shows respect for the poor and the
vulnerable, while advancing the principles of human dignity and integrity.

This government is not only enacting legislation, but monitoring for
compliance is also imperative for maximum effect. The Independent
Complaints Directorate has been mandated to monitor and institute
disciplinary proceedings, should a member of the SAPS fail to comply with
the obligations of the Domestic Violence Act.

We have seen the integrated justice system being transformed and
strengthened so that the needs of victims are met. Special sexual offences
courts have been established. Thus, the DA should not whine about the
abolishment of special units.

The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development, the SA Police
Service, the Department of Social Development and the Department of Health
have all come together and established several Thuthuzela care centres
across the country. At these centres, victims have access to all services,
including police, counselling, doctors, social workers and prosecutors.

The main objective of these centres is to eliminate secondary
victimisation, where it is ensured that the victim is not further
traumatised in the process of reporting an incident. It is also ensured
that information needed to secure a prosecution and conviction is passed
seamlessly from one person to another.

Despite these remarkable achievements, related challenges remain. Probably
the main challenge that is faced by the government pertaining to sexual
offences is, ironically, the high rate of case withdrawal by the victims of
abuse and violence.

Despite the initiatives of facilitating needs-based programmes when women
are still in shock and trauma, too scared or intimidated to testify in
court or intimidated to withdraw the cases, still, many victims opt to
withdraw or not lay a charge at all against the perpetrators.
Owona ndoqo kule nyewe kukuba sizixelele singamakhosikazi ukuba
ukuxhatshazwa nobundlobongela obujoliswe kumakhosikazi nabantwana
asiyongxaki enokuthi isonjululwe ngurhulumente yedwa. Sisonke siluluntu,
singabahlali, simelwe kukuphakama sime ngeenyawo. Kufuneka siyiqonde le
ngxaki ukuba yeyoluntu lwasekuhlaleni. Ubunganga bamapolisa abunakusinceda
ukuba asisebenzisani nawo. Kufuneka intsebenziswano phakathi kwamapolisa,
abantu, urhulumente wephondo nowasekhaya - sonke sisebenzisane.

Iiprojekthi ezisungulwa ngulo rhulumente wethu kufuneka zifikelele
emaphandleni, ngoba kulapho igquba khona indlala. Siyazi ukuba kulapho
iingxaki neenzingo zikhoyo. Amakhosikazi asemaphandleni nawo kufuneka
ezifumene ezi nkonzo, angaweli amahlathi nemilambo ukuze abe nokufumana
iinkonzo.

Xa ndigqibezela, Mhlalingaphambili, ndifuna ukugxininisa kwinto yokuba
ukhuseleko nozinzo phakathi kwamakhosikazi nabantwana, kwanabo
bakhubazekileyo, luxhomekeke kuphuhliso nokuphakanyiswa kwabo ukuze
kananjalo kumiliselwe izimilo ezizizo kuloo madoda axhaphaza ze adlwengule
amakhosikazi nabantwana. Ndiyabulela, Mhlalingaphambili. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The central point in this debate is that violence and abuse against women
and children is not a problem that can be solved by government alone. All
the communities are expected to stand up and fight this. We must understand
this problem as our problem. The might of the police cannot help us if we
are not working with them. Police and community need to work together
including provincial government and local government – we all need to work
together.

Projects initiated by our government must reach rural areas because that is
where poverty is prevalent. That is where intricacy and difficulties are
prevailing. Rural women must enjoy these services and not travel long
distances crossing rivers and forests in order to obtain services.

Finally, Chairperson I want to emphasise that security and stability
amongst women, children and the disabled depend on their development and
the restoration of their dignity, whilst instilling morality in men who
abuse and rape women and children. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, with each passing year, the 16 Days of Activism
campaign intensifies, and with each passing year, the number of incidents
of violence against women and children increases by leaps and bounds.

In 2006 many communities rallied together around the common cause of
addressing the proliferation of sexual and violent acts against children.
Calls for the death penalty for perpetrators of child abuse were rampant,
and community leaders and ordinary South Africans from all walks of life
gave vent to their anger and concern in both the print and electronic
media.

It is a matter of grave concern to the ACDP that this heightened awareness
about violence did not arise from the expensive and time-consuming 16 Days
of Activism campaign, but from the fact that crimes against women and
children escalated to such an extent that a point of crisis was reached. In
this regard, one has to commend the media for fulfilling a crucial
obligation to the public by reporting relentlessly on these tragic events.

While the ACDP appreciates media efforts to maintain awareness of gender-
based violence, we nevertheless urge the media to step up efforts by
ensuring an end to the promotion of stereotyped images of women as sex
objects.

The ACDP supports calls for the 16 Days of Activism to be replaced by
commitment 365 days of the year. Thank you.

Ms M M MDLALOSE: Chairperson, colleagues, the government implements a
robust approach during the 16 Days of Activism to guarantee visibility of
this issue. Nadeco challenges all government departments to implement the
same strategy during the 365 days campaign to achieve a lasting impact. It
is our duty and obligation as Members of Parliament to lead and educate
people by implementing strategic campaigns and projects right through the
year.
Ake sibuyise ubuntu. Asifundise abantwana bethu ukuze bathande ubuntu
nempilo enhle. Asifunde ukusebenzela ukuthula, uxolo nobulungiswa futhi
sikhulume ngezinkinga esibhekene nazo ukuze zingabikhona izindlela
zobugebengu nokuhlushwa kwabanye abantu. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Let us bring back ubuntu. Let us teach our children to love ubuntu and the
good life. Let us teach ourselves to work for peace, forgiveness and
justice and be able to talk about the problems we are facing so that we can
do away with social ills like crime and the abuse of other people. I thank
you.]

Rre P H K DITSHETELO: Modulasetulo, re le UCDP, re kopa gore re boele kwa
re latlhileng tsela gona, ka gore se se diragalang mo nakong e ga se se se
re tshwanetseng. Re mo nakong ya go lebagana le borre kgatlhanong le go
tlhorisa bomme le basetsana. Borra, ikileleng le tlogele go tlhola le
keteka bomme le bana ba basetsana. Ithuteng maitseo a mantle mo mokokong.
Mokoko ga o ke o itaya koko e tshegadi kgotsa o palama dikokwanyana.

A re rateng bommaetsho ka go nna matsetseleko mo go ba direleng tse di
molemo le go ba itumedisa. Re kokoroge jaaka phikoko kgotsa jaaka rotwe yo
mogolo a na le losika lwa gagwe. Re sireletse bana ba rona ba basetsana
kgatlhanong le maitsholo a a makgwakgwa mo direng tsa bona. Borra, a re
tshwaraneng ka diatla kgatlhanong le petelelo ya bomme le basetsana. Re
ikitlanye, re lome meno, re lwantshe sera se se tseneletseng bomme le
basetsana ka mekgwa yotlhe e re ka e kgonang.

Mokgwa wa bokolobe ga o a tshwanela borre ba tsamaiso ya demokerasi. A re
nneng dikai tse dintle mo setšhabeng. Borra, ratang basadi ba lona jaaka
Morena Jesu Keresete a ratile lefatshe. (Translation of Setswana speech
follows.)

[Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Chairperson, the ACDP would like to review the matter
in order to know where we went wrong, because the fact of the matter is
that we have lost it. We are currently faced by challenges relating to the
abuse of women and girls. We would like to make a call to men to abstain
and stop assaulting women and girls. They should learn a lesson from the
cock which does not assault a hen and does not mate with its chicks.

Let us appreciate our women by doing good things for them which hopefully
might eventually make them happy. We should be proud of them like a peacock
or an elderly male baboon, which always takes pride in its family. We
should protect our girls against their perpetrators. Gentlemen, let us
unite against sexual abuse of women and girls. We should be determined to
fight this monster that terrorises our women and girls with whatever means
we have.

We should not allow immoral behaviour to bedevil our men in this age of
democracy. Let us be exemplary in our communities. Let us love our women as
Jesus Christ loved the world.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Chairperson, obviously the 16 Days of Activism for No
Violence Against Women and Children is only symbolic; it’s only to create
awareness of the problem. Since this problem is largely brought by men onto
women, the PAC submits that there must be an intensive education to make
men realise how important it is that they should respect their women, treat
them well and defend them.

Men should not be the source of violence against women and children.
Punishment of the perpetrators who inflict violence on women and children
is called for, but the past few years have shown that it is not a very
effective deterrent to be the only remedy for use in this problem.

This nation has also been traumatised for far too long. People were
dehumanised. It is important that men who are violent against women and
children are assisted to regain their self-esteem and human dignity.
Counselling must be one of the methods used. Brave men do not ill-treat
women and children. Brave men defend women and children. This is the
message that must be sent out to the nation. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mrs D M MOROBI: Chairperson, Deputy Minister and hon members, violence
against women is a form of discrimination and violation of human rights. It
causes untold misery, cutting short lives, and leaves countless women
living in pain and fear in all the countries of the world. It harms
families across generations, impoverishes communities and reinforces other
forms of violence throughout societies.

Violence against women stops them from fulfilling their potential,
restricts economic growth and works against development. The scope and
extent of violence against women is a reflection of the degree and
persistence of discrimination that women continue to face. Therefore it can
only be eliminated by addressing discrimination, promoting women’s equality
and empowerment, and ensuring that women’s human rights are fulfilled.

Violence against women is not confined to a specific culture, religion,
country, or a particular group of women within a society. The different
manifestation of such violence and women’s personal experiences are however
shaped by factors such as ethnicity, class, age, sexual orientation,
disability, nationality or religion.

Women are subjected to violence in a wide range of settings that include
families, communities and state custody. Violence constitutes a continuum
across the lifespan of women from before birth to old age. It cuts across
both the public and the private spheres.

Violence against women emanates from historically unequal power relations
between men and women, individuals or family behavioural patterns,
including histories of abuse, and has also been correlated with an
increased risk of violence.

The most common form of violence experienced by women globally is intimate
partner violence, which sometimes leads to death. Also widespread are
harmful traditional practices, including early and forced marriages and
female genital mutilation.

Violence against women has far-reaching consequences for women, children
and society as a whole. Those who experience violence suffer from a range
of health problems and their ability to earn a living and to participate in
public life is diminished. Their children are significantly more at risk of
health problems, poor school performance and behavioural disturbances.

Violence against women can be defined as any act of abuse, intended or
unintended, of verbal, emotional, psychological, sexual or physical form,
including threats of such acts as depriving one’s liberty. It includes
violence outside the family, intimidation at work and in educational
institutions, witch-hunting, trafficking in women and forced prostitution.
The fact that children, the mentally disabled and other disabled women who
are vulnerable to sexual violence find it difficult to testify in court
should be given special attention. Government should play a significant
role in examining systems of investigation, prosecution, and the way in
which media cover sexual violence, and take appropriate measures to
minimise further trauma for victims of sexual violence.

This year marks the 16th year of the 16 Days of Activism for No Violence
Against Women and Children. This is an international campaign aimed at
raising awareness regarding violence against women. It raises awareness
about gender-based violence as a human rights issue at local, national and
international levels. This campaign also strengthens local work around
violence against women; providing forums in which organisers can develop
and share new and effective strategies; and establishing a clear link
between local and international work to end violence against women.

The exact statistics on the level of gender-based violence are not known
due to underreporting. For the year 2006, the theme is, “Act against
abuse”. The theme gives individuals a chance to get involved, and it
encourages men in workplaces, local clubs, businesspeople and NGOs to say
“no” to all forms of violence against women and children.

In South Africa, President Thabo Mbeki made a call to consider the violence
against women and children not only for 16 days but for the whole year. He
said there should be 365 days of no violence against women and children, as
this violation occurs daily.

This year’s campaign seeks to revisit and strengthen the human rights focus
of work on gender-based violence against women. It also hopes to look at
the many obstacles that women in our communities face and nations that
interact with violence against women.

As we begin our campaign on 25 November annually, this day was chosen to
commemorate the death in 1960 of the Mirabal sisters, who were killed by
the dictatorship of Rafael Trujillo in the Dominican Republic. This day was
officially recognised by the United Nations in 1999, as the International
Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women. The 16-day period also
highlights other significant internationally recognised days, including 1
December, which is World Aids Day, and 6 December, which marks the
anniversary of the Montreal massacre.

In South Africa, the campaign has brought together civil society,
organisations, governments and businesses to raise awareness and to
participate in events to raise funds to support victim’s support
programmes. While the campaign is concentrated over a 16-day period, its
effects last for 365 days.

There has been significant progress in elaborating and agreeing on
international standards and norms. International and regional legal and
policy instruments have clarified the obligation on states to prevent,
eradicate and punish violence against women.

In conclusion, the combination of governments, businesses, civil society
activities and interventions, the envisaged saturation of media coverage
via advertising, public service announcements, interviews and editorial
pronouncements, in conjunction with the extensive education campaign, will
undoubtedly contribute to a heightened national awareness about the issues
related to violence, and the importance of integrated solutions to the
problem.

We encourage you to use this year to share the 16 days’ successes and
struggles with one another and strategise collectively about ways to
increase the effectiveness of the campaign, especially its human rights
focus. Act against abuse, and wear your white ribbons throughout the
campaign and make a difference! Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, I come to this podium feeling very distraught.
We have been coming to this podium to denounce violence against women and
children. We have been working in our constituencies educating and uniting
in the fight against violence directed at women and children, but where are
we failing?

The news about the little seven-year-old Cape Town girl who was raped,
stabbed and then set alight by a trusted family friend last Sunday angers
me and makes me question the fabric of people we are breeding amongst us.

Thanks be to God that the girl is recovering in the hospital. However, she
has sustained third-degree burns to 99% of her body. Our love and prayers
are with the little girl and her family. May God ease her pain and may the
vicious culprit be caught and convicted! What sane person does this to an
innocent child? What sane person brings harm to any human being, and what
excuse could be made for their evil?

The MF supports the 16 Days of Activism for No Violence Against Women and
Children. All spheres of government need to actively partake in reducing
crime and violence in South Africa. Local government needs to realise the
importance it plays in this regard. Our SAPS remains inadequate to assist
in these situations and it is time the promised funding was utilised to
train personnel and equip stations with the means to assist victims of
violence.

As much as we have the strong arm of the South African law, it is still not
a deterrent enough to stop crime. A harsher punishment must be considered
to assist us in the fight against crime. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S J NJIKELANA: Sihlalo obekekileyo, manditsho ukuba siya kumanqwanqwa
aphezulu ngoku. [Hon Chairperson, let me say that we are taking the
campaign to higher levels.]

We are taking the campaign to higher levels.

Bandla elibekekileyo lamaPalamente, nani basindwendweleyo, sesiphinde
safikelela kweli thuba lokuhlalutya iphulo lokuhlambulula eli lizwe
silithandayo ukuze lihlambuluke kubuxelegu bokuphatha oomama nabantwana
ngeendlela ezimanyukunyezi. Kutsha nje bendise Jiniva, apho i-Inter
Parliamentary Union iye yabamba intlanganiso ebiphicotha inkqubela ye-
Convention on the elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
kule nyanga idlulileyo, umhla we-19 kuOkthoba.

Kule ntlanganiso, ezona zinto ziphambili esiphume nazo zezi:
Ingxelo malunga nemizamo yokusetyenziswa kwale ngqungquthela nesikhokelo
sayo malunga nendlela yokuziphatha kwamazwe ngamazwe, okanye iprotocol;
indima enokudlalwa ziipalamente, uluntu kunye namaphephandaba
ekusetyenzisweni kwale ngqungquthela.

Kwakhona, kuye kwabuzwa ukuba yimithetho enjani efunekayo ukuze le nkomfa
ibe iyasebenza. Yintoni enokwenziwa ziipalamente ukuqinisekisa ukuba amazwe
ayayinika ingxelo ngezinto azenzayo malunga nale nkomfa. Zezo zinto ke
ebesiziphicotha.

Kucace okwekati emhlophe ehlungwini ke, Sihlalo, ukuba amapalamente
kwihlabathi lonke anxubile ngomba wobuxelegu bokuphathwa kakubi koomama
nabantwana. Kodwa masingayibaleki nento yokuba siyathetha ngemilomo
ngamanye amaxesha, kodwa nkqi ukwenza. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[Hon Members of Parliament and invited guests, we are here once again at
this point talking about the evils of women and child abuse in this
country. Recently I was in Geneva where the Inter-Parliamentary Union was
held, discussing the progress of the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women. This was last month, on 19 October.

The main outcomes of this meeting were as follows: Reports about the
efforts of using this Convention and its guidance, together with the
protocol of various countries; and the role that Parliament and
communities, as well as the media, could play in using this convention.

There was also a question on which laws were required in order for this
Convention to work. What should parliaments do to ensure that countries
give reports about what they do with this convention outcome? Those are the
issues that we discussed.

Chairperson, it is clear that parliamentarians around the world are
concerned about women and child abuse. We must not run away from the fact
that we sometimes voice these issues and take no action.]

Chairperson, let me share my views on a case for a resocialisation
strategy. It is high time that in our strategy for adding the campaign
against violence on women and children, particularly taking it to higher
levels, we need to enhance resocialisation for moral values within the
family.

The family is one of the vital agents of socialisation and evidently
resocialisation. Therefore, it is said to play a significant role in the
reversal and even effective eradication of such abuse.

The social configuration of the South African society is still strongly
anchored around the family institution. It therefore becomes equally
important to utilise this institution to remedy some of our social ills. It
is an undisputable fact that there are ideologies, philosophies and
political systems that, through their omission or commission, allow evils
such as violence against women and children not only to perpetuate but also
to flourish. Particular focus is on capitalism together with its younger
brother, neo-liberalism, as ideologies that are inherently violent
structurally, institutionally and even within their basic values.

The very essence of expectation of labour power of the workers creates a
culture and practice of imposition in many respects by those in possession
of power upon those powerless. One might go further and assert that there
is no religion of note that is worth its salt if it cannot claim, not just
to have a stand against, but also to have values that stand diametrically
opposed to abuse in general and violence against women and children in
particular.

Intolerance and the rejection of peaceful coexistence become cornerstones
for generations of violent behaviour. Capitalism has consistently served as
a model for resolving disputes, conflicts, and differences in a violent
manner instead of engaging in sincere dialogue that will result in peaceful
settlement. This model is further generated at the workplace where the ill
treatment of workers is a daily occurrence. What is unfortunate is that
abusive men in turn reflect such models of ill treatment in their families,
their casual relations and even when just generally relating to women.

At this stage the South African economy is still imbued with a social
behaviour of resolving even mere differences in a violent manner whether
emotional, psychological or physical.

The views of the ANC are nicely captured and confirmed by Comrade Cedric
Mayson in the ANC periodical called Umrabulo of April 2002 when he said:
  People are not naturally violent. Humanity has survived and prospered
  because we are co-operative and supportive, but when we worship money or
  individual and group centeredness our feelings for others degenerate and
  brutality becomes quite reasonable whether it is focused on hitting
  children, raping women or mugging the weak - the fact remains they cease
  to be real people, because for them it is no crime, no problem, but just
  business as usual.

After 16 years of incessant campaigning against violence against women and
children, we need to frankly assess the impact of such noble endeavours. In
this Age of Hope whilst there is a good cause for rejoicing over such
advances, we need to also be fairly vigilant.

Notwithstanding such an unfortunate environment, at times it is also
inspiring to witness campaigns that are initiated by men calling upon other
men to stop violence against women and their children. Whilst we may not be
fully exposed to the impact of this in other campaigns, persistence and
unflinching commitment are definitely bound to bring positive results in
the end.

Let us also note that the campaign for nonviolence is a precious heritage
of our revolution in South Africa, and therefore we need to safeguard it
and even advance it. The growing, improving partnership between the state
and civil society can be witnessed by the growing number of convictions,
heightened by the confidence of victims of violence when it comes to
reporting those incidents. It is just unfortunate that commercial media at
times inject a lot of sentimentalism when reporting incidents of violence
against women and children, obviously due to profit motives.

Well-researched and balanced newspaper articles, which are also educative
at times, find themselves to be unfortunately still very few and far
between. It is worth noting the contributions of both the SABC TV and radio
stations on the campaign, although a lot of improvement is still possible.

Hon Chair, may I also caution exponents of the politics of pessimism. I
want to make a passionate appeal to prophets of doom that whilst any single
instance of violence is one too many, such is an experience of borrowed
time, because the caring state of South Africa led by the ANC will ensure
that this becomes history within no time.

We need to acknowledge the dire need of the imperative of certain
fundamental changes in our society in order to effectively rid ourselves of
this social leprosy. I am referring to transformation of gender relations
whereby power relations of any form and character between men and women
will definitely have to be equitable.

Investment in moral values guided by the philosophy of ubuntu is equally as
important, if not more important at times, than consistent legislation as a
means of changing social behaviour. It is on this basis that I call upon
all parliamentarians not only to give support to the moral regeneration
campaign, but also to place themselves amongst the champions that are
driving the campaign. A change in the mindset of perpetrators as
individuals who are integral to their families is more than vital. Every
able individual in the family has a role to play in the eradication of
violence against women and children.

At the launch of the Moral Regeneration Movement in the Eastern Cape in
2003, it was emphasised that every South African must be a moral
regeneration agent, and furthermore all South Africans need to play their
part in the promotion of national moral and values.

Kulapho ke, Mphathisihlalo, ndiqinisayo ukuthi ukubangaba singahlala
ekhondweni kule ndlela, singakwazi ukuthomalalisa obu buxelegu bokuphatha
kakubi oomama nabantwana. [Chairperson, this is where I believe that if we
could follow this direction, we would be able to reduce the rate of women
and child abuse.]

The ANC has relentlessly mobilised its cadres, members and South African
society at large to rid itself of such social behaviours. However, let me
conclude by reasserting that unless prerequisite fundamental changes take
place in our society, our advances against such monstrosities are of
limited success, and will haunt us for some time. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, allow me to thank the hon Waters for placing
this item on the Order Paper. The Domestic Violence Act, amongst others,
was passed by this Parliament, and the Act correctly identifies domestic
violence as a serious social evil. Despite the good intentions of this Act,
the remedies currently available to victims of domestic violence are
ineffective.

I suspect that a great many police officers do not either understand or
take seriously the Domestic Violence Act. At many police stations police
officers cannot cope with the caseload. As a result only serious criminal
cases such as murder and armed robbery are given top priority.

When a choice has to be made as to which investigations should be
prioritised, the Domestic Violence Act cases are dropped. The statistics
raised by the hon Waters should be seriously considered by our government,
because they do have an impact in crime prevention. Physical, sexual,
emotional, verbal and psychological abuse against women and children must
be stopped, and we must do everything in our power to stop it. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Nksz P TSHWETE: Sihlalo, Sekela-Mphathiswa Nomatyala Hangana, Malungu
ahloniphekileyo ePalamente, ndibulela ukuba ndibe namhlanje ndiza kukhe
ndixhamle kwesi sihloko seeNtsuku ezili-16 zemiGushuzo. Kwakhona ndibulela
i-ANC ngokuthi isenzele uMgaqo-siseko okhusela amalungelo amakhosikazi.

Kwakhona mandibulele iOfisi kaMongameli ngokuhlonipha amalungelo abantwana
namakhosikazi. Mandingabalibali oomama abathabatha inxaxheba kumngcelele
woqhankqalazo owathi weza neenguqu. Abanye babo bayaphila, ngoko kungcono
ukuba sithethe ngabo ngoku besaphila, singalindeli ukwenza njalo bengekho,
sele babhubha. Ndithetha ngooMam’ Ndzanga, ooMe Lesea, ooMam’ uIvy Gcina.
Siyabulela boomama kuba namhlanje siyakwazi ukuba sivule imilomo sithethe.
[Kwaqhwatywa.]

Ndiza kucela uxolo kuwe Sekela-Mphathiswa Hangana. Ndicela ukungena
kwizihlangu zikaMphathiswa wezoKhuselo noKhuseleko. Nangona zizikhulu kum,
kodwa ndiza kuzinxiba. Ndiyacela ukuba ndikhe ndikhumbuze ilungu
elihloniphekileyo uWaters ngokuba kutheni ze kuthethwe ngeCandelo
elijongene noDushe phakathi koSapho, uKhuselo lwaBantwana noLwaphulo-
mthetho ngokweSondo, i-Family Violence, Child Protection and Sexual
Offences Unit ngesilungu, okanye i-FCS ngamafutshane.

Mhlawumbi mandiqale phambi konyaka we-1994 ukwenzela ukuba aze kuyazi
kakuhle le nto. Ndicela ukuba umamele kakuhle ngoba ziingcebiso ezi ndiza
kukunika zona. Oomama bethu babesebenza emakhitshini, bephangela ngentseni
bekhulisa ooWaters aba. Bengaka nje ooWaters bakhuliswe ngoomama noomakhulu
bethu.

I-ANC ingenelele kweso sithuba yathi makhe sibakhusele oomama ngoba kudala
becinezelwe kwaye bayivile intlungu. Waters, kaloku naphaya kokwenu xa
ufika uza kufika uziselwe ukutya ngumntu omnyama, isuka apho le nto.

Mhlawumbi kule mihla anisakwazi ukuyenza loo nto, kodwa ngexa umakhulu wam
wayesebenza ekhitshini ndandichwechwa xa kufuneka ndingene ekhitshini ukuze
umlungu ongumninimzi angandiboni. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[Ms P TSHWETE: Chairperson, Deputy Minister Nomatyala Hangana, hon members,
it is a pleasure to participate in today’s topic of the 16 Days of
Activism. I am also grateful to the ANC for having produced such a
progressive Constitution in which women’s rights are enshrined.

I would also like to express my appreciation of the Office of the
Presidency for the respect it displays for children’s and women’s rights. I
could not forget the women who participated in the marches that brought
about changes. Some of them are still among us and it would be the right
thing to honour them while they are still alive. Among them are Mrs
Ndzanga, Mrs Lesea and Mrs Ivy Gcina. We are thankful to you mothers; today
we are able to express our views openly because of your efforts.
[Applause.]

I would like Deputy Minister Hangana to excuse me a little.  I want to say
something with regard to the Minister of Safety and Security. It is not my
place to say anything regarding that; however, I am going to say it anyway.
I want to remind hon Waters about the reasons that led to the discussion
about the Family Violence, Child Protection and Sexual Offences Unit, the
FCS in short.

Perhaps things would be clearer for him if I took him back to the period
before 1994. I am asking you to pay attention, as I am about to give sound
advice. Our mothers were employed as domestic workers and used to wake up
in the early hours of the morning in order to take care of people such as
hon Waters. They have grown this old now under our mothers’ and
grandmothers’ care.

The ANC realised the need to protect their rights and intervened on their
behalf because these are the people who have, for a long time, been
suppressed. Hon Waters, you should not forget that when you get home, it is
a black person who is going to prepare and bring you food.

Nowadays that may not be happening, but when my grandmother was employed as
a domestic worker, I had to literally tiptoe into the white man’s kitchen
to avoid being seen by the owner or owners of the house.]

I want to remind you that before 1994 my grandmother worked as a domestic
worker. I couldn’t get into the kitchen of the house where she worked
because I was afraid of the white owner. [Interjections.]

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Deal with the matter at hand!

Ms P TSHWETE:  Wait! Wait!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order, please!

Nksz P TSHWETE: Emgodini ... ndiyeza kuwe Waters, ndiza kukungcambazisa
namhlanje. Uze kuma apha udlisela ngokuba ukhokela inkqubo yethu yokulwa
ubundlobongela obujoliswe kumakhosikazi, eze noomama bethu abasilwelayo
ukuze kube kho iinguqu eMzantsi Afrika. Namhlanje uyazigwagwisa, usixelela
ukuba ... nkqu into yokuba ubulelwe nguGreen ngokuba uthathe inxaxheba
yokuba ukhokele inkqubo yokulwa ubundlobongela obujoliswe kumakhosikazi.

Xa uqulunqa inkqubo uyafana nomntu ohlafuna amathambo, amane ekuhlaba.
Uyabundukunya, ulungisa uMgaqo-siseko ukuze amakhosikazi, nalawo asezifama,
axhamle. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Ms P TSHWETE: I am coming to you, hon Waters. I want to clear things up
with you. Where do you get the audacity to boast about leading a programme
that fights violence against women that was fought for and initiated by our
mothers who were part of the people who brought about changes in South
Africa? You are boastful today. I cannot even understand how hon Green can
thank you for this programme.

Starting a new programme is an effort. One struggles to draw up a
constitution that recognises women’s rights including those who work on the
farms.]

An HON MEMBER: Deal with the units!

Nksz P TSHWETE: Ingxaki yakho ... ndiyeza kuzo, ungandingxameli. Ingxaki
yakho kukuba uthatha le nkqubo sele yenziwe yi-ANC okanye inkqubo esele
siyihlafune yathamba, ukuze wena uthathe ngokuginya. Awuzi kuginya into
ehlafunwe sithi, awucingi.

Ndigqithe ke apho. Kwakhona ndicela ukucacisa ukuba thina siyi-ANC
siyalixhasa ilinge nenguqu eyenziwa liSebe lezoKhuselo noKhuseleko
lokusondeza ii-FCS eluntwini. Into abayoyikayo kukuba ezi FCS zisuswa phaya
koosinxibamxhaka edolophini ziziswa emakhaya.

Abalufuni uhlengahlengiso. Lungu elihloniphekileyo Waters, andikwazi
ukukuyeka uthethe into engekhoyo ngoba abantu baza kumka nalaa nto
uyithethileyo ingekhoyo. UMphathiswa wezoKhuselo noKhuseleko ulungiselela
aba mama babethwayo ezilokishini bangenazo izithuthi zokubheka edolophini,
kwiindawo ezifana ne-Bellville, baye kuchaza ezo zenzo. Kwenzelwa nalaa
mama uhluphekileyo ungenayo nemali yokuqabela iteksi aye edolophini ukuze
kube lula kuye ukuhamba ngeenyawo aye kuchaza isenzo sokubethwa kwakhe
kufutshane, kungathiwa: Hamba ubheke eBellville kuba icandelo elijongene
nezo ziganeko alikho apha.

Ndicela nje ukucacisa ukuba le nto ebethetha ngayo uWaters kukusondezwa
kwee-FCS eKhayelitsha, ePeelton nasezilalini. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[Ms P TSHWETE: I am going to address the problems you seem to have; please
do not rush me. You want to lay a claim to a programme that was initiated
by the ANC. That, you will not succeed in doing. Never!

Furthermore, the ANC supports and commends the Department of Safety and
Security for establishing FCS units and bringing them closer to the people.
Some are concerned because the service is being taken away from the
affluent areas and brought near the communities it matters most to.

They do not want any kind of restructuring. Hon Waters, I cannot avoid
stopping you from misleading people. The Minister of Safety and Security is
doing this to help the women who face abuse every day in the townships and
who may not have transportation to the city or areas such as Bellville
where they could report cases. This is done to help the poor woman who does
not have taxi fare, so that she is able to walk to the office at which such
cases are reported. They should not be told to go to Bellville to report a
matter such as that one because there isn’t one in their area.

I want to explain that what hon Waters was talking about was the bringing
of FCS’s close to Khayelitsha, Peelton and the rural areas.]

The opposition party or the DA continues to create the impression that
specialised units have been dismantled.

Ayikho loo nto; sanukuphosisa apha. [Nothing like that exists; please do
not lie.]

These units were brought to micro areas, where the police personnel with
relevant skills would be better placed to deal directly with the cases of
violence against women and children. Every perpetrator must pay for the
crime that he or she committed. We all say so as the ANC.

Nina anina kusixelela ngobundlobongela. Sasingcungcutheka sibethwa, noomama
bethu bebethwa xa bendwendwela abayeni babo emigodini, kubuzwe ukuba baze
kufuna ntoni emigodini ngala mapolisa athetha ngawo namhlanje. Namhlanje
afanelekile. Ulibele ukuba thina senza iinguqu kula mapolisa, siyawamkela
ukuze abe ngawethu. Musan’ ukusikhumbuza ukuba sicaphukele amapolisa ngenxa
yezinto awayezenza, ebetha amakhosikazi xa endwendwele abayeni bawo
emigodini. Bubundlobongela obujoliswe kumakhosikazi obo. Bubo ke obu
sithetha ngabo. Bubo obu bubangele ukuba siqulunqe uMgaqo-siseko.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[You are the last people to tell us about violence. We suffered abuse
previously and our mothers were beaten when they visited their husbands in
the mines, where they would be asked what they were looking for there by
the same police he mentioned here today. He seems to have completely
forgotten that we brought about changes even to the police service. We have
welcomed them as part of us. Please do not remind us of things that would
drive us to hate police for the things they did to us in the past, such as
beating women when they had gone to visit their husbands on the mines. That
is violence against women. That is what we are talking about. That is one
of the things that led to the drafting of the Constitution.]

Measures have been put in place to protect the rights of women and
children.

Nixhaph’ amagwebu nithetha ngeSebe lezoKhuselo noKhuseleko, aniyiphathi le
nto iyingxaki. Bendicinga mna ukuba uWaters efuna ukuhlahla indlela kule
ngxoxo-mpikiswano nje, uza kuchaza ngenguqu eyenzekileyo; akaboni kwa nguqu
eyenzekileyo.

UWaters ufumene iqonga lokunika ingxelo yophando abalwenze kwizikhululo
zamapolisa. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[You are foaming at the mouth talking about the Department of Safety and
Security, but avoiding what really matters. I was under the impression that
hon Waters was going to give a report about the changes that have happened.
It would seem that, according to him, no change has happened at all.

Hon Waters is using this platform to give a report about some police
stations.]

What is that?

Usixelela ukuba uze kuthetha ngeeNtsuku ezili-16 zemiGushuzo yokulwa
ukuxhatshazwa kwamakhosikazi, kodwa uze kunika ingxelo yophando
alwenzileyo. Asifuni loo nto thina namhlanje. Sifuna ukuthetha ngenkqubela-
phambili eyenziwe ngurhulumente wethu kwaneenkqubo aseza kuzenzela abantu
bethu abangoomama. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[He says he came here to talk about the 16 Days of Activism whilst he knows
that all he wants to do is to report on the investigation he has done. We
are not interested in that. We want to talk about the progress made by our
government and the programmes that are going to be established later to
assist women. [Applause.]]

We still need to address the questions of HIV and Aids, unemployment and
poverty, which is most prevalent in rural areas.

Siyakubona, Sekela-Mphathiswa, ukuba uyaya ezifama kwaye uyawushukuxa lo
mba. Amanye amakhosikazi athe aneSifo uGawulayo asifumene kuba
ebengaphangeli, engena kuthi hayi kutata esiza nayo endlwini, kuba
exhomekeke kuye. Nokuba akazi kuyinxiba ikhondom utata, inkosikazi iya
kunyamezela kuba kaloku yondliwa nguye. Nazo izinto ekufuneka kuthethwe
ngazo namhlanje, ungabe usixelela ngophando lwamapolisa apha. Lukhathalelwe
ngubani?

Imnandi le nto uyithethayo. Ndiyithand’ ukufa. Indifak’ iparafini.

Ukubangaba apha eMzantsi Afrika siza kuthi sizigqumelele izinto
esasizenziwe, kuba sisithi sizama uxolo, olo xolo alwenzeki kwi-DA nangona
siluzama, silubundukunya. Bayasixhokonxa benza yonk’ into. Ngokuhlahl’
indlela kule ngxoxo-mpikiswano, mna bendicinga ukuba baza kuthi:
“Makhosikazi, nazi iinkqubo”, kanti bathetha ukuba baza kuginya iinkqubo
zethu esizenzileyo, bengakhange bahlafune. Ayizi kwenzeka loo nto.
Xa ndigqibezela, mandimbulele kwakhona uSekela-Mphathiswa uHangana ngokuya
phaya ezifama. Sisenenxaxheba emasiyidlale ke boomama. Makhe silibale
ngophando lwamapolisa.

Sisenoxanduva, thina bantu abalapha ePalamente, lokuya phaya ezilalini,
kwiinqila zethu zovoto, siye kukhulula aba mama bangeka khululeki. Ezi
zinto sizenzayo apha ezidolophini, kufuneka siye kuzenza nasezilalini.
Ngoko thina singoomama abakwaziyo ukuya kufikelela ezilalini ngezithuthi
zethu kufuneka sibasele ezi nkqubo. Abanye boomama ezilalini basathi
bangqutywe licango ngexa bebethwe ngabayeni babo. Ngoko kufuneka sibavule
imilomo ukuze umntu kusasa akwazi ukuya kuchaza ukuba ubethwe ngumyeni
wakhe.

Okokugqibela, makhosikazi, kufuneka singayilibali into yokuba amakhosikazi
asela utywala ade aba ngamakhoboka abo awayanga etywaleni kuba ebufuna,
koko ngenxa yokuxhatshazwa ngabayeni.

Ukuba ungaba nomyeni onguWaters ungalala usele mihla le, ngoba kaloku
akanaxolo. Sidinga ukuba sikhulule abaa mama bangeka khululeki, bangawaziyo
amalungelo abo. Ndiyacela ke ukuba xa eza kukhwela eqongeni uWaters, ze
singammameli ngoba uza nengxelo yophando.

Endaweni yokuba asikhokele, uWaters usuke waza kuvakalisa inqala lakhe
ngokubhekisele kwiSebe lezoKhuselo noKhuseleko, ngoko andinakumyeka
agqithe, boomama. Enkosi kakhulu. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Deputy Minister, we know that you do pay visits to women on the farms
and this matter is one of your priorities. Some women have contracted Aids
because they are unemployed and dependent on their husbands and therefore
find it hard to refuse their husbands their conjugal rights. The woman
would find it difficult to force the man to wear a condom because of this
dependency. Those are the things we should be talking about today, not some
report on the police. Who cares about that?

I like what you just said. I like it very much. It gives me energy.

We will not be paying due respect to our struggle if we let them get away
without taking responsibility for the bad things they did to us because we
say we want peace. The DA does not want peace no matter how much we strive
for it. I thought that they were going to say they have certain programmes
through which women can be empowered, but instead they boast about
programmes that we initiated. That will not happen.

In conclusion, I would like to thank Deputy Minister Hangana for paying a
visit to farmworkers. Women still have a big role to play in their lives.
Let us not only depend on police statistics.

Members of Parliament have a responsibility to liberate women in their
rural constituencies. What we do in towns and cities, we should also do in
rural areas. Those of us who can go to rural areas, should educate them
about these programmes. Some women in rural areas would say that they
bumped against a door when in fact they had been beaten by their husbands.
We must empower them in such a way that they do not find it difficult to go
out and report their husbands when they beat them.

Finally, we should remember that some women resort to alcohol because of
violence and abuse at home.

If you had hon Waters as your husband, you would definitely go to bed
intoxicated every night because he does not have peace. We need to free
those women who are not aware of their rights yet. When he comes to present
a report from this podium, I appeal to you all that we do not listen to
him, because he will be presenting an investigation report.

Instead of providing leadership in this matter, hon Waters has come to
express his hatred for the Department of Safety and Security. I could not
let him get away with that, hon women. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr M WATERS: Chair, it’s typical of the ANC to reduce a debate of this
nature to the lowest common denominator by fawning a speaker like hon
Tshwete ...  [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order, please! Order!

Mr M WATERS: Chair, I just want to thank all speakers who participated so
constructively in this debate, and if I don’t refer to them in my four
minutes, they should please excuse me.

The Deputy Minister started off by asking if I took the media along on my
tour of Gauteng. No, I didn’t, Deputy Minister.

An HON MEMBER: Why not?

Mr M WATERS: Why should I? I’m going to offer to take you, Deputy Minister,
to all 36 cluster stations, in my car without the media, so that you can
see that what I’ve said is the facts and that I didn’t make anything up.
You can come back to Parliament and report, if you like. Do you take me up
on that challenge?

Now you’re silent. It’s the first time you’ve been silent for a long time.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order, please!

Mr M WATERS: One of our duties as MPs – all of us, irrespective of the
parties we belong to – is that we have to play an oversight role in respect
of government agencies. It doesn’t matter where we are from or what we are
interested in.

My going to police stations was just as a result of my concern about child
abuse in this country. I’ve highlighted what has happened since the
migration of FCS offices to cluster stations - those services to women and
children have been negatively affected.

In fact, the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Correctional Services
said last week that we should go “see for ourselves”. The Minister of
Correctional Services even offered us his access card to the prisons to go
and have a look. I think that the ANC should welcome the fact that
opposition MPs are going to see and report back to Parliament, but
obviously they don’t.

And it’s a great pity that the ANC gives such impetus and importance to
violence against women that there’s no Minister of Safety and Security, no
Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development, no Deputy Minister of
Safety and Security and no Deputy Minister of Justice and Constitutional
Development here either. Where are they?

I would like to respond to the hon Tshwete, if I can. She goes on about pre-
1994 domestic workers and miners. The venom with which she talks about the
past, it’s amazing that she can still sit in a party that has welcomed the
party of apartheid, the NP, into its ranks - lock, stock and barrel.

Let me tell you: You took them in, you chewed them and you swallowed them –
something we couldn’t do; so good luck to you. And just remember to ask
them at your next caucus meeting ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order, please!

Mr M WATERS: ... why they brought in the pass laws, the Separate Amenities
Act. Yes, that’s all you can do. You’ve made your bed, now you must sleep
in it.

The fact of the matter is that it was said that we are against the fact
that FCS units ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order, please, hon members! Please!
Please give the hon Waters the opportunity to respond, please. Hon Waters,
take your seat.

Ms A VAN WYK: Will the hon member take a question?

Mr M WATERS: If I have time, certainly. But I just want to finish here,
please Annelizé. Thank you. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon members, please! Please!
Mr M WATERS: May I continue, Chair?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Please continue.

Mr M WATERS: The DA is not against the transformation of the FCS offices.
The fact is, previously in Gauteng every woman and child had access to an
FCS police officer, who could investigate their case. Today this is not the
case. Eleven cluster stations, which represent over 22 000 FCS cases, are
not being investigated by specialised police officer. You cannot tell me
that is the promotion and protection of the rights of women and children;
you cannot. It’s retrogressive and you’ve got to accept that.

What I’m hoping for, Deputy Minister, since you are that passionate about
it and you are now leading the charge of 16 Days of Activism, is that I’ll
give you a copy of my report and that you and I will go to Gauteng and see
for ourselves. Maybe together we can put something right for those men and
women, because they are frustrated by not having offices, telephone lines
and vehicles in order to do their jobs. But I thank the rest of you for
participating in the debate. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                          UNPARLIAMENTARY LANGUAGE
                                  (Ruling)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order, please! Before the secretary
reads the second and third Orders of the Day, and after the conclusion of
this debate, I would like to make a ruling on a Point of Order raised in
the House on 21 September 2006.

On 21 September, during Members’ Statements, the hon Gibson raised a Point
of Order in regard to a statement made by the hon Gaum relating to the
conduct of the hon Coetzee towards a staff member. The hon Gibson contended
that the hon Gaum was presenting allegations made against the hon Coetzee
as though they were facts, this despite the fact that hon Coetzee had
denied these allegations.

I undertook to study the Hansard and return to the House with a considered
ruling. Having now had the opportunity to study the Hansard, I rule as
follows.

Any complaint of improper conduct of hon members against staff members is a
serious matter and would need to be formally drawn to the attention of
either the Secretary to Parliament or the Speaker, but cannot be offered in
this House without substantiation, as the hon Gaum had done.

Furthermore, it is regrettable that the hon Gaum, in his remarks, also
referred to the staff member by name. I gather from the hon Gibson’s Point
of Order that a formal complaint has been lodged. In any event, as hon
members know, it is established practice that a member that wishes to bring
any allegations of improper conduct on the part of another hon member to
the attention of the House should do so by way of a substantive motion,
comprising a clearly formulated and properly substantiated charge.

Except upon such a substantive motion, hon members are not permitted to
impute improper motives to other hon members or cast personal reflections
on their integrity, or verbally abuse them in any other way. Prefixing the
statement with the words: “It is alleged”, as the hon Gaum did, does not
make it any more acceptable.

The remarks by the hon Gaum are, therefore, out of order, and I must ask
him to withdraw all the offensive imputations against the hon Coetzee.

Adv A H GAUM: I withdraw, Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you. [Applause.]


        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
     CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT - PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION FROM OFFICE OF
                         MAGISTRATE Mr I X MASIMINI



Order disposed of without debate.

Question put: That the recommendation of the committee be adopted and the
provisional suspension of Mr I X Masimini not be confirmed.

Agreed to.

Recommendation of the committee adopted, and provisional suspension of
Magistrate Mr I X Masimini accordingly not confirmed by the House.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
     CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT - PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION FROM OFFICE OF
                          MAGISTRATE MR M MATEREKE

Order disposed of without debate.

Question put: That the recommendation of the committee be adopted and the
provisional suspension of Mr M Matereke be confirmed.

Agreed to.

Recommendation of the committee adopted, and provisional suspension of
Magistrate Mr M Matereke accordingly confirmed by the House.


    CONSIDERATION OF SEVENTY-SIXTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
    ACCOUNTS – APPROVAL AND ALLOCATION OF HOUSING SUBSIDIES AT PROVINCIAL
                             HOUSING DEPARTMENTS

   CONSIDERATION OF SEVENTY-SEVENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
                  ACCOUNTS - SOUTH AFRICAN WEATHER SERVICES

   CONSIDERATION OF SEVENTY-EIGHTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
    ACCOUNTS - COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER FOR OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH DISEASES

    CONSIDERATION OF SEVENTY-NINTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
                       ACCOUNTS - DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR

      CONSIDERATION OF EIGHTIETH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
                        ACCOUNTS - COMPENSATION FUND

    CONSIDERATION OF EIGHTY-FIRST REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
                 ACCOUNTS - INDEPENDENT ELECTORAL COMMISSION

    CONSIDERATION OF EIGHTY-SECOND REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
             ACCOUNTS - HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION OF SOUTH AFRICA

    CONSIDERATION OF EIGHTY-THIRD REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
                         ACCOUNTS - LEGAL AID BOARD

    CONSIDERATION OF EIGHTY-FOURTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
                 ACCOUNTS - PUBLIC PROTECTOR OF SOUTH AFRICA

Mr N T GODI: Chairperson, comrades and hon members, on behalf of the
Standing Committee on Public Accounts, let me thank the programming Whip
for accommodating our request at such short notice. We want to assure you
that, going forward, we will co-ordinate such matters better than in this
particular instance.

The debate on Scopa resolutions before the House was introduced last year,
and this was rediscussed and re-emphasised in our Scopa meeting last week.
The perspective of the entire membership of Scopa is that debating these
reports is not supposed to be about point-scoring or politics, it is about
dealing with pertinent issues of national importance. It is about rallying
together and mobilising everyone in the fight against mismanagement,
maladministration and waste of public resources. It is about bringing to
the fore the important work that Scopa is doing. It is about sensitising
the public about the need for what the late Vietnamese revolutionary, uncle
Ho Chi Minh, called “revolutionary morality in public service.” It is about
laying bear the indisputable connection between quality and timeless
service delivery, and sound financial management and administration.

We’ve called for the developmental state as a matter of ideological
conviction, but also as a practical necessity and response to socioeconomic
conditions imposed on us by historical circumstances. The expanded role of
the state in the socioeconomic sphere cannot be fulfilled in a state of
inefficiency, incapacity and a total disregard for laws, regulations,
policies and procedures - thus the call from Scopa for a heightened sense
of vigilance and intolerance against corruption and mediocrity.

We are bringing before this House reports that can be put into two
categories. The first one is about reports that are clean, whose audit
opinions are unqualified, and against whom we have no issues to raise
except to praise and thank them for sticking to the spirit and the letter
of the Public Finance Management Act.

They are shining examples that things can be done correctly and that it is
not impossible to do the right things. They are the lights that must be put
on top of the mountain to shine for everybody. Failing departments and
public entities can take the cue from them. We are referring here to the
81st report on the Independent Electoral Commission, the 82nd report on the
Human Rights Commission of South Africa, the 83rd report on the Legal Aid
Board and the 84th report on the Public Protector of South Africa. We hope
as Scopa that their future audit opinions will remain clean.

The second category is of those reports that had serious issues that
warranted us to call the participants for hearings. As has been noted on
each of these reports, there are serious issues of concern that relate to
poor administration of resources and disregard for laws and regulations.

The 76th report, which was a performance audit by the Auditor- General,
entitled “Report of the Auditor-General on the findings identified during a
performance audit of the approval and allocation of housing subsidies at
provincial housing departments.” We must state that, in this particular
hearing, the provincial housing departments were called together with the
national Department of Housing. The reason was that, whilst the money used
for building houses is voted in this National Assembly, it is dispersed to
the provinces as conditional grants. So we felt that in order to complete
the accountability spectrum, the provinces should also come.

Going forward, there will be no hesitation to call provinces to come with
national departments to account before Scopa for monies voted by this
House. Let us also indicate that the provincial Scopas participated in this
groundbreaking and mammoth hearing.

There were serious weaknesses and corrupt practices that were fingered in
this report. To mitigate or to actually eliminate these, Scopa recommends,
amongst others, that a comprehensive strategy of co-operation and
integration between the national and provincial departments be instituted;
that Parliament be reported to on disciplinary matters taken against any
officials and that progress reports be given on the status of
implementation of instructions from the Minister.

The same goes for other reports, namely the 77th report on the S A Weather
Service, the 78th report on the Compensation Commission for Occupational
Health Diseases, the 79th report on the Department of Labour, and the 80th
report on the Compensation Fund. In all of these reports mentioned above,
we‘ve made demanding observations and passed tough recommendations to
correct the problems as we have seen them.

Lastly, we would like to express our appreciation for the time allocated
for us to debate these reports in the House. We believe that the adoption
of these reports by the House will go a long way in strengthening Scopa’s
tough hand as a defender of the public purse. We equally believe that that
will, in part, enhance Parliament’s oversight responsibilities over the
executive.

We also want to thank Scopa members for their hard work, close scrutiny of
issues and the never-say-die attitude. The sense of purpose and focus in
the committee is both commendable and refreshing. With a united and focused
Scopa, there will be no hiding place for those who do not comply with laws
we pass in this House or National Treasury regulations. We commend these
reports to the House. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr E NKEM-ABONTA: Chairperson, Ministers ... there are no Ministers – I
salute you nonetheless. I also salute you, hon members of this august
House. I salute you because you represent the sovereign people of our
country and you have sworn to defend their rights, as enshrined in our
Constitution.

As you are well aware, our Constitution guarantees certain socioeconomic
rights to citizens, and key among them is the right to decent housing. But
this right, without intervention of government, will remain elusive for
millions of our people who lack personal resources to adequately provide
for themselves.

If history has taught us anything, it is that solidarity is essential for
peace and social cohesion. Indeed, most South Africans, irrespective of
their political persuasion, are agreed on one thing. They agree that those
of us who are fortunate will, despite the pain, contribute their resources
in proportion to their individual resource capacity to lessen the misery,
if not brighten the future, of less fortunate compatriots.

Such resources, offered in pain and sacrifice to government as public
money, are without a doubt sacred. They are sacred because they signal our
individual commitment to nation-building. They express our God-given duty
to be our brother’s keeper. They, more than anything else, announce loud
and clear that we as a people, mindful of our history and culture, uphold
ubuntu as our most cherished and sacred societal value.

Public money may not, therefore, be mismanaged. Nor may it be given to
those who do not qualify to receive it. And under no circumstances should
persons whose job it is to spend it wisely - that is, for the intended
purpose and objectives - steal it or allow it to be stolen. Public money
meant to provide housing for those who cannot provide it for themselves
must serve no other purpose. It must provide maximum housing for the very
needy among us.

An HON MEMBER: Hear! Hear!

Dr E NKEM-ABONTA: Am I dwelling on the obvious as I speak? I think so. And
I know that many of my fellow hon members might even think me trite in my
speech – I plead their indulgence. [Interjections.] I plead their
indulgence, because often the most basic principles are also the most
important. Such principles need to be emphasised, restated and highlighted
at every opportunity until at last they seem trite, even usé.

As I speak, I am sad. I am sad because disturbing signs have emerged. They
indicate that all is not well with the housing function in our national and
provincial spheres of government. They suggest that public money meant to
provide housing for the poor and vulnerable among us might be under
questionable husbandry ... [Interjections.] ... this, despite the tireless
efforts of the Minister of Housing and the wise stewardship of our able
Minister of Finance.
Indeed, a reading of the report of the Auditor-General on the findings of a
performance audit of the approval and allocation of housing subsidies of
provincial departments of housing will bear me out. The Standing Committee
on Public Accounts, Scopa, alive to its responsibility, held a public
hearing on the Auditor-General’s report with the nine provincial Scopas in
attendance. At that public hearing Scopa heard and considered evidence put
before it, which evidence it believes corroborates the Auditor-General’s
report.

The evidence given at that hearing, to say the least, painted a sad and
dismal picture of the state of affairs at our provincial departments of
housing. A few examples will suffice to bring the point home. Firstly,
almost any employee, no matter how junior, could manually override data
captured from applications for housing subsidies.

Secondly, many ID numbers captured on the system were either invalid,
incompatible with the 13-digit Republic of South Africa ID numbers or
simply reflected data significantly at variance with ID data at the
Department of Home Affairs.

Thirdly, in too many instances subsidies were approved for under-aged
persons in clear contravention of the law, and nonqualified public servants
also got subsidies – even many dead persons somehow managed to receive
subsidies.

Fourthly, many subsidies simply did not have supporting documentation,
because departments did not have credible filing and archiving systems.

Fifthly, co-ordination between the national Department of Housing and the
provincial departments was at best weak.

Sixthly, instructions issued by the Minister of Housing aimed at improving
the administration of subsidy allocation were disregarded.

Scopa, of course appalled by these findings and the zero prospects for a
significantly improved state of affairs, recommends to this House that:
Firstly, the practice of separation of duties be complied with and that
only duly authorised senior managers be allowed to effect overrides to
subsidy applications; secondly, the department establish an ID verification
mechanism linked to data on the Department of Home Affairs database;
thirdly, the department must ensure that policy guidelines with respect to
the administration and awarding of subsidies are enforced; fourthly, the
department must report to Parliament on disciplinary actions taken against
employees who engaged in fraudulent and corrupt activities; fifthly, the
department institute a comprehensive strategy of co-operation and
integration with provincial departments; sixthly, the department submit a
progress report to Parliament on the status of the implementation of the
instructions issued by the Minister; and seventhly, Scopa and the Portfolio
Committee on Housing be briefed on corrective measures taken on all the
above recommendations by the end of November 2006.

We in Scopa believe that we have acted with requisite speed and a sense of
urgency. We also believe that we have duly applied our minds to the
evidence put before us and that we have been circumspect in the
recommendations that we make here today.

Consequently, I urge you men and women of honour, in the name and interest
of the sovereign people that we here represent, and for whom many live
their lives, to adopt these recommendations. I further urge you to demand,
even with your last breath, the highest standards of probity, moral
rectitude and competence from our public servants, the personal risk to you
notwithstanding.

Let us not forget that our Constitution sets ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms S-C Botha): Order! Hon member, I regret your time
has expired.

Dr E NKEM-ABONTA: I leave you, nonetheless, with these words of advice.

An HON MEMBER: No, you can’t!

Dr E NKEM-ABONTA: He who wants to build very high, must dig very deep. I
thank you.

Mr E W TRENT: Chairperson, today we debate reports on a number of public
entities and key government departments based on the audit outcomes of the
2004-05 financial year, and there’s not a single Minister to listen to
these reports.

Many of the annual reports for the 2005-06 financial year have already been
tabled. This means that Scopa has virtually been toothless in helping to
effect any year-on-year improvement by the relevant public entities. We’re
already in the next cycle. [Interjections.]

The proper functioning of the public entities and key departments being
discussed here today is crucial to service delivery, poverty alleviation
and protecting the vulnerable. Scopa is also a key tool in Parliament’s
oversight arsenal.

If we, as MPs, are serious about consolidating Parliament as a power to be
reckoned with - separate but equal to the executive - then the parties
represented in this Parliament, through common co-operative effort, need to
ensure that Scopa can complete its oversight work in time to be effective.
[Interjections.]

To illustrate the importance of this point, I focused on one of these
departments, the Department of Labour. The Department of Labour is our
department of employment, our skills revolution department, our
productivity and labour relations department, and supposedly a key driver
of economic growth in South Africa - I say that with my tongue in my cheek
– yet year after year we have to read the AG’s report detailing massive
financial mismanagement.

In its 79th report - remember, this report we’re dealing with today is last
year’s report, not the current one – Scopa, amongst other things, finds the
following: Proper reconciliations were never done between the personnel
salary payment system and the basic accounting system, making the accuracy
of the reported information unverifiable, and should therefore be
considered having been open to abuse.

Various instances of noncompliance with the Public Finance Management Act
and Treasury regulations are also mentioned. The departmental asset
register was left split and incomplete, and should therefore be considered
having been open to abuse.

Finally, amongst others, the performance bonuses awarded, which is 5,06% of
total personal expenditure, was more than three times higher than the
allowed 1,5%, as directed by the Department of Public Service and
Administration. Now that’s for people who have administered a department
with that audit record!
In order to deal with these instances of mismanagement, Scopa has tabled a
number of resolutions for the consideration of the House. This means that
these resolutions, if supported, become effective today.

Let us now look at the Auditor-General’s report on the current audit, the
one we haven’t dealt with yet, and the latest one. In addition to a number
of new problems, we find once again, proper reconciliations between the
personnel salary payment system and the basic accounting system were still
not being done. Secondly, again, certain provisions of the PFMA and
Treasury regulations were still not met.

Thirdly, proper asset management was still plagued by incomplete asset
registers. And then, finally, the very people who got bonuses for last
year’s report – this is what the Auditor-General’s got to say about them –
received performance bonuses of R12,1 million, which, at 2,85% still
remains at almost double the level prescribed in the relevant DPSA
directive. [Interjections.]

Exactly the same problems persist! These are the departments – and there
are many of them – that are now commonly known as serial offenders. If
there had been proper intervention, it is probable that we might not have
had to deal with these problems yet again. Is it not time now that the
executive committee be called to account for their actions?
[Interjections.]
I conclude using an example of an instance in which Scopa has managed to
move with greater speed, and I would like to mention from its 76th report
that of the Auditor-General’s findings on the housing subsidies, as
mentioned by some of my colleagues. This is a ground-breaking exercise in
which all the provincial departments came together with us collectively and
the hearing, I believe, was very fruitful.

In this regard Scopa has resolved that the Minister should brief the
Portfolio Committee on Housing and Scopa on how the situation can be
improved by the end of November. It is my sincere hope that the Minister
has all the necessary answers ready before Parliament goes into recess on
15 December. Unless she does so she will surely be in contempt of
Parliament.

Mr H J BEKKER: Madam Chair, the nine Scopa reports before the House today
indicate varying degrees of compliance and noncompliance with the Public
Finance Management Act and National Treasury regulations by the relevant
institutions.

In respect of the SA Weather Service it is clear that the Auditor-General
uncovered massive management inefficiencies and deficiencies, leading the
committee to term management at the weather service a “failure”. This
stinging rebuke should, one hopes, motivate management to drastically
improve their performance. Scopa will of course keep a close watch on
improvements in this regard, and we await the report called for in the
committee’s recommendations. Unfortunately, it seems to me that lightning
has apparently struck the weather service.

Noncompliance with the PFMA and Treasury regulations caused fruitless
expenditure of more than R45 million at the Compensation Commissioner. The
Auditor-General has also highlighted numerous other deficiencies, among
them the inadequate role played by the national Department of Health.
Clearly, the entity suffers from a lack of skilled personnel, lack of
monitoring and very low levels of compliance.

It is particularly shocking to note that the Department of Labour displayed
various instances of noncompliance with PFMA and Treasury regulations. My
colleagues have referred to that. I can just say that, in addition of the
department paying performance bonuses far in excess of the Public Service
directive, it would also seem that bonuses had been paid for
underperformance. This indicates either complete incompetence, a total lack
of knowledge or wilful ignorance on the part of the department and its
accounting officer.

The PFMA is quite clear and an excellent directive for departments. The IFP
is concerned about financial officers and accounting officers who
apparently believe that they will not be criminally and/or civilly charged
or prosecuted. I trust that at some stage a process will be developed
according to which contraventions will be severely dealt with and that the
time will come when, under severe circumstances, the relevant Minister will
appear together with the accounting officer.

In conclusion, the IFP supports the recommendations of Scopa made in the
reports before the House, we express our appreciation for the outstanding
work being done by this committee and we thank the chairperson and each
member individually. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P A GERBER: Madam Chair, as one of the apparently junior Members of
Parliament who has only been on Scopa for 12 and a half years, it is an
honour for me to participate in this debate. We are today adopting reports
on four departments and three entities. I find it a bit disappointing that
there is no one here from either the Ministries or the entities, and that
is a similar situation with other reports of other committees.

They dilly-dally around here when they want their budgets passed, but a
year later when we have to comment on how they spent it, or didn’t spend
it, they are nowhere to be seen – and that is quite unacceptable.

I want to refer to the 77th Scopa report on the SA Weather Services for
2004 and 2005. The Auditor-General’s report on SA Weather Services
highlighted the following issues of emphasis of matter.

The committee was informed that there were inadequate controls in place to
monitor the progress of donor-funded projects against funds donated for
specific purposes and projects. The report of the Auditor-General also
highlighted the following instances of noncompliance with laws and
regulations that occurred: the nonmaintenance of an asset register of
members’ interests in relation to contracts; the investment policy of the
SAWS was inadequate; and a lack of controls to ensure that quarterly
reports were submitted on time.

The audit of the SAWS revealed shortcomings in the system of internal
control, which included the following. It has been operating without an
approved internal control policy for a number of years. There is a lack of
proper debt control policy and poor enforcement of internal controls. There
is a failure to monitor unallocated amounts on a regular basis in order to
clear suspense accounts, and failure to perform leave reconciliation.

Then there is the issue of land. According to the SA Weather Service Act of
2001, a portion of the Department of Public Works’ land was allocated to
SAWS. The SAWS did not register this land in its name, and therefore this
land remains in the name of the Department of Public Works. If an entity
takes five years to transfer a piece of land from a national department,
then we shouldn’t accuse landowners of delaying land reform. We should
rather look at the problems in our own midst.
I want to highlight one specific issue in this report, and that is the
nonmaintenance of a register of members’ interests in relation to
contracts. We recommend that interests in contracts by management be
urgently declared. Even if members of management do declare their interests
in contracts, I think it is still morally wrong to have such an interest in
contracts anyway. Even if an employee excuses him or herself from a
decision-making meeting, that employee still has ample time before and
after such meeting to influence decisions. It is morally wrong, altogether,
whether they declare or not.

I raise this because it opens the door for corruption. Corruption is the
enemy of economic development all over the world. It stands in the way of
every opportunity we are trying to create to better the lives of the
poorest of the poor. It drains our resources that would otherwise be used
for building roads, clinics, houses, schools, etc. A nation weakened by
rampant corruption cannot develop.

Our political liberalisation brought many challenges and opportunities. Our
economic liberalisation also brought many challenges, but also new problems
such as economic saboteurs, tax evaders, etc. Corruption is a business. The
owners don’t give up easily. The owners of corruption invest heavily in
politics, all over the world. It is self-sustaining and self-perpetuating.

Parliament should be a pillar of integrity at all times. Millions of people
did not vote for poverty or no housing, or corruption, or dirty hospitals,
etc. No, colleagues, they voted for us. They want us to stand up for them.
More than a billion of the poorest of the poor all over the world put their
faith in 35 000 members of parliaments all over the world. We have to pull
them out of the gutter of poverty. We cannot allow ourselves to fail them.

We should not only talk against corruption just because it is politically
sexy, as some parties do. We should – in the words of Uncle Billy Nair, who
has been in this House for 10 years and is a light for us in Scopa – go for
the jugular.

I want to end with a special poem on corruption, prepared by Mrs Kilumanga
and Mrs Munghezi from Tanzania, which was handed to me when I was there a
couple of months ago. I quote:

  Corruption is the cancer that moves its ugly tentacles silently over all
  segments of society,
  Ripping out at the very core of all that is ethical,
  Plucking the roots of development,
  Undermining the efforts of those already fighting against the tide.
  Politicians, you are all in a perfect position
  To stop the wilful neglect of people’s rights,
  The sabotage of projects and programmes,
  The apathetic rhetoric of “things are the same everywhere”
  It is time to rise to the challenge and embrace the incorruptible.
  Corruption lurks in the vacant gaze of an ailing chid who has been given
  fake drugs, that white elephant project unused, a ghost reflecting only
  greed and avarice, while millions subexist in abject poverty.
  Corruption is the arsenic that laces the bitter pill of negligence and
  poor governance.
  The wheel is in motion, we can’t stop, and we won’t stop.
  We must continue to recognise it, stigmatise it, realise it, criticise
  it.
  And with one global voice shout for a call to action now!

I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B E PULE: Madam Chairperson, as hon members know, the Standing Committee
on Public Accounts carries out searching and rigorous assessment of
financial administration in the national public sector, so that accounting
authorities can be held accountable for their spending of the taxpayer’s
money and their stewardship over public assets - of course, including this
very institution, Parliament.

Concerning the many entities that the Standing Committee on Public
Accounts, Scopa, engaged with this year, I wish to refer to issues that I
believe the House should take note of and, of course, those issues that my
colleagues have already alluded to. The first relates to the Auditor-
General’s special reports on housing subsidies administered by the
provincial housing departments.

By far the majority of our public sector spending on housing takes place
through provincial housing departments. But it is with concern that we
found that the co-ordination between the national housing department and
provincial departments was weak, to say the least, and there was no clear
directive from the national department. This cannot be permitted to
continue, especially the fact that the instructions issued by the Minister
of Housing aimed at improving the administration of subsidy allocations are
not being implemented.

The second example relates to the Legal Aid Board. This is an institution
that has proven that financial management challenges can be overcome if the
Ministry and the management of the institution are serious about correcting
that which needs to be fixed. From being one of the worst cases of
financial and general mismanagement that Scopa came across some years ago,
the Legal Aid Board has now received unqualified and very favourable audit
reports over the last couple of years, and must be commended. And we are
calling on other departments to do the same. Thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, in view of all the reports done by Scopa, the
MF has found all in order. We suggest that the recommendations be
prioritised to ensure that adequate management and funding of these sectors
is implemented, without any corruption and mismanagement. The MF supports
the Scopa reports.

Mr D M GUMEDE: Hon Chairperson, hon members and comrades, our freedom is
not to do what we like, but what we ought to do. Freedom has a price and
that price, is to be accountable. Without accountability, openness and
transparency there cannot be freedom and without freedom there cannot be
democracy. Secondly, our government, like any other organisation, company
or institution, does have problems here and there, and now and then in its
different organs.

Thirdly, the Office of the Auditor-General has noted that when it comes to
governance, we keep raising the bar. This means that while having had a
clean report the previous year and doing exactly the same things in the
same way the following year, it may end up with a qualified report
sometimes. For instance, we have introduced the Public Finance Management
Act, the Municipal Finance Management Act and a number of Treasury
regulations.

This has happened in an environment that has not augmented the availability
of the types of financial management skills required at the rate that the
changes demand. In the short to medium term, even Jipsa will not cope. If
you add the number of unfilled vacancies in departments, then the problem
grows and compliance becomes even more difficult. These are the concrete
realities on the ground that we have to take into account from time to time
and from situation to situation.

Given these dynamics, we indeed are proud that the vast majority of
departments have complied. There are, of course, some departments that have
repeatedly not complied. Amongst those departments is the Department of
Labour and some entities under its control. I shall touch on the report of
the Auditor-General regarding this aspect and also look at the report on
the Compensation Fund, which are qualified reports as usual.

The departmental report, which was qualified for lack of evidence as
required, stated that funds amounting to more than R90 million were indeed
spent for purposes they were meant for. There was no evidence to this
effect. That was one reason why the Auditor-General qualified this report.
There are other problems like noncompliance with laws and inaccuracy of
asset registers, amongst others.

Despite these problems, the department paid performance bonuses, which were
more than three times the limit specified by Treasury. The previous speaker
has mentioned that. The report before us tries to address that matter and,
as a first step, we have requested a detailed report on this matter so as
to take further action.

The Compensation Fund, which is administered by the same department, has
also a qualified report on the basis of a lack of integrity in their
financial information. Other problems relate to general computer controls,
noncompliance with Treasury regulations, and its processing of claims
information - for which recommendations have been provided in the report.

The committee commends, however, the Compensation Fund for establishing a
forensic audit upon discovery of possible fraud, although this clearly is
not enough. However, action has been taken and an attempt to recoup public
funds has been made.

Ongoing debates on improvement of oversight have distinguished our country
as one of the most vibrant democracies, and the one on Parliament is no
exception. With the guidance of our Constitution, our Rules and character,
it will ultimately be what it ought to be. This will set the scene for our
winning nation and its Parliament.


Lastly, Donald Waters in his book, Secrets to Life, has this to say:


  Leadership is an opportunity to serve – it is not a trumpet to self-
  importance.


Governance has a price, and that price is accountable, transparent and open
quality service to all. I thank you, Chairperson.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move that the
Reports be adopted.
Motion agreed to.

Reports accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 18:13.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                           FRIDAY, 3 NOVEMBER 2006

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Science and Technology

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Academy of Science of South
        Africa for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert T061103E-insert – PAGES 2441-2451 (only
the National Assembly )

                           MONDAY, 6 NOVEMBER 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Membership of Committees

     1. The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
        Committees, viz:

        Constitutional Review Committee


        Appointed: Joubert, Mr L K, Ms Camerer, Ms S M (Alt)


        JMC on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth
        and Disabled Persons


        Appointed:     Ngaleka, Ms E, Mohlaloga, Mr M R (Alt), Madella, Mr
                  A F (Alt), Tobias, Ms T V (Alt), Kondlo, Ms N C (Alt),
                  Mkongi, Mr B M (Alt)

National Assembly

 1. Membership of Committees

     1. The following changes have been made to the membership of Portfolio
        Committees, viz:

        Agriculture and Land Affairs
        Appointed: Greyling, Mr C H F, Thomson, Ms B (Alt), Dlali, Mr D M
                  (Alt), Ramphele, Mr T D H (Alt)
        Discharged: Baloyi, Mr M R, Ngaleka, Ms E, Nxumalo, Ms M D


        Correctional Services
        Appointed: Nawa, Ms Z N, Chikunga, Ms L S (Alt), Mahote, Mr S
                  (Alt), Makgate, Ms M W (Alt)


        Communications
        Appointed: Yengeni, Ms L E, Nxumalo, Mr S N, Nkuna, Ms C (Alt),
                     Maziya, Mr A M (Alt)


        Education
        Appointed: Van der Heever, Mr R P Z, Maloney, Ms L (Alt)
        Discharged: Gcwabaza, Mr N E, Mentor, Ms M P, Montsitsi, Mr S D,
                  Vadi, Mr I


        Finance
        Appointed: Ainslie, Mr A R, Hogan, Ms B A (Alt), Malahlela, Mr M J
                  (Alt), Mokoto, Ms N R (Alt), Dithebe, Mr S L (Alt)
        Discharged: Saloojee, Mr E


        Home Affairs
        Appointed: Mathebe, Mr P M, Ntombela, Ms S H (Alt), Vundisa, Mr S S
                  (Alt), Mathibela, Ms N F (Alt), Phala, Mr M J (Alt)
        Discharged:    Gxowa, Ms N B


        Public Works
        Appointed: Ngcengwane, Ms N D, Anthony, Mr T G, Nxumalo, Mr S N
                  (Alt), Huang, Dr S (Alt), Gogotya, Mr N J (Alt)
        Discharged:    Sekgobela, Ms P S, Molefe, Mr C T
        Safety and Security
        Appointed: Maziya, Mr A M (Alt),
        Discharged: Maunye, Ms M M, Gololo, Mr C L, Khumalo, Mr K M


        Transport
        Appointed: Thomson, Ms B, Nxumalo, Mr M D, Magubane, Mr E N (Alt),
                  Schneeman, Mr G D (Alt), Mshudulu, Mr S A (Alt)
        Discharged: Ngwenya, Ms W


        Trade and Industry
        Appointed: Oliphant, Mr D D A, Ntuli, Ms B M, Rasmeni, Mr S M, Mr
                  Nonkonyana, Mr M (Alt), Maja, Mr S J (Alt)
        Discharged: Sefularo, Ms M, Nkem-Abonta, Dr E, Khunou, Ms N P


        Water Affairs and Forestry
        Appointed:     Mosala, Mr B G, Mogase, Mr I D (Alt)
        Discharged:    Asmal, Prof A K, Ramphele, Mr T D H

     2. The following changes have been made to the membership of Standing
        Committees, viz:

        Private Members’ Legislative Proposals and Special Petitions
        Appointed: Sekgobela, Ms P S, Ntlake, Ms M, Wang, Mr Y, Gerber, Mr
                 P A (Alt), Kondlo, Ms N C (Alt), Tshwete, Ms P (Alt)
        Discharged: Carrim, Mr Y I

     3. The following members have been appointed to serve on the Ad Hoc
        Committee mentioned, viz:

        Review of Chapter 9 and Associated Institutions

        African National Congress
        Asmal, Prof A K
        Dithebe, Mr S L
        Johnson, Ms C B
        Masutha, Adv T M
        Matsomela, Ms M J J


        Democratic Alliance
        Delport, Dr J T
        Smuts, Ms M


        Inkatha Freedom Party
        Van der Merwe, Mr J H


        United Party of South Africa
        Simmons, Mr S


        Minority Front
        Rajbally, Ms S

TABLINGS

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


    (a)     Letter from the Minister of Communications, dated 3 November
         2006, to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
         65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
         1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of
         the National Electronic Media Institute of South Africa for 2005-
         2006:


        NATIONAL ELECTRONIC MEDIA INSTITUTE OF SOUTH AFRICA – LATE
        SUBMISSION OF ANNUAL REPORT


        This letter serves to inform you that the National Electronic Media
        Institute of South Africa “NEMISA” Annual Report for the year
        ending 31 March 2006 was tabled before Parliament of the Republic
        of South Africa after the due date of 31 August 2006.


        The reason for the delay was due to the finalisation of the audit
        as NEMISA had to attend to queries raised by the Auditor General.
        NEMISA agreed with the Auditor General that additional time should
        be allocated to rectify the issues raised in order to avoid a
        qualification which, in turn, led to the delay in finalising the
        Annual Report.




        I trust that you find the above to be in order.
        Best Regards,


        signed
        Dr IVY MATSEPE-CASABURRI
        MINISTER


                          TUESDAY, 7 NOVEMBER 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)     The JTM on 2 November 2006 in terms of Joint Rule 160(6)
        classified the following Bill as a money Bill:

          a) Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 32 – 2006] (National Assembly
             – sec 77)

    (2)     The JTM on 7 November 2006 in terms of Joint Rule 160(6)
        classified the following Bill as a money Bill:

          a) Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 33 – 2006] (National Assembly
             –sec 77)


    (3)     The JTM on 7 November 2006 in terms of Joint Rule 160(6)
        classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:
          a) Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 34 – 2006] (National
             Assembly – sec 75)


    (4)     The JTM on 2 November 2006 in terms of Joint Rule 160(6)
        classified the following Bill as a section 76 Bill:
          a) Public Service Amendment Bill [B 31 – 2006] (National Assembly
             Provinces – sec 76)

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)     South African Airways Bill, 2006, submitted by the Minister for
         Public Enterprises. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public
         Enterprises and the Select Committee on Labour and Public
         Enterprises.

National Assembly

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled


    (1)     The Report of the Auditor-General indicated below is referred
        to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 1 – The Presidency for
             2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements of Vote 1 for 2005-2006 [RP 145-2006].
    (2)     The following paper is referred to the Joint Monitoring
        Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women for
        consideration and report:

          a) Office on the Status of Women contained in the Report and
             Financial Statements of Vote 1 – The Presidency for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements of Vote 1 for 2005-2006 [RP 145-2006].


    (3)     The following paper is referred to the Joint Monitoring
        Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children,
        Youth and Disabled Persons for consideration and report:

          a) Office on the Rights of the Child and the Office on the Status
             of Disabled Persons contained in the Report and Financial
             Statements of Vote 1 – The Presidency for 2005-2006, including
             the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             of Vote 1 for 2004-2005 [RP 145-2006].


    (4)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Provincial and Local Government for consideration and report. The
        Reports of the Auditor-General are referred to the Standing
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 5 – Department of
             Provincial and Local Government for 2005-2006, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
             Vote 5 for 2005-2006.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Municipal Demarcation
             Board for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 140-
             2006].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Municipal Infrastructure
             Investment Unit (MIIU) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006
             [RP 196-2006].


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the National House of
             Traditional Leaders for 2005-2006.

    (5)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Transport for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
        General and the Independent Auditors are referred to the Standing
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 33 – Department of
             Transport for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 33 for 2005-2006.

          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Airports Company South
             Africa Limited (ACSA) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-
             2006.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Road Accident Fund (RAF)
             for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

    (6)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Social Development for consideration and report. The Report of the
        Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Development
             Agency (NDA) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 201-
             2006].

    (7)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Communications for consideration and report. The Reports of the
        Auditor-General are referred to the Standing Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 26 – Department of
             Communications for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 26 for 2005-
             2006 [RP 221-2006].

          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Universal Service Agency
             (USA) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 165-
             2006].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the National Electronic
             Media Institute of South Africa for 2005-2006, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
             2005-2006 [RP 114-2006].


    (8)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Service and Administration for consideration and report. The
        Reports of the Auditor-General are referred to the Standing
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 10 – Department of
             Public Service and Administration for 2005-2006, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
             Vote 10 for 2005-2006 [RP 209-2006].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 12 – South African
             Management Development Institute (SAMDI) for 2005-2006,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements of Vote 12 for 2005-2006 [RP 236-2006].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the State Information
             Technology Agency (Proprietary) Limited (SITA) for 2005-2006,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 20-2006].

    (9)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Works for consideration and report. The Report of the
        Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for the Built
             Environment (CBE) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 32 for 2005-
             2006 [RP 229-2006].


    (10)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Health for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
        General are referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
        for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 16 – Department of
             Health for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 16 for 2005-2006
             [RP 210-2006].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Medical
             Schemes for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 230-
             2006].


    (11)    The following paper is referred to the Joint Monitoring
        Committee on the Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of
        Children, Youth and Disabled Persons for consideration and report.
        The Report of the Auditor-General is referred to the Standing
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Youth
             Commission (NYC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
             242-2006].

    (12)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Housing for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
        General and the Independent Auditors are referred to the Standing
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the People’s Housing
             Partnership Trust (PHPT) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-
             2006.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Home Builders
             Registration Council (NHBRC) for 2005-2006, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2005-2006 [RP 159-2006].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Social Housing
             Foundation for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

     (13)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Education for consideration and report. The Report of the
        Independent Auditors is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council
             for Educators (SACE) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

     (14)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Environmental
             Advisory Forum (NEAF) for 2005-2006.


     (15)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Science and Technology for consideration and report. The Reports of
        the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors are referred to
        the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Research
             Foundation (NRF) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Godisa Trust for 2005-
             2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

     (16)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Minerals and Energy for consideration and report. The Report of the
        Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Electricity
             Regulator (NER) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


     (17)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Water Affairs and Forestry for consideration and report. The
        Reports of the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors are
        referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 34 – Department of
             Water Affairs and Forestry for 2005-2006, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 34
             for 2005-2006 [RP 166-2006].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Water Research
             Commission for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 118-
             2006].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Trans-Caledon Tunnel
             Authority (TCTA) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

     (18)   The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on
        Sport and Recreation:


          a) Letter from the Minister of Sport and Recreation dated 28
             September 2006 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in
             terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act,
             1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of
             the Annual Report of Boxing South Africa (BSA) for 2005-2006.


     (19)   The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on
        Minerals and Energy:

        (a)      Letter from the Minister of Minerals and Energy dated 27
             September 2006 to the Speaker of the National Assembly , in
             terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act,
             1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of
             the Annual Report of Mintek for 2005-2006:


     (20)   The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on the
        Auditor General for consideration:


        (a)      Budget and Strategic Plan of the Auditor-General for 2007-
             2010 [RP 225-2006].

     (21)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report. The Reports of the
        Independent Auditors is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:
          a) Report and Financial Statements of Sasria Limited for 2005-
             2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Reserve
             Bank for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          c) The Address of the Governor of the Reserve Bank at the Eighty-
             sixth Ordinary General Meeting of Shareholders.


     (22)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance for consideration:

          a) Third Reporting Exemptions made in terms of section 74 of the
             Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of 2001),
             tabled in terms of section 74(2)(b) of the Financial
             Intelligence Centre Act, 2001.

          b) Government Notice No 1035 published in Government Gazette No
             29299 dated 13 October 2006: Third Reporting Exemption in terms
             of section 74 of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001
             (Act No 38 of 2001).

     (23)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Trade and Industry for consideration and report. The Report of the
        Independent Auditors is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Empowerment
             Fund for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


    (24)    The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on
        Arts and Culture:

        (a)      Letter from the Minister of Arts and Culture dated 29
             September 2006 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in
             terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act,
             1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of
             the Annual Report of the Department of Arts and Culture for
             2005-2006.


        (b)      Letter from the Minister of Arts and Culture to the
             Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a)
             of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999),
             explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of
             Arts, Culture and Heritage Institutions for 2005-2006.

    (25)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Arts and Culture for consideration and report. . The Report of the
        Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of The Playhouse Company for
             2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


    (26)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance:

        (a)      Letter from the Minister of Finance, dated 4 October 2006,
             to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
             65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1
             of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual
             Report of the Government Employees Pension Fund for 2005-2006.
    (27)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Enterprises:

        (a)      Letter from the Minister for Public Enterprises dated 6
             October 2006 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms
             of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
             (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the
             Annual Reports of Denel and Alexkor.

    (28)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts and the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
        Constitutional Development for consideration:


          a) Report of the Auditor-General on the summary of statements of
             monies kept in trust in the Guardian’s Funds for the year ended
             31 March 2004.

    (29)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development:


          a) Government Notice No R.605 published in Government Gazette No
             28942 dated 15 June 2006: Commission of Inquiry to conduct an
             investigation into the alleged illicit activities of certain
             South African companies or individuals relating to the United
             Nations Oil-For-Food Programme in Iraq: Extension of period to
             report, in terms of the Commissions Act, 1947 (Act No 8 of
             1947).

    (30)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Trade and Industry for consideration and report:
          a) Free Trade Agreement between the European Free Trade
             Association (EFTA) and the Southern African Customs Union
             (SACU), tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
             1996.


          b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Free Trade Agreement between the
             European Free Trade Association (EFTA) and the Southern African
             Customs Union (SACU).


    (31)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Agriculture and Land Affairs:

          a) Memorandum of Understanding on the Trilateral and Allied Fields
             between the Governments of the Republic of South Africa, the
             Federal Republic of Brazil and the Republic of India under the
             India-Brazil-South Africa (IBSA) Dialogue Forum, tabled in
             terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Nelson Mandela National
        Museum for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 192-2006].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Robben Island Museum for
        2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 217-2006].


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert T061107E-insert – PAGES 2470-2506

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert T061107E-insert1 – PAGES 2507-2520

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert T061107E-insert2 – PAGES 2521-2526


