---
title: 'National Assembly - 14 June 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-06-14
---

WEDNESDAY, 14 JUNE 2006
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY+


THE DEPUTY PRESIDENT

               Outcomes of overseas visits by Deputy President

1.    Ms M M Ntuli (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      (a) What were the outcomes of the visits she recently undertook to (i)
          Japan and (ii) Indonesia and (b) what benefits will South Africa
          derive from these visits?                           N745E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Deputy Speaker, the reply to the question is as
follows: While I was in Japan and Indonesia I met the following people –
Prime Minister Koizumi; the vice-chancellors of 20 universities; the
Japanese business federation, including Japanese businesses operating in
South Africa such as Toyota and Mitsubishi; and several technical training
institutions, especially those that have a history of collaborating with us
in South Africa.

The outcomes of those discussions included the following: work that is
going on where we are looking at collaboration on training, specifically in
those areas where we have shortages and scarce skills, through placement of
students and exchange opportunities in companies, universities as well as
in government - of course where they can speak English. We intend to send
people, especially middle-level managers, so that we can fast-track them in
specific competencies that we need in South Africa.

They also included the strengthening of relationships and increasing
confidence amongst Japanese institutions which do business in South Africa,
for example assuring a company like Toyota of our support for their
training programme. They already want to expand their manufacturing
capacity in Durban and they have already employed 10 000 people. They have
therefore made a commitment to upskill their workforce but our interest was
to use their training methods also to train other people, other than the
people that they’ve already employed. We are exploring that with them.
The major focus of the trip to Indonesia was on small, medium and micro
enterprise development and tourism. Indonesia has considerable experience
in the development of souvenirs and in the promotion of the tourism sector.
The objective was to derive lessons from the Indonesian experience by
focussing on roles played by government, SMMEs and the financial
institutions in developing a robust SMME sector.

We were focussing, in particular, on the souvenir industry as the
Indonesians turned out to be leaders in that regard. In my delegation I had
the MECs of tourism for KwaZulu-Natal and North West; the Deputy Minister
of Finance as well as the Deputy Minister of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism; the Deputy Minister of Trade and Industry, Rob Davies; Ceda and
the National Productivity Institute. These different members of the
delegation focussed on the different possibilities of co-operation.

What emerged as interesting during that visit, was that in Indonesia they
are already making 2010 souvenirs, which was something that I feared,
namely that we are already being outsmarted by another country. But, of
course, the Deputy Minister of Finance and the Deputy Minister of Trade and
Industry, who are also involved, particularly the Deputy Minister of
Finance, who is a member of the Local Organising Committee for 2010, had to
look at how we could, as we collaborate with the SMMEs in Indonesia, ensure
that they are also compliant with the requirements of intellectual property
as requested by Fifa, without killing the possibility for collaboration
between South African SMMEs and Indonesian SMMEs.

The other industry that is highly developed in Indonesia is the batik
industry. This industry is also dominated by SMMEs who create unique
products that are highly in demand internationally and very popular,
especially on the African continent. An area of co-operation, therefore,
was possible joint ventures between our SMMEs and the Indonesian SMMEs to
create unique products, especially clothing that we would be able to use as
part of the 2010 memorabilia and souvenirs.

Most of the cotton, well maybe not most but a significant amount of the
cotton for their batik, is from Southern Africa, in particular from
Zimbabwe. The cotton goes to Zimbabwe; they value-add it; and we buy it
back. The idea was that we would import the skill from there. We would then
buy the cotton from Zimbabwe and from South Africa, and we would develop
partnerships on the basis of which we would increase our productive
capacity in South Africa.

We are also exploring the possibility of having a one-stop facility to
showcase the products of South African SMMEs so that the SMMEs are not
burdened with the challenges of market access. Already, a follow-up visit
has taken place. The Indonesians have come to South Africa and some
agreements have already been signed between some of the SMMEs. Thank you.
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately, Ms Ntuli is not here with us but the hon
Khunou will take the follow-up question.

Ms N P KHUNOU: Deputy Speaker, thank you Deputy President for your
comprehensive answer. Japan is known for its amazing economic growth rate
after the Second World War and that it has recovered from its economic
downfall. One of the strong points of Japan is the technology that they
have, but we also have a challenge with unemployed graduates. Is there any
system or any plan that the government has to take unemployed graduates to
go and learn in Japan? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Yes, actually, we are, in the main, obviously going
to place unemployed graduates in South Africa, but we are also looking for
placement anywhere else in the world. I think we have already sent about
150 potential “placees”, if I can call them that, who have qualifications
in technical areas and who were underemployed where they were, to Japan. We
are also taking some in the managerial sections, because Japan has a strong
training capability in that area. We are also taking some of them into
local government-related professions. We will, in all cases, be looking at
the utilisation of whatever technology Japan has which has relevance to
South Africa.

I must say that this process of placing students, whether in South Africa
or oversees, is very labour intensive. We learnt that after we recruited,
especially women. We were looking for 100 but we ended up with 500
applicants and we had a strong offer from the United Arab Emirates, UAE,
and from the private sector. But to place every student or graduate in an
area where they will learn meaningfully and to make sure that they have
accommodation, they have a stipend, they have a supervisor, is proving to
be quite a slow process.

We are learning as we go along. We have increased our staff in that respect
and we hope that, at least, at the end of the year we will be able to give
a comprehensive report on those that we have been able to place
successfully. Thank you.

Mr L K JOUBERT: Deputy Speaker, Madam Deputy President, it appears that you
spent more time in Indonesia than in Japan. Now, given the fact that,
overall, Japan is our third largest trade partner and our largest in Asia,
wouldn’t it have been better to spend more time in Japan? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: It is not about the time but the quality of
interactions that we had. We have had a long collaborative relationship
with Japan so it was easy to get all the people we needed to meet in order
to collaborate with them. And I spent most of the time in one city when I
was in Japan, whereas in Indonesia, for instance, when I had to see batik I
had to go to central Java, in Solo, to actually spend time there with
SMMEs, and to travel from Jakarta to Solo takes about three hours. The
reason more time was spent in Indonesia was just the size of the country,
the distances and the capability of getting in-depth interaction. Length of
time doesn’t always imply quality. [Applause.]

  Perceptions regarding Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South
                               Africa (Asgisa)

2.    Mr I O Davidson (DA) asked the Deputy President:

     Whether she will make a statement regarding the perception among
     commentators that the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for
     South Africa (Asgisa) is little more than a repackaging of existing
     economic growth initiatives for public relations purposes?
                                                               N748E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: The answer to the question, hon Davidson, is that I
do not intend to make a statement about a few isolated misperceptions about
the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa. Asgisa, in
fact, is repacking existing initiatives so that we can implement them
better. So if people have that perception, that’s not a problem for us.

We are doing the repackaging so that we can accelerate and ensure better
sharing of benefits of growth. If that also benefits our public relations,
that’s also good. That’s not a problem for us.

However, I need to state that Asgisa is a set of priority initiatives, most
of which are led by government departments or partnerships in the area in
which they were already doing this work, but maybe not doing it as well as
we want them to do it.

Asgisa does not have a separate and special budget. It is not a fund. It is
not an alternative planning system to only help a programme of action of
government or budgeting system. It is a strategic intervention that seeks
to capitalise on those things that we can roll out faster if we remove
particular obstacles.

What it does is that it identifies key actions for government that should
be prioritised in planning and budgeting. So, it is not a shortcut to the
budget cycle also. It is not as if we are asking departments not to follow
whatever they need to do in order for them to access resources from the
Treasury.

If a project is agreed to be an Asgisa priority, its implementation takes
high priority. We would expect other partners such as business who have
also identified areas where they would collaborate with us or
nongovernmental organisations and trade unions to prioritise them in the
manner in which they implement those projects. Asgisa also acts as a
mechanism for monitoring the implementation of decisions and for responding
where initiatives are falling behind or running into problems.

One of the most important contributions of the Presidency, obviously, is
the use of our office to convene meetings between parties that struggle to
get together so that we can make sure that we supervise that they are
working in a collaborative manner.

Perhaps, a few commentators may not yet fully understand what we are trying
to do, but the majority of the commentators and the partners do understand
what we are doing and, I think, for now, that you also understand that. I
am happy if you understand it. It doesn’t matter about other people.

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Madam Deputy Speaker, I thank the Deputy President for
that reply and I accept what she said. However, when you made your
announcement on that, you identified certain interventions. Some of them
were infrastructure; some of them were sector strategies. There was the
business process outsourcing and tourism Durban-Johannesburg corridor.

In relation to education skills, we had the Joint Initiative for Priority
Skills Acquisition. A committee was formed. Nothing has come back from
there. There were interventions in the second economy – there was the whole
question of regulation. There was the whole question of review of the
labour laws. These were all intervention strategies that you put on the
table and said they were going to be part of Asgisa.

Now, we have heard nothing since then. I think what we will be requiring
from you, ma’am, is to actually come forth with these strategies to
actually add meat to the bone so that we can see that Asgisa is on course,
that we are achieving, and that we will receive that potential 6% growth
rate.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I don’t know, because we have been coming back and
adding information as we go along, but obviously, many of these things
don’t take a few months before you can see concrete results. So, we don’t
want to be reporting every five minutes.

With regard to infrastructure, for instance, it is about ensuring that we
have capacity to spend the money for social infrastructure. So, as far as
that is concerned, for instance, one complete task that we have done is to
beef up the capacity of the municipalities to spend by deploying people to
actually go and work there. That is one concrete action that we have taken
since then.

Eskom has actually begun to implement the work that they need to do so that
they can address the issue of generation capacity. They are on course in
terms of the commitments that they have made. Transnet, in terms of
addressing harbours, also has a strategy plan. They have employed people.
They have gone back to look at some of the data that they have in order to
make sure where their implementation strategy had gaps. They are fixing it.
So, life is going on. We are meeting constantly to make sure that they are
going forward.
I don’t think that you can say that nothing is happening in Jipsa. Not only
do we have a committee, but we also have staff. We have students that we
have actually at least placed in the different institutions, be they
unemployed graduates. We have people that we are placing in the workplace
so that we can accelerate their training. We have technikon students that
were otherwise sitting at home and couldn’t graduate because they didn’t
have internships. We are bringing them on board so that they can graduate.

So, you are actually going to see people who have a ``before’’ and
``after’’ story. Before there was Asgisa, they were sitting at home; they
didn’t know what was going to happen to them. We have helped them to get
learnerships to train so that they can go back and graduate.

We are taking students who are sitting at home, and we are actually giving
them jobs. Just last night, we concluded a programme with KPMG concerning
20 young women who are going to go to KPMG, with the potential of going up
the ladder and becoming chartered accountants. That is one of the Jipsa
programmes. [Applause.]

So, I don’t have worries that nothing is happening. I would probably like
more. That is really my anxiety. I would like much more than what we are
doing. But, definitely, people are doing their best.

In relation to BPO, the strategy for business process outsourcing, there
are hundreds of students that we are putting into training with IBM and
with Microsoft, and we are preparing them for that. Of course, we have
finished the strategy. The team which has government and the private sector
working on the strategy is now about to adopt the strategy, and we are
going to launch the strategies.

With regard to tourism, we have the same situation. So, hon member, there
is progress. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ACDP, like all other political
parties, I’m sure, wants government to succeed with Asgisa. Whilst we
appreciate that there are enormous challenges, particularly in the area of
skills shortages, we must achieve the target of 6% growth by 2010 as well
as halve poverty and unemployment by 2015, or at least go a long way to
achieving these targets.

In view of the accusations by commentators as set out in the question, hon
Deputy President, what significance do you place on last month’s UK-South
Africa Bilateral Forum, whereby the United Kingdom agreed to work with
South Africa to determine how best it can support Asgisa.

In a statement released following the forum, both governments agreed that
``a special focus of the work of the forum and future SA-UK co-operation
would be support for Asgisa’’. Does this not signify acceptance of Asgisa
by a major trading partner that already supports us in development through
the employment promotion programme, and the consolidated municipal
transformation programme, and thus that there is already certain progress
with Asgisa and acceptance of it?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I couldn’t agree with you more, hon member. In fact,
as I speak, the Minister of media and sport in the United Kingdom will be
coming to South Africa, and one of the things that will be done will be to
interview some of the students that they intend to recruit in order for
them to be placed in the construction sector in the UK, where they are
building stadia for their Olympics. During that time, those young people
will be mentored. Obviously, they have to have the necessary qualifications
and degrees, and we have already provided them with all the data.

That is just one concrete thing that has happened since that visit. We are
hoping to send at least 30 young people and this has been one of the
shortest interactions that we have had, because in many of the places where
we are trying to place students, as we have done with the United Arab
Emirates, it just takes too long. There’s a long wait, the visas to be
sorted out, etc, and with the UK, the issue of visas is processed much more
quickly. The language isn’t a problem and the enthusiasm on their side is
actually quite commendable. Thank you.
Mr K A MOLOTO: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Deputy President, will you be able
to explain to this House what the different roles or responsibilities are
of certain elements within civil society in the enhancing and
implementation of Asgisa?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: The private sector has contributed financially.
Jipsa, the Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition, is in part
being supported by the National Business Initiative. They have provided a
secretariat and a budget. They are also facilitating the placement of some
of the students in the companies that are members of the chambers that are
supporting Asgisa. Labour has contributed ideas and criticism, which has
been very good. We have used some of the criticism to integrate.

In the work that we are doing on co-operatives and women, the
nongovernmental organisations in particular have sent us a lot of people
that we are now training. We have 150 people that are part of a training
programme that we are doing collaboratively with India and at least half of
those people have been sent by NGOs who are taking them back, and who will
make sure that when they go back to those NGOs they will have work to do to
apply the skills that we are imparting to them.

The private sector is collaborating on training. As I speak, we have
concluded an agreement with Old Mutual to train hundreds of project
managers, mainly for local government-related services. They have started
training at the Old Mutual business school. Those are the different
contributions by different stakeholders.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I don’t see another hand. I will then give the slot
back to Mr Davidson.

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Thank you, Madam Deputy Chair. Madam Deputy President,
thank you for your response.

However, laudable though it is to train people to take their rightful place
in our economic life, I do want to urge you to go back to that document
that you put out on your intervention strategies. Just do a checklist
against that, and see what was promised in terms of those intervention
strategies, and give us a report back on what has actually been achieved,
because then we will be able to measure the ongoing progress of Asgisa, and
then the charge won’t be made of you that this is just nothing more nor
less than a public relations document.

Let’s get the facts on the table so that we can all see, most of all those
people that are attempting to deride the programme. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: No problem. It will be done in my own time,
obviously, because I don’t want to bring half-baked information, and I can
live with criticism. It’s not meant to be easy. [Applause.]

              Action to address skills shortage in the country

3.    Mr B A D Martins (ANC) asked the Deputy President:


     (a)    What action is the Government taking to address the shortage of
          skills in the country and (b) what contribution are the business
          and organised labour sectors making in this regard?
                                  N746E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Deputy Speaker, again, this has to do with
skills. I’m quite excited that members are so concerned about this issue.

There are several approaches to addressing the skills shortage in the
short, medium and long term. In the short term, we have concluded the
identification and definition of what we regard as key skills that are
scarce, if we are to deliver in the short term.

These include the high-level engineering skills for networking industries,
such as telecommunications, transport logistics and energy, the city’s
urban and regional planning engineering skills, artisans, apprenticeship,
and technical skills for infrastructure needed in the construction sector,
management of the health care system, education, as well as teachers in the
public sector, especially for maths, science, ICT and languages.

These include skills also required in the specific industries that we have
identified, such as tourism and BPO, as well as cross-cutting skills such
as skills in finance, in project management as well as in ICT.

We’ve also identified challenges that exist in the skills pathway, and some
of the solutions that we are working on, together with the training
institutions, are improving the match between the supply and the demand and
unlocking the training capacity in the public sector. For instance, we are
reopening some of the training facilities that Eskom and Transnet used to
have for training apprentices so that we can utilise them again.

In the short term also, as you know, we have recruited people that were
retired. They are providing expertise and are also mentoring some of the
younger people in the municipalities and elsewhere. Of course, we also have
contributions in the Jipsa task team by labour, which is also assisting us
to identify the value of the training that is being given to the people
that we ultimately intend to place in the workplace.

I have already, in the reply to the previous question, indicated the
collaboration that we are having with the private sector, so I will not
repeat the reply to that part of this question. However, I do want to
mention that, in the long term, curriculum alignment at higher education is
fundamental. We certainly still have a problem in that what is taught at
higher education and what is required in the world of work is not aligned.

We also do not want to do that to the extreme, such that we turn students
into robots that only learn in order to lay a brick. But, if you can’t lay
a brick, you won’t have bread. So it’s the balance between learning
universally so that you can be a learned person and learning a competency,
so that you can do work. We are engaging with higher education institutions
in this regard.

Of course, also in the long term, this question has to do with the overall
improvement of the quality of education in the schools, something that the
Department of Education is seized with. Thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, before we call for a supplementary
question, I just wish to appeal to you: There are just too many meetings
taking place in the House. We encourage the meetings, but please go and
have a very fruitful meeting elsewhere, and leave those who’d like to
continue with the business of the House to do so. Agreed?

HON MEMBERS: Agreed!

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much for that commitment.

Mr D A A OLIFANT: Comrade Deputy President, it’s wonderful to address you
this afternoon. I just want to say that Mr Davidson falls within the
category of those that are “none so blind as those that don’t want to see,
and none so deaf as those that don’t want to hear”.

I just want to say that it’s quite critical that most of the opposition
parties, except the DA, are supporting the Asgisa programme as introduced
by the Deputy President. You have all these questions that have been asked
so far, which are very interrelated. So I just want to ask, on the part
focusing on business, whether there is any indication from your side that
business or the private sector is committed and coming to the party as far
as training is concerned? In the past there was a great deal of reluctance
on the part of business to come to the party because they always complained
that this would affect their production levels. What’s the position, in
your own opinion, at this particular point in time?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Deputy Speaker, business is coming to the
party, but I think that there is still a notion that training is a
corporate social responsibility rather than a strategic investment. And I
think this is the paradigm shift, which we are trying to introduce.

In the JSE they have a triple-bottom-line index that they have introduced,
which involves corporate social responsibility, environmental compliance
and profitability of the company. Those are the three things by which they
will gauge whether a company is sustainable.

We are saying that investment in human resources is another index that must
be added, so that we can get more companies to see investment in human
capital as a make or break for productivity and for profitability. It’s not
a nice-to-do.

In fact, it’s not just South Africa that is dealing with these issues.
Globally there is a shortage of the same skills that we are looking for. So
it’s not as if we are going to get these people somewhere around the world.

Remember we were very enthusiastic about bringing in people from outside
South Africa. But we actually realised that a lot of the people who are
coming back do not necessarily have some of the skills that are crucial for
us.

So, in the medium to long term, it’s going to depend on us investing in the
training. It’s also going to mean that, globally, most companies and
nations go back to the drawing board as far as the issues of training and
skills are concerned. Economies in many parts of the world are booming and
growing, and all of the people with those highly sought skills are being
absorbed. So we have to create our own base for those skills.
If industry does not make a big investment in the skills, it’s always going
to come back and haunt us. For me, that is the real thing that I’m trying
to push for, that paradigm shift. It’s not a nice-to-do, it’s not a
corporate social service, it’s a fundamental survival investment that the
companies need to make. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr C M LOWE: Good afternoon, Deputy President. It’s also an honour to
address you this afternoon. I’m sure you won’t need the hon Olifant to
answer for you, though.

Deputy President, my question revolves around the skills revolution,
because at the end of March, when you launched Jipsa, the Joint Initiative
for Priority Skills Acquisition, you quite correctly said that what South
Africa needs is a skills revolution, and the DA agrees with you
wholeheartedly.

The problem is, we’ve had the RDP, we had Gear, we had the Setas, all of
which, quite frankly, have not delivered the skills and certainly haven’t
delivered the jobs. What happens now? The question is: What makes it any
different? And the reason I ask this is that if you really want the skills
revolution that will truly deliver the skills and the jobs – and as I said,
we believe that you do – then economic growth has to be the non-negotiable
priority above racial preferencing, especially with regard to skills
acquisition.

And as you know, that hasn’t happened up to now. In fact, what happens is
that there are many skills, there is racial bias and there is prioritising
of one race above the other. With 8 million people out of work and with 500
000 skilled jobs vacant, we can’t afford to do that.

Will you, ma’am, identify priority scarce skills and exempt them from
employment equity requirements? Will you, in fact, ensure that the current
racial bias in hiring that sabotages the push for skills is amended, so
that everybody, whether black, white, Indian, coloured or whatever, who has
the skills, has the ability to work, wants to stay here and wants to be
part of South Africa can apply for these jobs, and we can fill the skills
and everybody will benefit together? That is the question, and I would ask
that you take the initiative that nobody else in your government has done
and say today, “yes, we will do that”, so that everybody belongs in the
skills revolution. [Time expired.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I don’t think that there’s racial preferencing, in
the manner you put it. Statistics show that the majority of the people who
are unemployed, including those that are qualified, are African. That’s a
fact. There is no “manga-manga” about that one. We are, therefore, trying
to increase the number of people from those communities so that they can
also feel that they are part of this new South Africa.

Of course, we have to do the balancing act. Sometimes you get it right,
sometimes you don’t get it so right. In trying to do that balancing, you
have to make sure that you do not alienate those of other races. That is
why in the recent recruitment drive we were happy to receive names from the
FF and we brought in those people and interviewed them.

One of the things that they are doing – and I think they are going to be
great – is the mentoring of other people so that they do the job. They are
imparting skills, but at the same time you are bringing in other people.

Once you completely relax employment equity – we are underachieving in any
case - can you imagine what would happen if we didn’t have that? So I think
it’s the sensitivity of the leadership to do these things not in the
extreme; and to create an environment where all South Africans can feel
that they are able to co-operate and to collaborate.

And I think that, amongst ourselves, hon members, we need to try and create
that environment so that we do not make any South African feel that they
are unwanted. [Applause.]

Mnu B W DHLAMINI: Somlomo, Phini likaMongameli nozakwethu, uqeda ukusho
lapha, mhlonishwa Phini likaMongameli, ukuthi njengamanye amasu okuzama
ukulwa nokwentuleka kwamakhono, namukele uhla olunabantu abangaphezu kwe-
100 abaphuma kwi-FF Plus. Kunombuzo futhi-ke othi, iqiniso yini ukuthi
abanye badudulelwa eceleni ngenkathi sifika ngo-1994 ngenxa yokuthi
kwathiwa abantu ababesebenza kusaqhutshwa ngohlelo oludala babengeke
baluqonde uhlelo olusha?

Laba okuthiwa banesipiliyoni basithola bengebodwa, kodwa kwakukhona nabanye
abantu abamnyama nabo ababesebenza bengama-administrators emalokishini
abamnyama nasezindaweni ezazibizwa kuthiwe “amaBantustani”. Nabo-ke
banesipiliyoni esifanayo nesalaba futhi babephethwe yilaba abayi-100
obathole kulolo luhla.

Kukhona imibono-ke futhi ethi sengathi laba abansundu ababekulolo hlelo
lwakudala baduduleke eceleni kodwa benesipiliyoni esifanayo nesalaba
abatholakele lapha. Kunemibono eyakhekayo yokuthi sengathi okumhlophe
kungcono kunokumnyama. Nalaba abamnyama bazibona sengathi bashiyekile ngoba
babesebenza ohlelweni oludala kodwa sekukhona abashuthekwayo ngoba
bemhlophe. Ngiyathokoza.

IPHINI LIKAMONGAMELI: Hhawu, baba, angazi ukuthi uyithathaphi le ndaba  embi
kangaka! Ayikho leyo nto. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr B W DHLAMINI:  Madam  Speaker,  Deputy  President  and  colleagues,  hon
Deputy President, you have just said that, as another means  to  tackle  the
skills shortage, you have accepted a list of more than 100 people  from  the
FF Plus. The other question is, is it true that other people were  sidelined
when we came into power in 1994 because it was said  that  people  who  were
employed during the old system could not understand the new system?

Those who have experience, when they got it, they were not  alone  but  with
black people who were working as administrators  in  townships  and  in  the
then Bantustans. They also have the same experience as those and  they  were
managed by those who are on the list of 100.

There are perceptions that those who were in the old  system  are  sidelined
although they have the same experience as those who are on the  list.  There
are also perceptions that whites are better than blacks.  Blacks  also  feel
sidelined because they were  working  in  the  old  system  and  others  are
squeezed in because they are white. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Wow, sir, I don’t know  where  you  take  such  a  bad
thing! There is no such thing.]

Firstly, let me correct this: the names that we got from the FF were not
actually 100. The 100 names I was talking about relate to the young women
that we recruited for placement internationally in the United Arab Emirates
in particular, whom we are now redirecting to other countries because we’ve
more quality offers where they will get better benefits, especially because
of the language, amongst other things.

However, regarding this list from the FF, yes, we have placed some of the
people, but we didn’t take everybody on it because there were interviews.
Some people, when they realised where they were going to be placed, decided
that maybe it would be difficult for the family to relocate, that the
skills didn’t match the offer and so on, and didn’t take up the offer. So,
in the end, a much lower number of people was placed than was anticipated.

Angikezwa lutho maqondana nokuthi sesithole amagama abantu abavela
ezabelweni. Asibaxwayi abantu abavela ezabelweni. Phela, angithi thina
sinokubuyisana, noma ngabe uvelaphi siyakuthatha. Angikezwa lutho.

Uma kukhona abantu enicabanga  ukuthi  mhlawumbe  sibabandlululile,  ngicela
usinike  amagama  abo.  Sizowathatha  lawo  magama   siwahambise   kuMnyango
wezemiSebenzi kaHulumeni nezokuPhatha.  Iwona-ke  uMnyango  ozobabiza  ukuze
babonisane. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[I haven’t heard anything about the list of people from the rural areas.  We
don’t avoid people from rural areas. We are  reconciling;  no  matter  where
you come from, we accept you. I have not heard anything.
If you think that there are some people who we have  discriminated  against,
please give us their names. We are going to  take  those  names  and  submit
them to the  Department  of  the  Public  Service  and  Administration.  The
department will call them and have discussions with them.]

Mr C M LOWE: Deputy President, through your answer to me, I certainly did
understand, not just the measure of sympathy but an agreement that we need
to move forward with this. We’ve so many positions that are vacant in South
Africa and so many people with those skills, whom we can use. We’ve got to
move past the hurt and the sensitivities. And I think, from our side, we do
understand the sensitivities of what’s happened in the past; you can’t just
simply pretend that they weren’t there.

The question I’d like to put to you, as a follow-up, Deputy President, is
specifically this: There are a number of very scarce skills in this country
but, truly, as you’ve said yourself, the education system that we currently
have doesn’t provide sufficient skills at matric level for people to go to
university. Until we can deal with that problem, can we take people from
groups that would have been seen as advantaged before and actually allow
them to apply for jobs? I’m thinking of the Gautrain, for example.

I’m told by some of my colleagues that we don’t have enough engineers in
this country to actually work on that project, and yet many young South
Africans with those skills, either here or abroad, would love to come back
and apply. The question is: Would you identify those priority skills that
we do have and exempt them from the current employment equity requirements
that only people from certain backgrounds may apply? Would you take that as
a start, to say to everybody, “We’re all part of this; let’s work
together”? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: No, hon member, I will not call for an amendment of
the Employment Equity Act, but I do want those people to be taken on board.
They will mentor other people. So they will have a job. They will provide a
service, but they will actually mentor, especially if they are older. If
they are younger, obviously we must also incentivise them; so they must
have longer-term contracts. There is a way of doing that without having to
change the law.

They must be able to mentor. Eskom is doing this already; where they don’t
have the skills in the designated group, they take the people they want,
but you must be committed to mentoring other people. In many cases they’ve
retired people who’ve these wonderful scarce skills who are mentoring about
four or five other young people. The chemistry is just amazing.

The exchange of skills, the robustness of the interaction is amazing. We
didn’t have to change the law. We’ve made sure that, at some point, when
these people have their second retirement, we’ve definitely kept a position
for someone from a designated group without robbing someone who has skills
at entry point of his or her opportunity.

These things need to be addressed on a case-by-case basis. If you tell me
that there’s a person who has a skill and there’s a vacancy there that has
not been filled, and the project is at a standstill, I’m prepared to go to
the Gautrain people and raise the issue. That is what Asgisa is about, by
the way, Mr Davidson - unblocking these things case-by-case when they
arise. Thanks. [Applause.]

               Implementation of youth development programmes

4.    Mr B M Mkongi (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

    (1)     What programmes is the Government implementing with regard to
         youth development in view of South Africa’s commemoration of the
         30th anniversary of the 1976 Soweto uprising;


    (2)     whether South Africa is meeting its international obligations in
         this regard; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
         details?
         N747E


The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Speaker, I am pleased to inform the House that
as we celebrate the contribution of the youth to our struggle for freedom
and beyond, government has youth development concerns on top of the agenda.

We are implementing information programmes that seek to alert millions of
young people about the opportunities available in this age of hope.
Expanding access to information is critical since many of our young people
do not enjoy the benefits of freedom as yet, not because there are limited
opportunities in some cases, but because they lack information on where
these opportunities are and how to access them.

It is within this context that we are hosting the National Youth Service
Expo - please tell all young people! - this week in Soweto and in the
Drakenstein municipality. The aim of this expo is to showcase community
service and service delivery activities that young people are engaged in.

We hope that, through this expo, we will encourage those young people who
do not know about the National Youth Service to become interested so that
when we recruit again they will make themselves available.

Why are we focusing on the National Youth Service? It is because,
obviously, this month we are celebrating the 30th anniversary of the
uprisings which the young people led, but it’s also critical to emphasise
that we are trying to provide young people with opportunities to be
included in nation-building, in social cohesion and in accessing new
skills.

In that way, the National Youth Service programme is a programme that is
going to be with us; it’s going to expand throughout the country and it’s
going to be implemented in partnership. It aims to accelerate service
delivery. Many of the young people are involved in the housing projects to
expand opportunities for skills development and occupational experience for
unemployed and out-of-school youth and to promote social cohesion.

I do urge all the members in this House to please share this information so
that as many young people as possible can participate in these activities.

But, more importantly, I want also to share with this House that we are
engaged in various planning activities aimed at expanding the capacity of
the existing programme to absorb thousands of young people, especially
those young people who are in the so-called second economy. So we are now
working on a business plan that will elaborate the placement of young
people in SMMEs, and this we are going to be doing together with Ceda which
has already opened offices in various parts of the country.

As far as the National Youth Service is concerned, we are targeting 10 000
young people by the end of this year, and those who are already in the
programme and are ready to start, will be starting in July.

In regard to paragraph 2 of the question, hon Mkongi, regarding whether
South Africa is meeting its international obligation, my answer is, yes. We
are making considerable progress towards achieving millennium development
goals. Both the World Programme of Action for Youth and the Millennium
Declaration urge all member states to invest heavily in education and
training, which we are doing.

Members will recall that I reported in this House last week that young
people’s participation in the schooling system has increased from 96% in
2002 to 98% in 2005. The Minister of Education also reported in her Budget
Vote that tremendous progress has been made in areas of secondary
education, further education and training, as well as higher education, and
now we are concentrating on improving the quality of this education, since
access has improved tremendously.

Time permitting, I would have loved to go on further to demonstrate how we
are meeting our obligations in areas such as youth participation and
decision-making. Many departments have gone out of their way to recruit
young people, either for learnerships or permanent positions, and the many
programmes that we have in which young people are given opportunities for
economic participation through access to finance as well as training. Thank
you.

Mr M R MOHLALOGA: Deputy Speaker, I just wanted to establish from the hon
Deputy President that, given the good programmes that government is
pursuing with regard to youth development, one issue that is not quite
clear is the role of the private sector, especially with regard to youth
economic participation. Is there a particular role which you think the
private sector can play in order to enhance the programmes that government
is pursuing? Thank you very much.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, I think we have a platform through which
the private sector can participate, but we are not seeing the numbers that
the country requires. For instance, if you take the economic empowerment
charters, all of them make provision for enterprise development that, in
many cases, would benefit young people. Most of them make provision for
human resource development. If implemented properly, most of those would
benefit young people, including young workers.

Of course, if young people are advanced enough to raise capital to buy
equity in companies it would also introduce them to the economy, but I do
know that that is perhaps one of the most difficult areas for young people
to obtain access to.

That is why Umsobomvu tries very hard to support young people with access
to finance. But, actually, the success of young people when it comes to
areas such as access to finance depends on what the banks will do, because
they are the people whose core mandate is to sell money. They have lots of
it, so they need to find a mechanism that will bring in young people to
start up businesses, because as a young person you need the start-up in
many cases. When they require collateral from a young person who is
historically disadvantaged, for that matter, it does make it very difficult
for those young people to make an entry point.

So, some of our interactions with the banks on the basis of the Financial
Services Charter, for example, is about changing the mindset in order to
enable more young people to get start-up capital so that they can become
entrepreneurs. Fortunately, there is a growing number of young people these
days who have relative sophistication and skills. They know how to write a
business plan, they know how to research a product and a market, and
therefore they can be trusted as entrepreneurs.

I would be the first one to say that I don’t think that we are making as
much progress there as I would like us to make, and I’ve already indicated
that, in the area of education, we have a basis on which to co-operate but
the numbers aren’t there. And it is tedious for us to get the co-operation
at the speed at which we would like to have it.
I have experienced that in relation to our own South African companies, but
even when we approached some of the international companies I find that the
speed, the volumes and the numbers are not to the extent that we need them.
However, I suppose this is something that we have to keep working on, and
to urge the companies to support us. Thank you.

Mr M M SWATHE: Deputy Speaker, Madam Deputy President, the National Youth
Commission has achieved very little over the past few years.
[Interjections.] The salary bill of the commission, which stands at more
than R7 million, is more than 50% of the commission’s budget. The
commission seems to help only those it employs, not the broader youth
population.

In the light of the imperatives to improve skills and grow youth employment
under Asgisa, do you not believe that an ineffectual body such as the
National Youth Commission should be disbanded, owing to its poor track
record? If so, will you make this recommendation to the President? If not,
how can you reconcile Asgisa’s goal with the ineffectual youth commission?
Thank you. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon member, no, I will not disband the youth
commission. We will improve where it is failing and there’s just been a
review of all these agencies so that we can enhance their participation.
The youth commission is also specifically involved in the rolling-out of
the National Youth Service. In many of the areas where we actually have
functioning young people in the National Youth Service, in the
municipalities, it is because we have been assisted by the National Youth
Commission.

I am not taking lightly what you are saying, hon member, but I’ll need to
familiarise myself with the facts. I cannot accept such a drastic decision
without being absolutely sure that this is the best thing for the people
and the young people of South Africa. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Hon Deputy President, arising from your response and in view
of the issue of programmes that the government intends implementing, can it
be said that the government is serious about protecting the vulnerable
youth, particularly children – and one looks at sexual abuse - when it is
an accepted fact that age-of-consent offences are one of the best
protections for vulnerable children from predator adults? Statutory rape
provisions protect child victims from the secondary trauma of having to
disprove consent - once the act is proven a conviction can follow.

In general terms, hon Deputy President, the government intends lifting the
legal age for purchasing cigarettes from 16 years to 18 years to protect
children’s health. You must also be 18 to vote, obtain a driver’s licence
and purchase alcohol, but to be involved in sexual activities, the
government has decided, in terms of the Sexual Offences Bill, to make the
age 16 years. How does the government justify this, particularly in view of
widespread sexual abuse of children and the Aids epidemic, and this in view
of the intention to lift the age for purchasing cigarettes from 16 to 18
years? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: That’s a very new question, but ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: That’s an ambush, hon member! Put it in print!

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

  SECOND READING OF REPEAL OF THE BLACK ADMINISTRATION ACT AND AMENDMENT OF
                         CERTAIN LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move the
motion printed on the Order Paper in the name of the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party, as follows:


  That Rule 253(1), which provides inter alia that the debate on the Second
  Reading of a Bill may not commence before at least three working days have
  elapsed since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended for the
  purposes of conducting the Second Reading debate on Repeal of the Black
  Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B 11B –
  2006] (National Assembly – sec 75) today.


Agreed to.


                  MEDIATION COMMITTEE ON OLDER PERSONS BILL


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move
the motion printed on the Order Paper in the name of the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party, as follows:

  That the House, In accordance with Rule 226, elect the following members
  as nominated by their respective parties as the Assembly representatives
  on the Mediation Committee on the Older Persons Bill [B 68D - 2003]:


    Chalmers, J        (ANC)
    Gumede, D M        (ANC)
    Louw, S K          (ANC)
    Makasi, X C        (ANC)
    Masutha, T M  (ANC)
    Nel, A C           (ANC)
    Ngaleka, E         (ANC)
    Weber, H           (DA)
    Waters, M          (DA) (Alternate)
    Mars, I       (IFP).

Agreed to.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
   CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT - REPEAL OF THE BLACK ADMINISTRATION ACT AND
                  AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move:

  That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

    REPEAL OF THE BLACK ADMINISTRATION ACT AND AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN LAWS
                               AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

                        CORPORATE LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Deputy Speaker, colleagues,
Members of Parliament, I’m honoured to introduce the second reading of the
Corporate Laws Amendment Bill in the National Assembly.

Amongst its varied and wide responsibilities, the department is also
responsible for the administration of the Companies Act of 1973 and the
Close Corporations Act of 1984, which deal with the registration and
regulation of big and small businesses respectively. The purpose of the
Corporate Laws Amendment Bill is to amend both these pieces of legislation.


The DTI is committed to piloting legislation through Parliament that will
promote corporate governance. Weak corporate governance, associated with
financial reporting, especially of those firms that trade their shares
publicly, undermines the confidence of investors and users of financial
reports.

To enhance the integrity of our financial reporting, it has become
necessary to enact legislation that incorporates new standards, which are
increasingly being adopted internationally, and to ensure that these
standards are enforced vigorously. This is in line with our commitment to
continuously improve and bring certainty to the business environment for
domestic and international businesses.

In this regard, the key issues addressed in these amendments are, firstly,
to allow financial assistance by a company for the purchase of its own
shares; secondly, the appointment of an audit committee; thirdly, issues
that relate to auditor independence, namely the rotation of an auditor and
the prohibition of an auditor from rendering nonaudit services. The two
final issues relate to legal backing for accounting standards and allowing
for an electronic system of registration of companies and close
corporations.

Although most of these matters are of a specialised technical nature, I
think it is important that I should briefly outline the key motivation for
each of these areas of change. Firstly, in relation to allowing for
financial assistance by a company for purchase of its own shares, the
current situation is that section 38 of the principal Act prohibits a
company from offering financial assistance for the purchase of its own
shares.

The rationale is that the assets of a company should always be maintained
if the company has to stay in business - the so-called “capital maintenance
rule”. This is an absolute prohibition. There are exceptions, but these are
difficult to apply in practice. This provision, therefore, has unintended
consequences where it serves to preclude lawful transactions, including
those relating to implementation of broad-based economic empowerment.

To remedy this situation, the Bill provides that a company may offer
financial assistance for the purchase of its own shares, provided three
conditions are met. These are the solvency test, the liquidity test and
approval by special resolution of the shareholders.

Liquidity means that a company should, immediately after the transaction,
be able to pay its debts as they become due. Solvency means that
immediately after concluding the transaction the assets of the company
should be more than its liabilities. The special resolution requirement
means that shareholders have a final say on the transaction and, most
importantly, that a special resolution requiring consent by at least 75% of
the shareholders has to be passed for the transaction to go through. The
first two conditions will protect creditors, whilst the third protects
shareholders.

We must proactively avoid the type of financial scandals that have occurred
internationally, where often audit committees comprising executive and
nonexecutive directors were unduly influenced by executive directors. In
fact, in both the Enron and Parmalat sagas one of the contributing factors
to the destruction of the companies was the lack of independence on the
part of audit committees.

The second key issue in the Bill, therefore, relates to the appointment of
audit committees. The relevant provision is that public interest companies
must have independent audit committees whose composition should include
nonexecutive directors only, and not executive directors as is now often
the case. The rationale is that, since nonexecutive directors are not
involved in the day-to-day running of the company, they have greater
independence.

The Bill further requires that an independent audit committee should advise
the board on the appointment of an external auditor and that the
shareholders must appoint this external auditor on the advice of the board.
The auditor, in turn, will be obliged to apply guidelines outlined in the
Bill relating to auditor independence, thereby greatly enhancing credible
and professional financial reporting.

A further accountability mechanism in this regard is that the board will
take appropriate action if the independence of the auditor is unduly
influenced in any way. In addition, a registered auditor, as defined in
terms of the Auditing Profession Act of 2005, should be rotated instead of
a firm of auditors. The rationale for rotating an auditor is to preclude
the development of too close a working relationship between an auditor and
the management of a company.

Our research has shown that most international jurisdictions require audit
firms to rotate the staff providing a service to a company. Voluntarily,
however, some South African companies are rotating firms of auditors
instead of an individual auditor within the firm. This is a welcome
development, but does not replace the need for auditing firms to rotate
their auditors servicing companies as provided for in this Bill.

The independence of auditing services is provided for separately through
the provisions that certain functions should not fall within the scope of
the audit function. Such nonaudit functions include tax advice and internal
audit services. Although these functions are not defined in the Bill, what
is provided for is that a subcommittee of the independent regulatory board
for auditors, responsible for developing a code of ethics in terms of the
Audit Profession Act, should define nonaudit services.

The fourth key issue relates to legal backing for accounting standards. In
terms of the principal Act, there is no legal backing for accounting
standards. This weakness was highlighted in the findings of the Nel
Commission of Inquiry into the fall of Masterbond as one of the
deficiencies in statutory measures designed to protect investors.

In particular, the commission found lack of disclosure and uniformity in
applying accounting standards because of different interpretations. The
Bill proposes to remedy these deficiencies through the establishment of a
financial reporting standards council and a financial reporting
investigation panel to establish financial reporting standards and monitor
compliance.

To reduce the possibility of unnecessarily increasing compliance burdens,
public interest companies will be required to comply with international
best practice financial reporting standards, whereas limited interest
companies, on the other hand, will be subject to less onerous reporting
requirements, for obvious reasons.

Finally, Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members, you will recall that the
Electronic Communications and Transactions Act of 2002 provides that
electronic commerce will enjoy legal protection at the commencement of the
Act. I’m glad to report to the House that, through the provisions of the
Bill under your consideration today and subject to your support, the
outstanding provisions of the Electronic Communications and Transactions
Act relating to the electronic registration of companies and close
corporations, as well as the use of electronic signatures, will have been
dealt with.

In conclusion, the department is committed to issues of corporate
governance and will continually monitor international and local
developments, with a view to adjusting the legal framework whenever it
makes sense to do so. It is our belief that these amendments will improve
the integrity of financial reporting with positive spin-offs for both our
small and larger businesses.

Finally, I would like to congratulate the chair of the committee, Mr Ben
Martins, and the members of the committee for the sterling work done in
shaping this important legislation. Madam Deputy Speaker, the Bill is
introduced for second reading. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Prof B TUROK: Chairperson, it is perhaps sometimes unfortunate that the
legislation which comes to the House dealing with financial matters takes
on the appearance of being purely technical. Often, the language is rather
dry and one has the impression - and the House has the impression - that
what we are talking about is merely some minor adjustment here or there to
legislation in the financial sector. This piece of legislation also has
that appearance, but nothing could be further from the truth that this is,
purely and simply, some mechanism or other.

The fact of the matter is that the world of global corporations is being
shaken up on a grand scale by virtue of serious concern in international
financial quarters that what is going on in many cases ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon Turok, give me a minute
please. Hon members, can I appeal to you to be seated and to please lower
your voices? Order! Please proceed, hon Turok.

Prof B TUROK: What is often not understood or appreciated, because our
newspapers don’t cover this except in the financial pages or in the
business pages, is that there is a major shake-up taking place across the
world, as I will show in a minute, and the major financial newspapers of
the world, such as London’s Financial Times, the International Herald
Tribune and papers of that kind, deal quite substantially with the problems
facing corporate governance and corporate good governance right across the
world.

My role here at the moment is to report to the House on the process
followed by our portfolio committee and explain why we approved the Bill.
We took the Bill very seriously, because we understood that although it’s a
relatively short Bill, the implications are substantial, and this Bill
leads the way to the major review of the Companies Act, which is coming, in
which many important issues affecting the future financial stability of
South Africa will be dealt with.

What we did therefore was to have excellent interactions with the
department, and let me say right away that this is one of the best
interactions we’ve ever had with the department. The lawyers and the
officials took it very seriously and we worked together with them in, I
hope, improving different parts of the Bill so that we have a really good
Act.

We organised public hearings, and the big four auditing companies of South
Africa were present and gave extensive evidence, as did the Association for
the Advancement of Black Accountants of Southern Africa and the SA
Institute of Chartered Accountants. I must say the work that was done was
rigorous and thorough.

Now, the Minister has dealt with some of the more immediate technical
issues of the Bill, and I don’t wish to repeat those, so I want to go a
little broader than he did in placing this piece of legislation in the
context of our own financial situation but, in particular, in the context
of an international trend.

The trend is to evaluate the culture of corporations globally and, having
done the evaluation, to then regulate them. For example, in yesterday’s
London Financial Times there was an article called “Global corporations”
and it said that IBM, one of the largest companies in the world, looked at
the emergence of global corporations and argued that those corporations
should be accompanied by clearer global corporate values – and not just be
money-making but have actual values - and that these corporations that have
now emerged are rather different to the multinational corporations we knew
before, because the modern global corporation locates itself in a country
where it can work most cheaply and most effectively, but that the outcome –
the products - of that company are then distributed globally, particularly
in areas where there are low tariffs.
So, the London Financial Times says that we need to “develop a global
regulatory system through better co-operation between regulatory agencies”.
I imagine that that includes the South African agencies because, although
these global corporations are technically domiciled in one place and are
beholden to one set of shareholders, it is the task of politicians and it
is the task of this House to improve corporate governance. I must say that
the Minister could not have written a better preamble to the Act than the
London Financial Times did yesterday.

So, clearly, as the Minister said, the reason for this international
concern about global governance lies in the history of Enron and WorldCom,
which we all know about. What happened there is that the executive
directors inflated the profitability of those companies, creating virtually
empty shells so that the shareholders, who then owned virtually nothing,
lost everything when the crash came.

The key role in all this is the auditors, and those who read these
financial newspapers would know that some of the largest international
auditing companies face tremendous setbacks – I don’t want to name them
here - because their lack of supervision, their lack of proper auditing,
allowed those manipulations by executive directors to happen. The problem
is that the auditors did not perform.

So when the big four auditors came to our committee, we had to ask them
and, by the way, all of them are international companies - they are based
all over the developed world - “In your objections to some of the clauses
in the Bill, how do you stand in relation to what happened internationally
with Enron, Parmalat and similar companies and so on?” And, so we engaged
rather seriously with them around those issues. I shall deal with one or
two aspects in a moment.

The Minister has referred to the Audit Committee. The Audit Committee is a
subcommittee of the Board of Directors and it has a vitally important role,
but it is not to be seen as an agency of the executive directors, of the
chief executive and of his colleagues, but is indeed an agency of the
board.

I now quote from the International Herald Tribune also from yesterday,
which said: “Companies in at least four countries have disclosed US
government or internal inquiries have been looking at what is called
“options grants”.

There’s a new technique, a new deal taking place in South Africa too, which
is equity handed out under various conditions in a form which allows the
chief executive and his colleagues to make enormous profits. What they do
is that they acquire this equity, the shares, and then they backdate them
to a time when the shares had a very low value so the purchase price is
very low, and then sell them when the price is very high, thereby making a
killing. Indeed, there have been articles in the international press in
which this is one of the main mechanisms for very rapid enrichment globally
by virtue of manipulating the purchase of equity by chief executives.

We are not immune to this. In the Business Report of the Cape Times of 12
June, we are told that the AECI executive exercised a share option scheme.
That share option scheme is that share options were bought in 1998, when
the value of a share was R4,50, and that today the same share is worth R50
– a multiple of 10 times. Now, the executives of the AECI are manipulating
their powers as members of the board in control of the shares so that they
can exercise and gain enormous profits on the basis of the manipulation of
those shares.

I do not wish to go into the details of the legislation. The Minister has
done that very well. With regard to the importance of rotating auditors,
for example, we are opposed to a cosy relationship between the auditors and
the company itself, especially the executive directors. There is the
question of nonaudit services.

Those of us who pay slight attention to these matters know that the big
four audit companies of South Africa have grown enormously over the past 10
to 20 years, because they perform functions way beyond auditing. They give
tax advice; they do tax planning; they do administration; they do
bookkeeping; they offer a range of consultancies. So what used to be a
profession of auditors who come in as independent people, examining the
performance of companies and their integrity, has now become a huge
industry offering a whole range of services and this obviously creates a
problem.

The draft legislation was intended to look at these matters. We found
enormous opposition from the big four, and so the question has been
referred to the Independent Regulatory Board for Auditors, which is set up
in terms of the Auditing Profession Act and which will look at nonaudit
services provided by audit companies. The principle that we all agreed on
and which was accepted in the hearings is that no one should audit their
own work, because what happens is that if a particular company does
bookkeeping for a firm and then comes along tomorrow as the auditor on its
own bookkeeping, the opportunities for sleight of hand and manipulation are
huge.

There’s much more in this small piece of legislation that I don’t have time
to deal with. The conduct of corporates, the culture in corporations in the
new world of globalisation in which there are such huge companies operating
right across the world, including South Africa, the activities of these
people, the culture in which they operate and the culture they bring to
their operations are of critical social importance and, therefore, the
public must pay attention and, in particular, this House must pay
attention.

Let me assure you that the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry will
keep an eye on all this in your interests and in the good interests of the
country as a whole. Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr P J RABIE: Mr Chairman, hon Minister, hon members, this piece of
legislation is significant, it’s highly technical and it basically provides
legal backing to accounting standards.

Investors generally make financial decisions based on the information
published by companies. It is generally accepted that the information must
reflect the accurate and true financial state of the company or financial
institution concerned. In the recent past, investors have lost grave
amounts of money in the domestic and international markets owing to
dubious, unreliable accounting methods, which often overstate
profitability.

A significant improvement in this Bill is chapter 11 of the Act, which
imposes a uniform accounting standard that will ensure that any information
published by a listed company must be calculated in accordance with the
generally accepted accounting practice, known as GAAP, which in lay terms
means that the standard will have to be comparable with international
standards adopted by the International Accounting Standards Board. This
will result in South Africa becoming even more accessible to the
international investment community, which is extremely important for future
sustained economic growth.
The Financial Services Board and the Department of Trade and Industry will
be responsible for monitoring compliance. It is of importance that the
public sector creates the capacity to monitor these standards, and we
appeal to the private sector to take the initiative and to apply the
accounting standards vigorously, because this Bill will ultimately benefit
the investors and the broad public.

The Bill also provides accounting standards which are less onerous and will
apply to closely held companies that, in essence, do not offer their shares
to the general public. My colleague, the hon Les Labuschagne, will
elaborate on these aspects of the Bill.

A number of submissions were made to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and
Industry regarding this piece of legislation. There was consensus and
support for the following amendments. Owing to my limited amount of time,
allow me to mention the following: “Substitution of section 287 of Act 61
of 1973” says “If any financial statements, or circulars, of a company
which are incomplete in any material particular or otherwise do not comply
with the requirements of this Act are issued, circulated or published, the
company and every director or officer thereof who is a party to such issue,
circulation or publication, shall be guilty of an offence.” I think this is
extremely important.

Meneer die Voorsitter, subafdeling 28 van die wet, soos gewysig, wys
pertinent daarop dat enige direkteur of beampte van ’n maatskappy wat in
gebreke bly om redelike stappe te neem om aan die rekenkundige vereistes
van die wet te voldoen, skuldig is aan ’n oortreding en dit is geweldig
belangrik dat ons die skuldonus verbreed. Ek dink dit kan werklikwaar net
positiewe gevolge na vore bring.

Verdere betekenisvolle veranderings is dat die behoefte en rol van die
ouditkomitees, rolle van ouditeure en die magte en bevoegdhede van die agb
Minister die finansiële state en die finansiële staande verslagdoeningsraad
uitspel. Die wyse waarop lede van voorafgenoemde raad aangestel word, word
ook in detail bespreek. Die DA ondersteun hierdie wetsontwerp.

Aanvaarbare rekenkundige standaarde en norme behoort nie gebruik te word om
korttermyn politieke gewin te verkry nie. Vergun my die geleentheid om al
die lede van die Handel en Nywerheid Portefeuljekomitee te bedank vir die
wyse waarop hulle ’n verbruikersvriendelike wetsontwerp met behulp van die
amptenary en ander rolspelers gefinaliseer het. Soos van die vorige
sprekers, is dit my kontensie dat hierdie ’n baie positiewe wetsontwerp is
wat sinvolle ekonomiese gevolge tot gevolg sal hê. Baie dankie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr Chairperson, subsection 28 of the Act, as amended, pertinently
indicates that any director or official of a company who fails to take
reasonable steps to comply with the accounting requirements of the Act is
guilty of an offence, and it is extremely important that we broaden the
onus of guilt. In fact, I think this can only produce positive results.

Further meaningful changes are the fact that it elaborates on the need for
and role of audit committees, the roles of auditors, and the powers and
authority of the hon Minister, the financial statements and the financial
reporting standards council. The manner in which members of the
aforementioned council is appointed is also discussed in detail. The DA
supports this Bill.

Accepted accounting standards and norms should not be used to attain short-
term political gain. Allow me the opportunity to thank all the members of
the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry for the way in which they
have finalised a consumer-friendly Bill with the co-operation of the
officials and other role-players. It is my contention, like some of the
previous speakers, that this is a very positive Bill which will have
significant Economic results. Thank you very much.]

Mr M J BHENGU: Chairperson, I must say that I am standing in for my
colleague, Prof Chang. The Bill before us today introduces a number of
amendments to the Companies Act of 1973, and the Close Corporations Act of
1984, which are required prior to the completion of the corporate law-
reform process currently under way.

According to the Department of Trade and Industry, the Bill is based on the
tenets of corporate governance, on winning the confidence of the investor
and on the protection of the investor. The Bill, of course, also seeks to
achieve corporate governance and investor confidence.

The amendment to chapter 11 of the Companies Act of 1973 will impose a
uniform accounting standard to ensure that any financial information
published by a company is calculated in accordance with generally accepted
accounting practice, or GAAP. The standard will have to be comparable to
the international standards adopted by the International Accounting
Standards Board. This will ensure a tight correlation between the
accounting practices of South Africa and the international investment
community and therefore make our capital markets more accessible to foreign
investment.

The DTI, together with other regulators and investors, will be responsible
for monitoring compliance with the prescribed accounting standards. We hope
that these new measures will have a positive impact and increase investor
confidence in companies in our country, as well as lead to increased
foreign investment.

Another important element of this Bill is that it introduces various
measures to ensure that auditors remain independent of the influence of
company directors. There are now new sections inserted in the Companies Act
that include the nomination of auditors etc. It is now also an offence for
an auditor or other person to be party to false or misleading information
in the financial statements of a company.

The Bill introduces two types of companies to which the Bill will apply,
namely public-interest companies and limited-interest companies. These
changes will have a profound impact on business and on the finalisation of
the department’s corporate law reform policy. The IFP supports the Bill.

Mr S M RASMENI: Chairperson, the introduction of the Corporate Laws
Amendment Bill is not incidental to but a culmination of many years of
intense debate that took place within the ANC in a quest to advance the
national democratic revolution.

During the Mafikeng ANC national conference in 1997 we observed that, in
integrating South Africa into a global economy, we needed to struggle for
an effective regulatory system that would promote development and equity,
thereby resulting in a competitive, fast-growing and developing economy
that created jobs for all workseekers.

The message of the President of the ANC to the country during the 2004
national elections was also instructive when he said:


  We are confident of the future. Over the past 10 years, working together,
  we have built South Africa into a land of peace and harmony, a land of
  expanding opportunities. We have built a stable and growing economy. We
  have created a possibility to realise more and more resources and social
  and economic services, while building a modern and competitive economy.


In responding to these directives, the Department of Trade and Industry, in
its medium-term strategy framework, undertook to review a set of
legislation, among which is the Companies Act of 1973, hence the Corporate
Laws Amendment Bill before this august House.

The Bill seeks to achieve two main outcomes: to enhance corporate
governance, and to boost investor confidence. Both of these will yield
economic benefits for our economic citizens and the country as a whole.

I would like to emphasise the following key features of the amendments.
Firstly, there is the appointment of audit committees to conduct internal
auditing of public-interest companies and limited-interest companies. These
committees must maintain their independence from the running of the
company. Their composition should be of nonexecutive directors only.
The second point is the provision of external and independent auditors.
This measure is crucial in avoiding the risk of auditors who may have close
relations with company management. This amendment safeguards good corporate
governance. The third point is the provision for the electronic
registration of companies to empower people to form and register their
enterprises and engage in economic activities without undue delay.

These measures and many others contained in the amending Bill seek to
tighten our laws to avoid incidents that took place during the apartheid
era and many others that may take place in the future. Those that took
place during the apartheid era, such as the Leisurenet and Masterbond
sagas, led to economic disaster.

With these remarks, we from the ANC would like to support the passing of
this Bill. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson, the ACDP supports the amendments to this Bill.
Significant in terms of the amendments is that financial institutions now
comply with international standards, which would make South Africa more
accessible to foreign investment.

The Corporate Laws Amendment Bill also has far-reaching implications for
the creation of a BEE framework that is truly broad based. Black economic
empowerment has, in the past, run the risk of enriching a small elite group
at the expense of economically disadvantaged beneficiaries. The provision
that companies may provide financial assistance to BEE beneficiaries as
long as the company remains liquid will increase the pool of potential BEE
beneficiaries and enhance the broad-based aspect of black economic
empowerment.

This Bill further provides for the streamlining and enhanced effectiveness
of the administrative processes of close corporations. Particularly welcome
in this regard is the provision made for the electronic certification of
registration of certain documents. This method will certainly enhance
administration. We support the amendments. [Applause.]

Mr W D SPIES: Hon Chair, I would just like to refer to the remarks made by
the hon Turok when he actually referred to the phenomenon of share
incentive schemes and where he criticised the fact that directors are
enriching themselves as a result of that.

I share your views in this regard, but I also hope that the ANC will use
its powers, as representative of government which is the sole shareholder
of Eskom, to stop the self-enrichment that is currently happening at Eskom,
where the directors are paying themselves a salary that is five times more
than the equivalent being earned in other public enterprises. That is just
one point.

With regard to the amendment to section 38 of the Companies Act, we do
support the liberalisation of these measures and we know that this is a
completion of what happened in 1990 or had already started in 1995 when the
buy-back of shares as well as the limitations on payments to shareholders
were abolished by section 95 and section 90 of the Companies Act. So we do
support the liberalisation of these measures.

But we want to point out that we are concerned about the fact that black
economic empowerment is being used as a justification for this
liberalisation. We believe that the principles should be healthy and, as
long as the principles are healthy and as long as this is being done to
bring us in line with what is happening internationally, we will support
that. As long as our motives are clear, we support that, but not in case it
is only being done for the benefit of BEE ... [Time expired.] I thank you.

Ms D M RAMODIBE: Chairperson, hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers, hon members,
ladies and gentlemen, the ANC supports the amending Bill. The ANC has
entered into a contract with the people of South Africa. It therefore
becomes necessary, from time to time, to amend Acts that were there in the
previous regime, in order to be efficient, responsible, transparent and
accountable.

This is exactly what the Bill seeks to achieve by giving legal backing to
accounting standards and promoting auditor independence. My focus area will
be on corporate governance.

The ANC inherited a government that was inefficient, irresponsible, and a
government that was not transparent and accountable. When we took over,
little did we know what we were getting ourselves into. There were no
systems in place and everything that was done was to the disadvantage of
the poor people. This Bill will now allow or make provision for the
disclosure of certain financial information.

No wonder when we called for disinvestment in South Africa, it was highly
supported internationally. This was because it was to the advantage of the
investors as there was no accountability. The economy of the country
benefited the few who were mostly whites. That is why even today the
economy of the country is still white dominated. They will do whatever it
takes to hinder progress. They continue to protect the wealth of the
minority and to make terrible noises about the few black people who are
trying to improve their quality of life.

Corporate governance ensures that government achieves its strategic goals
that focus on stimulating economic development, responding to unethical
conduct that has resulted in business failures and demand for greater
accountability of investors. Experience from other countries such as the
United States of America were cause for alarm, such as dishonesty by
directors, weak links between directors, compensation and company
performance. These have resulted in intense scrutiny. In some cases,
directors were appropriating funds of other stakeholders.
Corporate governance is about good governance, not leaving out the first
King report that was revised when the new Constitution was adopted. The
Public Finance Management Act, Act 38 of 1999, and Local Government
Municipal Finance Management Act, Act 56 of 2003, are some of the
instruments aimed to secure transparency. This is in line with the Freedom
Charter that says the people shall share in the country’s wealth.

Indeed, this amending Bill is an indication that we are committed to
continue with the mandate given to us by the majority of the people of this
country. Our people are convinced that our country has entered its age of
hope, as stated by the President of the country in his state of the nation
address.

Ka mora dilemo tse ngata re phela ka thata, re futsanehile tlasa puso ya
kgatello, e neng e se na letho le bonaletsang, re lebelletse hore ntho
yohle e amang setjhaba e se ke ya etswa ka sekgukgu. Melao e teng boholo ba
yona e ntse e le yane ya kgatello. Kahoo, ho a hlokahala hore nako le nako
melao ena e nne e lekolwe mme e fetolwe kapa ho lokiswe moo ho hlokahalang.


Ha re sa hlokomele, re tla iphumana re boetse re ntse re etsa diphoso tse
tshwanang le tsa ba neng ba behe melao e kgopo e neng e kgetholla. Hore
beng ba mosebetsi le dikomiti tsa bona ba tle ba sebetse hantle, ho
hlokahala hore ba be le boikarabelo bo tletseng ditjheleteng, le dinthong
tsohle, e le hore ho se ke ha ba le bobodu. Ke a leboha. [Mahofi.]
(Translation of Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[After several years of hardship, impoverished by the previous regime,
which was not transparent, we expect that everything that affects the
community will now be transparent. Most of the existing Acts are still the
ones of oppression. Therefore, it is important to review, change and amend
these Acts when necessary.

If we are not careful, we will find ourselves making the same mistakes that
were made by those who implemented the cruel laws of oppression. For
government and its committees to work properly, they need to have
meaningful involvement in finances and everything else, in order to prevent
corruption. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the MF supports the amendment made to the
Companies Act of 1973, in view of the legalities now being prescribed for
accounting standards. The said generally accepted accounting practice
should, as pointed out, efficiently protect investments that previously
suffered great loss as a result of, I quote, “dubious accounting methods
and rank overstatements of profitability”.

Further amendments pertaining to shareholder diversification, which now
accommodates a solvency test under the approval of shareholders and the
securities regulation panel - which serves to protect minority shareholders
- are found favourable. All amendments appear to be suitably devised to
address disparities in corporate law. As always, however, while provisions
may be perfectly drafted, it is the mechanics of incorporating, activating
and successfully utilising these in our development process which we truly
depend upon.

The Minority Front, however, finds security in our direction towards growth
and development. We support the Bill. Thank you.

Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE: Mr Minister, we are fully aware that the Department of
Trade and Industry, DTI, is engaged in the whole question of corporate law
reform, and that this Bill is very much a necessary, technical interim
measure.

Indeed the infamous Enron scandal has rocked corporate governance, and
various countries have adopted rectifying measures. In fact, the
parliamentary subcommittee on corporate governance’s response to the
African Peer Review Mechanism found that South Africa was one of the first
countries to adopt the Code of Good Corporate Governance to include triple
bottom line reporting.

The subcommittee did also identify certain shortcomings in state-owned
enterprises, in this regard. The DA has continually emphasised that the
burden of overregulation stifles our economy, particularly when we are
faced with what the President categorises as a first and a second economy.
We do not propose any regulation at all, as the hon Prof Turok likes to
think, we just want fewer regulations.

We welcome the new approach in this Bill of public-interest companies and
limited-interest companies, and the effort to lessen the regulatory burden
on limited-interest companies. To qualify as a limited-interest company, a
company’s articles will have to restrict transferability of its shares and
preclude any offer of its shares to the public.

While the main thrust of the Bill is to tighten uniform and international
standards of accounting, which should be of benefit to investors,
recognition is given to implementing less onerous accounting standards for
limited-interest companies.

An interesting amendment is that of section 35 of the Companies Act,
allowing a company to provide financial assistance for the purchase of its
own shares. This amendment will definitely facilitate shareholder
diversification and broad-based black economic empowerment. A company can
now offer assistance if it complies with a solvency test and its
shareholders approve the transaction.

As the DA always supports the principle of broad-based black economic
empowerment, we certainly welcome this amendment, and we hope that it will
indeed be broadly based and not benefit the same cliques and result in the
same people notching up BBBEE points time after time after time. The DA
supports the Bill. [Applause.]

Mnu S J NJIKELANA: Mphathisihlalo obekekileyo, baPhathiswa
abahloniphekileyo, Malungu ePalamente, kunye nani nonke bantu boMzantsi
Afrika abamameleyo, kuninzi okusele kuthethiwe malunga nalo Mthetho
uYilwayo sizama ukuwufakela izihlomelo namhlanje, kodwa ke  mna ndiza
kucaphucaphula nje apho oogxa bam banganyathelanga khona. (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Mr S J NJIKELANA: Hon chairperson, hon Ministers, Members of Parliament
and all the people of South Africa listening, there is a lot that has
previously been said about this Bill that we are hoping to amend today. But
I am going to highlight points that were not raised by my fellow members.]

I would like to share with you some of the main benefits of this piece of
legislation. Hon Turok has stated that this is not just a technical
amendment, but that it has its own economic and political implications. One
of the most important things coming out of this Bill and the changes that
are being proposed to it is the enhancement of the paradigm shift to active
shareholding. As we all know, in the past shareholders were merely
backbenchers and the people who used to run the show were the executive.

And, obviously, we will realise the enhancement of international trade
through the synchronisation of the standards that have been referred to
quite a lot. We will also see more transparency in business operations, as
it has been indicated that we would like to ensure that manipulative
relations become history. But, most importantly, we will see the necessary
paradigm shift, including the constitutional and historical duty of the
state to ensure best practice when it comes to business operations.

I would like to share with you what one of the participants in the public
hearings, Absa, said. They emphasised the catalytic effect of the
introduction of these amendments, particularly with regard to giving
opportunities to emerging black companies, and the reversal of too much
focus on large companies, the so-called “big four”.

Ithi i-Cosatu, Mhlalingaphambili ... [Chairperson, Cosatu says ...]

... arbeid het ’n spesifieke belang daarin om goeie koöperatiewe bestuur te
verseker aangesien pensioenfondse groot aandeelhouers is. Effektiewe en
goeie koöperatiewe bestuur is baie belangrik om beleggingsvertroue te
verseker. Om die vereistes van die Grondwet asook die objektiewe van die
RDP na te kom is dit belangrik dat sekere elemente van die koöperatiewe
wetgewing nie net hervorm word nie, maar ook getransformeer word.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)
[... labour has a specific interest in ensuring good corporate governance,
as pension funds are substantial shareholders. Effective and good corporate
governance is very important to ensure investor confidence. To satisfy the
requirements of the Constitution as well as the objectives of the RDP, it
is imperative that certain elements of corporate legislation should not
only be reformed, but also transformed.]

Ndizama ukuthi i-Cosatu, nokuba ayikho apha, nayo iye yanegalelo kule nguqu
siyizamayo. [I submit that although Cosatu is not here, it has made a great
contribution to the amendment of this Bill.]

The ANC emphasises the need to make political changes as well as economic
changes with regard to the policies that have been inherited from the
distortions of the past, particularly the values of the past, as
highlighted in the quotation by Prof Turok.

The ANC has been quite firm and loud enough on the need to increase the
number of economically active people and, hopefully, through this piece of
legislation, we will see the enhancement of broad-based black economic
empowerment, now that even auditors can be called to account during annual
general meetings.

However, Chairperson, there are challenges, in spite of the good that is
being introduced by this Act. One hopes that the intensive engagement that
we saw during the public hearings will be consistent. Whilst the big four
have been able to come as individual companies, the small companies,
through their associations, will be satisfied that their voices have been
heard.

We should be cautious about legislating ethical conduct, no matter how much
legislation we make. Moral regeneration is also important and imperative
within the business environment. We need to see the propensity to embrace
the paradigm shift that will be introduced by this piece of legislation,
particularly now that the public will have access to meetings of the
Financial Reporting Standards Council. This will move companies away from
their comfort zones.

Kodwa ke, Mhlalingaphambili, ndingathanda, njengokuba sendiqwela, ukuba
ndicaphule kwizinto ebendicinga ukuba abo besinabo ekomitini baya kuziveza
bangalindi side sibe lapha. [But, Chairperson, in conclusion I would like
to highlight some aspects that I thought my fellow committee members would
have raised before we came here.]

I am a bit puzzled by hon Rabie’s reference to gaining political points. I
thought we were a team in trying to deal with these amendments through the
public hearings up to the final stages.

Hon Spies made reference to self-enrichment in Eskom. I am sure, having
listened to everybody who came to this podium, the rationale behind these
amendments has been made crystal clear and has no bearing on and reference
to self-enrichment.

Broad-based economic empowerment has been ushered in through the leadership
of the ANC, and it puzzles me how it could be used to justify
liberalisation. It is out of practice and engagement that we have realised
that there is a need to make these amendments, not to use liberalisation to
create more space for BEE. If there is coincidence, so be it.

Hon Labuschagne, you made mention of overregulation and said that you would
like to have less regulation. What you are saying is exactly what the ANC
had been saying during the public hearings, and also during our
proceedings. So what you stated was not something new, and in any
legislation that we deal with, we shall ensure a good balance between
facilitation and regulation of an Act.

Mphathisihlalo, nam ndikunye noogxaba bam, amaqabane neNdlu yonke
ekuxhaseni lo Mthetho uYilwayo. Iyabulel’ ilali. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
[Chairperson, I concur with my fellow members, comrades and the House in
supporting this Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]]

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, I would like to thank all
the members who have supported this Bill. In reality, it means that there
isn’t much to say except, perhaps, to emphasise a few points.
It is important that we always remember that the fundamental objective of
the codes of good practice on broad-based black empowerment is precisely to
make sure that broad-based black empowerment is defined in a manner that
covers a whole range of issues which are critical to the empowerment of the
historically disadvantaged.

Therefore our definition, concerning the work that we are doing on the
codes of good practice, means that the empowerment that we are talking
about covers issues of skills development, and the issue of mobility of
people within their own companies so that our companies can begin to
reflect who we are, as South Africans. It’s about companies assisting
emerging companies to have a chance to succeed and to hold them by the
hand.

So our broad-based black economic empowerment is about all of those issues,
not only about people acquiring shares in existing companies. This process
will be a contribution to a wider programme that involves a range of areas,
as I have just indicated.

I also want to say that, in doing this, we seek to improve the corporate
environment in South Africa and corporate practices that recognise the
multi-stakeholder nature of society’s involvement and interests so that, in
running companies, you are aware of the multi-stakeholder involvement and
interests that are involved in that company. This is part of a wider
programme of work that we are doing as government, for example the work
that we are doing on enhancing consumer protection in South Africa.

This is the work that we are doing by putting in place a Bill which the
committee is going to deal with later on in the year, that is the consumer
Bill. It is meant to exactly ensure that companies and even public entities
ensure that the rights of consumers are recognised and protected in
delivering services as well as supplying products to the market place.

We are not trying to make life difficult but we are trying to improve the
corporate, social and economic environment in South Africa that recognises
that there are various stakeholders and that there are those that are in
less powerful positions than others. But it also concerns the matter of
regulation.

We are involved in work to process the outcomes of the investment climate
survey, which is a study we undertook together with the World Bank to look
at the environment in South Africa, concerning investors, that is work that
we are doing on regulatory impact assessment. So, these are things that we
are very conscious of.

The final thing to mention on this Bill concerns the African Peer Review
Mechanism process that is under way in South Africa today. In the
discussions on the corporate chapter of that process there was a lot of
focus on speeding up the comprehensive corporate law reform project. So
we’ll take note of that. Hon Njikelana, we will, of course, try to make
sure that we are able to meet the consistency that you are calling for.
Thank you.

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

                               POINT OF ORDER

                                  (Ruling)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon members, during the debate on
the Intelligence Budget Vote on 1 June, the hon Mr Ellis, on a point of
order, challenged certain remarks made by the hon Mr Abram in reference to
the hon Ms Smuts. I undertook to study the Hansard and I have done so. I
rule on the point of order as follows.

Mr Abram’s remarks, as they appear in Hansard, are, and I quote:


  I just want to say to the hon Ms Smuts she likes to cackle here. She will
  feel at home on my farmyard with all my feathered guests.


[Laughter.] Order, hon members! The hon Mr Ellis contended that the
reference to the hon Ms Smuts bordered on foul language. [Laughter.] Order!
I am not sure if a pun may have been intended. Associating a member with
some kind of animal or animals is, in general, as the hon Mr Abram has
done, frequently intended to be derogatory or insulting and is then, by its
nature, unparliamentary.

It is entirely unacceptable for a member, in the debate, to refer to other
members in a derogatory manner. The point of order by the hon Mr Ellis has
merit and I must therefore request the hon Mr Abram to withdraw the remarks
I quoted from his speech.

Mnr S ABRAM: Voorsitter, die agb lid Smuts het nie gekekkel nie, en sy sal
ook nie tuis voel op die plaaswerf met ons geveerde vriende nie, en
derhalwe trek ek die aanvanklike woorde wat ek hier geuiter het terug. Baie
dankie. [Applous.] [Gelag.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr S ABRAM: Chairperson, the hon member Smuts did not cackle, and she will
also not feel at home on the farmyard with our feathered friends, and
therefore I withdraw the initial remark that I made here. Thank you very
much. [Applause.] [Laughter.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order, hon members! I have just
ruled on this particular point of order and I am not sure that it should be
taken as a joke. Mr Abram, I am advised that in your response you referred
to Ms Smuts not feeling at home on your farm. Can you withdraw
unconditionally.

Mr S ABRAM: Voorsitter, uit eerbied vir die Stoel trek ek dit
onvoorwaardelik terug. [Chairperson, with due respect for the Chair, I
withdraw it unconditionally.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): The second ruling that was
outstanding was on the comments made by the hon Mr Groenewald, who is
unfortunately not in the House. So, that ruling stands over.

     THE ROLE OF THE YOUTH IN MAKING THE 21ST CENTURY, AFRICA’S CENTURY

                            (Debate on Youth Day)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, again and again, during
the difficult period of the struggle, history would confer upon the youth
of South Africa titanic responsibilities, calling upon them to carry the
hopes of the nation and to shoulder the task to propel the struggle
forward.

Acting as the torchbearers of the struggle, the catalysts and the foot
soldiers of the revolution, worthy successors to the heroic legacy and the
fighting spirit of the brave combatants for our freedom, again and again,
they walked fearlessly through the valley of the shadow of death, and
participated selflessly in all the struggles waged by their people.

They volunteered to occupy the most forward and dangerous trenches,
regardless of the sacrifice that could be demanded as the price for
victory, guided by the firm conviction that their interests as youth were
inseparable from those of their people as a whole, determining that freedom
had to be achieved in order to restore their people’s dignity and humanity.


The youth were decisive in the confrontation between the people and the
evil tyrant. This day, therefore, owes its origins to the youth’s
imperishable spirit, their insuperable courage and unsurpassed capacity and
willingness to volunteer and sacrifice in the name of freedom.

Rarely has a single day moved our people everywhere, and ignited so much
hope in the hearts of millions as this day did 30 years ago, when the youth
put paid to the regime’s illusions that the oppressed were too subhuman to
rise up for their freedom.

Consequently, we salute and thank the youth of 1976, in Soweto and all over
the country, both the living and the dead as well as the generations of
youth, before and after 1976, for the time-honoured role they played to
bring to an end the crime of apartheid as well as for the heroic example
they set for us to emulate.

Accordingly, this is to all of us both a day of mourning and a day for
celebration. What we commemorate is not the moral bankruptcy of the
apartheid system, but the moral superiority and indomitable spirit of the
oppressed, their stubborn refusal to allow the inhuman and criminal system
of apartheid to succeed.

By 1976 it had become clear that apartheid had become a hindrance to all
development, and the country had no possibility of making progress in any
sphere unless this system was liquidated. On that cold Wednesday morning,
parents went to work unsuspecting, not aware that their children had big
plans in mind, that they held the destiny of our country and struggle
itself in their own hands, that they were about to write their own history
and etch the name of their generation permanently in the annals of our
nation’s history.

It is thus correct that this august House, the tribune of our people,
should today salute the youth and their gallantry, to honour the youth that
perished on 16 June 1976, and during the years that followed, as the
regime’s campaign of terror against the people continued and their
resistance persisted.

In a heroic and dramatic fashion, the youth of Soweto took destiny itself
into their own hands. They taught us what it means to be youth, and thus
they raised the level of the struggle. Their interventions mobilised
international support further in favour of the liberation struggle, and
became a precursor for the massive organisation and mobilisation of the
roaring 1980s, the decade of liberation.
Here was a heroic and brave youth on the one hand, and a paranoid and
callous regime on the other, with no regard for human life and mortally
afraid of equality, justice and freedom. We owe it to these youth to
emulate their example, and to find meaning in the mission and purpose of
our generation today.

Today, the youth is free, free to expand the horizons and frontiers of
their freedom. Accordingly, their consciousness has changed and is
continuing to change. Their capabilities are expanding; they are more
complex and more dynamic, more exposed and informed.

Consequently, they are trying to discover themselves, their vision, tasks
and potential; seeking to give meaning to who they are as this generation,
and what it means to be the youth today and to hold the destiny of the
nation in their hands.

They must thus be encouraged to explore fully and without inhibitions all
the opportunities presented to them by freedom, to seize the opportunities
of democracy, bearing in mind that they have an obligation to raise South
Africa to a new level. They must be taught never to take freedom for
granted.

The notion of the age of hope celebrates not so much the creation, but the
difficult act of creating; the painstaking efforts that should go into
creating a better tomorrow for ourselves and for future generations. What
the President challenges us to do is not to become complacent; in itself,
hope is not the end, but a promise that a better day, through struggle, is
in sight.

In this regard, the youth of South Africa today have a special role to play
in pursuit of the national efforts to push back the frontiers of poverty
and underdevelopment, and to defeat disease and ignorance. They must
continue to become the anchor of our society and its reason to hope and to
dream.

They must be found in the forward trenches of the struggle to rid this
country of the great obstacles towards the fulfilment of universal human
emancipation. The youth must continue militantly to fight for both their
development and empowerment, as well as for the fundamental transformation
of our society.

South Africa still needs an organised youth movement and a militant youth
voice on all aspects of our national life, creating dynamism and vibrancy
in our political system, without which our nation will decay. To do so, a
special effort is required to empower and equip them with better capacity
and possibilities to accomplish their commanding and more complex political
and social tasks.

This requires a comprehensive and strategic focus on the needs and
challenges of the youth to ensure their political, social, and economic
empowerment and participation. The youth collectively constitute the most
economically marginalised group in our society, and suffer a high degree of
social dislocation.

Accordingly, their empowerment and development constitutes an urgent
challenge. The Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa,
Asgisa, recognises this fact in deliberately directing the focus on the
youth’s economic aspirations, and placing them in a prominent and strategic
position, both as partners as well as beneficiaries.

In the interventions that it envisages in order to mainstream their issues
and raise their capacity to participate in democracy and development, the
truth is that most youth are found in the second economy, and despite the
progress made since 1994, problems still persist that make the ideal of
youth development and empowerment even more relevant and urgent.

This is vital during this 10th anniversary of the National Youth
Commission, whose establishment 10 years ago signalled the commencement of
institutionalised youth development in South Africa. It is necessary that
we therefore utilise these occasions, both the 30th anniversary of the
Soweto uprising as well as the 10th anniversary of the Youth Commission, to
conduct a comprehensive review of the youth development policy programmes
and institutions to determine whether they are still able, in their current
form, to meet the all-round challenges posed and confronted by the youth.
This work has already commenced in government with the hope that bold
decisions may and will be taken to find better ways to advance the ideal of
youth empowerment and development.

Part of what we must do, working with the SA Local Government Association,
is to establish youth development institutions and programmes in all
municipalities, in order to ensure a seamless youth development framework
and programme.

To develop and empower the youth is a vital part of our struggle today, to
ensure that they seize the opportunities of democracy, and to improve their
level of competence in order to actively participate in the solution of all
the problems facing our revolution. In this regard, the need for the youth
to be organised and act in unity has never been greater.

In order for the youth to have an organised and united voice and presence,
and thus have the strength required to be a force that would compel even
the most indifferent to youth development, not only to listen but to do
something, we must build the capacity of the youth to be able to lobby and
advocate both the state and the private sector for youth development
programmes and policies.

We must continue to raise the capacity of the government youth development
institutions, both singly and collectively, to be able to pursue an
integrated youth development agenda. The point we are hereby trying to
underscore is that the youth sector needs better integration, co-operation
and united action in pursuit of the goals of youth development.

Many government departments are already engaged in youth development and
empowerment programmes, and they are gradually allocating more resources to
this ideal and scaling up their efforts. Youth development institutions
must take full advantage of this.

In two days’ time, our nation will pay tribute to the immortal memory of
1976, to the youth of South Africa past, present, and future, and will yet
again place on the shoulders of the youth its expectations and dreams,
hoping that these youth shall, as before, respond with a steely sense of
purpose and mission to these dreams and expectations.

Thirty years after the Soweto uprising, the challenge still remains for the
youth of today to take destiny into their hands, to define what it means to
be youth in the contemporary period, and to raise the level of the struggle
to new heights. Long live the fighting eternal memory of 16 June 1976, long
live!

HON MEMBERS: Long live!

Mr M JOHNSON: Chairperson, President, Deputy President, Ministers, Deputy
Ministers present and absent, colleagues, comrades and friends present here
and out there, allow me to greet you in the name of those unsung heroes and
heroines whose graves are known, but badly looked after and others that are
not known, out there at Gugulethu, Veeplaas, Soweto, Vergenoeg, Kwamashu,
Botshabelo, Mitchells Plain, Boipatong, Katlehong, Kleinskool, Lenasia ...
the list is long.

We are gathered in this beautiful precinct of Parliament because of your
blood that continues to “nourish the tree of freedom”, as Solomon Mahlangu
said on his way to the gallows.

  Lest we forget where we come from, history will judge us collectively,
  harshly. A people losing sight of origins are dead, a people deaf to
  purpose are lost.

Those are the words of Ayi Kwei Armah, a Ghanaian novelist and a poet.

  South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black and white. No
  government can justly claim authority unless it is based on the will of
  all the people.

Those are the words of the Freedom Charter. Equally, this country belongs
to you young people by virtue of your age, enthusiasm and anxiety, outlook
on society and nature, stubbornness, militancy, etc. Among other
characteristics, you possess that ability to change things for the better.
Youth makes and youth breaks.

So far, we have a youth that has brought us to where we are today, a youth
that has made us proud South Africans here at home, on our continent Africa
and the world over. Thanks to you, the youth of yesteryear, through the
brave battles and wars you fought so hard, South Africa indeed now belongs
to all who live in it - black and white, young and old alike.

In the words of the Collins Pocket English Dictionary ‘youth’ is defined as
“those who are in a state of being young”. A further definition describes
young people as “not far advanced in growth, life or existence” and
furthermore “these are people who are immature”.

History and the course of events continue to prove Collins wrong in most
instances. From time immemorial the energy and the eagerness to correct the
wrongs have made these young people catalysts of revolutions.

As we entered 2006, we celebrated the centenary of a young hero’s life well
lived: Chief Bhambatha kaMancinza. Like most young people, Chief Bhambatha
resisted colonialism of all kinds, including poll tax. His disciplined
militancy and fighting spirit is envied by all and sundry.
An ANC Youth League president, Peter Mokaba, once said: “Ask us to be
disciplined, but do not ask us not to act.” His loyalty to his nation and
continent to resist colonialism truly becomes a lesson for us all, to
continue where he left off, this time around, towards an advance of our
national democratic revolution and in defence of such.

As our country runs short of role models, his historic achievements, his
steadfastness and his resolve in resisting colonial oppression and
exploitation must be vigorously taught in our schools – all aimed at
teaching our youth about disciplined militancy, patriotism and loyalty.

Throughout our history and the history of class struggles, young people
have always been at the cutting edge of all revolutions. The formation of
the SA Communist Party and the swelling of its ranks, largely by the youth
in the names of Edward Roux, Ruth First, Moses Kotane, attests to this
fact.

As the students of those days, these then young activists took it upon
themselves to grow and nurture the SACP and its ideological being.
Alongside this development, the African youth at Lovedale College and Fort
Hare University were equally active in growing ideas towards radicalising
the ANC. These included O R Tambo, A P Mda, Joe Matthews, Congress Mbatha,
among others, who worked tirelessly towards the formation of the youth
league in 1944, whose influence culminated in the ANC’s programme of action
in 1949. The hour of the youth had struck! Indeed the trumpet call was loud
and clear!

It is true that from long debates, discussions and writings, these scholars
set the basis for ideological discourses within the ANC and the communist
party that radicalised these two great organisations of our times. This
necessitated unity in action, as there was and continues to be one struggle
for national liberation to the extent of dual membership towards achieving
this one shared vision of bringing about a nonracial and nonsexist
democracy.

One such example was Moses Kotane. As he rose to leading positions in both
the communist party and the ANC, his loyalty to one organisation did not
appear to be subordinate to his loyalty to the other. Even staunch anti-
communists in the ANC held him in high regard for his clear-headedness as a
thinker and his courage and pragmatism as a leader. Sometimes critical of
cautious leadership in the ANC, he did not hesitate to thrust himself
forward as an example of militancy.

June 16th 1976 was no accident of history. Yes, the events might not have
assumed all the sophistication of today’s organisations, but history was
made, as we celebrate it today. The contributions of young people in
changing the course of events in society emphasise the fact that the hour
of the youth had indeed struck.

With the banning of the liberation movement in 1960, the oppressed and the
exploited never gave up, but took three steps backward, waiting to pounce
20 more steps forward. The build-up towards June 16 by the SA Students’
Organisation, Saso, and SA Students Movement, SASM, along with a strong
arts and culture voice, saw the country going up in flames, in response to
bullets and teargas that struck at young heroes and heroines, and struck,
among others, Hector Peterson in Soweto, Nomvume in Port Elizabeth,
Makhwenkwe Mpande in Grahamstown and many other unsung heroes and heroines
of our country.

Armed with stones, molotov cocktails, the brave youth of 1976 changed the
course of history forever. The events of this era after June 16th did not
end there. In fact, they gave rise to a strong organisation that rendered
apartheid unworkable and the regime ungovernable.

Some of the names of our youth active at that time that come to mind
include: Baby Tyawa, Billy Masetlha, Jabu Ngwenya, Mnyamezeli Booi, Oupa
Monareng, among others. Along with Jabu Joe Gqabi, they became the pioneers
of our gallant student movement, Cosas, in 1979. As some of us were
celebrating Republic Day on 31 May, Cosas was being established.

Fearlessly, Cosas became the first organisation that adopted the Freedom
Charter after the liberation movement was banned in 1960. This fearless
formation adopted as its policy nonracism and nonsexism. The mood was
conducive towards building this massive student formation alongside the
Azanian Student Organisation, which was later called the SA National
Student Congress, Sanco.

As history is written today, the United Democratic Front, UDF, became this
popular front that mobilised and united a country against the apartheid
system that divided it. In action, the youth in Cosas and the trade union
movement in the former Transvaal under the theme “Students, workers united
in action”, staged the biggest stayaway of that time in November 1984.

These efforts did not go uninterrupted. Our enemies of the day stopped at
nothing in using force to stop the unstoppable. Some of the casualties of
that time are very fresh in our minds. Alongside these killings, torture in
detention, imprisonment, exiling and the cordoning off of townships were
the order of the day. They were all aimed at silencing the wave of popular
people’s revolts, for example in the Bantustans. In the Bantustans,
together with some of our colleagues here in the IFP, we had people who
were killed, especially at Ongoye.

These are the great lessons that we have to learn as young people. You
possess energy that has the potential to make or break. You have to learn
from the past. Making it is the only choice you have as you build a future
that you will have to live with. As Moses Kotane would have said: “A
country that does not value its youth, does not deserve its future.” We all
have a responsibility - as some of us went through so much - to nurture our
youth and to never give up regarding expected mistakes.

Lastly, Chair, we all went through those processes. Some of us fought
against apartheid and some of us experienced, through our parents, the
hanging of some of our own comrades who were involved in those struggles
against the same apartheid. I refer here to some of our mothers and fathers
who were judges at the time. They did not hesitate to hang some of our
leaders, members and activists of the day. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M M SWATHE: Chairperson, the youth was supposed to take the leading role
in making the 21st century Africa’s century. The problems faced by the
youth of South Africa, which impede the fulfilment of that role, relate to
the neglect of the rural youth and the centralisation of youth programmes.
This centralisation of youth programmes deprives and denies the rural youth
the opportunity to realise their potential to participate in the mainstream
economy of South Africa. It is only a few youth from the cities who benefit
from the government-funded youth programmes.

High unemployment is a major problem amongst the youth. According to census
2001, youth constituted 41% of the population and just over 70% were
unemployed. The macro social report of 2005 also presents a discomforting
reality on the status of youth, especially in relation to social capital,
social cohesion and labour market participation.

The National Youth Commission turns 10 and the Umsobomvu Youth Fund turns
five, but they have contributed very little to the development of youth
empowerment.

The National Youth Commission employees earn huge salaries of about R7
million, which is more that 50% of the commission’s budget. These two
bodies were established through the Presidential Job Summit of 1998 and the
National Youth Commission Act of 1996 to cater for the plight of the youth.


Presently, joblessness is alarmingly high amongst young people and the
younger you are the worst the situation. The labour market of South Africa
consists of people between 15 and 65 years and is estimated to be 29,7
million strong. In the 15 to 27 years age group, the unemployment rate is
more than 50%, and in the 25 to 35 years age category the joblessness rate
is about 30% according to the report.

These youth bodies and other organisations such as the SA Youth Council are
not visible in the rural areas like Tubatse, Backumburg, Seleka, Mokopane,
Fetakgomo, Jane Furse, Masemola, greater Marble Hall and greater
Groblersdal. The youth in those areas have lost hope and faith. There are
no job opportunities and the government programmes sideline them.

So, how can such youth contribute in building the country and making the
21st century Africa’s century? Surely, skills, education and support are
needed for these millions of young South Africans. These youth think the
government does not care. That is why they turn to crime. For them, to be
leaders of tomorrow is only a dream if not a myth.

The 30th anniversary of the Soweto uprising of 1976 means nothing if the
youth of today are poor, unemployed and dying of Aids. The youth of 1976
fought gallantly and died for the youth of today in order for them to have
a better education and a better life. But they now get the opposite.

Taba ya go hloka mošomo le bodidi di wetša baswa ba gaborena kotsing ya
donitagi le thobalano e sego ya širelatšwa. Gomme se se hlola gore ba tsene
kotsing ya lehu la Aids. Baswa ka bontši ba bolawa ke lehu la Aids gomme
mmušo o swanatše go tlogela go gana go fa balwetši ba Aids meriana ya go
alafa bolwetši bjo. Taba ya gore ka baka la bolwetši bjo go jewe merogo,
dikenywa le gigwere e a thuša e fela re rata gore batho ba hwetše diARV, ke
tšona di ka kgonang go thuša go kaonafatša bolwetši bja Aids.

Mmušo o swanetše go tlogela go gakantšha setšhaba ka go ntšha melaetša ya
go fapana mabapi le Aids. Go ya ka dipego bophelo bja baswa bo akanyetšwa
go ba masomenne šupa (47). Mmušo wa rena o swanetše go laetša boetapele – o
swanetše go lebelela dinaga tša go swana le Uganda, Botswana le tše dingwe
tšeo diphatlaladitšego gore Aids ke lenaba la bophelo.

Ke rolela ba TAC le Love Life mongatse ka go lwantša leuba la Aids le go
fihlelela dikarolo tšohle tša Afrika Borwa. Ke dira boipiletšso go tona ya
maphelo go tsenya letsogo le go laetša thekgo le boetapale tabeng ya Aids.
Setšhaba sa gaborena se swanetše go hwetša thuto ya maleba. Thuto ke yona
senotlelo sa bophelo bjo bo kaone. Ka thuto re ka fediša mathata a go
hlokega ga mešomo.

Dikolo di swanetše go hlokomelwa, di fiwe ditsebi tša thuto go thala
mananeo ao a ka tlišago bokgoni go barutwana. Re rata go bona mananeo a
thuto a sepelelena le mešomo yeo e lego gona ka mo gare ga naga. Ditsebi ke
tšona feela ka mahlale a tšona di ka kgonago go tliša dipoelo tše kaone. Re
swanatše go bona baswa bao ba feditšego dikolo ba šoma, le go godiša
ekonomi ya rena. Bontšhi bja bona bao ba hlokago mošomo, ke ka baka la gore
ga ba kgona go hwetša thuto ya maleba. [Lelahlelwa.] Ke a leboga,
Modulasetulo. [Magoswi.] (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[Unemployment and poverty are exposing our youth to drugs and unprotected
sex, which eventually leads to HIV/Aids. The government must stop denying
HIV/Aids patients ARVs. It does help to eat vegetables, fruit and herbs,
but people must also get ARVs because they also make a difference.

The government must stop sending out mixed messages on HIV/Aids. According
to statistics, the life span of the youth is estimated at 47 years. Our
government must show some initiative and look at countries like Uganda,
Botswana and many others that have publicised that HIV/Aids is a threat to
life.

I have great admiration for organisations such as the Treatment Action
Campaign and projects such as Love Life for their efforts to fight the
HIV/Aids pandemic all around South Africa. I appeal to the Minister of
Health to play a role in this and offer support and leadership in the
HIV/Aids issue. Our nation must be well educated on this. Education is the
key to a better life. Through education we can beat all the problems
brought about by unemployment.

Schools must be prioritised. Experts must be brought in to draft
educational curricula that will help the students with the necessary
skills. We would like to see educational curricula that go hand in hand
with the employment opportunities in the country. Only people with certain
expertise can draft curricula that will yield positive results. We should
be able to see all the youth that have completed their education getting
employment and helping out to boost the country’s economy. The youth mostly
find it difficult to find employment because they did not get a suitable
education. [Interjections.] Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause]]

Mr B W DHLAMINI: Hon Chairperson, members, the challenge faced by the youth
is of a different kind to the one waged by the illustrious class of 1976,
but the challenge is just as mighty. Prince Mangosuthu Buthelezi said, “We
need a revolution of goodwill to give hope to those without hope and
inspire those whose dreams have been crushed.” And more recently, President
Thabo Mbeki, spoke eloquently of the age of hope. Both these visions we
aspire to.

Today South Africa needs a peaceful revolution to raise the quality of life
of our youth. As we look at today’s leadership, we ask the question: What
legacy would we leave behind for the youth of South Africa? How will we
ensure that this would indeed be an age of hope for our young people?

The defining mark of the 1976 class was the inherent sense of unity of
purpose. The greater good and the noble cause transcended political
affiliations. Will our leaders supply the kind of united leadership
required to take South Africa forward?

The South African youth today face the challenge of a diverse and growing
young population at a time when a sizeable number of people are living in
poverty and going out in a climate of uncertainty, and when their prospects
for healthy development are dramatically compromised by the scourge of
HIV/Aids.

The IFP acknowledges that, as a country, we have deliberate strategies to
promote healthy youth development. We believe in young people’s capacity to
reduce the risky behaviour that threatens their wellbeing. We believe we
can increase the likelihood of our young people growing up as caring and
capable adults by providing opportunities for the development of skills,
competencies and positive experiences through working with caring adults
who have high expectations in life and a positive attitude towards the
youth.

In order to make sure that all the above materialise, we, in the IFP,
believe that our youth require access to the resources and opportunities
that would not only allow them to imagine wonderful possibilities for
themselves, but to pursue them with encouragement, vigour and effective
guidance of everyone around them.

In celebrating the 30th anniversary of the Soweto uprising that later
engulfed the entire country and that were led by the late Tsietsi
Mashinini, Kgotso Seahlolo and others, the question is: Do the immense
sacrifices of Tsietsi Mashinini and company, who risked their lives for our
freedom, count for nothing?

We have many people, such as Joe Slovo and Beyers Naudé, who have been
honoured by having our streets named after them, but the same honour has
not been extended to the heroes of 1976. Are they snubbed for coming from
the wrong political camp? Let the spirit of unity of 1976 guide our country
as we enter the new era of hope. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs D G NHLENGETHWA: Hon Chairperson, hon members, I don’t know how to
describe the hon member Swathe. I can describe him like a puppet that is
being used by the DA just to come here and cackle and cackle, not knowing
what to say. [Laughter.] I want to dedicate my speech to one of our
members, Portia Shabangu. She was a student teacher at Mgwenya College, who
was gunned down by the soldiers on the Swaziland border in 1988.

More than three decades later the statement remains just as relevant to the
youth of today as we mark the 30th anniversary of the 1976 uprisings. The
progressive world will be saluting and celebrating the lives of those
unselfish young women and men who took the apartheid bull by its horns.
Many young people sacrificed their education and their lives, and we are
now enjoying the fruits of this freedom.

The police of the then government were given the instruction to disperse
the crowd. The manner in which they handled the situation was outrageous
and inhuman - by shooting and killing unarmed youth like soldiers during a
war. The only weapons the students held were stones and dustbin lids as
their bulletproof vests. We should never forget the commitment and the
price they paid.

As we celebrate the youth’s struggle of the past, we are facing today an
even more brutal monster in the form of poverty, unemployment and HIV/Aids.
I want to call on our youth to play a leading role in overcoming and
bringing down this monster, for it to lie down on its stomach this time.
The youth must be the active agents in all the programmes the government
brings forward. The ANC strategy and tactics document describes the youth
as an important sector of the motivational forces for change.

The foundations for an integrated approach to youth development were laid
not only in the youth policy, but also in the practice of co-ordinating and
monitoring government’s initiatives to address the challenges the youth
face. These include the use of the Skills Development Fund and other
initiatives, such as Asgisa, for unemployed youth, helping them to find a
career path and structure in relation to their qualifications.

Bazosala bekhala, becula neculo lokuthi ayikho imisebenzi, njengaleli lungu
ebelikekela lapha lithi ayikho imisebenzi kanti imisebenzi ikhona. [They
will be complaining and singing the song that there are no jobs, like this
member who was indirectly saying that there are no jobs whereas jobs are
there.]
There are still challenges in some areas of the country, especially where I
come from. At the Amsterdam Laerskool and the Ermelo Hoërskool there are
still language problems. They are using language as a barrier to deny
access to people, especially black people.

Yes, we amended the South African Schools Act to give powers to SGBs to
determine which languages they can use as the medium of instruction. Now,
some of these SGBs abuse these powers. They still want to keep pure lily-
white schools by saying that Afrikaans is the only language which will be
used as the medium of instruction in their schools. Some schools agreed to
be dual medium, but this is still a problem because it takes us back to
square one.

This is because outside the structure of the school you can see that this
is a multiracial school, but inside the buildings – inside the classes -
blacks are put in one class and whites in another. Indians and coloureds
are mixed in either of the two. We hope that the Minister will take note of
these concerns.

It is clear that the challenges faced by the youth of 1976 and in the 1980s
are different from those facing the youth of today. The 1976 and 1980s
generations produced the best quality of cadres. During those difficult
conditions we managed to pull through. During those days we were compelled
to take teacher courses, to become police under the then police order, that
is to offend our people, and to train as soldiers to fight against our own
people. We pulled through and along the way we changed. Many of us and many
of the other youth of that time occupy very important positions in the
public and private sectors.

While young South Africans generally spend a large part of their time doing
everything that other young people do such as watching TV and hanging out
with friends, poverty is a major factor in their lives and for a large
proportion of our people.

I have realised that the young people have stood up and responded to the
spirit of Vukuzenzele, especially the young women who are beginning to
catch up – in some cases they are overtaking men. They excel in what they
do. They responded quickly to the programme that the ANC-led government has
put in place. Asgisa is here to address the shortage of skills and provide
learnerships and entrepreneurships.

The Deputy President of the country got together with the three spheres of
government to elaborate on the specific interventions aimed at ensuring
that Asgisa succeeds, which included reducing the unemployment levels.
Perhaps people had not realised this until now: We are breaking the
barriers of apartheid and bringing it to its knees.

Bayasala-ke laba abangaboni. [Those that do not see are left behind.]

Koloi a Asgisa a e duma e a tsamaya. [When the Asgisa car starts, it is
time to go.]

The funding for higher education students is at the centre of higher
education transformation, because it hinges on educational equity, redress
and access, and on the fiscal policies of the state. Thousands of unskilled
young people remain outside the system and the labour market, because
education remains a commodity to be exchanged in institutions of higher
learning.

In that context, the establishment of the National Student Financial Aid
Scheme, NSFAS, is another giant step taken by the ANC-led government to
complement the developmental role of higher education and its link with the
human resource development strategy, in the context of the Reconstruction
and Development Programme and the youth policy of 2000.

The challenge for NSFAS is still to reach the intended beneficiaries. Is it
enough to cover all the high fees at the universities, so that these poor
students do not fall into the trap of being blacklisted at the end of the
day?

In conclusion, from the time the ANC was founded in 1912, one would find
that there were always young people in the leadership of the ANC. Until
today, they are still there ...

... njengoba besho nje ukuthi isekhona intsha endala. [... as they are
saying that the old youth is still there.]

When the oppressed said: “Now, I stand up; it’s enough.” It was the
beginning of the end of the oppressor. Although we had been under the heel
of white racist colonialism for 342 years, we never gave up. In 1985 the
late president of the ANC, Comrade Oliver Tambo, at the height of the
massive incarceration of the youth and the disruption of township schools
by the security forces, said: “A nation that does not value its youth has
no future.”

In his inauguration on 10 May 1994 at the Union Buildings, former President
Mandela pledged that the time for healing the wounds had come; the moment
to bridge the chasm that divided us had come; that the time to build was
upon us; and that we had triumphed in the effort to plant hope in the
breasts of our people.

In his state of the nation address, the President of the country also said:


  What has been achieved since Nelson Mandela delivered his first state of
  the nation address, and what we can do, given the larger resources that
  have been since generated, has surely given hope to the masses of our
  people.


He further said:
  And I dare say that, essentially, all of us are very familiar with what
  the people expect, which would confirm that they were not wrong to
  conclude that our country has entered its Age of Hope.

A e duma e a tsamaya. [When the car starts, it is time to go.]

I thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon member, please remain
at the podium. You referred to the hon Swathe as a puppet and that he
cackles. Could you please withdraw those remarks?

Mrs D G NHLENGETHWA: I said that he is like a puppet.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Could you please withdraw those
remarks?

Mrs D G NHLENGETHWA: I withdraw.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S N SIGCAU: Chairperson and hon members, the events of 16 June continue
to reverberate through history, even 30 years after the oppressed youth of
this country voiced their opposition to apartheid. As some commentators
have said, that day spelt the end of the older regime. After that, it was
inevitable that apartheid would crumble.

We commemorate this day in recognition of the sacrifice that the youth of
that generation made. We need to recognise that the youth will become
tomorrow’s decision makers, whether we like it or not. The only question is
whether we will have done everything in our power to provide them with the
skills and knowledge to make good decisions.

The importance of education for Africa’s development is, perhaps, not
adequately recognised in the many economic and political initiatives
currently under way on the continent. It is our duty, then, to ensure that
the education system receives greater attention. That would be the most
fitting tribute to the youth of 30 years ago. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L W GREYLING: Speaker, during my travels across the African continent I
met many inspirational youth who were taking forward the vision of a new
Africa. They were doing this under enormously trying circumstances,
attempting to make a better life for themselves and their families.

In the midst of the Congo forest, for instance, I met Mzanga, a 16-year-old
boy who travelled with us for 10 days. In any other society, Mzanga would
have been an A grade student, and would have gone on to join a university
and live a prosperous life. In the Congo, however, Mzanga had to work for
six months of the year, simply to pay for a year’s schooling and had almost
no hope of going on to university.

Since the last time I travelled through the Congo forest, over 4 million
people have been killed there in a tragic conflict. Our first challenge, if
we want the youth to make this Africa’s century, is to save children like
Mzanga. Today is my birthday, and all I want as a present, is for all the
youth of Africa to be given the opportunity to truly fulfil their potential
and make this continent the global force it should be. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr H B CUPIDO: Speaker, in this age of rapid technological advancement and
pervasive influences of the media, the preparedness of our youth to meet
the challenges of the future depends on the extent to which they manage to
overcome the challenges with which they are faced today.

The glamorising of gangsterism as conveyed by the music video industry is
creating an environment where violence, drug abuse and disorder are
becoming widely accepted as the norm. The objectification of women and
sexuality in these videos further erodes the inculcation of moral values
based on respect for the sanctity of the female body and the act of sex.

Access to pornography via the Internet and cellphones has a direct impact
on rape, promiscuity and infectious diseases, and easy availability of
tabloid newspapers showing naked women in provocative and lewd poses, all
point towards a society that is turning a blind eye to the factors that are
shaping the minds and aspirations of our youth.

Technological advances hold significant educational, economic and other
benefits for our youth. Careful consideration of legislation that regulates
or controls access to content with regard to the Internet, cellphones and
various media is the most effective way in which government, Parliament and
civil society can make a positive contribution to preparing the youth for
the challenges of the 21st Century.

Instead of reacting only when HIV/Aids, rape, drugs and crime statistics
amongst the youth reach horrifying proportions, urgent attention must be
given to the statutory measures that place restrictions on the media’s
devaluation of sex within marriages; and that focus on abstinence,
fidelity, family values and a drug-free society. We support the growth and
empowerment of our youth in South Africa. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr W D SPIES: Agb Speaker, die Nasionale Jeugkommissie het onlangs die
wens uitgespreek dat alle Suid-Afrikaners, wit en swart, Jeugdag moet vier
en gedenk. Ek het die gedagte by ’n jong Afrikaanse student uit Gauteng
getoets en sy reaksie was soos volg:


  Wanneer ek aansoek doen vir toelating tot die universiteit maak die
  kwotastelsel dit vir my as wit student onmoontlik om vir my eerste keuse
  van studie in te skryf. Wanneer ek dan my klasse begin bywoon saam met 90%
  ander Afrikaanssprekendes, word my klasse in Engels aangebied. As ek my
  studies voltooi het, moet ek weer eens hoor dat my aansoek om werk nie
  oorweeg kan word nie, omdat die regstellende aksieteikens van die
  maatskappye waar ek aansoek doen, nog nie bereik is nie. As ek dan wil
  uitspring en my eie besigheid begin, moet ek weer eens hoor dat ek nie my
  produkte kan verkoop nie, omdat die aankoopbeleid van my potensiële
  kliënte vereis dat hulle by sogenaamde swart verskaffers moet koop. Ek het
  dus geen rede om fees te vier nie. Gee vir my ’n rede om fees te vier en
  dan gaan ek saam.


Hierdie belewenis van ’n anonieme student uit Gauteng vertel die verhaal
van wat duisende Afrikanerjongmense vandag beleef. Die optogte van 16 Junie
1976 het oor baie dinge gehandel. Een van daardie sake was die feit dat
leerders nie in die taal van hul keuse kon leer nie. ’n Ander en belangrike
rede was dat jongmense van Soweto en ander townships uitgesluit,
gemarginaliseer en vervreemd gevoel het.

Ons uitdaging is vandag om ’n bedeling te skep waarin almal, wit en swart,
Afrikaans en Zoeloe, Engels en Sotho, ryk en arm, oud en jonk, veilig voel
en vry is om te droom, maar veral ook vry is om daardie drome ’n
werklikheid te maak. Laat ons praat oor so ’n bedeling en laat ons vir
elkeen ’n rede gee om werklik fees te vier. Ek dank u. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr W D SPIES: Hon Speaker, the National Youth Commission recently
expressed the wish that all South Africans, white and black, should
celebrate and commemorate Youth Day. I tested this idea with a young
Afrikaans student from Gauteng and his reaction was as follows:

  When I apply for entry to university, the quota system makes it impossible
  for me as a white student to enrol for my first choice of study. When I
  then start attending classes with 90% other Afrikaans speaking students,
  my classes are presented in English. When I have completed my studies, I
  must once again hear that my job application cannot be considered, because
  the affirmative action targets of the companies that I apply to have not
  yet been met. If I then want to get about starting my own business, I must
  once again hear that I cannot sell my products, because the procurement
  policy of my potential clients requires that they buy from so-called black
  suppliers. I, therefore, have no reason to celebrate. Give me a reason to
  celebrate and then I will do so.


This experience of an anonymous student from Gauteng tells the tale of what
thousands of Afrikaner young people are experiencing today. The marches of
16 June 1976 were about many things. One of those issues was the fact that
learners could not be educated in the language of their choice. Another and
very important reason was that young people from Soweto and other townships
were excluded, marginalised and felt alienated.

Our challenge today is to create a dispensation in which everyone, white
and black, Afrikaans and Zulu, English and Sotho, rich and poor, old and
young, feels safe and is free to dream, but especially also is free to make
those dreams a reality. Let us talk about such a dispensation and let us
give everyone a reason to really celebrate. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr Y I CARRIM: Madam Speaker, comrades and friends, now, I know you may not
believe it but I was once young too. And, in 1976, I was a very handsome
first-year student - with hair too, let me stress - at the University of
Durban-Westville. As I stand on this podium today, I wonder what happened
to that guy.

But, anyway, in August 1976 at UDW we boycotted classes and organised
demonstrations in solidarity with the students of Soweto and elsewhere who
were in the thick of the uprising. We were, of course, at the university,
confined to Indian South Africans and until then, the only active
participants from this community in the growing rebellion.

Before the year was out, the student revolt had spread to the so-called
coloured students in Cape Town and other parts of the Western Cape. Four
years later, inspired by the 1976 uprising, Indian and so-called coloured
students waged major struggles against separate education and the apartheid
system as a whole. A nonracial political culture emerged that had not been
seen since the 1950s.

The 1976 student revolt has enormous significance, of course. I want to
focus on one aspect that is not sufficiently recognised: the impetus it
gave to the resurgence of nonracialism and the potential it suggested for
youth to lead in the breaking down of racial barriers.

As we demonstrated at UDW in 1976, we had no idea that the struggle would
advance so rapidly. Events overtook us. As erratic and uneven as our
demonstrations were, the police overreacted and detained three of us. We
were subsequently moved from our cells in Durban to Modderbee prison in
Benoni where we joined others from Soweto and elsewhere for the next five
months.

We were about 15, all in two cells. Among this group there were some who
later became Members of Parliament, including Father Smangaliso Mkhatshwa,
Samson Ndou, Peter Moatshe and I think Moss Chikane was there in that year
too.

In Modderbee we were not subjected to interrogation and we were free to
engage in political discussions in our cells. As the then Minister of
justice, Jimmy Kruger, with uncharacteristic wit, so to speak, told the
International Red Cross, he had, I quote, “simply taken us from places of
unrest to a place of rest”.

For the UDW students it was a fascinating and irreplaceable experience. We
spent 23 and a half hours a day, for five months, in close proximity to
senior comrades of the movement. It was also our first concerted engagement
with African comrades beyond our peripheral and superficial contact with
African students.

It confirmed, in a very vivid and powerful way, what our values and
intellectual understanding had communicated, that cultural differences
aside, we all essentially belong to a single human race. And it conveyed,
too, how utterly absurd, even laughable, apartheid was.

We engaged in intense and passionate debates in our cell. Most of us
recognised that, as heroic and courageous as the youth were, there were
limits to the role they could play in the national liberation struggle. It
was vital that the youth link up with the working class and the masses more
broadly. It was, we were clear, an alliance of all classes and strata of
the people, under the leadership of the working class, that would triumph
over apartheid and create the conditions for the fundamental transformation
of our country.

But the three of us from UDW also came to see that we applied our Marxism
too mechanically and tended to overemphasise class against race, instead of
appreciating the interconnection between the national class struggles in
our revolution. Our stay at Modderbee gave greater depth to our
understanding and subsequent participation in the struggle.

While we recognised the differing degrees of oppression and the differences
in material, political and other conditions within African, coloured and
Indian people, we felt that there was a need for greater nonracial co-
operation. There were intense discussions, needless to say, about the
relationship between the masses and the armed struggle. This, despite the
fact that we were aware that the police were monitoring our discussions.
But comrades were very motivated, inspired, determined and could not be
bothered.

We behaved as if it was the beginning of the end of apartheid. In a sense,
it was. Of course, it took another 14 years but the Soweto uprising of 1976
was a major turning point. So it is that we celebrate the contribution of
the youth to society with renewed commitment in this 30th anniversary of
the Soweto uprising.

Friends, as we reflect on the significance of the June 1976 uprising, a
question that is often hidden but needs airing is: What contribution is the
youth making today to break down racial barriers and contribute to nation-
building? For the youth to effectively play a role in advancing
nonracialism and nation-building they have to be clear about what their
overall role is in consolidating our national democratic transition. Twelve
years into our democracy, there is still not sufficient clarity on this
overall role. This clarity is urgently necessary.

Obviously, the youth cannot take responsibility for advancing nonracialism
and nation-building alone. Their role has to be linked to that of other
sections of our population. But, clearly, they have a specific role to play
and are uniquely placed to significantly advance nonracialism.

In most societies it is the youth that break with tradition, and that
emerge with new ideas, new values and new practices. This is almost in the
nature of youth. It is the youth that should find it easiest to break with
our racist past. In any case, they have spent the least part of their lives
under apartheid, and increasing sections of the youth converge across
racial divides in schools, universities and other tertiary institutions.
Yet, are we seeing a significant nonracial culture emerging among the
youth?

There are contradictory developments. In some respects there is greater
interracial contact than during our apartheid past but in other respects,
greater isolation. Certainly, the potential for the youth to contribute to
nonracialism and nation-building is far from being realised. In fact, it is
disappointing. Under apartheid, it was in the political sphere that
nonracialism among the youth found expression, especially from 1976
onwards. But there was much less interracial contact in the private sphere,
in individual engagements across the racial divides.

Now, under our new democracy, interestingly, nonracialism is expressed less
in the political sphere and more in private individual engagements of, for
example, youth attending mixed schools. You have only to attend a general
meeting of progressive youth organisations like the ANC Youth League and
the Young Communist League to see the absence of nonracialism in practice
or observe who will attend the Youth Day celebrations on Friday. Even where
there is limited nonracialism emerging, it is mainly among the elite. At
the mass level, the youth have very limited contact across racial lines.

We should not blame the youth for these shortcomings. We all have to take
responsibility, especially those of us who see ourselves as progressive. To
effectively deal with the challenges, we have to more directly and openly
acknowledge them. We need more discussion on this. What better opportunity
than the 30th anniversary celebrations of the Soweto uprising!

We need to develop a programme on enhancing nonracialism among the youth
and actively implement it. Among the issues we need to focus on are,
firstly, greater clarity on the overall role of youth in our national
democratic revolution.

Secondly, we need to focus on the importance of the youth office in the
Presidency; the parliamentary Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement
of the Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons;
the role of the National Youth Commission and other statutory bodies
dealing with youth; the role that the Commission for the Promotion and
Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities
and the Human Rights Commission can play; active fostering of nonracialism
and nation-building by schools and tertiary institutions; the very
important role of sport in breaking down racial barriers; the need for
spatial desegregation so that people live in more multiracial residential
areas; the crucial role that the private sector can play and so on.

Much of what Malusi Gigaba and Lulu Johnson said earlier needs to be
followed up on. If we do that, we will have more opportunities to ensure
that there is more contact between our youth across the racial divides.

As parents too, we also have a role to play in encouraging our children to
develop friendships across racial lines. Without being crude about this,
maybe this too should also be a measure of our delivery. Ultimately, the
development of a nonracial ethos among the youth will be an important
contribution to and reflection of the successes of our nonracial and nation-
building project. Let us all recognise this, and let us indeed all act on
it. I thank you. [Applause.]

Nk M M MDLALOSE: Somlomo, malungu ahloniphekile, intsha ka-1976  njengamanje
ingabaholi besizwe nabazali bentsha yanamuhla.  Intsha  yayishabasheka  izwe
lonke ifisa impilo nezwe elingcono nelihlaliseke  kahle.  Izinqumo  ezenziwa
ngaleso sikhathi  zinomthelela  empilweningqangi  namuhla.  (Translation  of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Ms M M MDLALOSE: Chairperson, hon members, the youth of 1976 are now the
leaders of the country and the parents of today’s youth. The youth were
marching for a better and harmonious country. The decisions that were taken
at that time have an impact on life in general today.]

Decisions of yesterday dictate today and tomorrow. Nadeco says to the youth
of today: Love yourselves. Have high objectives. Love hard work. Protect
yourself against drugs, aimlessness, HIV and Aids.

Asifune impilo engcono, imfundo, amacebo nezindlela zokwenza imali. [Let  us
strive for a better life,  education,  strategies  and  ways  of  generating
money.]

This will then lead our country to a better future, and to build a
successful nation and general wellbeing.

Lusha, vukani nizithathe. Inselelo  ingani.  [Youth,  rise  and  shine,  the
challenge is yours.]

Thank you. [Applause.]

Rre B E PULE: Ke a leboga Mmusakgotla, matshosetsi ke bolwetse jwa
kokwanatlhoko ya HIV/Aids, e e garimanyang ngwana le mmaagwe. Tota e
garimanya lelapa lotlhe. Ke maikarabelo a baša go e lwantsha jaanong jaana.
Ga go na jaaka re ka nna le Aforika e e lwalang.

Ntlha ya bobedi ke go nna le Aforika e e rutegileng mo mefameng yotlhe e e
ka tlhabololang. Aforika wa ngwaga kgolo wa bosomepedi nngwe ga e kitla e
dira kwa ntle ga bonetetshi, ga e kitla e dira kwa ntle ga boitseanape, ga
e kitla e dira kwa ntle ga botswiritshi.
Baša ba tshwanetse go ithuta go nna ditswerere le go nna le maikarabelo mo
ditirong tsotlhe tse ba di dirang.

Bolwetse jo bongwe jo baša ba tshwanetseng go nna le seabe mo go jone, ke
jwa go tlhoka kagiso ga Aforika. Dipolaano tsa bana le basadi tse di
aparetseng naga ya rona, di tswanetse go nyatsega le go kgalwa ke baša
gonne di senya leago le le edileng.

La bofelo, baša ba tswanetse go dira ditiro le rona bagolo gonne Motswana a
re: “Magogorwane rokela banneng e re setsiba se tlala ba se go thuse.” Ke a
leboga. (Translation of Setswana speech follows.)

[Mr B E PULE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The threat is the HIV/Aids virus,
which attacks both the mother and her child. In reality, it attacks the
whole family. It is the responsibility of the youth to fight it right now.
There is no way that we can have a sick Africa.

The second point is to have an Africa that is trained in all fields that
could be developmental. The Africa of the 21st century won’t be functional
without science and technology. The youth must learn to be experts and to
take responsibility in all that they are doing.

The other area of concern that needs the youths’ participation is the lack
of peace in Africa. The killing of women and children being experienced all
over our country must be condemned with contempt by the youth because it
destroys a stable society.

Lastly, the youth are supposed to work together with us, the elderly,
because the Motswana say: “Work with those who know so that they can help
you.” Thank you.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, the role of the African youth this century
is to rebuild the broken walls of Africa politically, economically,
culturally, educationally, technologically and morally.

The youth of today must struggle hard to ensure that Africa’s riches
benefit Africa’s people. The youth must be equipped with knowledge in their
gigantic task of making the 21st century Africa’s century by being provided
with free education. We also have a collective responsibility to ensure the
future of our youth by eradicating youth unemployment and the HIV/Aids
virus, from which millions of our youth are dying.

Africa’s challenges to make this century Africa’s century require young men
and women who are mentally decolonised and are as brave as the youth of the
Soweto and Sharpeville uprisings. This is the youth that will grow to be
leaders like Zephania Mothopeng, the PAC leader who orchestrated the Soweto
uprising, according to Judge Kaye-Lewis. This judge sentenced him to 30
years in prison for the Soweto uprising. He was with 16 PAC members in the
Supreme Court of South Africa. In 1979 Judge Kaye-Lewis said, and I quote:


  You, Mothopeng, acted to sow seeds of anarchy and revolution. The riot
  you engineered and predicted eventually took place in Soweto on 16 June
  1976 and at Kagiso the next day.

Such freedom fighters are a source of inspiration and a glittering example
to youth in Africa.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, your time has expired.

Dr S E M PHEKO: I am amazed at your intolerance. I speak for one minute
here and you speak for 15 minutes and you are amazed. We are not going to
distort the history of this country. That is not going to be allowed.
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon member, your time has expired.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, tracing our steps back to the 1976 uprising,
we hear the cries of our children forced into a man’s war. Apartheid blood
robbed our people of their right and children were forced to abandon their
childhood and unite in the fight for freedom.

Today, those children are adults, parents and grandparents, and would like
to convey their experience to today’s youth in the hope that history will
never repeat itself. Today, the aftermath of the apartheid regime continues
to manifest itself in the masses in the form of poverty, sickness,
imbalance and retardation. The challenge is great.

Through determination, commitment and perseverance, our democracy continues
to unlock these shackles of our past. It is at this stage that our young
leaders need to be socialised onto the road that will lead South Africa to
greatness. It is now that we will recruit our young into fighting against
poverty, to tackle our urgent need for development and to overcome
challenges such as HIV and Aids.

The MF views the active interaction between the various Houses, Cabinet and
the youth as an invitation to address issues in terms of a long-term
investment. The skills shortage and our employment supply cannot service
needs. There is a need to identify youth programmes and to invite the youth
to consider these ambitious and possible choices for after-school
qualifications.

The MF believes in the potential of our youth to rise to these great
pillars of democracy, economic strength and social security, all sown and
woven from the fabric of values and principles enshrined in our
Constitution. We may overcome our challenges today or maybe tomorrow, but
an investment in our youth will ensure that we will overcome our challenges
today. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms L N MOSS: Madam Speaker, hon members, comrades and friends, our
celebration of the 30th anniversary of the youth uprising in 1976, as well
as the 50th anniversary of the women’s march to the Union Buildings in
Pretoria in 1956 shows that women’s rights are human rights.
Organisasies wat aktief was gedurende die stryd van die jong
Christenstudente ... [Organisations that were active during the struggle of
the young Christian students ...]

... were organising the youth and the young women to participate fully.
They also organised youth out in the streets for better education and
observance of human rights that were poor because of Bantu education.

In the Western Cape, people were harassed when they did not have passes. It
was made very difficult for one’s friends to stay over here in the Western
Cape. That is why mothers and young women were marching against the pass
laws. It was the same youth who couldn’t stay with their mothers because of
the pass laws.

In the `80s, women were not allowed to stay with their families. We
remember the forced removals in Crossroads and Unibel. In KTC women stood
together to support others. The United Women’s Congress supported these
women because an injury to one is an injury to all. An injury to one is an
injury to all. [Applause.]

In the 1980’s the first houses were built in New Crossroads, KTC and lastly
in Khayelitsha, where the people were forced to stay. Women were not
allowed to stay in the Western Cape and forced to stay in Khayelitsha.

The youth congress was launched in the Western Cape and I am proud to state
that I was part of that. A cultural choir called Vulindlela was formed
where the participation of young women was not an act of charity. It was
the result of compassionate attitudes towards women and yet they still
found themselves in a disadvantaged situation because of a lack of skills
and education.

There are still key challenges that face women and children: building a
second tier leadership, human rights, building a strong progressive women’s
movement to make sure that young women speak out in a strong and united
voice, and to promote the participation of young women in political schools
and social and economic activities. Thanks to the ANC which gives us
political schooling.

There are a few observations that I would like to make with regard to race,
gender and class. Black women are mainly in middle and lower management
positions. The independence of women needs to be strategically considered,
with regard to gender needs. The struggle for nonsexism cannot be fought
outside class and national struggles. The struggle for transformation is to
improve the conditions of our young women and the poor. Transformation must
take place in the economy to create jobs and to relieve poverty.

Empowered young women leaders can be useful links by turning politics, HIV
and Aids and behavioural change amongst the youth into positive results, as
the Minister of Education did through integrating life skills and HIV and
Aids across all learning areas of the curriculum. Most young girls take up
the responsibility of looking after their siblings when their parents are
taken away by HIV and Aids and other medical reasons.

Ter afsluiting, as jong vroue en die jeug geniet ons nou die demokrasie en
menseregte waarvoor ons moeders baklei het in 1956. Opvoeding is belangrik.
[In conclusion, as young women and youth we are now enjoying the democracy
and human rights that our mothers fought for in 1956. Education is
important.]

When you educate a young woman, you are building a nation.

Ten slotte wil ek hierdie woorde voorlees vir die moeders daar buite en ook
vir die vroue in die Parlement: “ Om vrou te wees is nie om anders te wees
nie. Is nie om minder te wees nie. Is nie om swak te wees nie. Is nie om
ongeskik te wees nie. Om vrou te wees is om jouself te wees.” Ek dank u.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Lastly, I would like to read out these words for the mothers who are out
there and also for the women in Parliament: “To be a woman, is not about
being different. It is not about being less of a person. It is not about
being weak. It is not about being helpless. To be a woman, is about being
your own person.” I thank you. [Applause.]]
Ms N M MDAKA: Madam Speaker, hon members, it has been 30 years since the
youth of South Africa marched in all parts of the country, on a journey for
a better education, and transformed South Africa. Today the UIF salutes the
children of 1976 who gave their lives so that we and future generations of
this country could free ourselves from the yoke of apartheid and establish
a new democratic order.

It is very discouraging to see how little, if any, of the black economic
empowerment resources are being channelled towards the development of young
people. Formations such as the National Youth Commission and the Umsobomvu
Youth Fund have failed dismally on their mandates. They are viewed as only
being accessible to a select few that are connected to the ruling party top
brass and the youth league – the ANC Youth League, in brackets.
[Interjections.]

The UIF calls on the government to empower its development agencies and
lobby the business sector to advocate for greater resources to be directed
towards the young people of this country. The government must not fail in
its obligation of ensuring every young person’s right to quality education,
to develop their skills and to acquire knowledge. I thank you.
[Interjections.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Madam Speaker, the youth of today are the leaders of
tomorrow, but currently the negative onslaught on them is intense and
ferocious. Undisciplined behaviour, drug abuse and criminal activity are
the cancer among our youth; so are the lack of motivation and the
importance of education and skills. These shortcomings need our urgent
attention, the failure of which may result in devastating consequences for
the continent of Africa.

A possible solution would be to appoint a committee of experts consisting
of politicians, public servants, academics, and representatives of business
and workers’ unions. The committee would be commissioned to determine needs
and solutions, and draw up a blueprint for South Africa which will cover
activities in all spheres and at all levels of society. This, the UPSA
believes, would also address the shortcomings and experience amongst our
youth, and make the 21st century Africa’s century. I thank you.

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, the youth of today is not the youth of 1976.
The youth of 1976 were highly politicised – they had to be – and they were
compelled to enter politics at an early age. It was the age of change, and
therefore the youth had to be part of the movement.

High on the agenda of the youth of today – and let us speak to our young 15-
year-old, 16-year-old, 17-year-old sons and daughters – is their music,
whether it be kwaito or other kinds of music; their culture, and it
includes, of course, the latest fashions; and it is, of course, their
favourite TV programmes; and, of course, the ever-present cellphone. Those
are some of the things that are high on the agenda of the youth today. It
is not wrong that they have those kinds of interests, as they are signs of
the normalisation of our youth.

Many of our young people are marketing their skills globally. They are in
London, they are in Dubai, they are everywhere, and it is time for our
youth to come home. I thank you.

Mr G R MORGAN: Madam Speaker, hon members, it is a privilege to be able to
debate this topic while remembering the role that the youth of 1976 played
in standing up against a cruel and unjust system. Indeed, their brave
actions inspired countless more people of all ages to bring about change.
Many of those courageous people that took to the streets of Soweto 30 years
ago are now leaders in business, politics and civil society today.

It is natural that young people aspire to be leaders of the future. The
youth of 1976 hoped that that would be the case, and the youth of today
hope that it will be the case for them as well. While the youth of 1976 had
a clear and just battle to inspire them, it is questionable whether our
youth today have a cause. As individuals they certainly have dreams. They
want to be skilled in order to access the economy; they want secure, well-
paying jobs; and they want to be safe from criminals. All of these desires
are reasonable. But a cause? Is there something to inspire us as a group?

I believe there is such a cause, and that is to nurture, strengthen and
consolidate our democracy. The youth of today cannot merely sit back and
accept that the triumph of the youth of 1976 has secured all our futures.

Building a democracy is hard work, and for this reason young people must
take an interest in politically shaping the future of South Africa. That
which we as individuals aspire to achieve in our respective lives will mean
very little if we inherit the leadership of a country that is slipping
backwards and not striding boldly into the future.

I admit that it is easy to say that the youth should become more involved
in shaping the future of the country. But there are good reasons why there
is such apathy among the youth. Many young people feel let down by the new
South Africa. It is a country that provides opportunities to some and not
to all. Some are well educated; others are illiterate. Of those young
people that have Aids, a pitiful number have access to antiretrovirals. The
rest are dying. Some youth get preferential treatment in the job market
because of race quotas; others sit at home despite having postgraduate
degrees.

The problem is that the youth do not have equality of opportunity in this
country, and for this reason young people are not particularly united as a
group. We’re all too busy trying to overcome some hurdle thrown in our
path, whether through personal circumstances or legislation. And so, while
we debate the topic today, in this House, regarding the role of the youth
in making the 21st century the African century – an uninspiring topic
decided upon, presumably, by an ageing person in the ruling party – we may
be missing the point.

Granted, the youth have an exciting role to play. But this House should be
critically analysing how it can give the youth the opportunity to play a
role in the future. Indeed, it should be debating how to ensure that our
youth – those individuals between approximately 18 and 35 – can even
survive to see the future, considering how many of us are affected by
HIV/Aids.

This House should be debating whether some current political leaders are
acceptable role models. Mr Zuma, who receives unwavering support from the
ANC Youth League, has reckless views on preventing infection from Aids. Mr
Nqakula sends out the wrong signals to the youth by refusing to be
sympathetic to those people who justifiably complain about crime.
[Interjections.] Those MPs that stole from the taxpayer by misusing their
travel vouchers do nothing to promote the virtue of accountability to the
youth. It is sad that there are not enough role models for the youth.

My last comment is about the young people who head up the vampire-like
youth body, the National Youth Commission. The Youth Commission is quite
prepared to suck up funds from the taxpayer, but it offers nothing in
return. The commission has a salary bill of R7 million per year, 50% of its
total budget, and therefore serves to enrich only its own commissioners. It
should be disbanded and not defended. Its achievements are superficial, and
we can expect more of the same in the future.

We as the youth have a role to play in the future, and that future is not
too far away. We would like to be debating in 30 years’ time that South
Africa has indeed become the land of opportunity for all people that the
youth of 1976 aimed to bring about. Thank you. [Applause.]

Adv Z L MADASA: Madam Speaker, my contribution would be about the
contribution of the youth to change the Western Cape forever since 1976. Of
course, the debate about the 1976 student uprisings evokes sad and fond
memories - sad memories when we remember those that died like Xolile Mosi,
the first victim in Cape Town. He was my personal friend and a classmate.
On that fateful day, we had been called to a meeting at Langa High School
to prepare for a march to Langa police station to demand the release of the
leaders.

We were asked to form lines of six students each. Xolile, in his
characteristic courage, offered to be in the front line and to hold the
placard that contained our demands. He was the best boxer in his division,
maybe that is where he derived his tremendous courage. We marched to the
police station and when we reached the police station the police stopped
us.
After a few moments of discussion, we were ordered to disperse in five
minutes. We resisted and we were fired upon. We ran in all directions and
heard the following day that Xolile had died. His death made the students
even more militant and they pressed on with the struggle. Even the
invitation by the regime of two homeland leaders, K D Matanzima and L L
Sebe did not help. They were supposed to come to Cape Town to help and deal
with their people who could not be contained.

Matanzima, after unsuccessfully holding a meeting at Langa stadium, where
students stoned him, advised the regime to beat up the students. He said:
“Africans know one thing to stop trouble, a stick.” He said that students
were uncontrollable, because they were the offspring of promiscuous women
who had no husbands.

NgesiXhosa wathi,“Ngabantwana boonomokhwe aba. Bafun’ intonga.” [“He said
in isiXhosa, those are offspring of promiscuous women. They need to be
punished.”]

Indeed, heeding his advice, the regime became more brutal and introduced
rubber batons that were very painful if one was hit. The poor man, on the
other hand, was suffocated by teargas when he unsuccessfully tried to hold
a meeting at the I D Mkhize school, which was disrupted by the police who
were not aware of his importance.

What is not often told about the contribution of these uprisings in the
Cape is that they were the direct result of the scrapping of the pass laws
in the Western Cape, because after the pass laws were scrapped, waves and
waves of people from the Eastern Cape came to Cape Town to settle. The
first so-called squatters, NY 78 and KTC squatter camps, were established
as a direct result of these struggles.

Mr P W Botha tried in vain to send the squatters back to Transkei. He
bussed them to Mthatha. I was at St John’s College in 1978 when we as
students decided to sympathise with the squatters who were at Mthatha and
housed in churches. We sent them our food rations. We advised them to
refuse to go home and demand to go back to Cape Town, because they had the
right to freedom of movement in South Africa. Their plight attracted a lot
of international media and Botha decided to allow them back to Cape Town.
This was the beginning of expanded settlements of black people in Cape
Town.

In 1979, Crossroads started and the students went there to defend the
rights of people to settle when the regime was trying to remove them by
force. The late Oscar Mpetha was the prominent leader of that movement. He
was arrested and released on R1 bail, because of his age and health. He was
famous for the slogan ...

... “Inkululeko ngoku! Isikolo ngomso!” Wayedla ngokuthi, “Nas’ isibham’
eAngola”. UOscar Mpetha wakha wasibalisela ibali likaNkosi Luthuli athi
wayethetha nabelungu apha eKapa. Uthi abelungu bathi kuye ... [... “freedom
now! School tomorrow!” He used to say, “A gun is in Angola”. Oscar Mpetha
once narrated a story about Chief Luthuli who negotiated with white men in
Cape Town. He said the white men said to him, ...]

... Chief Luthuli, you are wasting your time. Black people will never rule
this country.

UOscar Mpetha uthi wathi iChief ukuphendula: Xa abantu abamnyama bengenza
isigqibo bathi emlungwini: Suk’emagxen’ am, bangaze bakhululeke ngaloo
mini. [Kwaqhwatywa.] [Oscar Mpetha says Chief’s reply was: If black people
can say to white men, get off our shoulders, that will be the day they will
be free. [Applause.]]

These events that carried through to the 80s and 90s were responsible for
triggering political consciousness in both the coloured and black
communities of the Western Cape. They had to bring about the social and
political transformation that we see today unfolding, albeit very
painfully, as the opponents of transformation are putting up stiff
resistance to change. But, like in the past, these struggles will prevail.

We must not forget where the Western Cape comes from. We, as black children
who grew up here, were racially abused in the coloured townships. When we
went to watch movies, for example in Mannenberg, from Gugulethu township,
after the movies we would be chased around called “kaffirtjies”. We were
racially abused when we went to watch soccer at Hartleyvale stadium. We
were beaten up in the trains if the white teams like Cape Town City lost to
the Johannesburg-based
black teams.

This is where the DA wants to turn this country and this province back into
the old Western Cape. This not a vicious attack but it is corroborated by
their use of the slogan “Vat jou stad terug! [“Take back your city!”] Back
from what?

They know that there is still resistance in some communities to seeing
black people, not only settling in the Western Cape but running the
government. To them this is unacceptable. It means the end of white
supremacy in the Cape and some people in the coloured community must help
to defeat these blacks. This is what the slogan “Vat jou stad terug!”
[“Take back your city!”] means.

Yiyo loo nto sihlaba ikhwelo kubantu bakuthi abahlala koomaCrossroads,
Khayelitsha nakooPhillipi, ukuba bakhumbule ukuba bafumana ilungelo
lokuhlala eKapa ngegazi labantwana besikolo. [Kwaqhwatywa.] [This is why we
make an appeal to our people who live in Crossroads, Khayelitsha and
Philippi, to remember that they got the right to live there through the
blood of school children. [Applause.]]

The lessons to be learnt from the youth of yesterday are sacrifice and
discipline. Though most of us were under 16 at the time, we destroyed beer
halls in the townships because we felt that they brought antisocial
behaviour that was harmful to the struggle.

In the early ‘90s, the strategy of boycotts had already been abandoned.
There was toyi-toying but classes were attended simultaneously. Today the
youth need new forms of struggle, mainly education and more education as
the democratic government has opened a space for engagement.

Asisathi siyaya ePitoli. Safika ePitoli. Asisathi uza kuwa umbuso kaDe
Klerk, sele wawa. [We are no longer saying we are going to Pretoria. We are
there. We are no longer saying that the government of De Klerk will
collapse because that has already taken place.]

The youth must make use of democratic structures fought for by the youth of
yesterday to press for their current demands. The youth must inculcate a
culture of active participation as a space of democratic participation has
been created. All in all, the doors of learning have been opened. The youth
must get skills to ensure that the 21st century truly becomes the African
century. The youth must ensure that the democratic government governs. The
time for physical fights is over; it is now time for the current youth to
engage with the democratic institutions that were brought about by the
youth of yesterday.
We salute the indefatigable spirit of the youth of 1976 that has brought
about the 21st century, which is the African century.

Mandigqibezele ngokuthi kulaa ntwana yakwaSwathe ayiyazi into ebiyithetha
apha. Ifanelwe yintonga. [Kwahlekwa.] [Kwaqhwatywa.] [In conclusion I must
say that Swathe’s young man does not know what he was saying here. He needs
a hiding. [Laughter.] [Applause.]]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: I
cannot allow a member to refer to another member as “intwana” [“young
man”]. [Laughter.] He is an hon member. Though he has confused ideas he is
an hon member and must be addressed as such. [Laughter.]

 CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF JOINT CONVENTION ON
 THE SAFETY OF SPENT FUEL MANAGEMENT AND ON THE SAFETY OF RADIOACTIVE WASTE
          MANAGEMENT IN TERMS OF SECTION 231(2) OF THE CONSTITUTION

Mr E N MTHETHWA: Madam Speaker, the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent
Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management is an
incentive convention under the auspices of the International Atomic Energy
Agency, IAEA. The joint convention intends to ensure the achievement and
maintenance of a high level of safety worldwide in the management of
radioactive waste, in compliance with the internationally identified and
endorsed fundamental safety principles.

Key to the joint convention is ensuring that the management of radioactive
waste is such that there are effective defences against potential hazards
now and in the future. Furthermore, it also encourages the prevention of
accidents and the mitigation of their effect, should they occur. It also
seeks to reinforce the implementation of basic safety criteria and
standards currently used in the regulation of nuclear activities in the
country, in a way that ensures the continued protection of humankind.

The joint convention is an instrument premised on the safety and
accountability of the management of spent fuel and radioactive waste. At
the core of the joint convention are the following objectives: firstly, the
achievement and maintenance of a high level of safety through enhanced
national measures, international co-operation and technical co-operation;
secondly, ensuring the provision of effective defences against potential
hazards to protect society and the environment from the effects of ionising
radiation; thirdly, the prevention of accidents with radiological
consequences and the mitigation of their consequences in cases of
occurrence at any stage of spent fuel or radioactive waste management.

The joint convention is applicable to the following: firstly, the safety of
spent fuel management resulting from the operation of a civilian nuclear
reactor; secondly, the safety of radioactive waste resulting from civilian
application; thirdly, the safety of management of spent fuel and
radioactive waste from military or defence programmes, if and when such
materials are transferred permanently to and managed within exclusively
civilian programmes.

Accession of the joint convention is critical as it enables us to interact
with other countries on issues related to spent fuel and radioactive waste
management, especially on issues of safety. Fundamental to the convention
is transparency and accountability to the people of the land and the
international community.

Compliance with the joint convention places our country at the heart of the
discourse on nuclear safety. Interestingly, the meeting on the joint
convention under the auspices of the IAEA was held in South Africa from 15
to 24 May 2006. Furthermore, this is indicative of our commitment to
ensuring that radioactive waste is managed according to international norms
and we are open to peer review. Thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety
of Radioactive Waste Management approved.

      CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF THE UNESCO
    CONVENTION AGAINST DOPING IN SPORT IN TERMS OF SECTION 231(2) OF THE
                                CONSTITUTION

Mr L R R REID: Chairperson, the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation
supports the ratification of the United Nations Education, Scientific and
Cultural Organisation, Unesco, Convention Against Doping in Sport, that
tightens up doping measures as experienced recently in athletics, and
reaffirms the steps taken by South Africa as a leading country in
antidoping measures. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): That member was standing in for the
committee chairperson.

There was no debate.

United Nations Education, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (Unesco)
Convention Against Doping in Sport approved.

     CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF PROTOCOL TO
    CONVENTION ON INTERNATIONAL INTERESTS IN MOBILE EQUIPMENT ON MATTERS
                       SPECIFIC TO AIRCRAFT EQUIPMENT
There was no debate.

Protocol to Convention on International Interests in Mobile Equipment on
Matters Specific to Aircraft Equipment approved.

The House adjourned at 17:37.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           WEDNESDAY, 14 JUNE 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Translations of Bills submitted


     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


          a) Wysigingswetsontwerp op die Herroeping van die Swart
             Administrasie Wet en Wysiging van Sekere Wette [W 11 – 2006]
             (National Assembly – sec 75)


         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Repeal of
         the Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws
         Amendment Bill [B 11 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75).

2.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 14 June 2006:


          a) Appropriation Bill [B 2  – 2006] (National Assembly– sec 77)


3.    Bill referred to Mediation Committee

    (1)     Bill, as amended by National Assembly, and rejected by National
        Council of Provinces on 13 June 2006, referred to Mediation
        Committee in terms of Joint Rule 186(2)(b):


          a) Older Persons Bill [B 68D – 2003] (National Council of
             Provinces – sec 76).

National Assembly

1.    Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly in
     respect of Bills passed by Council and transmitted to Assembly

     a) National Land Transport Transition Amendment Bill [B 38B - 2005]
        (National Council of Provinces – sec 76)


        The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Transport
        of the National Assembly.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Provincial and local Government

            Draft Local Government: Municipal Performance Regulations for
      Section 57 Employees, 2006 in terms of section 120(7) of the Local
      Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000).

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

      Report of the South African Human Rights Commission (SAHRC) on the
      Public Hearing on the Right to Basic Education, 2005.

COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly


1.    Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
    Development  on  the  Provisional  Suspension  from  Office   and   the
    withholding of remuneration: Mr M S Makamu, Senior Magistrate and  Head
    of Office at Benoni, dated 2 June 2006:

    The Portfolio Committee for  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,
    having considered the reports on the provisional suspension from office
    of  Senior  Magistrate  M  S  Makamu,  and  the  withholding   of   his
    remuneration, tabled by the Minister  for  Justice  and  Constitutional
    Development  in  terms  of  sections  13(3)(b)  and  13(4A)(b)  of  the
    Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of 1993), reports as follows:

    1)      The  Portfolio  Committee  noted  from  the  reports  that  the
        Minister provisionally  suspended  Mr  Makamu  from  office  on  23
        November 2005 in terms of section 13(3)(a) of the Magistrates  Act,
        1993 and that, on 31 March 2006,  the  Magistrates  Commission,  in
        terms of section 13(4A)(a) of the Act, determined to  withhold  his
        remuneration. The reports indicating the reasons  for  Mr  Makamu’s
        provisional suspension and the withholding of his remuneration were
        tabled in  Parliament  on  24  November  2005  and  7  April  2006,
        respectively, in compliance with sections 13(3)(b) and 13(4A)(b) of
        the Magistrates Act, 1993.

    2)      The Portfolio Committee invited Mr Makamu on 10 April  2006  to
        submit written  representations  to  the  Committee  regarding  the
        recommendation  by  the  Magistrates  Commission  to  provisionally
        suspend him from office  and  its  determination  to  withhold  his
        remuneration.  The Committee did not receive any response  from  Mr
        Makamu by the due date, 26 April 2006.

    3)      The Portfolio Committee noted that Mr Makamu had been convicted
        by the Johannesburg Regional Court on a charge of fraud on 21  June
        2005 and that he was sentenced to a fine of R10 000  (ten  thousand
        rand) or in default of payment to 6(six) months  imprisonment,  all
        of which were suspended for a period of 4(four)  years  on  certain
        conditions. He was charged for inducing an  Administration  Officer
        at the Benoni Magistrate’s Court to sign an official letter stating
        that he was entitled to an official motor vehicle  allowance  which
        letter was presented to Bankfin for the purpose of  an  installment
        sale agreement.


    4)      The Portfolio Committee noted that it has taken a  considerable
        period of time to finalise the criminal case against Mr Makamu  and
        to finalise his application for leave to appeal (which also has had
        a delaying effect in respect of the inquiry  into  his  fitness  to
        hold office as a Magistrate) and that the  Magistrates’  Commission
        attributes this to an effort on the part of Mr. Makamu to delay the
        process.

    5)      In terms of section  13(3)(c)  of  the  Magistrates  Act,  1993
        Parliament must as soon as is reasonably possible pass a resolution
        as to whether or not the provisional suspension of a magistrate  is
        confirmed. Parliament must also, in terms of section  13(4A)(c)  of
        the Act, as soon as is reasonably possible, consider a  report  and
        pass a resolution as to whether or not  the  determination  by  the
        Magistrates Commission to withhold a Magistrate’s  remuneration  is
        confirmed, either with or without amendment, or set aside.

    6)      The Portfolio Committee considers the matter to be  of  such  a
        serious nature so as to make it  inappropriate  for  Mr  Makamu  to
        perform his functions as a magistrate, whilst the inquiry  referred
        to in section 13(3)(e) of the Magistrates  Act,  1993  is  pending.
        Furthermore, the Committee is of  the  view  that  the  Magistrates
        Commission’s determination to withhold Mr Makamu’s remuneration  is
        appropriate in the circumstances

    7)      The Committee therefore recommends that the  National  Assembly
        resolves to confirm -


        (a)      the provisional  suspension  of  Mr  Makamu  in  terms  of
             section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993; and
        (b)       the  determination  by  the  Magistrates  Commission   to
             withhold Mr Makamu’s remuneration in terms of section 13(4A)(c)
             of the Magistrates Act, 1993.

      Report to be considered.


