---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 25 August 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2006-08-25
---

FRIDAY, 25 AUGUST 2006
                                    ____


              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 09:30.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


            WELCOMING OF DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION


The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): We would like to
welcome the hon G C Oosthuizen, national Deputy Minister of Sport and
Recreation, to the sitting.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr A WATSON: Madam Chair, I propose this motion without notice on behalf of
the hon Denise Robinson, who is ill in bed and has asked me to do this.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order! Hon member,
can I call you to order, please. We are not dealing with motions without
notice. I’ve asked you whether you wish to give notice of a motion.

Mr A WATSON: Oh, right.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you.

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day I
shall move on behalf of the IFP:

    That the Council –

        1) notes with alarm that East Rand police are searching for clues
           after the bodies of two men were found in the boot of a car near
           the old Heidelberg road this past Sunday;


        2) further notes that the practice of dumping the bodies of murder
           victims in the boots of cars and driving away from the crime
           scene seems to be on the increase;

        3) extends its condolences to the families and friends of the
           deceased; and


        4) urges the relevant authorities to use all the resources at their
           disposal to bring the perpetrators of this heinous crime to book
           so that they can be dealt with in a manner that fits the
           brutality of their crime.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Chairperson, on behalf of the DA, I will move at the
next sitting:

    That the Council-

      1) notes the verdict of the Constitutional Court regarding the lack
         of consultation in this House when enacting legislation;


    (2)     further notes that the Democratic Alliance has consistently
         warned about the fact that proper procedures were not followed;
         and


    (3)     ensures that in future the correct procedures will be followed
         to avoid such an embarrassing situation from reoccurring.

Mr N J MACK: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move at the
next sitting:

    That the Council –
        1) notes the decision of the Supreme Court of Appeal to refuse
           former Chief Whip of the National Assembly, Mr Tony Yengeni,
           leave to appeal against his four-year prison sentence and that
           such decision is sad and regrettable;


        2) recalls that Mr Yengeni made a statement in the National
           Assembly on 27 February 2001 that the independence of the
           judiciary is an important pillar of any healthy democratic
           system and that the ANC upholds court decisions;


        3) furthermore recalls the tremendous contribution that Mr Yengeni
           made towards the achievement of a united and democratic South
           Africa; and


        4) extends a message of solidarity and compassion to Tony Yengeni
           and his family at this difficult time.


             SLOW RATE OF TRANSFORMATION AT CERTAIN UNIVERSITIES


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the Council –


        1) notes the very slow rate of transformation at the University of
           the Free State, where 82% of all senior academic staff is still
           white, 87% at the University of Stellenbosch and 84% at the
           University of Pretoria;


        2) further notes the recent student dissatisfaction at the Free
           State campus, partly due to the slow transformation process;



       3) therefore calls on the Minister of Education to urgently conduct
          an inquiry into the slow rate of transformation at the
          Universities of the Free State, Stellenbosch and Pretoria; and


        4) calls on all students at the Free State campus to remain calm in
           anticipation of an increase in the rate of transformation.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                  LOSSES AS A RESULT OF DEVASTATING FLOODS


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr A WATSON: Deputy Chairperson, I move the following motion without
notice, on behalf of hon Robinson:

    That the Council –

        1) notes the devastating floods that have occurred in the past week
           in the Heidelberg, Swellendam and Riversdale areas; and


        2) expresses its condolences to the residents who have lost their
           homes and possessions and to the farming community who have once
           again been subjected to severe losses with regard to crops and
           equipment.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


          BEHAVIOUR OF STUDENTS AT THE UNIVERSITY OF THE FREE STATE


                             (Draft Resolution)

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Voorsitter, ek stel voor:

  Dat die Raad met misnoeë kennis neem van die optrede van sekere studente
  aan die Vrystaatse Universiteit wat eiendom beskadig het omdat hulle nie
  die uitslag van die Studenteraadsverkiesing wat die Vryheidsfront Plus
  oorweldigend gewen het, kan aanvaar nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)


[Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council notes with displeasure the behaviour of certain students
  at the University of the Free State who damaged property because they
  could not accept the results of the Students’
  Representative Council election which was won with an overwhelming
  majority by the Freedom Front Plus.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Is there any
objection to the motion?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, due to the poor interpretation
I don’t think members have a fair chance either to object to or support the
motion.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Can someone see to
the electronics of the system, please. In light of the objection, the
motion may not be proceeded with. The motion without notice will now become
notice of a motion. Thank you.


                     INVITATION TO FRAUDSTERS BY THE DA


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr N J MACK: Chair, I move without notice:

  That the Council –


     1) notes the serious political offence committed by the DA in inviting
        known fraudsters to be part of the Kannaland Council in the Western
        Cape;


     2) further notes that the very same DA were the ones calling for the
        removal of both Mr Truman Prince and Mr Donson from public office
        and they are now willing to work with them;

     3) acknowledges that the ANC finds this act a breach of public trust
        on the part of the DA and a clear demonstration that the DA is not
        committed to clean governance; and ...

[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order!

Mr N J MACK:

     4) therefore condemns this act of desperation which further
        demonstrates that the DA is interested in holding on to power at
        the expense of community trust and good governance.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order, Order! Is
there any objection to the motion? [Interjections.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Deputy Chair, on a point of order: There was an
objection.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Nobody stood up to
say that there was an objection. Will you please sit down?

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Mr Watson and I raised an objection.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Will you please sit
down? Will you please sit down, for the third time! [Interjections.] No one
stood up when I asked if there was any objection to the motion.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: On a point of order: Where in the Rules does it say that
one has to stand up to object? It does not say so anywhere in the Rules.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Will you please sit
down? I am not going to argue with you about that.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: I would like to ... [Interjections.]
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I think I am still
in the Chair, thank you very much. Will you please sit down!

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: It does not say so in the Rules.

 50th ANNIVERSARY OF THE WOMEN’S MARCH TO UNION BUILDINGS, HUMAN TRAFFICKING
                       AND ABUSE OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Mgcinisihlalo, ngiphakamisa lesishukumiso
lesibhalwe egameni lami lapha ku Oda Phepha kanje:
[Chairperson, I move the draft resolution printed in my name on the Order
Paper, as follows:]

   That the Council -


   (1)      noting -

          a) that 2006 marks the fiftieth anniversary of the 1956 Women’s
             March to the Union Buildings in Pretoria against pass laws
             imposed by the apartheid regime;

          b) that the trafficking of persons has been identified as a
             serious threat to human security and development globally and
             that the effects of human trafficking are manifold;
          c) the 1949 Convention for the Suppression of the Trafficking in
             Persons and the Exploitation or the Prostitution of Others, the
             1979 Convention on the Rights of the Child, the 1979 Convention
             on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
             Women, the 1993 United Nations Declaration on the Elimination
             of Violence Against Women, the 1995 Beijing Declaration and
             Platform for Action, the 2000 Convention Against Transnational
             Organised Crime and the Palermo Protocol;


          d) the regional instruments aimed at eradicating violence against
             women and girl children such as the 1997 Southern African
             Development Community Declaration on Gender and Development,
             the 2002 Protocol to the African Charter on Human and People’s
             Rights on the Rights of Women, the 2004 Solemn Declaration on
             Gender Equality in Africa; and

          e) the lack of regional international instruments specifically
             addressing human trafficking;

   (2)      believing -

          a) that the socioeconomic vulnerability of women and children and
             the lack of a protective legal framework render them prime
             targets for trafficking syndicates, that the prevalence of
             gender inequality facilitates the trafficking of women and girl
             children;

          b) in the need for states to enact national legislation and put in
             place measures to prevent and ultimately eradicate human
             trafficking; and


          c) that states cannot effectively deal with human trafficking in
             isolation but require cross-border co-operation, that Africa is
             not only a region of origin for trafficking in persons, but
             also a transit and destination site, that the majority of women
             and children trafficked in Africa are trafficked in networks,
             some of which are linked to global syndicates; and


   (3)      resolves -

          a) to call upon the Executive to establish an inter-ministerial
             committee on human trafficking to play a strategic and
             coordinating role in South Africa’s efforts to eradicate human
             trafficking;


          b) to call for the urgent tabling of legislation aimed at
             eradicating human trafficking and providing a national
             normative framework to further promote and protect the rights
             of women and children;
          c) to call upon the Executive to initiate an inter-departmental
             response to develop intervention strategies, including access
             to support services, appropriate repatriation and social
             integration programmes for persons who have been trafficked and
             the adequate training of law enforcement and other relevant
             government officials;


          d) to call upon the media, civil society organisations and the
             private sector to collaborate in exposing human trafficking and
             raising awareness in society, including raising awareness
             through the 16 Days of Activism of the No Violence Against
             Women Campaign and other public campaigns and programmes aimed
             at eliminating violence against women;


          e) to call upon the Executive to encourage states to collaborate
             on the prevention of human trafficking, arrest and prosecution
             of offenders and eradication of crime syndicates; and


          f) to call upon the Inter-Parliamentary Union, the Commonwealth
             Parliamentary Association and Pan African Parliament to
             facilitate the introduction of national legislation in all
             member states and coordinate the harmonisation of laws to
             ensure the effective eradication of human trafficking.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I shall now put the
question. The question is that the motion be agreed to. As the decision is
dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first
ascertain whether all the delegation heads are present in the Chamber to
cast their provinces’ votes. Are all the delegation heads present?
[Interjections.] Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71 I shall first allow provinces the opportunity to
make declarations of vote if they so wish. None.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. The delegation heads must please indicate
to the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: Eastern Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Steun. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Mr P MALEFANE: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal elethu. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Mrs H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo steun. [Limpopo supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSONOF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?

Ms J M MASILO: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Steun. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Ms J N WITBOOI: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): All provinces voted
in favour. I therefore declare the motion agreed to in terms of section 65
of the Constitution.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

           2010 FIFA WORLD CUP SOUTH AFRICA SPECIAL MEASURES BILL
        SECOND 2010 FIFA WORLD CUP SOUTH AFRICA SPECIAL MEASURES BILL

               (Consideration of Bills and of reports thereon)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, hon members, what
a privilege to be in this august House this morning!

The Bills facilitate the hosting and staging of the 2010 Fifa World Cup in
South Africa in accordance with the organising association agreement
between Fifa and Safa, and then the guarantees issued by our government to
Fifa.

When Fifa decided in 2001 that the 2010 World Cup should be held on African
soil for the first time, the continent rejoiced, not only for the love of
the game, but also knowing that it would help us to make this a century of
African growth and development. Our government saw in the opportunity to
host the Football World Cup a whole range of benefits for South Africa and
the African continent.

In anticipation of such positive spin-offs, our President dubbed the 2010
World Cup an African World Cup. The notion of an African World Cup captured
the imagination of Fifa, the African countries and our fellow Africans in
the diaspora. The notion of an African World Cup has been well received by
most South Africans, especially our young people.

The 2010 World Cup also brings the unique opportunity to ensure that the
world learns more about the strengths and opportunities of a country and a
continent undergoing far-reaching reconstruction and development. We
believe that hosting 2010 affords us the biggest opportunity to banish Afro-
pessimism.

By hosting the biggest event in the world we’ll go a long way in
strengthening our bond as one nation. It will also boost our image among
the nations of the world. Although we do not intend to replicate Germany in
2006 or compete with the Germans, we firmly believe that the same spirit of
national pride we saw and experienced in Germany can be achieved in South
Africa. This is if we work together with unity of purpose.

In 1996 President Mbeki captured Parliament and the world when he delivered
the speech in which he declared, “I am an African”. That speech is simply
indelible on the mind. “I am an African,” the African Renaissance, Nepad
and the African World Cup of 2010 seem to fit into one another. They give
us as Africans a rare opportunity to look into the President’s logical,
systematic and brilliant mindset.

This characteristic of being an African engenders caring, compassion and
sharing. It gives birth to the model order of empathy, helping others and
having feelings for them. In a nutshell, this is ubuntu, a philosophy of
the collective, of the community as opposed to individualism.

The 2010 Fifa World Cup in South Africa has been marketed to be intended as
an African World Cup, so the preparations for this tournament, its hosting
and long thereafter must bequeath to our people and our nation a legacy
that we can all be proud of.

Hosting the 2010 Fifa World Cup, we believe, provides our government with a
golden opportunity to boost our tourism and sports industries. It will push
our economic development to a higher notch. The tournament will assist us
to address the infrastructural backlogs we have in our roads, our
transport, sports facilities, telecommunication and broadcasting networks.
Our electricity and water needs will increase and the infrastructure will
receive a great boost. In a nutshell, hosting the 2010 World Cup will fast-
track the attainment of some elements of the 2014 Millennium Development
Goals and of Asgisa.
In 2010, 31 countries will converge on South Africa. In terms of languages,
followers of the national teams will exceed the 32 competitors. South
Africa will be the 32nd nation. This affords an immense opportunity for our
young people to learn foreign languages. This, together with the skills
they must be trained in, will improve the skills base of our young people.
It will also expose them to other cultures and teach them to respect
diversity even more.

The 2010 World Cup will help us fight xenophobia and it will help us to
unite the African people. Social services like disaster management, public
health services and safety and security are already advanced, far advanced,
in their plans for 2010. These services will be accessible to our people
before and long after 2010.

I’m articulating some of the issues that our government took into account
when we supported Safa’s bid to host the World Cup in 2010. We were acutely
aware of what the preparations would contribute to our broad plans for
transformation and development. We are also alert to the contribution that
this programme will make towards social cohesion and nation-building. The
challenge for us as South Africans is to make the best of the opportunities
offered by hosting 2010.

Geleenthede gaan veel verder as die aanbied van ’n suksesvolle 2010-Fifa-
wêreldbeker. As regering kyk ons reeds na waar Suid-Afrika in die dekade ná
2010 moet staan. Die aandag van die wêreld is reeds op ons gevestig. As
regering het ons die planne, strategie en strukture om ’n blywende en
volhoubare erfenis te skep en na te laat.

Die vraag is of ons as Suid-Afrikaners verenig is in ons strewe om 2010 ’n
sentrale punt van ons vaderlandsliefde en ons patriotisme te maak, want
patriotisme is mos wanneer ’n mens die belange van die land ’n hartsaak
maak en dan dienooreenkomstig optree. Die vraag is: streef ons almal na
dieselfde eenheidsgevoel van trots wat ons in 1995 gehad het toe die
Springbokke die Rugbywêreldbeker gewen het?

Die vraag is: is ons almal eenparig in ons strewe om 2010 ’n nasionale
doelwit en ’n nasionale sukses te maak? Ek stel hierdie vrae, want elkeen
van ons sal eerlik daarop moet antwoord. Enersyds wil elke goeie Suid-
Afrikaner hê dat Fifa se 2010-sokkertoernooi moet plaasvind en sal alles
moontlik doen om dit wel te laat geskied, maar ongelukkig is daar ook
diegene wat deur allerlei foefies en eierdansery ’n stokkie daarvoor wil
steek. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Ek sê vir hulle, vir daardie eierdansers, hulle moet gereken word saam met
die vyande van ons land. Die tyd het aangebreek dat politieke leiers oor
die spektrum heen uitstyg bó eng partypolitieke belang en hulle
ondersteuners eerder aanmoedig om die geleenthede wat 2010 bied aan te
gryp. Moedig jou mense aan om, byvoorbeeld – ek noem net een voorbeeld -
breë swart ekonomiese bemagtiging te bevorder, aan te help en te skep.
Moenie vrees nie, daar is geleenthede vir ons almal. [Tussenwerpsels.]
President Roosevelt het gesê die grootste ding wat ons moet vrees, is vrees
self. [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The opportunities extend far beyond the hosting of a successful 2010 Fifa
World Cup. As a government we are already looking at where South Africa
should be positioned in the decade following 2010. The world is already
focusing its attention on us. As the government we have the plans,
strategies and structures to create and bequeath a lasting and sustainable
legacy.

The question is whether we, as South Africans, are united in our endeavour
to make 2010 a focal point of our love of country and patriotism, because
patriotism is indeed a matter of one having the interests of the country at
heart and acting accordingly. The question is: Are we all striving toward
the same feeling of unity and pride that we had in 1995 when the Springboks
won the Rugby World Cup?

The question is: Are we all unanimous in our endeavour to make 2010 a
national goal and a national success? I am posing these questions, because
each one of us will have to answer it in an honest way. On the one hand,
every good South African would want the Fifa 2010 soccer tournament to
happen and would do everything possible actually to make it happen, but
unfortunately there are also those who want to put a stop to it through all
kinds of gimmicks and an egg-dance. [Interjections.]

I am saying to them, to those who are doing an egg-dance, that they should
be regarded as enemies of our country. The time has come for political
leaders across the spectrum to rise above narrow party-political interest
and rather encourage their supporters to seize the opportunities that 2010
is offering. For example, encourage your people - I am mentioning only one
example – to promote, support and create broad-based black economic
empowerment. Do not be afraid, there are opportunities for all of us.
[Interjections.] President Roosevelt said: We have nothing to fear but fear
itself. [Interjections.]]

Since June 2004 both Safa and our government have been involved in
discussions on the list of requirements for hosting the World Cup. A number
of departments have been involved in these discussions. As such, these
Bills traverse a number of functions that belong to departments other than
Sport and Recreation.

These Bills are one of the keys to whether or not Fifa should continue
trusting us with their World Cup in 2010. So far Fifa is more than pleased
with our preparations. They are pleased, not as observers; they are pleased
as participants in our local organising committee meetings.
[Interjections.]
One of the objectives of the Bills, in a nutshell, is to empower the
Minister of Trade and Industry to stipulate a date later than one month,
but not later than six months, after the completion or termination of the
2010 Fifa World Cup in South Africa as the date on which the protection of
the 2010 Fifa World Cup in South Africa as a protected event in terms of
section 15A(1) of the Merchandise Marks Act, Act 17 of 1941, ends. This is
very important. I quoted very extensively so that we could hear and
understand what it is that we’re referring to. A second objective is to
suspend certain restrictions regarding marketing, distribution and
consumption of liquor for the duration of the 2010 Fifa World Cup in South
Africa.

A third objective is to facilitate the accreditation of foreign medical
contingents and the approval of permitted medicines, scheduled substances
and permitted medical devices for the purpose of the 2010 Fifa World Cup in
South Africa. A fourth objective is to set out the scope of authority of an
accredited medical foreign contingent. A fifth objective is to suspend
certain restrictions and prohibitions on the sale of unregistered medicines
and on the registration of, and community service by, certain health care
providers in connection with the 2010 Fifa World Cup in South Africa. A
sixth objective is to provide for the promulgation of regulations by the
Minister of Sport and Recreation.

Die borge van 2010 het reeds R2 miljard by Fifa gedeponeer. Dit was nog
voor die afskop in Duitsland. Dis nou die tyd om, soos die borge van 2010,
ons vertroue in die regering, die land en die organiseerders van 2010 te
toon, en om ons energie en ons entoesiasme te deponeer en so te help dat
2010 ’n sukses vir ons almal is. Almal van ons het nou ’n plig om ’n
versoeningsbydrae te lewer tot ons demokrasie. Ek is van oordeel dat sport
in die algemeen, en dan meer spesifiek die 2010-sokkertoernooi, ’n waardige
voertuig is om hierdie belangrike inisiatief ’n hupstoot te gee.

Ek is egter erg bekommerd dat Afrikaanssprekende kinders nie die
geleentheid kry om op skool kennis te maak met sokker nie. Dis die geval
bloot omdat daar nog skoolhoofde is wat dié sportsoort van hulle
skoolterreine uitsluit. Hierdie gesindheid en ingesteldheid impakteer nie
net op die geleenthede wat ons kinders ontneem word nie, dit kortwiek ook
ons transformasieproses.

Ons spreek hierdie leemtes aan in ’n gees van versoening op pad na 2010 en
daarná. Ons koester regtig die hoop dat ons as Suid-Afrikaners die
struikelblokke saam sal oorkom. Dan en dan alleen sal ons as Suid-
Afrikaners saamdrink by die fontein van nasietrots en sal ons ’n eenheid
wees in ons verskeidenheid. [Interjections.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[The sponsors of 2010 have already deposited R2 billion with Fifa. This was
even before the kick-off in Germany. Now is the time, as the sponsors of
2010 did, to demonstrate our confidence in the government, the country and
the organisers of 2010, and to apply our energy and enthusiasm and in this
way contribute to making 2010 a success for all of us. Now we all have an
obligation to make a reconciliatory contribution to our democracy. I am of
the opinion that sport in general, and the 2010 soccer tournament in
particular, is a worthy vehicle to give this significant initiative a
boost.

However, I am seriously concerned that Afrikaans-speaking children are not
being given the opportunity to be introduced to soccer at school. This is
the case merely because there are still school principals who are excluding
this sport from their school grounds. This outlook and attitude not only
impacts on the opportunities that our children are being deprived of, but
also impedes the transformation process.

We are addressing these shortcomings in a spirit of reconciliation on our
way to 2010 and beyond. We really cherish the hope that as South Africans
we will overcome the obstacles together. Then and only then we, as South
Africans, will be able to drink together from the fountain of national
pride and be united in our diversity. [Interjections.]]

The 2010 Fifa World Cup must leave behind a South Africa and an Africa that
are better than what we have now. Both the millennium development goals and
the national development plans must guide what we do, united in our
diversity. Hosting the Fifa World Cup may never again be awarded to South
Africa in the lifetime of most of us who  have to determine the fate of
these Bills.

Let me say, to support these Bills is a legacy in its own right. Let us be
part of that legacy. We cannot fail. Afrika, ke nako! [Africa, it’s time!]
Together, united in our diversity, we shall deliver the best Fifa World Cup
ever in 2010. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B J TOLO: Chairperson, Deputy Minister and colleagues, in 2004 when Fifa
announced that the 2010 World Cup would be held in Africa, and in South
Africa in particular, all the people of our country and indeed of the
continent were united in jubilation. We had a reason to be joyful, for it
is the first time in the 100 years of the existence of this biggest
sporting event, the Fifa Soccer World Cup, that it comes to the African
continent.

This happiness would have been a pipe dream had we not had that epoch-
making event, namely the democratic breakthrough of 1994. There is a
dialectical link between the event we are celebrating and the national
liberation struggle waged relentlessly and selflessly by the ANC and other
liberation forces. We owe it to Tambo, Kotane and others; we owe it to
those women veterans who marched to Pretoria against the pass laws 50 years
ago; and we owe it to those who paid with their lives for us to be jubilant
today, for a World Cup to be held in South Africa four years from today.

For a country to host the Fifa World Cup, it is expected to give certain
guarantees to Fifa that it will hold this event successfully. South Africa
has had to do the same. The Bills before this House represent the legal
framework to give effect to the guarantees that our government has given to
Fifa. They are meant to facilitate the preparation for and the hosting of
the World Cup in 2010, including the Confederations Cup in 2009, which is
generally regarded as a dress rehearsal for the big event.

The 2010 Fifa World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill provides that
the Minister of Sport and Recreation of South Africa should declare certain
venues or stadiums as venues where the World Cup matches will take place.
It is common knowledge that this has already been done by the Minister and
that the host cities have already signed the host city agreements with
Fifa.

The fact that three stadiums are still to be built does not in any way
suggest that we will not be ready. In our interaction with the CEO of the
Local Organising Committee, hon Danny Jordaan, we were left with no doubt
in our minds that these stadiums would be completed by 2008. Work has
already begun in some areas such as Durban.

It is only the prophets of doom who seem not to be happy that our country
will host this event, who doubt that we will be more than ready for it.
[Interjections.] They should know that Germany completed its last stadium a
year before the event, whilst ours will be ready two years before the
event.

In a meeting that was held recently in Mangaung between the host cities and
the Minister for Provincial and Local Government, it was found that some
cities were even ahead of schedule in terms of preparations for this event.
There is no doubt therefore that South Africa will host a successful World
Cup, come 2010, to the disappointment of these doubting Thomases who even
suggested that Fifa is thinking of shifting the World Cup from South Africa
to Australia – “Mama mia!” - to echo Sepp Blatter.

These Bills also facilitate the singing of national anthems and the flying
of recognised national flags of the participating teams, amongst other
things. Experience has shown that if this is not regulated, from time to
time you will find some backward elements flying undesirable flags at a
match.

During the 1995 Rugby World Cup we saw some people who were nostalgic about
the past flying the old apartheid South African flag. That flag opens old
wounds for the majority of the people of this country. The regulations in
this Bill must provide for the removal of these and other undesirable
flags, if these rear their ugly heads at matches that will be played during
that time.

The Second 2010 Fifa World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill is a
section 76 Bill. Among other things, it provides that the Minister of Trade
and Industry should declare the 2010 Fifa World Cup in South Africa a
protected event in terms of the Merchandise Marks Act of 1941. This will
help to prevent ambush marketing prior, during and some time after a match
at a stadium. This means that nobody other than Fifa sponsors will be
allowed to advertise or sell products of any company that is not Fifa-
accredited within the stadium and any other area designated as a Fifa area
at that particular time.

The Bill also allows the Minister of Health to accredit foreign medical
contingents who will be accompanying their teams to bring into the country
medicine and devices that are not registered in the country in terms of
South African legislation, on condition that they will be able to
repatriate such devices and medicine after the event.

My colleagues who will speak after me will refer to other provisions of
these two Bills under consideration today. Suffice it to say that the World
Cup in South Africa will bring many spin-offs to our people. Hon members
will remember that we had the Rugby World Cup and the Cricket World Cup in
this country, but there is no visible legacy that those two World Cups left
for the country. The difference is that those World Cups were dwarfs
compared to the Soccer World Cup.
The Cricket World Cup attracted only about 19 000 foreigners to South
Africa whilst, conservatively, the Soccer World Cup is expected to draw
about 350 000 foreigners, who will stay in this country for the duration of
the World Cup. This presupposes that there will be a boom as far as the
hospitality business is concerned. Our people must position themselves to
be able to tap into this industry.

A study that was commissioned in Mpumalanga recently around Mbombela, which
is one of the host cities, has already indicated that there will be a
shortage of beds in all the hotels and lodges that are found in that
province. We suspect that the same might apply in some of the rural
provinces.

There is a fallacy making the rounds that our people will not be allowed to
sell merchandise and traditional food like pap and wors around the match
venues. Nothing is further from the truth. Outside Fifa-protected areas,
which will not be miles away from the venues, our people can sell anything
they like. In the courtyards, where there will be big screens for thousands
of fans who don’t have tickets, one can sell, drink and eat anything that
is not Fifa-related, such as your beer and Black Label whisky.

Furthermore, the Local Organising Committee has assured us that 90% of the
money that they will receive from Fifa for preparations for this event will
be spent on black and emerging companies. We call upon all black businesses
and aspirant black businesses to take advantage of this situation and
engage the Local Organising Committee for further information so that they
are able to benefit from this.

Only yesterday, I was listening to SAfm and I heard the Minister of
Transport saying that government would roll out billions of rands to
rehabilitate and repair our road infrastructure so that, in 2010, our road
network will be able to cope with the situation. This will inevitably
translate into jobs for our people. The people who will descend on our
shores in 2009-10 will not only be coming to view the soccer matches and
then go away; a sizeable number of them will want to take advantage of the
World Cup and also explore the beauty of our country.

The teams that will participate in the World Cup will also come much
earlier than the beginning of the World Cup to practise and acclimatise
themselves to the conditions here. It is expected that whilst some of them
will be based in South Africa, some will camp in neighbouring countries.
The spin-offs therefore will not accrue to South Africans only but to the
entire region, and indeed the continent, in order to give effect to the
idea that this is an African World Cup.

We call upon those towns and municipalities that are not host cities, and
indeed the Southern African region and beyond, to start to lobby that their
towns become practice venues for countries which will be participating in
the World Cup. Chances are that we may not have another Soccer World Cup in
South Africa after 2010 - in our lifetime anyway, as the Deputy Minister
indicated.

After Germany 2006, the whole world is talking of and preparing itself for
2010 in South Africa. We dare not disappoint the world. Let us work
together as a nation to see to it that the 2010 World Cup is a resounding
success, which will live for many more decades thereafter in our minds. And
the cherry on top will be for the cup to remain in South Africa. I thank
you very much. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order! I have an
announcement to make. We have in our audience here today, on the gallery,
the stand-in vice-chairperson of the government office of Vietnam, Mr
Nguyin Xuan Phuc, and the Minister of Arts and Culture. They are visiting
South Africa on a study tour, and they have done a tour of Parliament. We
welcome you to the city. [Applause.]

Nkk N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Ngiyabonga, Sihlalo. Ngithanda ukubingelela
iSekela likaNgqongqoshe nabo bonke abahlonishwa abakhona. Ngithanda ukusho
ukuthi ngale midlalo ka-2010 yeNdebe yoMhlaba iNingizimu Afrika iphokophele
ukuhlomula, ikakhulukazi kwezenhlalakahle nakwezomnotho. UMongameli wezwe,
umhlonishwa uThabo Mbeki, enkulumweni yakhe kulo nyaka ophezulu wakubeka
kwacaca ukuthi siyisizwe saseNingizimu Afrika. Silindele ukuhlomula
okukhulu. Kungethina kuphela kodwa nezwekazi lase-Afrika.

UMongameli wabuye futhi wanxusa wonke umuntu wakuleli kanye nabaphethe
ezemidlalo ukuthi lemidlalo ka-2010 yenziwe ibe yimpumelelo futhi ibe
yinqophamlando. Kungakho-ke kunalo Mthethosivivinywa obizwa ngokuthi yi-
Second 2010 Fifa World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill kwenzelwa
phela ukuhlela, ukuxhumanisa kanye nokuhola lemidlalo ngokuphumelela
okukhulu okugculisayo. Ngithanda ukusho-ke ukuthi ... (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Thank you, Chairperson. I greet the Deputy
Minister and all hon members present. I want to highlight the fact that
South Africa is looking forward to the benefits of the 2010 World Cup,
particularly in social development and economic growth. The President, hon
Thabo Mbeki, stated clearly in his state of the nation address this year
that we are a South African nation. We are expecting great benefits, not
for us only, but for the entire African continent.

The President also appealed to all South Africans and sports authorities to
make the 2010 World Cup a success and a historic event. That is the reason
why we have this Bill called the Second 2010 Fifa World Cup South Africa
Special Measures Bill, which is intended for the preparation, co-ordination
and effective administration of these games. Therefore, I want to say ...]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order! Hon member,
are you rising on a point of order?

Mr A WATSON: Sorry to interrupt, Madam Chair, but the interpretation is
absolutely inaudible. There are noises that are making it impossible to
follow the speech.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Could I request that
the people see to the sound system please? Thank you. You may continue, hon
member.

Nkk N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Sihlalo, ngithanda ukuphinda inkulumo
eseliyishilo iSekela likaNgoqngqoshe kanye nosihlalo wekomidi ukuthi lo
Mthethosivivinywa unikeza uNgqongqoshe wezoHwebo neziMboni amandla okunquma
isikhathi esingangenyanga ngemuva kokuphela kwemidlalo. Lesi sikhathi
singedluli ezinyangeni eziyisithupha ukuvikela imidlalo ngaphansi kwalo
Mthetho obizwa ngokuthi yi-clause 15(a)(1) of Merchandise Marks Act, Act 17
of 1941.

Lo Mthethosivivinywa ubuye unikeze uNgqongqoshe wezeMpilo amandla okuthi
abe nesiqiniseko sokuthi amakhambi okwelapha angena kuleli ayiwona yini.
Lokhu uzokwenza ngokuthintana nabasingethe ezemithi kuleli kanti futhi
kuzoba khona ukuxhumana ne-Fifa qobo lwayo ekugunyazeni lama khambi.
Ngamanye amazwi kuzocutshungulwa wonke umuntu oqhamuka ngaphandle
osebenzisa noma olawula amkhambi ngandlela thize. Ngakho-ke kuzoba
nesiqiniseko sokuthi iqembu ngalinye linodokotela walo onamakhambi athize
aqondene nabadlali balelo qembu.

Labo dokotela kumbe abahlengikazi bazokwaziswa kuNgqongqoshe wezeMpilo.
Kuzodingeka amagama abo kanye nemaphepha asemthethweni okuhamba abizwa
ngama-passports abo. Lokho kuzodala ukuthi amaqembu ezemidlalo avikeleke
kodokotelambumbulu. Ukuze kube khona ukuvikeleka kwemidlalo noma amaqembu
ekuthikamezeni nanoma yini engase iqhamuke, uhulumeni uzovikela zonke
izithikamezo. UNgqongqoshe wezeMidlalo nezokuNgcebeleka uyena oyothintana
nozakwabo abanjengoNgqongqoshe wezoHwebo neziMboni kanye noNgqongqoshe
wezeMpilo ukuze phela kuxazululeke noma kungayini ethikameza imidlalo.

Mangisho ukuthi osomabhizinisi abasafufusa bayohlomula kule midlalo ka-
2010, ikakhulukazi abesimame bona abazobe bekhangisa ngemisebenzi yabo
yezandla kanye nokudla kwakuleli laseNingizimu Afrika. Ngaleyo ndlela
amathuba emisebenzi ayovela. Iningi labangasebenzi bayothola imisebenzi.
Intsha yethu mayikhuthazwe ukuba ngamavolontiya kule midlalo ka-2010 ngani
ngoba iyozuza isipiliyoni esibalulekile emphakathini, ikakhulukazi
kwezemidlalo. Ngakho-ke wonke umuntu onesifiso sokuvolontiya noma ukwenza
ibhizinisi uvumelekile ukuthintana nohulumeni wasekhaya noma kusiphi
isifundazwe.
Kukithina-ke ukuthi sikhuthaze umphakathi wakuleli ekuphatheni kahle
abavakashi ngaleyo nkathi, futhi babemukele ngokuzithoba ukuze iNingizimu
Afrika yamukeleke kwamanye amazwe angaphandle. UKhongolose uyaweseka lo
Mthethosivivinywa obizwa ngokuthi yi-Second 2010 Fifa World Cup South
Africa Special Measures Bill. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Chairperson, I want to reiterate what the Deputy
Minister and the committee chairperson have said, that this Bill gives the
Minister of Trade and Industry the power to give an extension after the
World Cup tournament of two months, up to not more than six months, for the
protection of the tournament under clause 15(a)(1) of the Merchandise Marks
Act, No 17 of 1941.

This Bill also gives the Minister of Health the power to screen imported
medicines to determine whether they are genuine. The Minister will do this
in consultation with the South African Pharmaceutical Council’s authorities
and there will be consultation with Fifa to obtain authorisation for these
medicines. In other words, everyone who comes from outside the country who
uses or deals in these medicines in any manner will come under scrutiny.
There will be the assurance that each team has its own doctor who is in
possession of certain medicines that will be provided for the players of
that particular team.

These doctors or nurses shall be made known to the Minister of Health.
Their names and passports will be required. These measures will protect
players from fake doctors. In order to ensure the security of the games or
teams against unforeseen obstacles, the government will prevent all
possible impediments. The Minister of Sports and Recreation shall, in
consultation with the Ministers of Health and of Trade and Industry,
prevent anything that might disturb these games.

I must say that emerging businesses will benefit from the 2010 World Cup,
particularly women who will display their crafts and offer South African
food. Therefore, there will be the creation of job opportunities. Our youth
should be encouraged to volunteer for the 2010 World Cup because they will
acquire invaluable experience for their communities, particularly in
sports. Therefore, everyone who wants to volunteer or open a business is
welcome to contact the local government offices in any province.

We should take it upon ourselves to encourage the South African community
to treat visitors with hospitality during that time, and also to treat them
with respect so that South Africa will be respected by international
countries. The ANC supports the Second 2010 Fifa World Cup South Africa
Special Measures Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr O M THETJENG: Hon Chairperson, the 2010 Fifa World Cup is a special
event for all South Africans, as since its inception it has never taken
place in Africa. Despite taking place in South Africa, it remains an
African event. Past Fifa presidents did not have Africa at heart, until
Sepp Blatter took over the reins. He introduced the rotational concept and
this allowed other nations of the world outside Europe an opportunity to
host this event. Africa, in particular South Africa, could have hosted this
event in 2006 instead of Germany, were it not for Charles Dempsey’s fatal
decision to abstain. We need not be reminded of that memory.

South Africa has, in the recent past, hosted other world events such as the
Rugby World Cup and the Cricket World Cup. All these events were
successfully hosted, putting South Africa on the world map once more. We
have been on the world map before, but then these events put us on the map
even more. These events should not blind us and make us complacent. The
Fifa World Cup is a much bigger event, considering that it is watched by
the majority of people worldwide, including in South Africa. These fans
will need a proper transport system and accommodation facilities that are
of world standard.

The DA supports this particular Bill and the hosting of this particular
event because it is for all South Africans. The question is: Will we be
ready? I have great hopes that in terms of stadia construction and
renovation, we will be ready if the right companies with expertise are
contracted to do the job, and not friends and family members.
[Interjections.] We have the capacity in the ... [Interjections.]

The DA is also worried about the transport system. Our transport system is
nowhere near being ready to transport the fans with ease. The entire system
is disintegrating, and this could disappoint the fans a great deal. An
integrated transport system is needed to enable this event to be a success.
The rail system is decaying in front of our eyes, and the relevant Ministry
is failing to maintain what is already available. The infrastructure is
more than 30 years old. [Interjections.] Lately trains have become more
dangerous, because more people have been thrown out of moving trains and
have died.

The other concern that the DA has is increasing crime levels.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order! Are you
rising on a point of order?

Mr R J TAU: Is the member ready to take a question?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Are you ready to
take a question?

Mr O M THETJENG: No.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): No. Will you please
sit down, hon member. You may continue, Mr Thetjeng.

Mr O M THETJENG: The Minister of Police recently acknowledged that there is
a great shortage of bulletproof vests for police officers. This is basic
apparel that each and every police officer should receive on graduation and
which should be replenished thereafter, but this basic need cannot be met.
Women and children are raped and maimed every second in our country. I say
thanks for the conviction and long sentencing of people like Sipho Dube who
behaved like a monster, even in court. Cash-in-transit heists are on the
increase. Our streets are no longer safe because valuables are grabbed at
gunpoint.

The other big concern for the DA is the capability of the Department of
Home Affairs, which will be dealing with the facilitation and issuing of
...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order! Hon Chief
Whip, are you rising on a point of order?

SOSISWEBHUWEMKHANDLU WEMAPROVINSI: Sihlalo, yebo, ngisukuma ngobe ngibona
shangatsi lelunga lelihlon ngeke likhone kuwotsa lomlilo leliwubasako.
Ngiphaka ngobe lelunga seliphambuke kakhulu esipolweni salengcoco yetfu
lesikhuluma ngayo. Lapha sikhuluma ngemdlalo lekufanele usingatfwe livekati
laseNingizimu Afrika nga 2010. Ngempela loku lakukhulumako kuyimbudane nje
lengevakali. (Translation of Siswati paragraph follows.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I rise because I can see that
the hon member will not be able to stand against the tide of flames from
the fire he is igniting. I just want to caution the hon member that his
remarks are out of context. Here we are talking about the international
event that is going to be hosted by our country, South Africa, in 2010.
Clearly, what the member is talking about does not make any sense.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon Chief Whip, that
is not a point of order. You may continue, hon member.

Mr O M THETJENG: The other big concern for the DA is the capability of the
Department of Home Affairs, which will be dealing with the facilitation and
issuing of visas and work permits. Do we have competent staff to carry out
this job? We heard recently how disorganised this department is. Recently,
foreign nationals arrived at the Johannesburg International Airport and
waited for almost 45 minutes for officials to assist them. They left this
port of entry without being helped.

This makes our country vulnerable to drug peddlers that would like to take
advantage of the event for their own gain. All ports of entry must, at all
times, be manned by staff that understand their obligation to the state. I
hope that those who issue identity documents fraudulently in the space of a
few hours to foreign nationals will be flushed out of the system quickly.

The DA supports this Bill as it tries to make the hosting of this big event
easy. The agreements that have been concluded by various departments, with
Safa and with Fifa, are welcome. The Department of Trade and Industry must
ensure that ambush marketing by unauthorised entities is discouraged, and
that appropriate measures are put in place to punish those that violate the
rules.

Host-city agreements concluded with Safa are also critical in ensuring that
the business plans are put in place. This is our event. Let us join hands
and deliver a credible World Cup as a nation. Thank you, Chairperson.

Mr P MALEFANE (Gauteng): Madam Chairperson, Deputy Minister and members,
our democracy is gradually maturing and our transformation agenda is
steadily evolving and bearing fruit. This is hailed by the world as a
miracle that befell our country and its people and it is up to us to ensure
that the hard-won democratic gains brought about by the struggles of our
people are not undermined.

The poor in our country have only one hope for their future, and that is a
developmental state that is committed to protect them from the tyranny of
market forces, which only have regard for those who are economically
advantaged. These are the people who consistently brave any weather
conditions to cast their vote with the hope that their conditions will
improve one day. They wake up every day dreaming that their suffering will
one day be a thing of the past.

They were among those who prayed and wished that South Africa would win the
right to host one of the most prestigious events ever organised in the
world - the World Cup. They did all these things because they hoped that
the World Cup would bring about change in their lives. They also did all
these things because soccer has been their darling sport, even when things
were tough during the dark days of apartheid.

As public representatives we should ensure that their hope and trust in the
new dispensation are not undermined by forces that are only concerned about
their narrow interests. As provinces, we need not undermine the role of the
public in shaping policy and participating in lawmaking processes that
impact on the hard-core values of our democracy as imposed by section 118
of the Constitution.

The NCOP was established to further strengthen public involvement in
lawmaking and policy formulation as well as promote co-operative
governance. The NCOP must assert itself as a reliable and credible
institution that should not be perceived as a rubber stamp or a lap dog of
the executive. As provinces, we need to reclaim our role of influencing
lawmaking at this level and start exercising our powers and
responsibilities.

The recent court judgement against the state on abortion should be a lesson
to all of us that we cannot undermine the provisions of the Constitution
for the sake of convenience. The method of steamrolling and bulldozing
legislation to cover administrative inefficiencies should be done away with
as it makes a mockery of our role of promoting good governance and public
input in lawmaking. We lament this point because provinces are equally to
blame for their mediocre contribution in strengthening the role of the
NCOP. The type of mandates we send, if properly scrutinised, would expose
the way we undermine our influence and our role. One was also surprised
that some provinces can even claim to have subjected this Bill to public
hearings in less than a week.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: (Ms P M Hollander): Hon member, thank
you very much. I think you are going off the point. [Laughter.] We are
discussing the Fifa World Cup South Africa Measures Bill and the Fifa World
Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill. Thank you.

Mr P MALEFANE: Thank you, Chairperson. I thought our mandate was very clear
around the issues that were basically discussed during our consideration of
the Bill.

We also need to agree that as this piece of legislation is intended to
facilitate the hosting of the 2010 Fifa World Cup in South Africa, it also
gives us an opportunity to convene public meetings throughout the country
to separate fact from fiction and provide people with accurate information
for proper planning. What has been emphasised by all and sundry of late is
what people will not be allowed to do during the World Cup rather than what
opportunities exist for them.

As public representatives and lawmakers, we need to work closely on our own
to ensure that we maximise the benefits that will be brought by the World
Cup taking place in our country and continent. This is what even the host
city agreements must address. Fifa has acknowledged that South Africa is a
relatively poor country and it will not be in Fifa’s interest to see a
World Cup event that will not bring any change to the lives of Africans
even after the event.

It is not for us to bother about whether we will get complimentary tickets
to attend the matches, but to ensure that Ma-Mbele, who is a hawker, would
by 2010 have become a well-trained and self-reliant entrepreneur, so that
she can be registered and be part of the hospitality trade that is thriving
and successful. Let us not romanticise the hawking trade by encouraging
people to be perpetual informal traders, with no security and sustainable
benefits. We need to start now to assist them to be organised and be
nurtured to start to practise their trade in a more viable and self-
sufficient way so that they can grow and compete with the best in the
market.

Municipalities are the centres of SMME development and they need to be
supported with resources to achieve that goal. If we talk of stadia that
need to be upgraded and that need to be build, there is no way we can
ignore our own in providing that service. Surely, they will succeed if we
have confidence in them and equally they will fail if we expect them to
build a stadium in less than two years because we want to justify why
multinationals should be prioritised.

We need not behave like the local soccer body, which has never bothered to
produce its own, but most of the time relies on rejects from Europe. They
always fail to walk the talk, hence they will not even stop short of
importing players to come and do duty for us because they believe that you
need to throw money at every problem for it to disappear.

Let us remember that Murray and Roberts started as an SMME, Absa Bank
started as a co-operative and some multimillionaires started as workers. A
country with a small island of the rich surrounded by a sea of poverty will
never be stable and prosperous. Therefore, let’s make this World Cup a
strategic opportunity that will leave an everlasting legacy that will make
the coming generation proud of us and wish to emulate us.

As Gauteng, we begrudgingly support the principle and the detail of the
Bill and trust that the NCOP will put measures in place to ensure that we
advance the objectives of this institution - and as provinces, we reclaim
our ownership of this august House. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnu L SUKA (eMpuma Koloni): Sihlalo ochophele le Ndlu yeBhunga leSizwe
laMaphondo ebekekileyo, Sekela-Mphathiswa weSebe leZemidlalo noLonwabo,
malungu eNdlu yeBhunga leSizwe laMaphondo abekekileyo, zidwesha nani
zidweshakazi, namhlanje kuluvuyo nochulumanco kum xa siza kuxoxa sizathuze
ngeenjongo zokuphumeza lo Mthetho uYilwayo ngezandla ezingenamikhinkqi.
Ndimele eli phondo leMpuma Koloni nje ndifuna ukugxila kwiingongoma
ezimbini okanye ezintathu ezibangela ukuba siwuxhase lo Mthetho uYilwayo.

Okokuqala, kukulungiselela uMphathiswa weZorhwebo neMveliso ukuba amise
usuku emva kwenyanga enye, zingadlulanga ezintandathu luqoshelisiwe
uKhuphiswano lweHlabathi lweFifa eMzantsi Afrika ngowe-2010, njengomhla
wokuphela kokhuseleko loKhuphiswano lweHlabathi ngowama-2010 njengesiganeko
esikhuselweyo ngokwemiqathango yecandelo lo Mthetho i-Merchandise Marks Act
yowe-1941.

Okwesibini, alungiselele ukwamkelwa kweqela loogqirha bamazwe angaphandle
nokuvunyelwa kwamayeza okanye iziyobisi ezityunjiweyo kunye nezinto
zamayeza avunyiweyo. Ewe, siyazi ukuba amaxhwele namagqirha kwakunye
namayeza awo awekho kulo Mthetho. Umzekelo, amanye amazwe adlala ibhola
ekhatywayo anenkolo yokusebenzisa iingcambu zakwaNtu. Apha, lo Mthetho
awusingathanga loo mrhiba.

Njengoko sisazi ukuba abanye abantu, ingakumbi kweli lizwekazi laseAfrika
bakholelwa emagqirheni nasemaxhweleni, uthi ukuba umntu ukhatywe eqatheni
kuthatyathwe umhlabelo omhlophe ukhuphe oko kungcola. Ayikho ke loo nto
apha kulo Mthetho. Kambe siyiMpuma Koloni sinesiphakamiso sokuba
mawuhlonyelwe phaya ngemva phantsi kwesihloko ekuthiwa yimimiselo.

Okwesithathu, achaze ngokucacileyo ubungakanani bamagunya eqela loogqirha
bamazwe angaphandle abamkelweyo. Le nto ke iza kufuna ukuba kubekho
intsebenziswano phakathi kwamasebe karhulumente ingakumbi lawo ajongene
nokuphuma nokungena kwabantu kweli loMzantsi Afrika, esebenzisana
nabaphathiswa abajongene nemida yeli lizwe ukuba kungangeni abantu
ngokungekho mthethweni.

Sihlalo, njengokuba abantu bethu bevakalise ukuwuxhasa lo Mthetho xa
besiwuse kubo siye kuwuvavanya, sifuna nezimvo zabo bathe size sithi kule
Ndlu, lo mdlalo webhola ekhatywayo oza kusingathwa nguMzantsi Afrika
neFifa, uze wohluke kwimidlalo yehlabathi edla ngokusingathwa ngamanye
amahlelo ezemidlalo apha ekhaya. Loo nto ithetha ukuba akufuneki ufane
nomboxo okanye iqakamba. Mawohluke kucace ukuba ngowama-Afrika. Iimpula
zikaLujaca namashishini asakhasayo ze abonelelwe kwiinkqubo zoshishino kuba
zinazo izakhono zokwenza inxalenye yemisebenzi eza kuphuhlisa amakhaya azo.

Okunye, kwicandelo lezemfundo, abafundi bacele uMphathiswa weZemidlalo
ukuba abonisane okanye adlane iindlebe neSebe leZemfundo ngokuba banikwe
iiflegi ukuze kucace ukuba izikolo ziza kuba negalelo kule nkqubo
yezemidlalo yehlabathi izayo ngowe-2010.

Xa kusingathwa le midlalo, abo bangathathi ntweni banomnqweno wokuba
imiboniso bhanyabhanya yebhola ekhatywayo kufuneka igxunyekwe kufuphi
neendawo abahlala kuzo njengoko bengazi kuba namali yaneleyo yakungena
emabaleni emidlalo. Bacele ukuba iikhothi zababukeli noko zingabikho kude
neendawo abahlala kuzo kuba kaloku siyazi ukuba ebaleni lebhola ekhatywayo
kuba kho nabanezipaji ezifumileyo.

Xa ndiza kusithela Sihlalo mandithi, umnqweno wabantu bethu ingakumbi
kwicandelo lokhuseleko nakwelezekhaya kubuka izihlahla zabo ziqine
ekuphatheni uMthetho weli loMzantsi Afrika kwakunye nabo basemagunyeni
ngesakhono esisiso. Siliphondo sikwathi, urhulumente uze nazo izixhobo
ebantwini, okuseleyo ngoku kukuba abantu beloMzantsi Afrika bagqibezele
umsebenzi.

Bathi xa bebhekisa kubadlali bebhola ekhatywayo aBafana Bafana, ewe bona
baqalile ukwenza isiseko kwiiveki ezidlulileyo ngokutywatyusha kwabo
iNamibia kodwa sithi mabangayeki koko mabaqhube bewabetha namanye amaqela.
Elokugqibela Mhlalingaphambili, athi amaXhosa, kukhonkothwa ehambayo.
Ababhulela ecaleni nabanxaxhi beminye imibutho masibayeke bakhonkothe kodwa
urhulumente weli akasoze ayeke ukwenza le nto ifunekayo. Enkosi.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa speech follows.)

[Mr L SUKA (Eastern Cape): Chairperson of the NCOP, Deputy Minister of
Sport and Recreation, hon members of this House, and respected people,
today it is a great pleasure for me to participate while we debate this
Bill with enthusiasm. I am standing here speaking on behalf of the Eastern
Cape province and intend to emphasise two or three points that made us
support this Bill.

Firstly, to empower the Minister of Trade and Industry to stipulate a date
at least a month but no more than six months after the completion or end of
the 2010 Fifa World Cup South Africa as the date on which the protection of
the 2010 Fifa World Cup South Africa as a protected event in terms of
section 15A(1) of the Merchandise Marks Act, 1941(Act No 17 of 1941), ends.

Secondly, to facilitate the accreditation of foreign medical contingents
and the approval of permitted medicines, scheduled substances and permitted
medical devices. We know for a fact that traditional health practitioners
and their medicines are not catered for in this Bill. For example, some
other nations believe in using their traditional medicines when they play
football. This aspect is not provided for in this Bill.

Most African states believe in traditional health practitioners, where
traditional medicines are used for sprains and fractures. The Eastern Cape
province is raising this point for inclusion in this Bill under the section
called regulations.

Thirdly, the description of legal, binding accreditation of foreign doctors
is needed in order to restrain illegal immigration. Consequently, co-
operation between government departments, especially with the immigration
services, to work together with the Minister responsible for borders, is
envisaged in this regard.

Chairperson, this Bill was taken to the public for submissions. Some of the
submissions include that the Fifa World Cup South Africa must be different
from other sports events. This event must be different from rugby and
cricket. The difference must prove that this is Africa. Small businesses
must be given a chance because they have the potential to develop their
homes to the expected standards.

With regard to the education sector, learners are pleading with the
Minister of Sport to work with the Department of Education to provide them
with flags that will indicate that they are part of the Fifa 2010 World
Cup.

The disadvantaged communities wish for the erection of big-screen
televisions near their dwelling places, as they cannot afford tickets for
the stadiums. They ask that the fan courtyards be situated close to their
communities.

Last, but not least, Chairperson, the request of the people to the
Department of Safety and Security and Department of Home Affairs is for
them to sharpen their skills in implementing the laws that govern this
country. This province also says, government has provided the people with
resources therefore people must complete the process.

They are saying to Bafana Bafana that they have started by setting the pace
last week with the triumph over Namibia and they have to keep the spirit
and win all their football matches.

Finally, Chairperson, amaXhosa say, dogs bark at a car that is in motion.
Let the right-wingers and the opposition parties bark as dogs do at a car
in motion, but the government will not stop doing its work. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Hon Chair, hon Minister, and hon members, the undoubted
opportunities and benefits that the 2010 Fifa World Cup will bring to South
Africa and the continent of Africa as a whole are very exciting. The World
Cup, which is watched by billions of people around the world, may be just
the key that Africa needs to finally unlock this undoubted potential.

South Africa is going to be in the spotlight. The whole world will be
watching us. It is therefore imperative that we do everything in our power
and use all the resources at our disposal to make this the best World Cup
that has ever been staged and in the process prove wrong all the people who
do not believe that we can host an event of this magnitude.

We must make this a truly African World Cup with a uniquely African flavour
and style. This Bill before us today is a step in the right direction and
will assist in our quest to stage the best World Cup tournament ever.

We in the IFP are adamant that the benefits and opportunities generated as
a result of this tournament must be shared amongst South Africans in all
parts of our country. We cannot allow a situation to develop where a select
few in the urban areas enjoy all the benefits whilst those less fortunate
in the rural areas and other outlying areas of our country remain
unaffected and do not share in the gains.

A lot of talk has focused on the legacy that the tournament will leave to
the country. But we have to ask: If that is the case, to what extent will
the legacy filter through to the deep rural communities to benefit them in
ways that are meaningful and sustainable, such as basic services and jobs?

We must also ensure that the benefits are sustainable, so that they can be
enjoyed long after the tournament has finished. The year 2010 is not very
far away and there is still an enormous amount of hard work that has to be
done and many obstacles that have to be overcome before we can successfully
host this tournament. We in the IFP believe that with hard work, dedication
and the necessary support we will be ready to successfully host this
tournament in 2010.

Ukuza kwemidlalo ka-2010 eNingizimu Afrika kuyigugu kithina sonke.
Esikulindele ukubona abantu abampofu behlomule nabo emnothweni ozozuzwa.
Abantu abathanda ukubhidlanga kwezohwebo abathole imininingwane yokuthi
yini okufuneka bayenze ukuze bavule amathuba okwandisa izindawo ezamukela
izivakashi kanye nokunye okuyizidingo ezibalulekile okuyodingeka ngo-2010.

Siyabona kuwubunikiniki kwakhiwa yonke indawo: amahhotela nezinkundla
ohlangothini lwezemidlalo, imigwaqo iyanwetshwa nokunye nokunye.
Akucatshangelwe wonke umuntu ofuna ukubamba iqhaza ngo-2010 sibe
umfelandawonye ngempela. Impumelelo kuyoba ngeyethu sonke. Sihlalo,
ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The coming of the 2010 World Cup to South Africa is treasure for all of
us. We expect to see disadvantaged people also benefiting from the
financial gains to be won. People closely involved in the trade business
need to get details of what is expected of them so as to open up
opportunities for more bed and breakfast establishments and meet other
relevant needs that might be necessary for 2010.

We can see construction is taking place everywhere: hotels, stadia as
regards sport, the extension of roads and so forth. Consideration should be
given to all those interested in taking part in 2010 and we will be truly
united. Success will belong to all of us. Chairperson,thank you.
[Applause.]]

Kgosi S G THOBEJANE (Limpopo): Chairperson and hon members, we in Limpopo
are very honoured to be part of this developing South Africa that we are
building. We indeed acknowledge the challenge that will come along with the
2010 World Cup. As a host, South Africa needs to make sure that we are
ready more than ever before.

We want to say, on behalf of the people of Limpopo, who have moved
throughout in an effort to implement what the Constitution required us to
do, that we have given everybody an opportunity to go through that
particular piece of legislation. The result is as follows: The people of
Limpopo support the 2010 Special Measures Bill to create an environment
conducive to hosting this particular 2010 event.

However, the people of Limpopo have identified certain snags within that
particular Bill, which says provinces, together with municipalities, are
key to that particular 2010 event, but the Bill itself does not mention the
MECs. What role should the MECs be playing? Therefore, the people say we
should consider looking into what specific roles we are giving the MECs so
that it is not only the Minister who has a role, but also our MECs, who are
going to be closer to the cities that are hosting this particular event.

Over and above that, the Bill says this and that should not happen, but it
does not indicate what measures should be applied in the case of
violations.

Generally, 2010 will come with a variety of challenges. We have said that
the 2010 World Cup in South Africa is not only for South Africa, but also
for Africa. We should therefore create an environment that will enable
South Africa to continuously manage and control the influx of people who
will be coming from Africa as part of the family of South Africa.
Therefore, we need to make sure that we work very hard as we continue to
finalise the preparations to ensure that other Bills follow so that we
contain those particular challenges that make things go wrong.

We are aware that obviously there will be some kingpins of crimes in the
world who will come to South Africa. Again, we need to make sure that we
create an environment that will ensure that they don’t do as they wish.
South Africa is a country that adheres to the rule of law. We don’t run
South Africa like other countries, where they do as they wish.

So, we must make sure that our laws clearly continue to enable us, with
Fifa, to manage the influx of people to South Africa. That alone indicates
that the challenge that comes with 2010 is still huge. We need to work
together as South Africans, as people in the world, and make sure that we
reach 2010 a better nation than we were yesterday. Limpopo supports this
particular Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S N SKHOSANA (Mpumalanga): Hon Chair, hon Deputy Minister of Sport and
Recreation, hon members of the NCOP, and colleagues from other
legislatures, good morning.

The challenges that come with these huge international tasks include the
commemoration strategy for the event, which should form part of the
countervailing measures needed to respond to the nurturing of pessimism
that pushes its own cause. Those who are negative about our capabilities to
host must choose whether they are with us or against us, and openly declare
their allegiances. Patriotic South Africans will work together to make this
World Cup an unforgettable experience for our visitors and citizens.

This event serves as a catalyst for our National Reconstruction and
Development Programme and provides a fertile ground for our African agenda
to claim the 21st Century as an African Century. The 2010 Fifa World Cup
South Africa, in accordance with the Organising Association Agreement, put
the SA Football Association in the spotlight, and demands from them to take
these measures that the Bill advocates, and other regulatory measures that
might be promulgated, into account when performing their task with due co-
operation.

The Second 2010 Fifa World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill has come
at a time when our country and continent are united and confident about the
historic task to host and stage a football tournament. The Bill serves as a
firm political gesture of the people of the country and the continent’s
commitment to do everything in our power to stage an event that will set
the record straight on who we are and what we are capable of.

The Bill goes a long way in creating, over the next four years, a strategic
legislative framework to successfully manage an intensity that is unlikely
to repeat itself for decades.

We in the province of Mpumalanga are delighted to see the political
decisiveness of the Minister of Sport and Recreation to introduce these
special measures today.

As part of our contribution, the following milestones have been recorded
thus far. Technical and political committees are in operation and a series
of constructive meetings have taken place over the past two months. A
consultative workshop, inclusive of all stakeholders, business, labour,
government and other interested parties was held in Malelane, and gave
valuable input into the development of the 2010 implementation and
masterplan.

Strong relationships are continuously being built with the National 2010
Director-General’s office and the local organising committee on the one
hand, and the host city of Mbombela on the other.

The master plan that is to be finalised within two weeks will facilitate
the delivery of the eight critical success factors, ie safety and security;
disaster management and health; economic development; funding; stadium and
related infrastructure; infrastructure development; information
communication technology, and sport legacy projects. This will ensure that
all the strategic actors playing a vital role in ensuring the success of
the 2010 event are integrated.

Whilst we have hosted events of international magnitude in the past as a
country, the commitment and responsibilities that are bestowed on us this
time require that we convey a single message to organising structures that
this is an African dream, aimed at nation-building, regional integration
and continental solidarity. This compels all South Africans to mobilise to
work together to ensure that the organisation of the event goes smoothly
and on schedule to see the economic opportunities that come with the
expected interventions that this Bill empowers the Departments of Trade and
Industry and of Sport and Recreation to promulgate.

In conclusion, hon Chair and members, the Mpumalanga provincial legislature
supports and votes in favour of the Second 2010 Fifa World Cup South Africa
Special Measures Bill. Hon Chair, I thank the legislature for having
accorded me the opportunity to take part in this debate on what, 350 years
ago, was an impossible dream for Africa. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms J WITBOOI (Western Cape): Chairperson, Deputy Minister of Sport and
Recreation and members, the passing of this Bill is like the referee
blowing the whistle to kick off the opening match at the World Cup; if I
may use a soccer metaphor. The game is underway and right now South Africa
has a position as it moves up the field towards the goal. But it is so
early in the tournament; we are still in the group stages. We face a number
of tough challenges, each of which needs to be tackled appropriately.

As South Africans, we need to ensure that the legacy of the World Cup is
uplifting, something that our people will be proud of, and not a burden to
us. It is our responsibility to ensure this, but we will meet and deal with
those challenges. To win the World Cup you need to face the strongest
opponents.

It is through the World Cup that we can address other issues facing our
society as well. Issues of redress and transformation, issues of nation-
building, issues of levelling the playing field in South Africa and issues
of fair play.

Ambush marketing is the business equivalent of a tackle from behind.
Companies spend lots of money to support the Fifa World Cup and other
businesses try to capitalise on the event. They either imply that they are
associated with the World Cup and sponsor it or they try to gain exposure
for their products using World Cup portals. Both these forms of ambush
marketing have been given the red card by this Bill.

It is amazing how the World Cup chances of certain countries depend solely
on one player’s medical condition. And when a player is tackled from behind
on the field of play, he would surely like to be treated by a medical
practitioner or doctor of his own country. It should be someone who can
speak his language, who has actually worked with him before and knows his
medical history, and can make the best medical decision at the time.

The medical practitioners are thus part of the team. And the Bill, by
allowing the foreign medical contingent limited and controlled access into
the country and by lifting the suspension on certain medicines and medical
devices, allows the team to operate in conditions known to their home
country.

The Western Cape province was, on two occasions, briefed by Sport and
Recreation SA regarding the contents of section 76 of the Bill, regarding
which members of the standing committee raised their concerns and also
requested additional information. One of the concerns was the monitoring of
all foreign medicine to be taken out of South Africa after the World Cup.
The Western Cape had public participation in respect of the Bill, after
which we sent our final mandate as a province to the NCOP. The Western Cape
supports the Bill. Thank you. [Laughter.]

Ms L SHABALALA (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, Deputy Minister and hon
members, it is an honour for KZN to be part of this historic moment. As
KZN, we had public hearings and we are privileged to say to you that we had
the feel of the people’s power in defining, shaping and directing our
political conscience to the fact that we still represent the interests of
the people. For them, they have already realised that a better life has
come.

I wish to highlight elements of the Bill, which declares part of the area
around the stadium as a traffic-free zone. This could never have been more
relevant to our country given our past experience with the Ellis Park
disaster where innocent lives were lost.
I am pleased to be a member of the ANC, which led the process of
reconciliation and a revolutionary international relations policy. There
would have been the issue of to whom and how visas and visitors permits
should be issued, and how many terror attacks from within and outside we
anticipate as a country, if we had not had stability in this country,
thanks to the ANC.

We are proud, as a country, that we are not counting and emptying babies
bottles when people land at our airports, because of terror attacks. Our
country has reached the point of no return in terms of reconstruction, in
terms of all the changes that we anticipated. We will go a long way to
showcase South Africa and Africa as a whole. Let me quote Shakespeare in
Julius Caesar:

There is a tide in the affairs of man, which
taken at the flood, leads on to fortune;
Omitted, all the voyage of their life
is ever bound in shallows and in miseries;
On such full sea are we now afloat, and we must take the current when it
serves or lose our ventures.

The issue of the Host City Agreement comes with sociopolitical challenges.
However, we will not look backward, we need to forge ahead. None of us will
agree with all aspects. Sometimes in practice, it will not be in the
interest of the motive forces. However, we will face the challenge as we
have faced apartheid. We shall, as the President has declared, be part of
the age of hope.

The issue of trading was raised sharply by our people, whose ambition it is
to make a profit during the 2010 Fifa World Cup. It becomes critical for
our people to know that Fifa has its own sales agreement with its chosen
merchandise, but the balance lies in the fact that only three million
tickets will be issued. One million will be sold to the South Africans and
most activities will take place outside the stadia, which means most of our
communities will be able to participate economically in this event.

Our people are still being greeted by and initiated to new business terms,
such as “ambush marketing”. We are used to selling in the streets, but as a
country and the larger community, we are learning.

It is really shocking that as a country and as the leadership of the
country, we are still facing critics who are casting aspersions on the
trips made by the Premier of KwaZulu-Natal and the Members of the Cabinet
to Germany. With all the other professional disciplines, comes the
practical. How do you host such a historic tournament without personal
practical experience?

Of course, we have learnt that the DA is to blame. They are all suspicious
of how we do things and think we will fail. Surely, you can’t gain the
experience without spending money. Or is it a given that we are expected to
fail as every other black government has? No, we will not fail, as our
valleys, climate, sense of humour, culture and natural resources have never
failed all the tourists who have visited our shores.

KwaZulu-Natal supports the 2010 Fifa World Cup South Africa Special
Measures Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Order! Hon members, on your behalf I
want to acknowledge a group of learners and educators in our public
gallery; and in the same vein say that there would have been no better time
for our learners to be present in this august House than today, when South
Africa is passing one of the critical milestones towards the 2010 Fifa
World Cup. You are welcome. [Applause.]

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, hon members and our visitors on the gallery,
the hosting and staging of the Fifa 2010 World Cup in South Africa requires
our country to provide a range of guarantees to host a successful World
Cup. These guarantees follow the submission of an economic and social
impact assessment report to our government. This assessment report precedes
any consideration of support for the 2010 bid. It includes a diverse range
of stakeholders.

When the Fifa executive decided that the World Cup should be held in
Africa, and South Africa should host the 2010 World Cup, it took into
consideration our logistical and financial capacity to discharge this
obligation. Moreover, it sought to convince the world that the African
Renaissance is indeed a reality.

As South Africans and the ANC, we have, with the dawn of democracy in 1994,
created the basis for the confidence the world is showing in us. And now,
as in 1994, our ANC-led government will ensure that 2010 will contribute to
realising the strategic objectives of a developmental state.

Therefore, the 2010 Fifa World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill gives
effect to measures, and might I add, extraordinary measures, to realise the
objectives of an extraordinary event. Not that such extraordinary events
are anything new to us. But then again, as South Africans, we have become
globally known as an extraordinary people.

The central tenets of the Bill seek to empower the Minister of Sport and
Recreation, and by extension our democratically elected government, to
facilitate the hosting and staging of the 2010 Fifa World Cup in South
Africa, in accordance with the Organising Association Agreement between
Fifa and Safa and guarantees issued by our country to Fifa.

Because of the sheer gravity of the event, it is critical that as a country
we ensure political accountability, hence the powers given to the Minister
in this regard. One such power is enshrined in section 2(1), which ensures
that the Minister must declare, by notice in the Gazette, a stadium or
venue or stadiums or venues recognised for the purpose of the event upon
written confirmation by the Local Organising Committee.

Furthermore, and subject also to this confirmation by the Local Organising
Committee, these venues and stadiums have been identified and selected to
host one or two matches under the auspices of the 2010 Fifa World Cup. Yes,
among other things, the Bill seeks to clarify all necessary requirements,
both technical and academic, for example, the seating for spectators, its
demarcation in terms of an enclosed or semi-enclosed, temporary or
permanent building structure, etc.

One of the scenes that left most of us as a television audience with lumps
in our throat during the recent World Cup in Germany, was certainly the
pride and vigour with which supporters of the various countries sang their
anthems before matches and the unbridled display of the colours of the
nations competing.

Whether it was paint on the faces of the fans and spectators or replicas of
flags and other regalia, it was indeed something to savour. Moreover, what
struck me more than anything was the respect afforded to the individual
countries during the singing and playing of the anthems.
In this regard we are happy with the provision that ensures the right of
all countries that will qualify and come here to display their flags and
sing their anthems without fear of intimidation and provocation. If there
were to be intimidation of any kind, we would believe it should be in the
display of skill, ability and technique on the playing field. We therefore
welcome the penalties as outlined in the Bill for such offences.

In terms of the visas, visitors’ permits, work permits and business
permits, the Bill is very clear. No person or persons unscrupulous
intentions and sinister activities will be allowed in the country. As South
Africans we have become a favourite destination for millions of tourists.
As much as we enjoy that status, we have to sustain it.

However, suffice it to say that complacency by officials within the
Department of Home Affairs will not be tolerated, let alone the threat of
corruption, since this event will certainly re-emphasise the sheer weight
of the dollar. We want to therefore encourage contingency and
anticorruption measures as a matter of urgency.

Our current measures are, by admission of our Minister of Home Affairs,
clearly not sufficient to prevent corrupt activities. So, the message
should go out to every official that as the ANC-led government, we are
indeed highly vigilant. And as the National Council of Provinces we wish to
assure the Minister of our unstinting support in this regard.

As is the case with events of this magnitude globally, the phenomenon of
psyched up fans presents its own challenges. And once we have managed this
successfully the battle is half won. From what we have witnessed through
media images, we are certainly facing Herculean tasks in terms of crowd
control, unruly behaviour - some call it hooliganism - etc. Yes,
communicating our control and safety measures will present its own
challenges, given the diversity of languages we will encounter.

I also think that the hundreds of thousands of fans who will definitely
come to our shores will do so with reverence. So, it would be invidious of
us to prejudge and label visiting fans.

In terms of section 7 of the Bill, traffic-free zones are envisaged in
certain areas, with the concomitant provisions for prevention and
penalties. We endorse and support these provisions although we are also
mindful of the fact that football fans would be travelling largely by bus
and public transport and perhaps on foot, etc. Experience and research in
cities where previous World Cups were held prove this point. However, it
does not mean that we should be complacent because we should be prepared
for any eventuality.

Laasgenoemde moet natuurlik ook gesien word teen die agtergrond van die
huidige chaotiese situasie, wanneer ons topspanne teen mekaar opweeg en
toeskouers hulle motors myle van die betrokke stadiums af moet parkeer. Dit
is bo en behalwe die aandeel van die openbare vervoersektor aan die
daaglikse chaos in veral ons stedelike gebiede. Ons sal dus beslis krities
en progressief in visie hieromtrent moet wees. In soverre die ANC kon
vasstel wat betref ons eie navorsing en prognose, is vervoer ’n kardinale
uitdaging.

Kortliks, rakende die bepaling vervat in artikel 8, soos ons  almal  behoort
te weet, is daar tans verskeie individue, organisasies, gesiglose  bewegings
in ons land, op ons kontinent en selfs  transkontinentaal  met  agendas,  en
wat hulle visiere gestel het  om  wanorde  te  saai.  Hierdie  wanorde  gaan
gewoonlik gepaard met uiters gesofistikeerde beplanning  en  metodes.  Enige
wetgewende voorsiening om hierdie tipe modus operandi  hok  te  slaan,  moet
verwelkom word. Hierdie artikel word  dus  ook  verwelkom.  (Translation  of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The latter should, of course, also be viewed against the background of  the
current chaotic situation, when two of our  top  teams  are  pitted  against
each other and spectators must park their cars miles away from the  relevant
stadium. This is over and above the role that the  public  transport  sector
plays in the daily chaos, especially in our urban areas. We  will  therefore
definitely need to be critical and progressive in our vision about this.  As
far as the  ANC  could  establish  with  regard  to  our  own  research  and
prognosis, transport is a cardinal challenge.

In short, as regards the provision contained in section 8, as everybody
should know, there are currently a variety of individuals, organisations,
and faceless movements in our country, on our continent and even
transcontinentally, with their own agendas, that have set their sights on
spreading anarchy. Highly sophisticated planning and methods usually go
hand in hand with this anarchy. Any legislative provision that can curb
this type of modus operandi must be welcomed. This section is therefore
also welcomed.]

In conclusion, as the ANC, we are indeed secure in the knowledge that our
government is putting in place the required instruments to send out a
message of confidence to the global community. Hence the provision in
section 9 of the Bill to empower the Minister to make regulations regarding
any incidental administrative matter that is necessary to ensure proper
implementation once the Bill becomes law. We welcome this.

We are therefore calling on our people to demonstrate in no uncertain terms
why we got the vote of confidence, because ultimately 2010 is about the
African Renaissance in general and South Africans in particular. Let the
games begin. Amandla!

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, I want to thank
all the members for their positive contribution, with the exception of one
or two, which we will address.

I just want to say to the hon Sulliman that the thing that impressed me
most when I watched the Fifa World Cup being played in Germany was the
pledge against racism that was undertaken. As a country and as a people, we
have to say that coming from the past that we come from, having the
knowledge that we have today, that is one of the legacies that we must
strive vigilantly to leave – to rout out racism in any form in our country.
Therefore, that was one of the things that really impressed me the most
when I saw it.

It demonstrates that sport is a vehicle for development; it’s a vehicle for
peace and peacekeeping and peace-building. It has no language; it speaks to
everybody. We are looking forward to hosting this event.

I also want to say to the hon Sulliman that, with regard to the National
Youth Service Programme, we are budgeting specifically to make sure that we
train and skill volunteers and specific youngsters to make sure that we
have the volunteers available for our foreign guests coming into the
country, to make sure that we know how to do crowd control, and that we
send people back home with a much more positive message than the one they
got before they came here.

Afford me the opportunity to also thank the Leader of Government Business,
the whippery, the Chair of the National Council of Provinces, and the chair
and members of the select committee, and hon members for their support for
this Bill. It is yet another of the milestones we have reached ahead of
schedule, yet again, en route and on the march to deliver a wonderful 2010.

The chair made reference to people that may be tempted, in 2010, to go to a
stadium with the old flag, which is of some historic value in this country.
May I say – I am not challenging people; I am just making a comment – that
if a person is so short-sighted at that time as to take that flag to a
particular stadium, they must not expect the police to protect them,
because I’m convinced that the spectators will deal with them long before
they enter the stadium. Let’s hope that by that time we will not have
people who still have sentiments towards the old flag. Let’s hope we will
be united in our diversity, and we will fly the flag of this wonderful free
democratic country of ours.

I just want to say to the hon Vilakazi of the IFP that the Department of
Tourism and the Department of Trade and Industry will be publishing the
possibilities. We are doing the analysis in terms of the sustainability of
development and the opportunities, and it will be published very shortly.

I did say in my opening remarks that that is the whole drive we have as a
government – to make sure that 2010 contributes to our achieving and
attaining the Millennium Development Goals, and that we achieve what we say
we want to achieve through the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for
South Africa, and Asgisa’s shared economic growth. It means the people of
the country must share. That’s also in line with the Freedom Charter. We
are absolutely committed to that, but thank you for your input. We have
taken note of that.

May I just say to the hon Kgosi Thobejane from Limpopo that there is other
legislation in place. This is the 2010 Special Measures Bill to translate
the 17 guarantees which government provided. There is other legislation in
place to provide for the penalties that you said were omitted in this Bill.

I just want to say to the hon Shabalala from KwaZulu-Natal that, yes, it is
precisely because we want to prevent the disastrous reoccurrence of the
tragedy we had at a soccer match at Ellis Park.

You may recall that the hon President appointed Judge Ngoepe and the Ngoepe
Commission to come up with a report. Flowing from that, we will be bringing
to this House also, very shortly, legislation, which will deal with the
safety measures in terms of security at stadiums. It is far advanced in its
drafting. We are in the consultation process. So, hopefully, we will be
able to yet again put another first in the world on the books; something
that will make our people feel comfortable.

Before I end, I have to address the hon Thetjeng. I can’t see where he is
now. [Interjections.] I’m sorry, but let me say that I trust that the hon
Thetjeng is a new member. I see two members of the DA here – the hon Watson
and the hon le Roux. I trust they will inform the hon young member that
common courtesy has it that if you take part in a debate in which you make
a lot of statements, and you are not going to be present at the time of the
reply, you send a note to the speaker asking to be excused because you
won’t be there. I did not get that note, but I have to deal with what he
was saying this morning.

This is a notion that I have picked up in the country wherever I go. A
certain political party is saying that it is supporting this because the
spin-offs are wonderful, it is beautiful, but they speak with two tongues.
On the one hand, they will say ``We welcome the Bill’’, and we thank them
for their support. ``We vote for the Bill; we want to be part of the
positive spin-offs of the Bill’’.
Then they come and say: No, you won’t be ready in terms of transport. No,
safety and security won’t be ready. This morning, the hon Thetjeng started
naming the stadiums that would more or less be ready or not ready, and went
on right through to medicine. He started with crime, and he ended up with –
I wrote it down here – transport, and safety and security. We won’t be
ready on these. On health services also, and we can carry on.

Let me just say this: We hosted the Rugby World Cup in 1995. We hosted the
Cricket World Cup. We hosted the World Summit on Sustainable Development.
You know what, Chair, tomorrow, God willing, in Pretoria, at Loftus
Versfeld, the Springboks will play. The stadium will be packed with over 60
000 people. They will get there safely. They will leave there safely. What
is wrong with that? [Applause.]

Do we know how many rugby, soccer and cricket matches are taking place on a
weekly basis? Every single weekend in this country - whether you are in
Mangaung in Bloemfontein or in Ellis Park in Johannesburg or whether you
are in Port Elizabeth in the Nelson Mandela Metro - the people go there.
They park their cars; they go into the stadium; they watch the game, and
they go home. If you go to FNB in Soweto, the people go there – 90 000 or
100 000 of them.

In fact, you know what, hon Tolo, we should invite the DA to attend a rally
of the ANC at FNB. [Interjections.] They will then see how many people we
transport in there safely, and we transport them out safely.

So, what is this whole hype about? It has to do with the attitude. We have
to address the attitude. Unless we address the attitude and say ``You are
wrong; you are out of order; it’s not patriotic to say those things,
because we are delivering’’, we will be failing our people.

Let me just conclude by saying this: All 17 guarantees of this government
have been translated into a risk analysis. We didn’t wake up one morning
and say, ``Oh, by the way, we have now won the Fifa World Cup bid. What are
we going to do?’’ No, we are a decade ahead. We are already planning for
the 10 years and 15 years after 2010. We have translated those guarantees.
We know what the risks are. We know what it is that we have to deliver, and
on time. We understand and we know the timeframes.

Let me conclude by saying this: Like the sponsors who showed their positive
support and who displayed their confidence by depositing more money already
for 2010 in South Africa than they deposited before the kick-off for the
entire Germany 2006 World Cup there, I am as confident as some of the
members I heard this morning that this government and the people of this
country, united in our diversity, will deliver something the world has
never seen: A truly African World Cup. We will send people back with one
thing: They will have experienced ubuntu. They will come back to experience
it again. May God bless us all. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I shall now put the question in
respect of the first Order. The question is that the Bill be agreed to. In
accordance with Rule 63, I shall first allow political parties to make
their declarations of vote, if they so wish.

Is there any political party that wants to make a declaration of vote?
There is none. We shall now proceed to voting on the question. Those in
favour say ``Aye’’.

HON MEMBERS: Aye!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Those against, say ``No’’.

HON MEMBERS: No!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I think the ``ayes’’ have it.

The majority of members have voted in favour. I therefore declare the Bill
agreed to.

2010 FIFA World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill agreed to in
accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): We shall now proceed to the next
Order. I shall now put the question in respect of the Second Order. The
question is that the Bill be agreed to.

As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the
Chamber to cast their province’s vote, and I am quite certain that everyone
is here.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make declarations of vote if they so wish. It seems there is no province
that wants to make a declaration.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order. I will call on provinces by name to indicate whether
they are in favour of or against the Bill. Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: Eastern Cape is in favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Vrystaat steun. [Free State supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal is in favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Re a tega. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Ra dumelana. [We agree.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): North West?

Rev P MOATSHE: Ke a rona. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Western Cape?

Ms J N WITBOOI: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): All nine provinces voted in favour.
I therefore declare the Bill agreed to.

Second 2010 FIFA World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill agreed to in
accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Before I conclude, I was asked by
the hon Chief Whip of the National Council of Provinces to inform members
of the Joint Monitoring Committee on the Quality of Life and Status of
Women to remain in the Chamber.

The Council adjourned at 11:21.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                         WEDNESDAY,  23 AUGUST 2006


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Labour

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Insurance Sector Education
        and Training Authority (Inseta) for 2005-2006, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006
        [RP 77-2006].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Banking Sector Education and
        Training Authority (Bank-Seta) for 2005-2006, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006
        [RP 67-2006].


     c) Report and Financial Statements of the Tourism, Hospitality and
        Sport Education and Training Authority (Theta) for 2005-2006,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 87-2006].

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     a) Government Notice No R853 published in Government Gazette No 27946
        dated 2 September 2005: Standards Matters in terms of the Standards
        Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


     b) Government Notice No R854 published in Government Gazette No 27947
        dated 2 September 2005: Withdrawal and replacement of the
        compulsory specification for motor vehicles of category N2/3, in
        terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


     c) Government Notice No R855 published in Government Gazette No 27947
        dated 2 September 2005: Withdrawal and replacement of the
        compulsory specification for motor vehicles of category M2/3, in
        terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


     d) Government Notice No R856 published in Government Gazette No 27947
        dated 2 September 2005: Withdrawal and replacement of the
        compulsory specification for motor vehicles of category M1, in
        terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


     e) Government Notice No R857 published in Government Gazette No 27947
        dated 2 September 2005: Withdrawal and replacement of the
        compulsory specification for motor vehicles of category N1, in
        terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


     f) Government Notice No R915 published in Government Gazette No 28039
        dated 23 September 2005: Incorporation of an external company as a
        company in the Republic of South Africa: Paddington Limited, in
        terms of the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of 1973).


     g) Government Notice No R916 published in Government Gazette No 28039
        dated 23 September 2005: Incorporation of an external company as a
        company in the Republic of South Africa: Kasvel Limited, in terms
        of the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of 1973).


     h) Government Notice No R.397 published in Government Gazette No 28767
        dated 28 April 2006: International Trade and Administration
        Commission of South Africa: Tariff investigations: Regulations, in
        terms of the International Trade Administration Act, 2002 (Act No
        71 of 2002).


     i) Proclamation No 22 published in Government Gazette No 28824 dated
        11 May 2006: Commencement of the National Credit Act, 2005 (Act No
        34 of 2005).


     j) Government Notice No R.489 published in Government Gazette No 28864
        dated 31 May 2006: Regulations made in terms of the National Credit
        Act, 2005 (Act No 34 of 2005).


     k) Government Notice No R.517 published in Government Gazette No 28894
        dated 1 June 2006: Establishments of Collecting Societies in the
        Music Industry, in terms of the Copyright Act, 1978 (Act No 98 of
        1978).


     l) Government Notice No R.477 published in Government Gazette No 28848
        dated 2 June 2006: Regulations: Payment of levy and the issue of
        sales permits with regard to compulsory specifications: Amendment,
        in terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


     m) Government Notice No R.478 published in Government Gazette No 28848
        dated 2 June 2006: Regulations: Payment of levy and the issue of
        sales permits with regard to compulsory specifications: Amendment,
        in terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


     n) Government Notice No R.479 published in Government Gazette No 28848
        dated 2 June 2006: Regulations: Payment of levy and the issue of
        sales permits with regard to compulsory specifications: Amendment,
        in terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


     o) Government Notice No R.599 published in Government Gazette No 28924
        dated 15 June 2006: Exemption from the provisions of sections
        143(2): WPP Group PLC, in terms of the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No
        61 of 1973).


     p) Government Notice No R.654 published in Government Gazette No 28976
        dated 7 July 2006: International Trade Administration Commission of
        South Africa, in terms of the International Trade Administration
        Act, 2002 (Act No 71 of 2002).



National Council of Provinces


1.    The Chairperson

    (a)     Report of the 37th CPA Africa Region Conference held in Accra,
        Ghana from 28 July – 5 August 2006.


        Copies of the Report are available from the office of the Clerk of
        the Papers.




COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Council of Provinces



 1. Report of the Select Committee on Education and Recreation on the 2010
    FIFA World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill [B 13B - 2006]
    (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 23 August 2006:


        The Select Committee on Education and Recreation having considered
        the subject of the 2010 FIFA World Cup South Africa Special Measures
        Bill [B 13B - 2006] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it,
        reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


 2. Report of the Select Committee on Education and Recreation on the Second
    2010 FIFA World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill [B 16B - 2006]
    (National Assembly - sec 76), dated 23 August 2006:


        The Select Committee on Education and Recreation having considered
        the subject of the Second 2010 FIFA World Cup South Africa Special
        Measures Bill [B 16B-2006] (National Assembly - sec 76), referred
        to it, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


                          THURSDAY, 24 AUGUST 2006


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     South African Representatives’ Report on the Fourth Session  of
        the Pan-African Parliament (PAP) Gallagher Estate,  Midrand,  South
        Africa, 21 November – 2 December 2005:

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - T060824E-insert – PAGES 1819 - 1849

    (b)     Draft Notice and Schedule in terms of section 2(4) of the Judges
        Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Act, 2001 (Act No 47 of
        2001), determining the rate at which salaries are payable to
        Constitutional Court judges and judges annually, with effect from 1
        April 2006, for approval by Parliament.


    (c)     Draft Notice and Schedule in terms of section 12(3) of the
        Magistrates’ Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993), determining the rate at
        which salaries are payable to magistrates annually, with effect
        from 1 April 2006, for approval by Parliament.
        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
        Development for consideration and report.

2.    Minister of Public Enterprises

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Transnet Limited for 2005-
        2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements for 2005-2006.



                           FRIDAY, 25 AUGUST 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Social Development


         On request of the Minister the following Bill was introduced by the
         Select Committee on Social Services in the National Council of
         Provinces:


          a) Children’s Amendment Bill [B 19 – 2006] (National Council of
             Provinces – sec 76) [Bill and prior notice of its introduction
             published in Government Gazette No 29150 of 23 August 2006.]


         Introduction and referral to the Select Committee on Social
         Services of the National Council of Provinces, as well as referral
         to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
         of Joint Rule 160, on 25 August 2006.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.


2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)     Transnet Pension Fund Amendment Bill, 2006, submitted by the
         Minister of Public Enterprises. Referred to the Portfolio Committee
         on Public Enterprises and the Select Committee on Labour and Public
         Enterprises.

3.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)     Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 25 August
        2006:


          a) 2010 FIFA World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill [B 13B –
             2006] (National Assembly – sec 75).


          b) Second 2010 FIFA World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill
             [B 16B – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).


National Council of Provinces


1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report
        and to the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs:

          a) International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
             Terrorism, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
             Constitution, 1996.


          b) Explanatory Memorandum to the International Convention for the
             Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.


    2.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report:

          a) Convention between the Republic of South Africa and the Kingdom
             of Spain for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
             Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income
             and on Capital, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
             Constitution, 1996.

          b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention between the Republic
             of South Africa and the Kingdom of Spain for the Avoidance of
             Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with
             respect to Taxes on Income and on Capital.

        (c)      Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania
             for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of
             Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, tabled in terms
             of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

          d) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
             of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the
             United Republic of Tanzania for the Avoidance of Double
             Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to
             Taxes on Income.

    3.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration:


          a) Interim Report of the Special Investigating Unit (SIU) for the
             period April 2005 to September 2005.

    4.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance and the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs:

          a) Government Notice No 972 published in Government Gazette No
             29033 dated 21 July 2006: Minister of Finance, acting in terms
             of Section 66(3)(b) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
             (Act No 1 of 1999), approve that the accounting authority for
             Rand Water may commit to a shareholder’s loan of USD 245 000, a
             performance bond of USD 1 470 000 and provide bid security
             amounting to USD 122 500 for the Joint Venture with the Vitens
             International BV of the Netherlands pursuant to effect the
             management contract awarded by the Ghana Water Company, in
             terms of the Act. The above approval is granted subject to Rand
             Water not exceeding their debt limit provided in the Government
             Gazette Notice 23450 of 31 May 2002.

      5.    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
Finance and the Select
            Committee on Local Government and Administration for
consideration:


          a) Government Notice No 669 published in Government Gazette No
             29010 dated 21 July 2006: Notice setting out particulars of
             arrears demarcated by Municipality of Matjhabeng in terms of
             section 13quat in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58
             of 1962).


                 6.  The  following  papers  are  referred  to  the   Select
                    Committee on Security  and  Constitutional  Affairs  for
                    consideration and report:


          a) A report on the provisional suspension from office of Mr
             Matekere, an additional magistrate at the Magistrate Court,
             Johannesburg, in terms of section 13(3)(b) of the Magistrates
             Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


          b) A report on the provisional suspension from office of Mr I X
             Masimini, an additional magistrate at the Magistrate Court,
             Queenstown, in terms of section 13(3)(b) of the Magistrates
             Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).

    7.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:

          a) Draft Notice and Schedule in  terms  of  section  2(4)  of  the
             Judges Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Act, 2001 (Act
             No 47 of 2001), determining the  rate  at  which  salaries  are
             payable to Constitutional Court  judges  and  judges  annually,
             with effect from 1 April 2006, for approval by Parliament.


          b) Draft Notice and Schedule in terms  of  section  12(3)  of  the
             Magistrates’ Act, 1993 (Act No 90  of  1993),  determining  the
             rate at which salaries are  payable  to  magistrates  annually,
             with effect from 1 April 2006, for approval by Parliament.

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Labour

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Umsobomvu Youth Fund (UYF)
        for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Economic
        Development and Labour Council (NEDLAC) for 2005-2006, including
        the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
        for 2005-2006.


     c) Report and Financial Statements of the National Productivity
        Institute (NPI) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.
     d) Report and Financial Statements of the Clothing, Textiles, Footwear
        and Leather Sector Education and Training Authority (CTFL-Seta) for
        2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 70-2006].


     e) Report and Financial Statements of the Education, Training and
        Development Practices Sector Education and Training Authority (ETDP-
        Seta) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 72-2006].



