---
title: 'National Assembly - 22 March 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-03-22
---

WEDNESDAY, 22 MARCH 2006
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The House Chairperson, Ms C-S Botha, took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

     ADDITIONAL ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL (2005-06 FINANCIAL YEAR)

                           (First Reading debate)

Mr G D SCHNEEMANN: Chairperson, Ministers, comrades and hon members, as the
ANC we support the appropriation of an additional amount of R2,7 billion
which will enable the Road Accident Fund to meet its liabilities for the
period 2005-06.

In addition, this appropriation clearly indicates the caring nature of our
government. The Road Accident Fund provides compensation to victims of
motor-vehicle accidents for injuries, loss of income and loss of financial
support.
Without this appropriation many victims would be adversely affected and
would not receive the much-needed compensation provided for by the Road
Accident Fund.

We are mindful that this is not a permanent solution to the challenges
facing the Road Accident Fund and we urge the Minister of Transport,
together with the national Department of Transport and the Road Accident
Fund, to ensure that the necessary measures needed for the Road Accident
Fund to operate in a sound manner are introduced.

Amongst other things, attention will need to be given to minimising the
cost of administration, promoting good governance and developing a
sustainable economic model, which will put the Road Accident Fund in a
financially sound position.

According to the estimates of National Expenditure in Vote 33 – Transport,
the recommendations of the Road Accident Fund Commission have been assessed
regarding both their impact and implications. It further states that,
subject to a Cabinet decision, work on a no-fault benefit scheme will start
with the publication of a White Paper during 2006.

This appropriation will generate a surplus of R1,7 billion that will assist
in partially offsetting future deficits over the 2006 MTEF.

During 2005-06 a total of 185 773 new claims were received by the Road
Accident Fund. Owing to slow progress in finalising claims, the backlog of
claims grew to 443 399. This indicates the need for measures to be
introduced to ensure the future financial sustainability of the Road
Accident Fund.

Whilst changes can be made to the structure of the Road Accident Fund, a
critical challenge is the high number of fatalities and accidents which
occur on our roads each year with an estimated cost to the economy of some
R40 billion per annum. During December 2005 there was a 16,9% increase in
fatalities in comparison to December 2004.

Every year more and more new drivers take to our roads. An estimated 60 000
new vehicles were purchased last year.

The national Department of Transport and the Arrive Alive campaign have
performed well in raising awareness of the need for road safety. Despite
these efforts the number of fatalities and road accidents remain at an
unacceptably high level. On the one hand we need more visible and tougher
traffic law enforcement, whilst on the other hand the users of our roads
have to take responsibility for their own driving practices and the
roadworthiness of their motor vehicles. The owners of vehicle fleets must
start to take responsibility for how the drivers they employ drive.

It is correct that government must take responsibility for the enforcement
of traffic laws on our roads, but it is equally correct that the users of
our country’s roads must ensure that they abide by the traffic laws, which
govern our roads. We are pleased that the Road Traffic Management
Corporation has started to function. We urge the Road Traffic Management
Corporation to approach its task with a sense of urgency, as it has an
important role to play in ensuring order on our roads.

In conclusion, we in the ANC support this appropriation and also urge all
the users of our roads to obey the rules of our roads. Together we can
create safer roads and reduce the number of fatalities and motor vehicle
accidents. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr S M VAN DYK: Mevrou die Voorsitter, hierdie wetsontwerp kan beskou word
as deel van die huidige boekjaar se aansuiweringsbegroting, waarvan die
meeste aansuiwerings van ander departemente reeds einde verlede jaar in die
Parlement aangehoor en bespreek is. Hierdie aansuiwerings ten opsigte van,
onderskeidelik, Denel en die Padongelukkefonds word beskou as addisionele
fondse en beredeneer as onvoorsienbaar en onvermydelik. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Madam Chairperson, this Bill could be regarded as part of the adjustments
appropriation for the current financial year, of which most adjustments of
other departments have already been addressed and discussed in Parliament
at the end of last year. These adjustments, with regard to Denel and the
Road Accident Fund, respectively, are regarded as additional funds and
considered to be unforeseen and inevitable.]

The DA in principle supports the appropriation of R2,7 billion for the
Department of Transport for further transfer to the Road Accident Fund in
order for it to proceed with scheduled payments to successful claimants and
to settle the outstanding payment to the SA Revenue Service. We base this
decision purely on the knowledge of the 400 000 claims outstanding - some
going back nearly three years – and the long and painful suffering these
claimants have endured because of not receiving payment for injuries.

But just throwing R2,7 billion at the Road Accident Fund to bail it out of
its state of insolvency is not the answer. The DA opposed the recent
amendments to the Road Accident Fund Act, as did over 100 000 signatories
to the Stop the Bill petition, because the Bill failed to address the real
issues facing the fund, namely poor management and high costs of fees spent
on lawyers, medical experts and actuaries.

In the long run the only thing that will make the Road Accident Fund
sustainable is a dramatic reduction in the number of road accidents. Over
12 000 people died on our roads last year, and many more were injured and
maimed. This costs the economy of the country as much as R40 billion per
annum.

Die huidige toestand van Suid-Afrika se padnetwerk dra grootliks hiertoe by
en die regering moet in ’n groot mate die mede-aanspreeklikheid daarvoor
aanvaar. Ek het die Minister van Vervoer verlede jaar gevra hoeveel
kilometer paaie op die waglys is vir onderhoud en rehabilitering. Uit sy
antwoord blyk dit dat 105 627km paaie dringend aandag nodig het.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Soos die agb Seremane dit stel, deesdae kyk ‘n mens op
sommige paaie nie meer uit vir die slaggate nie; jy soek eerder die pad wat
oorgebly het tussen die slaggate! [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The present state of South Africa’s road network is largely contributing
to this state of affairs and the government must, to a great extent, be
held co-responsible. Last year I requested the Minister of Transport to
provide details of how many kilometres of road were placed on the waiting
list for maintenance and rehabilitation. From his answer it appears that
105 627km of roads need urgent attention. [Interjections.] As the hon
Seremane puts it, these days you no longer look out for potholes on certain
roads, but rather for the piece of road that has been left between the
potholes! [Interjections.]]

The question needs to be asked whether any conditions have been linked to
this appropriation in terms of ensuring that the fund won’t end up looking
for further appropriations in the future, or, for that matter, a further
increase in the fuel levy.

The DA has on a number of occasions in this House asked for the Minister to
commission an appropriate external task team to investigate the Road
Accident Fund with a view to coming up with recommendations to restructure
the fund in an appropriate way and to make it more sustainable, efficient
and free of corruption.

The amendments to the Road Accident Fund have a number of controversial
clauses. Amendments now take away the common-law right of the innocent
motorist, whilst the offending or negligent driver carries no such burden
and in many cases can walk away scot-free, despite the fact that he or she
may be in a position to pay for any damages caused in excess of the Road
Accident Fund’s accountability.

I wonder whether the Minister took these issues into consideration when so
generously bailing out the Road Accident Fund. Surely, some of this money
could be well placed in campaigns to educate and provide the necessary
enforcement to stop the continued loss of life of and injuries to our
citizens, which is indirectly costing the economy billions. I trust the
Minister will have time to ponder these areas where we seem to be robbing
Peter to pay Paul.

Secondly, the DA supports the R2 billion bail-out of Denel to restructure
itself, given present circumstances. We are appalled by the financial
losses this company suffers year after year and we must emphasise that this
drain on the fiscus cannot be allowed to continue indefinitely. Denel must
shape up or be shipped out!

Nevertheless, Denel is a strategically important enterprise that should be
salvaged if at all possible. It has long-term commitments to maintain and
has to upgrade existing weapons systems in the Defence Force. It is the
core of our valuable aerospace capability. Its internationally recognised
scientific and technical expertise is a national asset that we cannot
afford to lose or compromise. It has more than 10 000 employees. They
cannot just be abandoned to the hardships of unemployment or the lure of
emigration.

Uit voorleggings aan die Parlement blyk dit dat daar geen wanpraktyke by
die organisasie voorgekom het nie. Agterlosige bestuur en die verkleining
van Denel se hoofuitsetmark, die SANW, is verantwoordelik vir die
organisasie se verliesgeskiedenis. Tog lyk Denel se nuwe visie en missie as
internasionale vennoot vir die ontwikkeling van onderdele van wapentuig,
eerder as om die volledige artikels te vervaardig, meer belowend. Die
ontwikkeling van wapentuig het verreikende openbare en nasionale
strategiese beleidsimplikasies.

Gevolglik is dit moeilik om Denel te privatiseer. Denel moet óf
herstruktureer word óf, indien dit nie slaag nie, as organisasie gesloop en
gelikwideer word. Die DA vertrou dat hierdie addisionele R2 miljard-
inspuiting so ’n katastrofe sal voorkom en Denel eerder op die pad na
herstel sal plaas. Die DA steun hierdie wetsontwerp. Dankie, Voorsitter.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[From submissions to Parliament, it appears that no irregularities occurred
at this organisation. Careless management and the shrinking of Denel’s main
market, the SANDF, are responsible for the organisation’s loss history.
Though, it seems that the new vision and mission of Denel, as international
partner to develop spares for armaments rather than manufacturing the
complete items, is more promising. The development of armaments has far-
reaching public and national strategic policy implications.

Consequently, it is not easy to privatise Denel. Denel has either to be
restructured, or, if this does not succeed, dissolved or liquidated as an
organisation. The DA trusts that this additional R2 billion injection will
prevent such a catastrophe and will rather place Denel on the path of
recovery. The DA supports this Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr T E VEZI: Thank you, Chair. According to Denel’s annual report of 2005,
the net loss for the year is significantly worse than the loss of the
previous financial year, which came to R377,5 million. According to the
report, the major contributors to this year’s financial performance were,
mainly, the failure to achieve the sales target, an increase in provision
for contract losses and the adverse impact of the exchange rate.

According to Ernst and Young, included in the cost of sales is an amount of
R697,8 million, representing the expected contract loss on the Rooivalk
attack-helicopter project. Unfortunately, they did not obtain all the
information and explanations they considered necessary to satisfy
themselves that this provision is fairly stated. They conclude by stating:

  These conditions, along with other matters, as set out in the director’s
  report, indicate the existence of a material uncertainty, which may cast
  significant doubt on the group’s ability to continue as a growing
  concern.


Cash is the lifeblood of any living organism. And unless drastic steps are
taken ... [Time expired.]

Mr J BICI: Chair, hon members, the UDM supports the Bill. However, the Bill
before us constitutes large additional appropriations for two government
entities that suffer from perennial financial woes. As far as Denel is
concerned, its struggle to become and stay profitable has been ongoing for
years. This, despite billions in taxpayers’ money being invested in it, as
well as the billions more spent on the arms deal, which should have
produced positive spin-offs. We are being asked to sponsor another
restructuring. Let’s hope that this time the investment bears fruit.

The other entity that stands to benefit from additional taxpayers’ money is
the Road Accident Fund. It has also been the subject of restructuring over
the years. Despite annual promises of improvement following annual bail-
outs, the RAF remains a budgetary black hole that sucks up the taxpayer’s
money, without ever seeming to get out of the red. Nevertheless, we support
the Bill. Thank you.

Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson, the ACDP notes the progress made by Denel with
regard to securing equity partnerships and the selling of noncore assets.
This is a welcome step towards the goal of reshaping our parastatals, so
that they are in line with international standards. We have repeatedly been
told that the shortage of professional skills is the greatest challenge
facing our state-owned enterprises.

The ACDP exercises its faith that Denel’s R2 billion injection will cover
world-class human resource practices. State-owned enterprises are generally
expected to become largely self-financing, and not to place an extra burden
on the budget. It is therefore our hope that every effort will be made to
address those issues that may have been identified as obstacles to the
growth of Denel.
Regarding the Road Accident Fund, the ACDP appreciates the precarious
financial situation of the fund. The solution, however, lies in better
management of the fuel levy funds and the eradication of corrupt practices,
not the reduction of victims’ rights to claim. Additionally, we urgently
need to reduce the number of serious collisions on our roads, which, in
turn, will reduce the number of claims to the fund. Thank you, Ma’am.

Dr G G WOODS: Madam Chair, like other parties, the National Democratic
Convention, Nadeco, sees the similarity between the circumstances of the
two institutions that seek additional funding. The similarity concerns
their viability, and therefore whether the additional appropriations are
justifiable.

Concerning Denel, with no real competitive advantage in a tough
international market, it has found it difficult to succeed. The arms-deal-
related work gave it something like a reprieve, but this is insufficient
and unlikely to last. We note that British Aerospace recently decided
against buying a substantial share of Denel pertaining to questions of
commercial viability, and we therefore ask: “Is Denel’s latest turnaround
plan sound enough to justify an additional R2 billion?”

Then there is the Road Accident Fund, which has long been problematic.
There have been too many failed rescue plans to remember over this period.
Seemingly, a lack of management and an inability to do what it takes to
make the fund viable remain. Solutions concerning the scope, nature and
integrity of the claims allowed against the fund have yet to be introduced.
So, here too, are we just pouring money into a bottomless pit?

Nadeco, however, supports the appropriations on the understanding that the
Ministers for Public Enterprise and of Transport will now be taking a far
more rigorous approach towards dealing with the problems of these two
institutions.

Mong M T LIKOTSI: Motsamaisi wa mosebetsi, PAC e amohela tshisinyo ena ya
Tlatseletso ya Letlole lena la R2,7 billion bakeng sa Road Accident Fund,
bakeng sa batho ba fumanang dikotsi mona ditseleng. PAC e boela ere ke
maswabi a maholo hore ebe ho ntse ho ena le diketekete tsa batho hona
jwale, ba so kang ba fumana ditlhapiso ha ba ile ba fumana dikotsi tsa
ditseleng.

Re re ke boikarabelo ba mmuso hore baahi ba fumane tshireletso ya bohlokwa
ditseleng, ele hore ba tle ba se ke ba iphumana ba le dikotsing. Mmuso o
tlamehile ho bona hore o ntlafatsa mebila e le hore ho tle ho se ke ha eba
le dikotsi tse etsahalang ha bobebe. PAC e amohela tlatseletso ena ya
ditjhelete tsena, e le hore tshebetso e tle e kgone ho tswella pele hantle.
Ke a leboha. (Translation of Sesotho speech follows.)

[MR M T LIKOTSI: Madam Speaker, the PAC supports the Adjustments
Appropriation Bill for allocating an additional R1,2 billion to the Road
Accident Fund to compensate people involved in road accidents. The PAC
notices with despair that there are still thousands of people who have not
yet received compensation from the fund.

We feel that it is the responsibility of the government to protect its
citizens on the roads and to minimise accidents. The government should
upgrade roads constantly to avoid an increase in road accidents. The PAC
supports the Bill. Thank you.]

Mr R H BHOOLA: Madam Chairperson, the MF acknowledges and accepts that a
total of R4,25 billion was appropriated in this Bill. We do feel that there
is no need for a roll-over if sectors utilise their funds adequately. We
are not, however, suggesting that expenditure should be created to avoid a
roll-over, but in view of the fact that we are constantly complaining about
a shortage of funds, that a roll-over does exist, it does not make sense.

We believe that because of the seriousness of unemployment, the Department
of Labour should devise means to utilise funds adequately in the
alleviation of unemployment. We have no reservations regarding additional
funds appropriated to Public Enterprises and Transport. Considering the
reasoning behind this addition, we support it.

We are, however, pleased that the funds are being made available to manage
the Road Accident Fund and for the adequate payment of successful
claimants. The MF supports the Adjustments Appropriation Bill.

Mr C L GOLOLO: Chairperson, I want to applaud the President and the Finance
Minister on realising the importance of giving support to this very
strategic entity, Denel, which is universally renowned for the state-of-the-
art and sophisticated products it has to offer the defence fraternity.

Denel cannot ship out. Indeed, there are those who feel that Denel should
be privatised and should not be given state funding. But the majority in
our portfolio committee appreciate that the new leadership at Denel has a
major responsibility to restructure it and make it a competitive, viable
and world-class entity.

It is a fact that we as a nation do not face any external military threats
because of the fact that we have made more friends than enemies since the
demise of the apartheid regime. The picture that was painted last year by
the new leadership of Denel, of the need to fundamentally transform it,
seems reasonable to us.

We would like to call upon all relevant stakeholders to work together and
do their utmost to reconstitute Denel and ensure that it serves the
national interests and that it is commercially viable on a sustainable
basis.

We believe the CEO when he says that part of the problem has been lack of
clarity among the government and other stakeholders of the exact role Denel
should play to the extent that there is convergence among the major
stakeholders on the exact role of Denel and greater co-operation among
them. We appreciate that.

If there is disagreement on this matter, particularly within government,
surely there should be more political and financial support for Denel too,
especially as we are told that defence companies globally rely on Denel.

The recent R2-billion injection by National Treasury to Denel is a positive
move in that it will not only sustain jobs, but will also ensure that new
skills in science and technology are acquired. This eventually enhances
development, which will enable us to meet our economic growth rate goal of
6% by 2010.

In our interaction last year the CEO, Mr Liebenberg, said that fixing Denel
included making Denel a profitable and dynamic organisation commercially;
delivering consistent growth; attracting, developing, retaining and
appropriately rewarding world-class skills; achieving world-class
productivity; focusing on areas in which Denel can compete credibly;
partnering with state agencies to meet the country’s defence needs; and
competing in the open market, which means behaving like the best in the
open market.

Denel cannot achieve world-class results with a subsidy mind-set. Anything
other than world-class will not cut it in this highly competitive
environment. Denel needs to decide on what it is and focus on a game plan.

Global defence procurement is a US $360 billion market. Many of the global
defence contractors such as Denel find it almost impossible to serve the
United States, for example, and the Nato countries, which have a closed
bidder and tender process. The USA and Europe are also trying to expand
their markets to areas previously served exclusively by Denel, such as the
Middle East, the Far East and South America. Independent contractors such
as Denel are forced to become reliant on domestic markets.

To succeed, Denel should pursue a strategy based on prime contracting here
at home, and the export of systems and components through selective equity
partnerships and alliances. A process is under way to evaluate alliance
opportunities and drive internal improvements across all business units.

In conclusion, this time round we as a committee are going to closely watch
Denel’s performance after its R2 billion allocation. Denel is the only
state-owned enterprise getting money directly from the national fiscus.
Hence, our committee will have a much more direct oversight role over
Denel.

We need to be clear about what the money is going to be used for and we are
going to monitor that it is being used for the correct purpose. We will be
meeting with Denel very soon to make it clear that we are going to monitor
them regularly. Hon members, ladies and gentlemen, the ANC supports this
Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, Chairperson. Let me express
appreciation for the support from all parties in the House, and deal with
the issues at hand.

The first issue I’d like to deal with is that which the hon Gololo raised
about the friendship that we enjoy internationally. Minister Erwin has
assured me that this is not because of diplomatic endeavours, but rather
because of the awesome array of weaponry that Denel has produced that has
created this condition in which there are no external threats. So, it is in
that context that we have to see the Additional Adjustments Appropriation
Bill as well.

Of course there are different issues at play here. In agreeing, as this
House does this afternoon, to an appropriation of an additional R2 billion
to Denel, it is done against the backdrop of very intensive discussions,
detailed presentations by the CEO and the Minister to the portfolio
committee on state-owned enterprises; discussion then about the choices we
exercise in order to retain the capacity in weaponry manufacture; and also
against the backdrop of where Denel has been, understanding why this
additional appropriation is now important.

The issues in the Road Accident Fund are considerably different. It’s worth
commenting on them again, because a number of hon members did so here this
afternoon. We don’t have a choice about the Road Accident Fund. The
R2,7 billion that we’re asking Parliament to appropriate to the Road
Accident Fund arises against the backdrop of, firstly, understanding that
the Road Accident Fund is an integral part of our social security network.
It’s part of the raft of social security that we have.

If we take that perspective, then a series of other issues follows. Yes,
firstly, I think we must agree with those members who raised the fact that
we have to do considerably more to ensure that drivers are held responsible
for their conduct on the roads. It’s too easy a cop-out to say that it’s
potholes in the roads. There is an incredible amount of driver
irresponsibility in South Africa, and that is something we have to take
joint responsibility for wherever we find ourselves.

The second issue is, of course, that this has been the most remarkable
honeypot for all kinds of interests - lawyers, doctors, hospitals, people
who claim way in excess of what they had previously – and what we need is a
system that minimises the fault and minimises the payout.

Now, if you accept that this is part of our social security system, we then
don’t take responsibility for paying wealthy people more by way of
pensions. Why should we suddenly have to pay wealthy people more when they
have their private insurance as well? It’s all part of retraining and re-
educating, and I hope that this House will stand united as we transform the
conduct of those who drive on our roads, those who are responsible for
accidents, and ensure that we can maintain the RAF as an instrument within
the raft of social security institutions we have in South Africa, recognise
that there must be equity in how we go about this, and ensure that we can
keep the fund solvent. I thank you for your support. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a first time.


     ADDITIONAL ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL (2005-06 FINANCIAL YEAR)


                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I’m going to ask the Secretary ...
Oh, Mr Nene. The Secretary will read the Third Order of the Day.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


     (Consideration of Report of Portfolio Committee on Finance thereon)

Mr N M NENE: Chairperson, I think there is confusion. Regarding the
consideration of the report, the committee moves that the report be
adopted. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you. May I then ask a Whip from
the majority party to move a motion to adopt or note the report?

Mr S K LOUW: Madam Chairperson, I move the adoption of the report.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                           (First Reading debate)

Mr N M NENE: Chairperson and hon members, yesterday this country celebrated
and commemorated Human Rights Day 46 years from the day that unarmed
citizens were massacred for protesting against an unjust system that
oppressed the majority of the indigenous inhabitants of this country.

We celebrated because South Africa today is a different country. It is
free, and the rights of all human beings are guaranteed and protected in
the Statute Book and in practice. We commemorated the day because we were
also paying tribute to those who laid down their lives in pursuance of this
cause of building a South Africa that belongs to all who live in it,
without discrimination.

It is for this reason that one of our institutions supporting democracy,
the Human Rights Commission, took stock of how far we have come as a
country to realise these human rights, as entrenched in our Constitution.
The findings of this commission are encouraging indeed. This progressive
realisation of basic human rights has been made possible by the ANC
government’s commitment to its historical principle that has characterised
this movement over decades without flinching.

The distribution of resources has been informed by the People’s Charter,
which categorically guaranteed equality before the law in the economy and
at a social level.

It was only 12 years ago when the ANC came into power and faced daunting
economic challenges of severe poverty, inequality and economic stagnation.
It was beyond imagination how the ANC government was going to address these
challenges, as it has done in the first decade of our democracy.

To use the wise words of Alan Hirsch in his book Season of Hope, he said
that:

  ... the ANC government followed a consistent economic philosophy that had
  the following elements: ... at the centre is a social democratic approach
  to social reform - it is the state’s job to underwrite the improvement in
  the quality of life of the poor and to reduce inequalities, but with a
  firmly entrenched fear of the risks of personal dependency on the state
  and of the emergence of entitlement attitudes. The state exists within a
  market economy that depends on private investment, and therefore a
  successful state creates an environment that supports high levels of
  private investment.


It is in the context of this emerging market economy faced with new
challenges of a shortage of suitable skills, persistent poverty and
unemployment, and limited uptake of investment opportunities that this
year’s Budget was tabled.

The economic outlook for the coming Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
period remains positive and is set to continue improving. We have been
experiencing higher than expected economic growth and expect an average of
5% over the medium term. The expansionary fiscal stance adopted since 2001
continues, with an increase in government expenditure in pursuit of the
accelerated shared growth initiative goals.

This initiative is consistent with the ANC government’s unwavering
commitment to the ideals of the Freedom Charter; the Reconstruction and
Development Programme; and the Growth, Employment and Redistribution
policy, as these refocus government’s efforts to the new challenges.

The Freedom Charter captured the aspirations of all South Africans, whilst
the Reconstruction and Development Programme was a programme that served as
the ANC’s manifesto for the 1994 elections. And then the Growth, Employment
and Redistribution policy was our macroeconomic policy that made it
possible for this government to increase expenditure in areas that would
have redistributive outcomes.

Real increases in social spending, with significant increases in
infrastructure development and a renewed commitment to skills development -
given that these are some of the pillars of the Accelerated and Shared
Growth Initiative for South Africa, Asgisa - seek to address the
constraints on economic growth.

Asgisa, in line with government’s main policy aims of reconstruction and
development, supports the fiscal stance that offsets the impact of the
commodity price cycle and the robust consumption. It further identifies
that the recent growth, although welcomed, is not balanced as it is based
on strong commodity prices, capital inflows and domestic consumer demand,
which have increased imports and have strengthened the currency beyond
desirable levels, as observed by the Minister of Finance in his speech.

The Minister further warned that the current boom in commodity prices is
not sustainable in the absence of support on the production side. The
economists that appeared before the committee share the Minister’s view and
added that, historically, economic growth has been followed by a period of
recession in which commodity prices were major catalysts for growth, citing
1981 and 1994 as examples of this phenomenon.

An important feature of the government’s economic management is the Medium-
Term Expenditure Framework, with projections spanning over a three-year
period. The committee noted that government’s projections have been
relatively conservative, hence the higher than expected growth rate in 2005-
06.

According to the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, inflation is expected
to remain within the target range of 3% to 6% over the MTEF, further
underlining the fact that the economy is on a structurally stronger growth
path.

This positive economic outlook is underpinned by a number of factors, among
which are: a sound and sustainable macroeconomic platform; favourable
global economic conditions, particularly the growth in Japan and China, and
a growing market in Africa; the improvement in policy co-ordination between
National Treasury and the Reserve Bank in keeping inflation within the
target range, moderate interest rates and reduced costs of capital; and a
rise in commodity prices.

Inselele ekulu-ke ebhekene nalo hulumeni eyokuxosha ikati eziko nokudala
amathuba emisebenzi ukuze abantu bahlomule kulolu hlelo lokuthuthukisa
umnotho olusheshayo futhi olunkomo isengwa yiviyo.

Ingqinamba-ke kulokhu ngeyokungabikho kwamakhono afanele nobuchwepheshe
besimanjemanje. Kungakho nje isabelo sezimali sokuthuthukisa amakhono
sikhule ngokubonakalayo kulo nyaka. Ukukhula kwalesi sabelo sezimali
sokwakhiwa kwezingqalasizinda nakho kuzoba nezithelo ezinhle ngoba kushaya
izinyoni ezintathu ngetshe elilodwa, kunikeza amathuba emisebenzi, kususa
ikati eziko futhi kunikeze labo abaqashiwe amakhono emisebenzi yezandla
abangaziphilisa ngawo izimpilo zabo zonke.
Izibalo zakamuva-ke zikhombisa ukuthi noma amathuba emisebenzi ekhulile
kodwa izinga lokuqashwa alehlanga ngokwanele ngenxa yokwanda kwabantu
abazama ukungena kwezomsebenzi.

Inhlangano ebhekene nokuqoqwa kwezibalo, iStatistics SA, iphezu  komkhankaso
wokulungiswa kwendlela eziqoqwa  ngayo  izibalo  ukuze  lezi  zibalo  zifeze
umsebenzi  wazo  ngendlela  efanele.  (Translation  of  isiZulu   paragraphs
follows.)

[The biggest challenge facing the government is poverty alleviation and  job
creation so that people will benefit from the Accelerated and Shared  Growth
Initiative for South Africa.

The obstacle to this is a skills shortage and technology.  It  is  for  this
reason that the budget for skills development has been increased this  year.
The budget increment for infrastructure development is also  going  to  bear
fruit because it means that we are killing three birds with  one  stone.  It
creates jobs, alleviates poverty and gives the unemployed  craft  skills  to
make ends meet.

The latest statistics show that employment opportunities have increased  but
the rate of unemployment has not decreased because of the  increase  in  the
number of people looking for jobs. The statistics  company,  Statistics  SA,
is in the process of changing the way in which information is  collected  so
that statistics will serve their intended purpose in a proper way.]
With the ANC having once again emerged as the only reliable champion of the
poor and the vulnerable in the recent local government elections, the
challenge to live up to the expectations of the masses of this country is
even greater. Indeed, the people shall continue to share in the country’s
wealth and all shall enjoy equal human rights.

The committee is going to ensure that all matters raised during the
hearings and all undertakings by the department are implemented without
fail. Progress on the recommendations, as tabled in the report, is also
going to be monitored on an ongoing basis. My other colleagues are going to
be speaking on the aspects of oversight, social spending and tax policy in
more detail.

Allow me to commend the National Treasury, under the political leadership
of the Minister, Mr Manuel, the director-general and staff, the
commissioner, the SA Revenue Service staff, the statistician-general and
Statistics SA staff for all their hard work. I also commend committee
members for their dedication and hard work, as well as the committee
support staff for putting up with the pressures of the committee.

Business, labour, academia and civil society have also contributed
tremendously in the hearings, and their inputs are going to inform our
future engagements going forward. The ANC supports this Appropriation Bill.
Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]
Mr I O DAVIDSON: Madam Speaker, the DA wishes to congratulate the Minister
on the presentation of his tenth budget to this House.  Under his tenure we
have seen the introduction of prudent macroeconomic policies, which appear
to have a sound base for economic growth. This we applaud.

Yet, despite the sound base, we have seen our economy struggle to reach GDP
levels comparable to other emerging markets, and more importantly, to grow
at a level that not only absorbs the annual entrants into the labour market
but also makes a dent in our stubbornly high rate of unemployment.

It is in this context that we welcome the Deputy President’s growth
initiative, Asgisa, aimed at projecting our GDP growth to 6% and above. We
are supportive because growth in economy brings growth in jobs and
alleviates poverty. The Deputy President reflected correctly that our
recent growth has been unbalanced based on strong international commodity
prices, strong capital flows and strong consumer demand.

We agree with the Minister of Finance that commodity prices will one day
retreat and investment flows can, as they have done in the past, swing away
from emerging markets.

Sustainable growth cannot take place on the back of consumption demand
alone. What is needed is growth on the investment and the production side
if South Africa is to be placed on a more sustainable growth path.

We need to turn the current low-inflation, high-consumer growth momentum
into a high-fixed-investment, high-employment-growth environment.

In respect of investment, government is to be commended on the R372 billion
infrastructure roll-out over three years.  But even – and this is the point
- if government does succeed in spending all of this allocation it will
only raise fixed capital investment by between 1% and 2%. At present, fixed
capital investment is at round about 16,5% of GDP, up on the recent low of
15% in 2000, but still well behind the 23,6% of emerging market countries
and even further from the 25% target we have set ourselves if we are going
to hit the 6% growth level.

So, my simple point is this: Where is the rest of the fixed investment
going to come from? The answer is obvious: the private sector. Government
itself has acknowledged that the private sector is the main engine room for
sustained economic growth. Their participation is key. Yet, where are the
incentives in the budget to induce the private sector to be part of
government’s growth initiative? Where are the measures to boost the supply
side of the economy and enhance South Africa’s attraction to foreign and
local investors?
Despite a good deal of rhetoric, a few key figures evident in the
Treasury’s Budget Review tell a revealing story: Firstly, net foreign
direct investment inflows for the first nine months of 2005 reached about
R35,7 million, a great improvement on the stagnant levels of 2003 and 2004,
but if you strip out the Barclays-Absa deal, which constitutes the bulk of
that amount, we are back to the stagnant levels of before. The truth of the
matter is that we are just not attracting our rightful share of foreign
direct investment.

Secondly, the growth of fixed capital formation in 2005 grew by 8%.
However, if you focus on the private sector component of that figure, it
fell to 6,7% for 2005, off the high of 9,7% realised in 2004.

Thirdly, an analysis of government’s R372 billion infrastructure roll-out
invites the question: what is the private sector’s part in this roll-out?
Almost 22% is allocated to municipalities, 38% to national and provincial
government, 33% to parastatals and a mere 5% to public-private
participation.

So, here is where we have to register a disappointment that the budget, we
believed, failed to show that ours is a government that is business
friendly, and not just business tolerant. We wanted to see bolder steps in
the budget: a budget embracing the role of the private sector, challenging
it; a budget that incentivises the private sector to create jobs and makes
it an integral part of the Deputy President’s growth initiative, not just a
peripheral player.

And in this, fiscal or tax policies do play a key role. Let me welcome the
reduction in tax on retirement from 18% to nine per cent. This move has
long been called for by the DA and will positively affect retirement
funding and increase the worryingly low savings rate. Secondly, let me also
welcome the range of fiscal measures aimed at stimulating small business.

Thirdly, there can be no complaint that the budget’s main impact will be on
enhancing the spending power of lower-income groups both directly and
through incentives for skills development. But this raises a basic dilemma
– we also need to encourage savings and investments, and this is
predominantly done by the corporate sector and top-income individuals. And
this is where the budget fails. The tax burden and therefore the cost of
doing business in SA is high in comparison to our competitor nations in
other emerging markets.

I know that the Minister is sceptical, if not cynical, about the role of
taxes in encouraging investment. In this he is sometimes joined by
Professor Katz, but with respect to the Katz commission, when it sat it
faced a completely different investment world, in and outside South Africa.

I would, quite frankly, far rather listen to Business Unity South Africa,
Busa, which believes that the time has come for a critical review of
corporate tax structure, including the secondary tax on companies. This
follows their own research, as well as that of others such as Merrill Lynch
and KPMG, which place SA on the high side in respect of international
corporate tax rates and very high when one adds in the secondary tax on
companies.

The Minister published in response in the portfolio committee a note that
at an effective rate of 36,9%, we compared favourably with a whole list of
companies. Well, I could not help but notice in respect to the whole list
that he produced that these were mostly developed countries that we were
comparing ourselves with. What we need to do is compare ourselves with
developing countries, more particularly those in the so-called emerging
market club against which we are competing for that highly mobile
investment capital.

Let me deal with a few points raised by the Minister in the meeting. Yes,
looking at the effective corporate tax rate in isolation is meaningless.
What has to be added in is state and other taxes that our competitors may
in addition need to apply, but then so too do we have to add in our
municipal taxes, skills levies and who knows what the costs of BEE and
other costs are in that context.

I also hear the Minister’s argument that if he lowers the corporate tax
rate unaccompanied by a reduction in the maximum marginal tax rate of
individuals, it would result in unhealthy tax arbitrage. Here I think the
Minister is being disingenuous. Firstly, the costs of corporatisation are
not taken into account.

Secondly, but more importantly, the Minister knows that if he had not
raised the threshold to R400 000 in respect of the top marginal rate, but
lowered the marginal rate itself, it would have had the same effect as far
as revenue is concerned but eliminated the arbitrage potential.

Finally, in respect of STC, Busa indicates that this form of double
taxation does not go down well internationally. The objective of STC was to
encourage companies to retain earnings and invest as opposed to taking
those earnings out. I think we have to critically examine that. The trade-
off the Minister makes of saying that shareholders will prefer the tax paid
in companies’ hands as opposed to taking the dividend in theirs, wrongly
places the purpose of this tax. Secondary tax on companies was never
intended to be a tax on dividends, nor was it intended to be a trade-off.
The tax on dividends was abolished in 1990; STC was brought in with a
different objective in 1993.

We recognise that a scrapping of the RSC levy does positively impact on
certain companies. Firstly, the RSC levy is deductible against tax and
therefore it is not a R7 billion tax write-off, but closer to a R5 billion
tax write-off. Secondly, the RSC levy, as I made the point, is turnover-
and employment-based and therefore only high turnover and high employment
companies will really benefit.
Now, Minister, let us understand one another as far as this is concerned:
Our plea is not for a race to the bottom but for a competitive rate.

We believe that committing SA to a 25% corporate tax rate, by say 2010,
would have brought the tax rate down to the nominal international norm,
sent out a strong signal of confidence in the economy and provided business
with an incentive to commit to expansionary projects; and most importantly,
create jobs and alleviate poverty.

And here we would have liked to see the Minister use the tax system more
creatively and encourage the private sector to create jobs by introducing
wage subsidies for persons employed on a full-time basis. We give
incentives for investments of a capital nature, why not of a human
employment nature?

Now let me concede: Fiscal policy is both complex and integrated.  We might
be wrong, Busa might be wrong. But I think the time is right, as part of
the growth initiative, for a critical review of our tax structure. And so I
ask the Minister - if he is listening – is it not time for him to
constitute a task team of all stakeholders to address this issue?

In a similar vein, we are disappointed by the slow progress of
privatisation, which, besides other positive spin-offs, would significantly
reduce government’s public sector borrowing requirements.

Eskom’s recent indication that its plans to build a power station in
Lephalale may be put on hold, because a Canadian consortium plans to build
one across the border in Botswana, has a logic all of its own. We are happy
to buy electricity from the private sector across the border but reluctant
to buy electricity from the private sector within our own borders. That
does not make sense.

On skills, while we welcome the extension of learnership advances to 2011,
as well as the raising of limits, the budget does little, in our view, to
address our capacity and skills crisis. The Setas have failed SA miserably
and yet their cost to the SA taxpayer is R5 billion and rising. The money,
we believe, could have been far more usefully spent on further
incentivising the private sector to do the job.

Finally, another area of debate that needs to be opened up is that around
the level of the budget deficit. Government is now projecting a deficit of
1,5% before borrowing for 2006-07 and which, in all likelihood if overruns
continue, will come in again well below projections, below 1% with even a
possible surplus. Such prudence may gain praise for a developed country,
but for a developing one such as ours, levels closer to 3% would have been
sustainable and provided a flexibility regarding increased employment
incentives and other categories of spending.

As indicated Minister, we will be supporting the budget. But let me close
by quoting the Financial Mail of 17 February:

  On the whole this is a steady-as-you-go budget: Prudent, sound, but
  unimaginative and not innovative. But that is no small feat; and back in
  1994 few could have predicted the revolution we have seen for the better
  in the handling of our public finances by government. The Minister has
  now delivered 10 budgets and is entitled to take much of the credit for
  this.

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you, hon House
Chairperson and hon members. As the hon member spoke here I was wondering
whether it is my time that is wrong or maybe the House Chairperson’s time,
but the House Chairperson correctly said to me he was within his time.

I would like to congratulate the Minister of Finance, Trevor Manuel, for
presenting a budget representing the spirit of hope embodied in the state
of the nation address, which was made in this House by our President, the
hon President Mbeki.

In tabling the 2006 Budget, the Minister of Finance correctly used the
quotation from Ben Okri’s book, A Way of Being Free. Central to this
quotation he used, in my view, is a reminder that there are no easy
victories. What we have been able to achieve as a country, 12 years into
our democracy, owes much to the tough decisions we had taken earlier with
regard to the management of our economy while at the same time addressing
the legacy of social inequities in our society.

We can indeed repeat the words of President Mbeki in this year’s state of
address that today is better than yesterday. Indeed, our yesterdays are a
myriad of challenges that we had to contend with, both as government, this
Parliament, as well as our people. Central to these challenges has been the
building of a nonracial, nonsexist democratic South Africa, an ideal
espoused by our people in 1955 in Kliptown when they drafted the Freedom
Charter. It also has been about building a caring society.

The 2006 Budget is, once again, a reminder that we are indeed on the path
of building a caring society. Our social wage, as reflected in many aspects
of this budget, in particular the social security system, which is the
largest expenditure item in this budget, is an indication that the poor are
at the centre of our development. It is against this background that I
support the growth and income support to vulnerable households while at the
same time ensuring that our communities are not overly dependent on state
support, but seek employment opportunities, as well as access other
government programmes, such as the food production support grants available
through our provincial departments of agriculture within the context of the
Integrated Food Security and Nutrition Programme.

The mobilisation of the poor and vulnerable through the self-help
programmes and co-operatives seeks to ensure that our social security
system, as an intervention, creates an enabling environment while it
assists people to engage in programmes that can improve their capacity to
provide incomes for themselves.

The continuous support to learners from a poor background, particularly
with regard to bursary allocation as is reflected in the National School
Financial Aid Scheme, is another intervention that seeks to support those
who are vulnerable in our society, as well as ensuring that it can
contribute to the building of skills - a capacity which all agree we need
in this country.

The allocation of the conditional grants to provinces as a way of improving
mass participation in sport and recreation again affirms our commitment to
building a caring society and a healthy society too. The Minister of
Health’s initiative, which is a campaign known as Vuka South Africa, would
also ensure that we as citizens play our part in improving our own health
while at the same time we partner with government in improving our capacity
to deal with the challenges that are there in terms of our health
situation.
The budget also reflects our commitment to support delivery at local
government. This is an area all of us would agree is where we are able to
access the impact of our policies and programmes. The support given towards
continuing with Project Consolidate, which, as we know, was an intervention
to ensure that we can support those municipalities that are ailing, is
again a way in which we can, in a meaningful way, show a need for
integrated government. All of us who have been engaged in the campaigns at
local government have realised that this area of our work is an important
indicator of an integrated and co-ordinated government.

I hope that the amounts that are reflected in the budget, as tabled by the
Minister in February, towards the support to political parties will ensure
that, as the members of this Parliament, in doing our work in the
constituencies we will be able to lend support to the local government at
municipal level. It is also necessary that we are able to induct and work
with the newly elected representatives so that they themselves can fully
appreciate the work that they have to do in order to improve the capacity
of our people in making their lives better.

In order for our government to work as a collective, we would like to lend
our support to the work that the Presidency is doing through the
Presidential Co-ordinating Committee, as well as the resources,
financially, that have been provided by the Minister of Finance in this
budget. We have seen improvements particularly from last year July to this
year January where alignment in having the lekgotla between national
government and provincial government enabled us to bring synergy to our
work.

It is also necessary for me to point to the work that is being done by the
Premiers through their Premier’s Co-ordinating Forum, which also brings
together the district mayors to ensure that both in the planning and the
execution of our development programmes we can deliver quality service to
our people. Indeed, Ben Okri, as the Minister of Finance reminded us,
indicates that there would always be challenges that lie ahead of us as
long as we live. Hence, as we climb the mountains, we are mindful of the
frontiers ahead.

I am mindful of the challenges of spending in the area of conditional
grants. Some of these are clearly evident when one examines the spending in
the Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme by various provincial
departments of agriculture. In itself, the essence of the grant cannot be
dismissed as being unimportant. However, our responsibility is to deal with
the challenges on spending that are there.

It is therefore comforting that the national departments affected by
conditional grants - not just the Department of Agriculture, but other
departments at national level - have devised mechanisms to work in support
of the provinces so that they can improve the quality of spending. This
would also mean, as the Minister of Finance articulated in the presentation
of the budget, that we might have to review the criteria that we have set
to ensure that indeed they themselves don’t become an impediment for
spending by the provinces.

What we have seen in the weeks after the tabling of the budget by
Parliament was engaging with the various departments, looking at where we
need to improve, alerting us to what the challenges are that we need to
continue to deal with. Therefore what we have seen today, Minister of
Finance, is actually an indication of the work that has been done over
these weeks by members of this Parliament to ensure that as the executive,
as well as the administration, as we discharge our duty we are mindful of
those frontiers that lie ahead of us that we need to conquer.

I’m sure as Parliament we will play our oversight role so that, as the
departments as well as the executive continue with their work we are able
not only to monitor and evaluate the impact of the programme but also to
lend a helping hand. I thank you, House Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mnr H J BEKKER: Agb mevrou die Voorsitter, die agb Minister van Finansies
verdien 'n pluimpie vir weer eens 'n goeie begroting. Die kroonjuweel in
die agb minister Manuel se kroon is die Suid-Afrikaanse Inkomstediens wat
'n oorskot van meer as R40 miljard daargestel het, hoofsaaklik as gevolg
van die oorverhaling van inkomstebelasting en die surplus op belasting op
toegevoegde waarde. Wat 'n voorreg om te beplan en te begroot met so 'n
geweldige voorsprong, terwyl die begrote tekort van die vorige jaar feitlik
uitgewis is deur onderbesteding. Die Minister se grootste probleem is
oënskynlik wat om met al die surplusgeld in sy koffers te doen.

Die IVP is 'n sterk ondersteuner van effektiwiteit en finansiële
dissipline, en veral dat klem gelê word op ekonomiese groei. Groter of
versnelde ekonomiese groei lei tot groter maatskappywinste en kapitale
uitbreidings, wat op hul beurt meer inkomstebelasting vir die staat beteken
én, veral kumulatief, meer belasting op toegevoegde waarde. Wanneer die
staat dan sy surplus en lenings terugploeg in massiewe kapitaalprojekte,
soos met die miljarde aan Transnet en Eskom, is die tafel gedek vir verdere
ekonomiese groei waarbinne die sogenaamde “multiplier effect”
[vermenigvuldigereffek] definitief gaan inskop. Die vermenigvuldigereffek
beteken dat die oorspronklike kapitaalbesteding tot tienvoudig
gehersirkuleer kan word en 'n ware inspuiting vir die ekonomie en
werkverskaffing kan beteken.

Die IVP het gepleit vir die afskaffing van belasting op pensioenfondse en
die Minister het ons halfpad ontmoet. Ons vertrou dat dit vir die Minister
moontlik sal wees om volgende jaar met die oorblywende 9% belasting op
pensioenfondse weg te doen.

Ons is verder ten gunste van die geleidelike infasering van 'n basiese
inkomstetoelaag in ooreenstemming met die Taylor-verslag en daarom het ons
vrouegroepe ondersteun wat gepleit het om die verhoging in die
ouderdomsperk tot 18-jariges vir die kindertoelaag. Dink net daaraan, dan
word daardie meisies wat op skool bly en presteer ook beloon pleks van
diegene wat babas kry voor hul agtiende verjaarsdag.

Soortgelyk kan die middeletoets aangepas en mettertyd afgeskaf word met
betrekking tot ouderdomspensioene van ons senior burgers. Op hierdie wyse
kan die basiese inkomstetoelaag geleidelik ingestel word, sonder om die
stelsel oornag ryp te druk. Volgende jaar is nog 'n jaar en, wie weet,
miskien kan die Minister soos in die verlede met die amnestiewetgewing met
Inkatha saamwerk, of ons raad aanvaar. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr H J BEKKER: Hon Madam Chairperson, the hon Minister of Finance once
again deserves to be complimented for an excellent budget. The crown jewel
in the hon Minister Manuel's crown is the South African Revenue Service
that accomplished a surplus of more than R40 billion largely as a result of
the over recovery of income tax and the surplus of taxation on value-added
tax. What a privilege to be able to plan and budget with such a great
advantage, while the budgeted shortcoming of last year has practically been
wiped out as a result of underspending. The Minister's biggest problem is
apparently what to do with the surplus money in his coffers.
The IFP is a strong supporter of efficiency and financial discipline, and
in particular that emphasis be placed on economic growth. Greater or
accelerated economic growth leads to greater company profits and capital
expansion, which again lead to more income tax for the state, and
especially accumatively, more value-added tax. When the state then
reinvests its surplus and loans into massive capital projects, such as the
billions to Transnet and Telkom, the table is set for further economic
growth in which the so-called "multiplier effect" will definitely kick in.
The multiplier effect means that the original capital expenditure can be
recirculated tenfold and can be a real injection for the economy and
employment opportunities.

The IFP pleaded for the abolition of taxation on pension funds and the
Minister met us halfway. We trust that it will be possible for the Minister
to do away with the remaining 9% on pension funds in the next year.

We are furthermore in favour of the gradual phasing-in of a basic income
allowance in accordance with the Taylor report and therefore we supported
women groups who pleaded for an increase in the age limit to include 18-
year-olds for the children’s grant. Just think about it, then those girls
who stay at school and perform are also rewarded instead of those who have
babies before their eighteenth birthday.

Similarly the resources test can be modified and later abolished with
regard to old age pensions for our senior citizens. In this manner the
basic income grant can be introduced slowly, without having to force the
system to ripen overnight. Next year is another year and, who knows, the
Minister could perhaps, as he did in the past with the amnesty legislation,
collaborate with Inkatha or accept our advice.]

For several years the IFP has highlighted the importance of Richards Bay
and that it could become the gateway to Africa whilst opening up the
slumbering provinces of Mpumalanga and Limpopo via the underutilised rail
track from Richards Bay to the Mpumalanga coalfields. Government has now
bought into the idea and we thank them.

For industrial development and cheaper electricity there are no better
regions than Mpumalanga and northern KwaZulu-Natal, which are both also in
close proximity to Cahora Bassa. Cross-boundary negotiations have been
opened by the government and I can even foresee gas and oil pipelines
connecting the South African development region. Imagine what it can mean
for Southern Africa if we were to be linked by pipeline to the oilfields in
Cabinda, Angola.

We applaud government’s efforts to accelerate economic growth and recent
statements on developing the manufacturing base of South Africa. Together
with the modernisation and technological innovation of industries you
simply have to realise the importance of the principle of competitive
advantage. Let’s face it, in certain categories it will be impossible for
South Africa to compete internationally and particularly against the Asian
and East blocs.

Handicaps with regard to region, provincial bias and price-fixing must be
addressed. The IFP supports the Department of Trade and Industry in its
criticism of Mittal Steel with regard to their price-fixing aimed at South
African steel manufacturers by selling steel at the London international
export price. South African manufacturers should at least have the benefit
of the international price, less the freight cost of that exported steel.

Telkom is another example of abuse of a privileged monopolistic situation,
whilst Eskom is boasting cheap electricity tariffs, but at a single
outgoing price regardless of where the industrial hubs are situated. It
simply does not make sense that industries relocate to Cape Town and the
Eastern Cape, driven by false economies of scale in terms of which
electricity tariffs are kept artificially the same as in Mpumalanga and the
Tugela Basin of KwaZulu-Natal. Why not lower the tariffs or increase them
according to the real cost factor of power generated by Eskom? Industries
will then locate to the most economical and advantageous region.

We are also in favour of the gas-fired turbine power station envisaged for
and linked to Mossel Bay and the pebble bed modular reactor in order to
level the playing fields and to generate the most sought-after scarcity of
electricity in the Western Cape. Spectators at the last evening rugby match
at Newlands must have seen the poster of the Koeberg Supporters Club:
“Enjoy rugby by candlelight.”

Feit is egter, mnr die Minister, dat die Kaap van “Stormers” nog steeds nie
voldoende krag het nie. Al slaan jy jou oë op na Tafelberg sien jy nog
steeds nie waar jou krag vandaan kom nie, en dis waarom die nuutste
statussimbool in die Kaap nou is om jou eie generator te kan besit.

Ten slotte, 'n vraag aan die agb Minister en sy kollega van Openbare
Ondernemings: Het julle nou al die moer gekry wat Koeberg gesaboteer het?
Sterkte en krag vir julle almal. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[The fact, however, Minister, is that the Cape of “Stormers” still does not
have sufficient electricity.  Even if you cast your eyes up to Table
Mountain, you will still not see where your electricity will be coming
from, and that is why the latest status symbol in Cape Town is to own your
own generator.

In conclusion, a question to the hon Minister and his colleague from Public
Enterprises: Have you found the bolt which sabotaged Koeberg? Power and
strength to everyone.]

Power to the people! [Time expired.]

Ms J L FUBBS: Hon Speaker, hon members of this House, comrades and
colleagues, “In the midst of winter I found in me an invincible summer.”
Inspiring words that echo through the decades and which, for me, so aptly
recall one of our greatest heroes, Bhambatha, and the revolt he led. Indeed
the Bhambatha Rebellion signifies the beginning of umzabalazo, the end of
the wars of resistance and the beginning of the struggle for freedom, and
the culture for human rights, which we celebrated yesterday throughout the
country, began.

Indeed, the beginning of the 20th century was a time of rapid and radical
change, when Africans were dispossessed of their land, their cattle and
their agrarian industry and enterprise. It was a time when an unholy
alliance, which was struck between the government of the day and the mining
magnates, who, through the poll taxes, forced black Africans - referred to
as natives - over the age of 18, to work on the mines.

Diamonds were discovered. How many of us don’t wear them today and forget
how it all happened! Mine bosses wanted large numbers of black people to
work for them in the mines. Laws and taxes were designed to force people to
leave their land. The most severe law was the 1913 Land Act, which
prevented Africans from buying, renting or using land, except in the
reserves.

This Act was the beginning of many such pieces of legislation that broke up
families and unsuccessfully tried to crush the spirit of the majority of
our people. Unwittingly, it created a proletariat and in many ways
expedited the liberation struggle. It was during these tumultuous times
that the ANC was born in 1912 - the oldest liberation movement. Since then,
it has continued the struggle for liberation.

As a liberation movement, the ANC has fought against Bantu education, and
for the right to vote for a government of our choice. And we have just all
been through local government elections. It is only through an ANC
government that we have democratic elections in this country. Say thank you
to the ANC. This history is about our struggle for freedom and justice.

There is a strong message of hope, ushered in by the President earlier on
this year, spelt out in Asgisa and, once again, mapped out in the budget,
by the Minister of Finance. The policies of our current taxation reflect
this commitment to address the daunting challenges we face in our country.

Just as Pixley ka Isaka Seme, in 1911, called on Africans to forget the
differences of the past and unite together in one national organisation,
today we are called upon to work together within the framework of Asgisa.
Who in this House does not want to be in harness to eradicate poverty?
Indeed, it is through Asgisa that we can address these daunting challenges
of poverty.

In 1920 the ANC supported the militant strike of the mineworkers when, for
the first time, workers became the motivating force of the national
democratic struggle. Interesting enough, just in passing, I want to mention
that the SACP then took an active role. It was, of course, among the first
nonracial political organisations in the country.

Over the past 10 years we have implemented major tax reforms to broaden the
tax base and to introduce equity and fairness. We have reduced marginal
taxes and improved the administration of tax collection. The support for
accelerated and shared growth in South Africa is supported by taxation
measures over the medium term.

Regarding personal taxes, bracket creep has been directly and substantially
addressed by 30% and 33% respectively for personal income tax. The middle-
income earners have not been forgotten, with the top marginal tax rate now
starting at R400 000 a year. When one looks at this figure of R400 000 a
year, one is reminded very much that the ANC government now has done
everything it can to foster and further the implementation of tax relief.
In fact, we are looking at something along the lines of R13,5 billion,
which really indicates that we put people first.

By raising the tax threshold on personal income tax to R400 000, the
government has in one swift move exempted many low-income earners from
income tax. It has also addressed the plight of our people who wish to own
their own homes by drastically reducing the transfer duty. This has cut the
costs of property transactions.

I want to refer to someone mentioned by one of my esteemed colleagues – a
man I have the greatest respect for. I also want to refer to someone who
enjoys just the edge of that respect – Prof Katz. All of us listened with
great interest to Prof Katz’s inputs. I know we all did. We didn’t agree
with everything that he put forward. In fact, some of us were debating the
research and development as at 150, not just over the top, as it were. But
let’s leave that as it were, and we will come to some debate on it.
Let’s look at the companies. My heart bleeds for these companies. In 1994
the tax rate was 40%, and then it came down to 35%. We did this as a sign
of good faith to try and reassure them. That was not sufficient and, of
course, we brought it down to 29%. Having brought it right down to 29% and
so on, I look at this and I am not an authority on tax but Prof Katz said
... [Interjections.] ... No, no, you are quite right, but I now listen to
the authorities. May I suggest something like what Ben Okri said, “Turn on
the light”. Read his poem. It was drafted for the millennium, but, of
course, it is very relevant today. Katz said, and I quote:

   I support the decision not to reduce basic corporate tax. A further
   reduction of corporate rates unaccompanied by a reduction in the maximum
   marginal rate of individual tax would result in a very unhealthy tax
   arbitrage.

As a matter of fact, hon Davidson, you were concurring there. It is not an
appropriate time to reduce maximum marginal rates of individual tax. That
is not a Fubbs statement; it comes from an esteemed, respected tax
authority called Katz.

Now I want to tackle the secondary tax on companies, STC. Here is another
thing, I don’t claim to have the edge on maths but I know how to count
though. That’s very useful when you come to STC. If you look at the STC,
the ANC government said, “Look, of course, we are going to reduce this. We
can’t reduce it by that much, but at the very least we can take it down
from 25% to 12,5%.” That was not enough and I didn’t even hear a thank you
at the time.

But on top of that, because there were no thank yous, there was a further
sweetener. They said: “Now, look guys, take out your calculators and we
will tell you what you can do. You have all these dividends coming from
other companies. You are all in this together. Before you declare your
dividends, have a little discussion on your golf course, and work out as to
whether this is the right time to declare your dividends, or whether you
should withhold it for a moment and offset it against losses. You can take
that decision. It leaves that in your own hands.”

Then it was said, “Deduct what you want to pay as a dividend to what you
are receiving.” Of course, they do this long before you see it in writing.
And then, “Maybe you want to offset the losses next year, only if what you
are paying exceeds this will you then have to dip into that little resource
of yours at the bank.” Now, I have never heard of such a hand-out.

The Americans are looking at us and saying, “Hey, you give it to them on a
plate!” They are looking at us with envy. But, never mind because we have
taken a decision to develop and shape our own tax policy. As I said this
morning, complex as tax legislation may appear to be, it doesn’t take
truckloads of policy before you can take a decision like you would have to
do in the United States or the United Kingdom.

Furthermore, to show how lenient we are, we don’t make taxation proposals
law with immediate effect, but maybe one or two years later. In Britain,
just the opposite applies. I think it was in 1913 when they said, “You guys
hang on to everything. As soon as the chancellor of the exchequer
pronounces, my friends, the guillotine has fallen.” We are not like that,
because we are equitable and fair.

If I am trying to make this sound as if tax is just a numbers game, it is
not. It’s all about equity and expanding our minds and contributing to
human capital. Look at Tsotsi, the Oscar-winning film, which was in fact
made possible to a degree, you could argue, because of the tax rebates. So
there we have an ANC government that says, “It’s not just a matter of
number crunching. Let’s promote the film and production industry, and
develop our labour-intensive areas in the industry.”
Really, all I want to say to members who disagree with me is: “Switch on
the light, because once you do, you are going to see a lot better and
understand a lot better.” The ANC government supports this budget. I thank
you. [Time expired.][Applause.]

Mr J BICI: Chairperson, hon members, the UDM supports the budget again, Mr
Manuel. The national Budget, as reflected in this Appropriation Bill, is a
balancing act. Overall it is a good reflection on the strength of our
economy.

Much of this year’s budget’s success is built on the better-than-expected
economic growth and revenue collection. A number of problematic areas
remain, however, when it comes to expenditure. The failure to spend
allocated funds bedevils the best of intentions to deliver.

At provincial and local level, shortages of skills and capacity as well as
mismanagement nullify increasing budgets and shares of revenue.

On the social front the Appropriation Bill allocates significant funding
towards education, health and social grants. Education remains one of the
most fundamental long-term social and economic investments that we can make
in our country. Therefore the no-fee school system is to be welcomed. But
is the growth in higher-education allocations keeping pace with the real
needs and demands being placed upon higher-education institutions?

The real growth of social grants cannot be said to adequately address the
real cost of living of the recipients. The Minister argues that social
grants should not become disincentives for employment. But, be that as it
may, people depending solely on these grants are specifically or
essentially becoming poorer each day.

Another social matter the UDM would have liked the Minister to address
emphatically in his Budget Speech is the HIV/Aids pandemic, which
constitutes one of the single biggest threats to the future success of the
country when you compare the amount of people requiring antiretroviral
treatment with the target the government has set.

There are two macro factors that will affect our society profoundly,
economically and socially. These are energy and water. The increasing
incidence of power failures and persistent droughts are exposing a severe
lack of infrastructure, investment and maintenance.

We are looking towards a water and energy-scarce future, even if these
problems are addressed. What this requires is long-term investment in
research and development of alternative sources of water and energy. We
again say, Mr Manuel, that we support your budget. [Applause.]

Mr B A D MARTINS: Hon Chairperson and hon members, we meet at a time when
there is broad agreement across the political spectrum that the South
African economy continues to improve its performance in many important
areas. A cursory look at the facts also reveals that the past 11 years of
democracy have indeed been very good to big business.

For the ANC the key challenge remains to ensure that the growing economy
benefits all, with special reference to workers, the economically
marginalised, the unemployed and the poor. It is in this context that the
ANC sees Asgisa as an important stimulant to drive the economy to a higher
rate of growth that will optimise broad-based impact.

The ANC further supports the Asgisa programme of targeted interventions,
and its aim to halve unemployment and poverty by the year 2014. In order to
meet the 2014 objectives, it will be important for the interdepartmental
economic cluster programme to focus on the joint implementation of
strategic high-impact Asgisa projects so that government firstly, moves
faster to address the challenges of poverty, underdevelopment and
marginalisation confronting those caught in the margins of the economy to
ensure that the poor share in our country’s growing prosperity.
Secondly, we need to make the necessary interventions with regard to the
economy to accelerate progress towards the achievement of higher levels of
economic growth and development of at least 6% per year. Thirdly, we need
to sustain and improve the effectiveness of social development programmes
targeted at providing support to those most exposed to the threat of abject
poverty.

It is, however, important to bear in mind that Asgisa is not intended to
cover all elements of a comprehensive developmental plan. It rather
consists of a limited set of interventions that are intended to serve as
building blocks to accelerated and shared growth and development. It is in
this context that the Asgisa objectives confirm the need to expand the
small, medium and micro enterprise sector, and the need to pay particular
attention to broad-based black economic empowerment, and the development of
women and the youth.

It will thus be necessary to ensure the effectiveness of measures and
programmes such as the Apex microcredit fund; the Micro-Agricultural
Financial Institutions of South Africa for agricultural development; Seda,
the Small Enterprise Development Agency; Khula; the Umsobomvu Youth Fund,
the IDC Small Business Initiative; and others.

On the other hand, manufacturing remains the engine of our economy. As a
major sector, it has substantial linkages to primary and tertiary sectors.
Industrial policy must, however, be increasingly broader than manufacturing
to include particular activities in services and agriculture.

It is appropriate that the DTI will be finalising the National Industrial
Policy Framework that will include a regional development strategy and
focus on strengthening competition regulation. The policy will focus on
unlocking South African industrial development in a sustainable manner
through identifying strategic industrial interventions.

In this context, it is also important that state-owned enterprises, such as
Transnet, Eskom and Telkom, amongst others, also facilitate public
expenditure-led growth.

Finally, it will be crucial that the economic cluster, in co-ordinating an
effective implementation strategy, ensures that it mobilises all relevant
social partners to contribute to the process of economic growth in a manner
that all South Africans can take pride in. The ANC supports the
Appropriation Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, hon Ministers,
Deputy Ministers, fellow members, comrades and colleagues, the ANC has been
the party for and of the poor - and still is. Most of us, as we are seated
here, have grown up in townships. We have learned our politics on the
streets, and today we sit here, having been elected largely by the poor.
They have voted for us so that we can deliver to them water, electricity,
jobs, services and, most critically, safer communities.

The ANC welcomes the 2006 Budget as a firm indication and commitment that
is focused on the needs and aspirations of the poor. It is truly a people’s
budget, as it seeks to balance economic growth and social development. Our
people look to us to tip the scales in their favour with substantial
investment in their communities, which will alleviate poverty and
significantly contribute to their development.

If we look at Budget 2006, what we see is that the Minister of Finance and
his team have produced a very even-handed and well-balanced budget. Their
major task was always to provide for the needs of the poor, as well as to
create the conditions for capital to grow, and thereby grow the economy and
create jobs that our people so badly crave.

In the safety and security cluster our role in bringing social stability
and economic sustainability to our communities is taken very seriously.
Measures announced in the budget will better provide resources for the
criminal justice system as a whole, and will therefore assist in making our
communities safer.

The President, in his state of the nation address, stated quite clearly
that government would continue to focus its efforts on the critical
challenges faced by our criminal justice system. For this cluster, we look
forward to measures that will further reduce illegal firearms through
stringent new licensing procedures; reduce drug trafficking and substance
abuse; and implement social crime prevention measures.

Due to the high incidence of crime in our communities, government
departments and particularly Justice are struggling to cope with the
caseloads in the courts, and will be given extra financial capacity to deal
with this matter. For Correctional Services, in particular, this has a
direct impact on the awaiting-trial detainees languishing in our
facilities.

Overcrowding is the single biggest challenge and, critically, it is a
challenge that can only be addressed by the Justice, Crime Prevention and
Security Cluster, JCPS, as a whole. Three areas were specifically
highlighted for Correctional Services by the President in his state of the
nation address: firstly, the building of new correctional centres;
secondly, the reduction of the numbers of children in correctional
facilities or centres; and thirdly, the implementation of the
recommendations of the Jali Commission.

Priority number one, regarding the construction of new centres, we do
recognise that they will alleviate overcrowding and contribute to economic
growth through infrastructure development and job creation. As members
might know, the major constraint in projects of this nature is that neither
the department nor the Minister is in control of the multiplicity of
processes involved between the declaration of intent and the completion of
construction. Members should therefore rest assured that this issue is
receiving the full attention of senior management in the Department of
Correctional Services, as well as the Minister, Treasury and Public Works.

Secondly, as the ANC, we have always proclaimed that the correctional
facility or centre is not the place for any child. In this regard, I have a
scheduled meeting with my counterpart in social development, Deputy
Minister Benjamin, where we will take forward previous discussions between
her and my predecessor on this matter.

The Department is also fully committed to removing children from our
correctional centres, and we will continue working with our partners in the
JCPS and social clusters to ensure that there is delivery on this matter.
The Department of Social Development, at the moment, does not have the
necessary financial and human resources to manage children or juveniles
convicted of crimes or awaiting trial.

We are also aware that the continued detention of children at these
centres, which were meant for sentenced adults, constitutes a violation of
some of the provisions of the Children Bill, as well as the children’s
charter. At our last national general council of the ANC, which was in June
2005, we resolved to continue lobbying government to pay attention to the
establishment of places of safety for children in conflict with the law.

I am also glad to note that this matter is one of the priorities within the
social cluster, as well as the JCPS cluster.

With regard to the Jali Commission’s report and its recommendations, the
report is now before the Minister. We will refer it to Parliament once we
have digested its contents and have articulated a way forward regarding the
recommendations contained therein.

With regard to Asgisa, spearheaded and led by our Deputy President, it is
expected that all government departments will, in addition to the reporting
systems relating to the legislative and policy mandates, produce short-,
medium- and long-term plans, and reports on how they will contribute
specifically to this project.

The envisaged contribution of the Department of Correctional Services to
Asgisa creates an opportunity for the department to develop a coherent
strategy for alignment of its core business of rehabilitation and
correction with wider national objectives, such as poverty alleviation, job
creation, growth and economic development.

The intersectoral nature of Asgisa implies that the Department of
Correctional Services will have to build and strengthen its relationship
with NGOs, business, labour, communities, professional bodies, statutory
bodies, and all strategic partners. Regional commissioners, area
commissioners and heads of centres should therefore direct their energies
at strengthening relations with the spheres of government in which they
operate with a view to realising these objectives within Asgisa.

The Department of Correctional Services, I am also glad to note, has
prioritised its engagement with local government during the course of this
financial year. Senior management has been tasked with developing a list of
standard issues that should constitute a programme of engagement between
the department and the municipalities.

Lastly, we, as the ANC, are of the view that to achieve our objectives of
the second decade of freedom, we need stronger partnerships among all South
Africans, a people’s contract for a better South Africa. The ANC commits
itself to working within communities and within government to play its role
in forging a people’s contract for a better South Africa.

Inspired by its commitment to democratic consultation, mass participation,
and volunteerism, the ANC has, over the decades of its existence, focused,
amongst other things, on safe and crime-free communities. We therefore want
to call on all sectors of society to make their contribution to creating a
crime-free South Africa. Our people have voted for peace, safety and
prosperity. Let’s make the age of hope a living reality for all. And, once
more, the ANC supports the Appropriation Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, hon Minister, congratulations on delivering your
10th Budget Vote; you correctly painted a rosy picture of the economy with
the economic growth forecast revised to 4,2% of GDP from the forecast of
3,8%. The revenue authorities are also to be commended for collecting R41
billion more than last year’s projected target.

The balance, hon Minister, that must be struck, is to use the fiscal space
created by the revenue overruns and savings on debt service costs to give
something back to the economy, and in so doing, to address poverty and
unemployment.

The ACDP trusts that personal tax relief granted will result in higher
levels of domestic savings. The national savings ratio has steadily
declined to 13,5% for 2005, bringing the savings ratio to a level
previously seen in 1949. We also trust that the welcome reduction in the
tax on retirement funds, halved from 18% to 9%, will result in greater
domestic savings.

The ACDP is also on record as supporting a reduction in corporate tax
rates. However, the removal of the RSC levy will result in substantial
savings for business, bringing effective tax relief of about R7 billion a
year. According to the Business Law Review of March 2006, the fact that the
RSC levy is not replaced can, for all practical purposes, be equated to a
2% cut in the corporate tax rate.

The ACDP encourages small businesses that are not tax compliant to make use
of the tax amnesty granted by SARS. Clearly, the larger the net, the lower
the rate of tax will be for all of us. With the core priority of the budget
to strengthen education, public health services and social welfare
services, we welcome the additional R30,9 billion to the provincial
equitable share over the next three years.

We also welcome the increases in the social welfare grants, which, though
modest, will go some way to alleviate the plight of the poorest of the
poor.

Serious cause of concern is that we are running our largest current account
deficit in history, currently at R73 billion or 4,7% of GDP. Can we
continually rely on a sufficient surplus on the financial account to cover
the deficits on the current account? A further constraint to economic
growth is clearly the capacity of Eskom to deliver power.
Certain issues have been raised in the Financial Mail, which I would like
to quote from the 3 March 2006 edition. Whilst Eskom itself has certain
plans in place, the Financial Mail quote says that “whilst we can blame
Eskom for the blackouts, the biggest folly is that of economic planners,
government itself”. Clearly this is an aspect that needs to be looked at.

Whilst there is a huge demand for social security as indicated by
substantial increases in the budget, government must shift from welfare
towards development - and this, hon Minister, you have stated already - in
order to address poverty and unemployment in the long term. At the end of
the day we will be judged on the degree to which the economic boom
translates into more jobs to address the poverty experienced in our
country. This is the ultimate challenge.

Thank you, hon Minister, and congratulations to the Treasury and Ministry
for the exceptional job done with this Budget.

Mr M JOHNSON: Chairperson, hon members, Ministers and Deputy Ministers, the
Treasury team, comrades and friends, as always, it brings joy for one to
address this august House on matters of national importance, matters that
mean life and death to the vast, destitute majority out there.

Indeed, it becomes an honour and privilege for anyone of us to stand here
and speak, not only to a few of us here, but to the poor and rich, to the
young and old, to the black and white, to the literate and the illiterate,
to the South Africans, the Africans in Africa and in diaspora.

Appropriation of monies from the National Revenue Fund for requirements of
state in the 2006-07 financial year becomes a vital component of our
democracy as we continually seek to entrench it. This we do consistent with
the constitutional requirements of section 213(2) that stipulates that -

  Money may be withdrawn from the National Revenue Fund only –
     a) in terms of an appropriation by an Act of Parliament; ...

Furthermore, the Public Finance Management Act of 1999 provides that
Parliament must appropriate money for each financial year for requirements
of state.

For the progressives led by the ANC, we contribute in this debate in
fulfilment of the Freedom Charter’s slogan that stipulates that, “The
people shall govern.” More importantly, this governance must and can only
and mostly be felt at local government level where the coalface of delivery
is to be seen and felt.

Our debate takes place against the backdrop of 21 March, officially
declared as Human Rights Day on our calendar. Lest we forget, an official
figure of 69 of those peaceful marchers shot dead was recorded at
Sharpeville.

Human rights are people’s rights, people’s rights to basic services. They
are people’s rights to govern their lives through ward committees and other
spheres of government. These are human rights to live a better life. These
are people’s rights that stipulate that for you to talk of human rights,
you must have shelter, a job and food.

Those living perpetrators who engaged in such callous acts need to go back
to those communities and publicly apologise for their actions that caused
so much misery to the dear ones of the deceased and the living, maimed both
physically and spiritually.

Yes, the truth and reconciliation term came and is indeed gone forever, but
reconciliation is a process that involves forgiveness. President Mbeki
said: “Today is indeed better than yesterday, and tomorrow will certainly
be better than today.”

Part of this act that we are engaged in seeks to make local government work
better for you and your communities. Having identified the constraints and
the gaps, we build on reconstruction and development, and the human
resource development strategy by focusing on capacity-building through the
Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa, Asgisa, as it is
popularly known. Together with the RDP, Asgisa is continually to build on a
sound economic basis that is aimed at bringing about a better life for all.

This initiative is also intended to enhance Project Consolidate, an
intervention that seeks to bring a working system to the ailing
municipalities in order to have effective and efficient local government.
Minister Manuel’s proposals on zero-rating municipal property rates will go
a long way to simplify the accounting tax records of municipalities. We
have inherited a complex structure of municipal systems that must be made
people-friendly and must talk to the daily experiences of our people.

Once again, skilling at this level of governance ensures the extent of
capacity-building in our local government. Capacity-building must be
supported by a strong learnership programme, thanks to the extension of
this programme to 2011. This then calls on the private sector to join
government in supporting these programmes that will ensure young people
enter into training and gain experience and jobs.

Local government, through the Joint Initiative for Priority Skills
Acquisition initiative, Jipsa, must call on the skilled and the newly
skilled audit in order to enhance the skills base that seeks to bring about
a better life for all. The ANC supports this budget, a budget that talks to
the building of capacity within our municipalities, the coalface of
delivery. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Agb Voorsitter, ek het oor die jare heen al na baie
begrotings in dié Raad geluister. Dis min dat 'n Minister so kan geld
uitdeel aan departemente en aan maatskaplike toelaes sonder om ingrypend
aan die ander kant belastings hoef te verhoog. Tog het die agb Minister met
dié begroting dit reggekry.

Ek het dit dus in mediareaksie dan ook as 'n goeienuus-begroting beskryf.
Die Minister was in 'n posisie om verskeie toegewings te maak, wat ek glo
in die langer termyn bewys sal lewer en sal wys dat dit goed was vir die
ekonomie. Verskeie jare reeds argumenteer die VF Plus aangaande die
belasting op aftreefondse en ons verwelkom dit dat die Minister wel die
belasting op aftreefondse verlaag het. Die 9% gaan die staat R2,4 miljard
kos.

Die vraag is of met so 'n klein verlies aan die staat se kant, die Minister
nie maar die belasting kon afgeskaf het nie. Dieselfde geld vir
boedelbelasting. As gevolg van die styging in huispryse loop 'n
middelklasfamilie nou die risiko dat die waardasie van hul huis so gestyg
het dat hulle die huis sal moet verkoop vir boedelbelasting sou die
broodwinner skielik sterf. Dit was tog sekerlik nooit die bedoeling met
boedelbelasting gewees nie. Hierdie saak sal jaarliks dopgehou moet word om
te voorkom dat ons weer in so 'n situasie beland.
Die Minister weet dat die landbousektor tans groot ekonomiese probleme
ondervind. Hul gevoel is dat dié regering nie werklik begrip of simpatie
met hul situasie het nie, en dat die begroting – met soveel geld beskikbaar
– dit vir hulle makliker kon gemaak het. Kom ek gee vir u een voorbeeld:
ons raak gewoond aan die jaarlikse verhoging van die sogenaamde
sondebelasting, dis dinge soos tabak en alkoholiese drank; die persentasies
is meestal meer as inflasie. Volgens ons berekeninge kry die regering tans
meer inkomste uit 'n bottel wyn as wat die boer as produsent kry.

Die deurlopende hoë verhoging van dié belasting kan hierdie bedryf in
byvoorbeeld die Noord-Kaap, waarvan ek kennis het, permanente skade aanrig.
Elke jaar word na die agb leier, mnr Buthelezi gekyk – dié kant toe – en
dan word daar aangekondig dat tradisionele bier uitgelaat word en geen
verhoging sal kry nie. Ek dink die Minister skuld die wynbedryf een jaar
ook so 'n kyk om hulle dan ook 'n jaar vry te skeld.

Omdat dienslewering dikwels op provinsiale en plaaslike vlak vashaak, hoor
ek regeringsgeluide om die probleme op te los deur van hierdie magte
nasionaal te sentraliseer. Dis 'n normale reaksie om te sê, “Kom ons beheer
dit, dit word nie dáár goed gedoen nie.” Ongelukkig het ek nie in my
toespraak tyd om volledig daaroor te argumenteer nie, maar die VF Plus glo
regtig dis 'n fout om as gevolg van huidige probleme die hele beginsel van
die afwenteling van mag na sentrale mag te vernietig. Tussentydse
oplossings is moontlik om probleme, waar daar gesentreer is, aan te spreek.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Hon Chairperson, I have listened to many budgets in this
Council over the years. It is seldom that a Minister can distribute money
to departments and in the form of social grants in this manner without
having to increase taxation drastically on the other hand. Nonetheless, the
hon Minister has managed to do so with this budget.

In my response to the media, I accordingly described it as a good-news
budget. The Minister was in a position to make various concessions, which I
believe will prove and will show that they were good for the economy in the
longer term. The FF Plus has been arguing for many years already about the
taxation on retirement funds and we welcome the fact that the Minister has
indeed decreased the taxation on retirement funds. The 9% is going to cost
the state R2,4 billion.

The question is whether, with such a small loss on the side of the state,
the Minister could not just have abolished the tax. The same applies to
estate duty. As a result of the increase in house prices a middle-class
family now runs the risk that the valuation of their house might have
increased to such an extent that they would have to sell the house for the
purposes of estate duty if the breadwinner were to die suddenly. That is
surely not what was intended by estate duty. This matter will have to be
monitored annually to prevent us from finding ourselves in such a situation
again.

The Minister knows that the agricultural sector is experiencing serious
economic problems at present. They feel that this government does not
really have an understanding of or sympathy with their situation, and that
the budget – with so much money available – could have made it easier for
them. Let me give you one example: we are getting used to the annual
increase of the so-called “sin tax”, namely things such as tobacco and
alcoholic beverages; the percentages are, more often than not, higher than
inflation. According to our calculations the government is at present
getting more revenue from a bottle of wine than the farmer as producer
receives.

The continuous high increase in this taxation can cause permanent damage to
this industry in, for example, the Northern Cape, of which I have
knowledge. Every year a glance is directed the hon leader, Mr Buthelezi -
in this direction – and then an announcement is made that traditional beer
is to be exempted and will not be subject to an increase. I think that the
Minister owes it to the wine industry to look at it in the same way one
year and then also to exempt it for a year.

Because service delivery is often problematic at provincial and local
level, I can hear sounds from the government’s side to the effect that the
problems can be solved by centralising these powers nationally. It is a
normal reaction to say, “Let us control this, it is not being done well
there”. Unfortunately, I do not have time in my speech to elaborate on this
in full, but the FF Plus truly believes that it is a mistake to destroy the
whole principle of the devolution of power and resort to central power and
as a result of present problems. Interim solutions are possible to address
problems where centralisation has taken place.]

The irony is that government must still have the voting power behind it,
but the question is: How much doing power does it have? A well-known
political analyst put it in this way:


  The lack of capabilities is not restricted to one or two sectors of the
  Public Service, but impacts on most of the government departments. The
  Department of Finance and SARS are among the very few where an efficient
  job is still being done.


And that is a compliment for the Minister.

So, the question is, as government functions decline the private sector is
taking over these functions and we have the privatisation of government
functions, is that good or bad? Let me give you one example. By the end of
2005, there were 300 000 private security guards in comparison to 148
police officers. Do we want to see this trend continuing? Is that the best
way or not? I would like to think that we can debate that as well as the
centralisation of more power. I thank you.

Ms L L MABE: Chairperson, colleagues and South Africans, I send you
revolutionary greetings and want to say that we must all take part in
reconstructing and developing our country for greater economic development
and growth.

The growing awareness and interest of South Africans in the affairs that
impact on their lives pose a serious challenge to legislatures and
government to be more efficient in service delivery.

Simultaneously, the legislatures need to strengthen their oversight role of
government and the executive to ensure that the programmes and strategic
plans are implemented with the desired diligence and passion towards the
achievement of a better life for all.

There is an increasing demand for the oversight function of the
legislatures, in particular Parliament, to insist on government departments
achieving and producing the outcomes as indicated in their strategic plans.
Thus the pace of service delivery must be increased during this decade of
our democracy to reduce poverty by half in 2014. There is no reason not to
achieve this aim, because we have good policies and we only need commitment
for better implementation, as we have financial resources at our disposal.

The reduction of poverty levels by half in 2014 is achievable, as I have
indicated, because we have the required financial resources. I hope that
the Minister of Finance will double his efforts to produce more in the
coming years.

I want to add a word of caution: having the required financial resources is
not a guarantee at all for the achievement of the expected outcomes or
results. The allocation of financial resources or money by the National
Treasury in the past few years is not matched by the results the
departments produce at the end of the financial year. The departments
always have reasons or excuses about why they have not achieved their
objectives, whereas they ask for budgets as per their strategic plans,
which need commitment and passion, as I indicated, to be implemented.

Therefore this is an indirect call by departments for Parliament to
strengthen its oversight role to ensure that the budget is implemented as
per those strategic plans, without any unnecessary deviations.

Many South Africans are always keen to know what government has in its
trolley on Budget day, because they want to know more about the financial
resources that government allocates towards the achievement of a better
life for all.

However, it is unfair and at the same time oppressive for our people when
the departments do not make the realisation of a better life for all a
reality, but instead make it look like a donkey cart that moves slowly and
does not match the financial resources that are at the disposal of the
department. Thus, this is an indirect removal of the hope of our people,
rather than strengthening that hope.

To cite an example, the announcement in the previous budget about the
building of four new correctional centres gave many people confidence that
this would assist greatly in addressing overcrowding in prisons, whereas
strategic plans and budget estimates done prior to the allocation made it
possible to realise these objectives.

I quote from the estimates of the national expenditure to 2006:

  Four new correctional centres with the original target date for
  completion set for the 2006-07 financial year were included in the
  Budget. After the Department of Public Works’ tendering process, the cost
  per project had virtually doubled compared to initial projections. Then
  the department appointed independent quantity surveyors to investigate,
  resulting in the delivery date being revised to 2008-09.


The heart of the matter is: Were the initial projections realisable? Whzy
did it take so long to implement those plans that were presented, because
money was made available as requested? How much will be spent before the
actual construction comes into operation? Will it be business as usual for
people who have failed and delayed the implementation of the initial plans?
What must Parliament do in this instance as part of its oversight function?

Mmega dikgang wa City Press e leng Mpumelelo Mkhabela o fetsa a e nametsa
thaba kgomo e tlhotsang ena a re ... [A City Press reporter, Mpumelelo
Mkhabela has eventually put the frying pan into the fire by saying that
...]

... information that the departments had rechannelled was never presented
to Parliament in its documents.

Fela o bowa a tswella a re ... [However, Mpumelelo continued by saying ...]

... National Treasury has told Parliament that –

   ... with an allocation of R1 billion in its three-year budget cycle, the
   Department of Correctional Services should have been able to start and
   complete four prisons, even though the costs were increased.

This scenario emphasises the importance of Parliament’s oversight role in
the budget. It poses a big challenge to Parliament to ensure that the Joint
Budget Committee is given the necessary resources that it requires in order
to complement the work of the portfolio committees and the Standing
Committee on Public Accounts, and for Parliament itself to carry out its
oversight function, as stated in the Constitution.

The 51st national conference of the ANC noted that there is –

   ... need for all legislatures to exercise oversight responsibility
   comprehensively by holding government departments and organs of state
   accountable for both non-financial service delivery and financial
   performance.

The conference resolved that it supported the need for all legislatures to
improve their capacity to exercise their constitutional oversight role and
assess the performance of all organs of state, and be provided with the
necessary and sufficient resources to carry out this role effectively.
Therefore Parliament needs to speed up the process of legislating how its
oversight function over the budget should operate.

Taking note of the points I have raised earlier on in my speech, the
underlying questions are: Is the time not ripe for Parliament to have
powers to amend the budget? If not, how will it ascertain that departments
are effective and efficient in the implementation of the plans in relation
to their budgets, as presented to Parliament? How will Parliament ensure
that financial resources that are allocated to various departments and
organs of state improve the lives of the poor? If the status quo is
maintained, how will Parliament ensure that the increasing budget
allocations bring about drastic changes in the lives of the majority of our
people, and promote sharing and greater participation by previously
disadvantaged people in the growth of our communities?

How can our budget ensure that these people participate more, rather than
having only those who have been advantaged continuing to participate, or
those who are at the top continuing to participate rather than increasing
the participation of more people in accessing economic benefits?

I want to indicate clearly to members of this House, and I want to
challenge members of this House, to engage in the discussion or in the
debate on what the effective oversight of Parliament over the budget means
in relation to poverty eradication. What does it imply about us in the
portfolio committees having to ensure that the financial resources that are
made possible by National Treasury are utilised efficiently so that
departments can achieve what they intended to achieve in that particular
year? How do we make these departments accountable, rather than, from time
to time, having departments spending towards the end of the financial year?
Why should that be the case? Why can’t they redesign their plans to ensure
that whatever they have planned for will be achieved in that particular
year?
I repeat: I challenge those of us in portfolio committees to ensure that,
for those budgets where departments come and plead with us to convince us
that they will be able to deliver on their targets, we pin them down to
delivering on those targets as per their strategic plans.

Unfortunately, it is the burden of the Standing Committee on Public
Accounts, at the end of the financial year, when everything has been done
and people have presented their excuses - or perhaps don’t even present
their excuses - to the portfolio committees for why they did not implement
the budget as planned, to interrogate why money was not utilised
effectively. That is the challenge I leave with you. Thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]

Dr G G WOODS: Chairperson, over the last 10 years, revenue collections have
increased on average by a remarkable 10% a year, and this is the single
biggest contribution to the country’s improving fiscal fortunes, and more
than anything else, is the means through which the Minister has been able
to strategically promote both demand and supply sides of the economy.

Lowering taxes, increasing social spending, reducing the national debt and
stimulating economic growth has been the type of opportunities he has
capitalised on in order to improve the country’s economic and socioeconomic
situations.

It stands to reason, however, that sooner or later, there will few or no
new taxes to introduce, and there will be less and less efficiency gains to
be made at the SA Revenue Service. Annual revenue increases will then
struggle to keep up with inflation and other demands on the expenditure
side.

As such, the Minister will not have the range of budget options he has had
in recent years. That is, of course, unless government is able to achieve
far greater savings on the expenditure side. I want to argue that such
savings are to be had if financial management across all departments begins
to achieve the particular objectives of the Public Finance Management Act.

There is a strong and growing body of international evidence, covering both
private and public sectors, which proves that substantial gains in
economies and efficiencies are to be had if modern performance budgeting
and spending management methods are properly employed.

My contention is that the PFMA is not being adequately used. It was
implemented in a rather mechanical way, and is now being applied in a
rather mechanical way. Old bureaucratic attitudes of “Let’s live by the
book” and “Let’s only do what we have to do to keep out of trouble” remain.
The Minister’s intentions at the time of the PFMA’s introduction such as
“We must now move away from a rules-bound regime and must let managers
manage” and “It’s now all about performance and managerial initiative” have
not been properly realised.

The performance idiom of the PFMA is not evident enough, and a value-for-
money culture is not being fully instilled. Sure, there are now strategic
plans and more extensive reporting, but this has quickly become just
another part of the administrative routine rather than a part of the
dynamic that drives higher performance.

The predetermined performance objectives are generally too vague, and are
mostly not measurable in the required way and, at the end of the day,
outputs and outcomes remain modest, and the potential expenditure savings
remain out of reach.

It is clear that there is something lacking in how departments are being
orientated and educated regarding modern, performance-related, financial
management. Perhaps Treasury itself does not have the particular experience
and knowledge to impart the necessary attitudes, and perhaps the SA
Management Development Institute doesn’t either.

The situation requires that we go far beyond just teaching a new set of
rules and procedures to how managers must think, take initiative, seek and
achieve new goals, and feed success with success. [Applause.]

Mrs N B GXOWA: House Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Ministers, hon
members, South Africa’s pre-1994 economic growth path was characterised by
extremes of development and underdevelopment, resulting in the legacy of
South Africa as a country of two nations.

The developed component of this economy has enjoyed historic over-
investment, which achieved short-term cost-competitiveness. This, however,
has been at the expense of the underdeveloped part of the economy, which
represents the experiences of the vast majority of South Africans where
economic potentials have not been able to harness results due to backlogs
and underinvestment in social and productive capital.

Our Constitution and government are committed to building a truly nonsexist
society and progressively addressing the legacy of the past. However,
despite the changes ushered in by the democratic dispensation, there are
gaps such as the lack of a budget document that gives a gender breakdown of
spending by departments.

Identifying this gap, female MPs and women representatives of NGOs started
the Women’s Budget Initiative, which was and remains an important tool to
assess the impact that the main budget has had on women since the
democratic government came to power. Although called the women’s budget, it
is not a separate budget, but rather a policy tool that does gender
breakdowns for the purposes of analysis and further improving our policies
on a continuous basis.
The Expanded Public Works Programme received an additional R3,2 billion in
2005 to boost provinces and municipalities, which, on the surface, will
benefit women because of the Code of Good Practice, for the programme
requires 60% female employment. Since 1999, the Department of Public Works
has invested more than R1,7 billion and created 2 993 rural infrastructure
projects and 123 738 jobs in the impoverished rural areas of KwaZulu-Natal,
Eastern Cape, Free State, Mpumalanga, North West and Limpopo.

Since 1994 many women are now able to own houses irrespective of their
marital status, age and race. The Department of Housing has adopted a
policy, which says that in all the contracts that are given to emerging
contractors, 10% of them should be given back to women. This sector is also
empowering women through the People’s Housing Schemes, which are largely
composed of women.
Many women benefited from the presidential-led projects aimed at poverty
alleviation such as the Working for Water Programme. These projects employ
members of communities to remove invasive species near and around dams and
rivers so that water can flow with ease. Such programmes provide women with
an income and, at the same time, communities benefit directly through their
efforts. They are also trained and given skills for future purposes.

The deracialisation and redistribution nature of our social security system
introduced since 1994 has benefited many black people and women in
particular, especially such social grants as pensions and child support
grants. However, our comprehensive social security system is still evolving
and we need to improve on the delivery system of the already existing
grants so that they indeed reach the core target groups - which are women
and children.

The universal access to basic education through the schooling system, adult
basic education and other skills training programmes continue to make an
impact on the high levels of illiteracy amongst women. However, educating
the girl-child continues to pose serious challenges because of the high
dropout rate for girls, especially at secondary level.

The structures are demand-driven and include community gardens,
multipurpose community centres, rural access roads, bridges, taxi ranks,
market stalls, sports fields, additional classrooms, poultry houses, theme
parks and many more. These projects benefited mostly women, because women
were employed and for the first time some were able to put food on the
table.

In last year’s budget some consideration was given to tackling gender
inequities. However, many interventions tend to be gender-blind. For
example, interventions that benefit everyone, including women, will benefit
women less than men and girls less than boys as a result of the imbalances
mentioned above. Thus a gender-blind policy or intervention becomes gender-
insensitive. What is needed is a move away from the gender-blind
interventions to proactive gender- sensitive interventions. In order for
this to happen, there has to be ongoing critical engagement with the impact
of budget expenditures on vulnerable groups, both inside government and
within the civil society.

This year’s budget should address the imbalances observed with regard to
who is most vulnerable in society. For example, those most vulnerable to
HIV/Aids infections are female; those most vulnerable to poverty are
female; and those most vulnerable to lower-paid employment and to
unemployment are women. Within the South African context, racial, class and
geographical factors compound these vulnerabilities.

Thus, when developing plans and programmes to address the imbalances within
society, a gender perspective provides a critical lens through which these
layers of inequalities can be considered, for example, the rolling out of
ARVs to all those who are in need of them. Unless gender-sensitive plans
and programmes have money allocated to them, it is not possible to
implement them, thus the budget also needs to be gender-sensitive.

In keeping with our maxim that the people must govern, we must embark on a
legislative process to make sure that women are the beneficiaries in our
economy. It is best to fast-track and maximise our interventions for women
entrepreneurs in our communities.

In his state of the nation address, the President of the Republic of South
Africa said that we will also need to pay the necessary attention to the
important issue of the inclusion of women, and that of Asgisa has, once
more, confirmed the need for us to expand our small, medium and micro
enterprises sector, paying particular attention in this regard to broad-
based black economic empowerment and the development of women.
Entrepreneurship is core to building a vibrant and sustainable SMME sector.
The SMME sector is critical to achieving the key national development
objectives of economic growth, employment creation and equity.

Without the development of women there cannot be development in the
country. Women need to play an increasingly important role in the
leadership of businesses in our country, and in particular in state-owned
enterprises. None of you here today need me to remind you of the multitude
of challenges that face women in business in South Africa. Thank you, House
Chairperson. [Time expired.][Applause.]

Mr S J NJIKELANA: Chairperson, Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon members,
members of the public, ... maqabane, bantu bakuthi niphelele kunye nani
basebenzi ... [... comrades, fellow countrymen and members of the labour
movement ...] We need to examine the ability of the current budget to
advance workers’ rights, which are an integral part of human rights. I say
this because we celebrated Human Rights Day just yesterday.

Chairperson, the current budget is characterised as a pro-poor budget by
all, because of its contribution to the social wage. The total social wage
for poor households has certainly been substantially increased,
particularly when we take into account that individual households have
access to more than one social grant.

One may go further and include the provision of schooling, the school fees,
free nutrition programmes, etc. The extension of learnership allowances
that were introduced in 2002 for another five years as well as the impact
thereof on the job training and skills development is worth mentioning and
commending. The budget also commits itself to a favourable allowance for
workers living with disabilities.

However, a question arises: What about the private sector’s role? Will the
private sector respond positively by taking advantage of these initiatives
articulated in the current budget?

There will be benefits for labour, owing to improvements in the long-term
retirement savings, as well as a further increase in finance for skills
development. It is worth mentioning that labour will be amongst the
beneficiaries of the joint initiative on priority skills acquisition, as
outlined in Asgisa.

Government’s emphasis on labour-intensive infrastructure spending enhances
the sharing aspects of Asgisa, because it has a potential to increase the
elasticity of employment creation.

Mphathisihlalo, siyafuna ukusoloko sisiva minyaka le ukuba uHlahlo lwabiwo-
mali luyixhasa ngamandla imizamo yokudalwa kwemisebenzi. [Chairperson, we
would like to hear every year that the budget considers job creation as one
of its priorities.]

The ANC has long committed itself to decent work and living standards in
the context of improved equity ownership and management skills, as well as
access to opportunities. Hence the budget also ensures that through the
promulgation of the Co-operatives Bill co-operatives, as a new entity in
the economy, will also have financial support.

In spite of the noble achievements, as stated above, there are a few
challenges lying ahead. Amongst these is the ability of the Expanded Public
Works Programme to convert short-term jobs into permanent, sustainable,
quality jobs. I say this simply because there is an irrefutable assertion
that workers are central to the economy of any country. And definitely the
ANC commits itself to the full potential of our economy to be productive,
as we all know.

The sustainability and the extension of the sharing aspect of Asgisa is
also another challenge. Whilst recognising that Asgisa has the intention of
sharing the wealth that will be created, we also, as the ANC persuades us
to, have to assume collective responsibility for ensuring that such ideals
are fully realised.

Kumnandi, bantu bakuthi, xa sisithi urhulumente makenze le, naleya. Kodwa
ke masibambane ngezandla, sisebenzisane norhulumente wethu, siqinisekise
ukuba ezi nkqubo siza nazo siyavumelana ngazo kwaye ziyaphumelela. [It’s
easy for us to say that the government should do this and that. We need to
hold hands and work together with the government to ensure that all our
programmes come to fruition.]

The extent of access by the unemployed to government grants must still be
on all of our agendas, particularly those of MPs when they engage in their
constituency work.

There has to be enhanced understanding by labour of government programmes
so that they can take advantage of such programmes. Of course, another
challenge is whether the small business sector will pass on any of the
current tax benefits to workers.

Mhlalingaphambili, ndithe makhe mandicaphule nje zibe mbalwa kwezi zinto
zithunukayo. Nokuba ezinye izinto zintle, kodwa ke noko makhe sizijonge ezi
ziza kukhe zisithi ntsho ngamehlo. [Chairperson, I thought I should mention
just a few of the issues that have the main points of contention. Although
some of the programmes have good intentions, we should consider those that
may cause us problems in the future.]

Organised labour must also take advantage of the substantial budget
expansion. I also strongly maintain that they should provide leadership and
consistently ensure that all the workers benefit from such expansion. If
our country is to ensure human rights for all, our budget has to be
integral to that noble endeavour.

Just as we recognise the centrality of workers in our economy, so should we
admire the government’s recognition of labour, as articulated in the
current budget. Let us, however, take outstanding achievements to even
higher levels. Iyabulel’ ilali. [Thank you.]

Mng M T LIKOTSI: Modula-setula  le  lekgotla,  mokgatlo  wa  PAC  o  amohela
dikabo tsena tsa letlole la setjhaba tsa selemo sena sa 2006.  Kabo  ena  ya
matlole e tla ka nako e thata  ho  batho  ba  habo  rona  ba  ma-Afrika,  ba
futsanehileng, ba hlokang mesebetsi, ba phelang maemong  a  mabe  a  bodulo.
Batho ba ha bo rona ba kenwe ke  diketso  tsa  botlokotsebe  mme  basadi  ba
hlekefetswa ka mekgwa e mengata, dikgwebo tsa  rona  makeishebneng  di  wele
mme di nkuwa ke melata.

Dikaabo tsebo tsena di fihla ka nako eo ka yona boramapolasi ba rona ba  ma-
Afrika ba tlaletsweng ke naha. Ba bang ba fumaneng mapolasi, empa  ba  hloka
disebediswa. Empa re tshepa hore dikabo tsena tsa matlole  di  tla  leka  ho
hlokomela ho loka ha a mang a mathata a boletsweng. Mmusmo  o  tlamehile  ho
bona hore ditjhelete tsa setjhaba di sebediswa hantle le ka toka.

PAC e re naha ena ya habo rona ena le bokgoni, empa batsamaisi  ba  yona  ke
matlaila. Mmuso o tlamehile ho fehla mesebetsi sepheo  e  le   thibela  hore
naha ya habo rona e se be ya moruo o putlameng  (welfare state),  moo  batho
ba phelang e ele  mekopa-kopa  ya  ditjhelete  tse  mona  tsa  matheka,  tse
kgothaletsang bana ba rona hore ba tlatse matlo a rona ka  bana  ba  hlokang
bo-ntata bona.

Mmuso o tlamehile ho thibela  thekiso  ya  thepa  ya  setjhaba  ka  sena  se
bitswang privatisation. Thekiso ya thepa ya  setjhaba  ka  mokgwa  ofe  kapa
ofe, e fedisa mesebetsi, e atisa  bofutsana,  e  kenya  tlala  le  malwetse.
Ditjhelete tsa setjahaba di lokela ho sebediswa ka tlhokomelo le toka.

Batsamaisi ba tlamehile ho hlokomela hore diphallelo eleng di donation, tse
tswang matjhabeng ho phallela ditshebeletso tsa setjhaba, haholo batho ba
futsanehileng, di sebediswa ho ya ka ditumellano le dinaha tse re
phallelang kgahalanong le ditjhelete tsena tse kgutlelang ho beng ba tsona,
hobane re sena bokgoni le boikarabello ho di sebedisa. Ditjhelete tsa
setjhaba ha di sebediswe ho phahamisa naha ya ha bo rona. Ke a leboha.
(Translation of Sesotho speech follows.)

[Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairperson, the PAC supports the 2006 national budget.
This budget comes at a very difficult time for Africans, many of whom are
poor, unemployed and live in appalling conditions. Many people have become
criminals and they abuse women in many ways. Businesses in the townships
have closed.

This budget comes at a time when many African farmers do not know what to
do with the farms they were allocated, because they do not have farming
resources. We hope that the money will help solve some the above-mentioned
problems and that the government will ensure that there is proper financial
management.

The PAC asserts that this country has the resources, but the problem lies
with administration. The government must create jobs to prevent the country
from turning into a welfare state, where people beg for grants such as the
child support grant, which encourages our daughters to fill our houses with
children whose fathers are unknown to us. The government must also stop
selling state property through privatisation. The selling of state property
in any way results in unemployment and the accompanying poverty and
diseases.

Directors of NGOs must ensure that donations from foreign countries to help
communities are used according to agreements with donor countries, and that
they are channelled towards poor communities. No funds should be returned
to donor countries because of any organisation’s incapacity to use them.
Public funds must be used to uplift the people of this country. Thank you.]

Ms M V MERUTI: Hon Chairperson, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, as South
Africans and as part of a progressive humankind, we have a moral and
political responsibility to change the society in which we operate, in the
interest of a better future for the human species, in particular the poor
and vulnerable sections of our society.

Whilst these ordinary masses of our people make history and change society,
they find themselves trapped in demeaning poverty and underdevelopment.
However, because our democratic movement, the ANC, and the ANC-led
government have always prioritised developmental issues concerning these
poor and vulnerable masses, and because the ANC-led government remains a
beacon of hope for the masses, during the processes of distribution and
appropriation of material resources of our country the ANC is always
mindful of this hope and faith that the ordinary masses of our people have
in our democratic movement and the ANC-led government.

These distribution and appropriation processes are always informed by the
Freedom Charter which, amongst other things, provides that South Africa
belongs to all those who live in it, black and white, and provides that the
people shall share in the country’s wealth. Needless to mention, these
processes are also informed and guided by our notion of equality, which
takes into account the legacy of apartheid inequalities and also reflects
race and gender contradictions.

The justice system in South Africa was inaccessible to the majority of the
poor and vulnerable sections of our country. The ANC firmly believes that
access to justice is essential to any legitimate justice system because it
strengthens public respect for the law and gives people confidence in the
legal system. It is this belief and the vision of the ANC to improve access
to justice for all which has underpinned the appropriation and related
processes.

In essence, the Appropriation Bill is a product of the processes which took
into account various progressive, political and policy considerations that
include bringing justice services closer to all people, particularly rural
and township communities; alleviating the onerous burden of long-distance
travel to access justice services, which involves redemarcation and
rationalisation of our magistrates’ courts and High Courts; the
intensification of programmes which seek to help the most vulnerable in our
society, namely women and children; and strengthening criminal justice
system initiatives and efforts.

Let me emphasise that we need to welcome all the progressive aspects of the
Appropriation Bill, in particular the funding, which will assist the
justice sector in developing infrastructure and capacity so as to further
improve access to justice for all. The ANC supports the Bill. I thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, budget time is our favourite time of the year,
as we can redevise our means to attain our goals for South Africa.

The MF is confident that the R12,1 billion tax cuts certainly have many
smiling this year. The MF takes this opportunity to thank the hon Minister
of Finance, Mr Trevor Manuel, for an outstanding budget - thank you, sir.

Bringing our attention back to the Appropriation Bill for 2006, the MF is
pleased with the 9,58% allocated for appropriation to provincial and local
government. We view local and provincial government as key institutions to
providing delivery to our people. We applaud the allocation and request the
effective dispersal of funds to ensure efficient delivery.

We are extremely pleased with the prioritisation of allocations made to
Education and Health. Both sectors are crucial to the upliftment and
wellbeing of our people. The increased effort towards adult education and
the prioritisation of educating our people should greatly benefit skills
development and growth for our economy.

As for Health, with the threat and reality of HIV/Aids, the allocation will
benefit those infected, as well as boost the prevention of HIV/Aids. We,
however, would have appreciated a bigger allocation to Labour, considering
unemployment and our fervent effort to eradicate poverty. It is, however,
correct that the bulk of the appropriation of 23,85% goes to Social
Development. It is within this sector that our people are in most need; and
it is through Social Development that the standard of living will be
increased thus metamorphosising the poverty situation.

Another crisis in South Africa is our crime rate, which has been adequately
combated by the 12,52% allocation of the appropriation. In respect of
disputes globally and our necessity not only to protect ourselves but also
to protect the innocent globally, the 9,16% allocated to Defence is
supported.

We would have appreciated a larger allocation to Sports and Recreation. The
importance of the sector needs to be realised through nation-building and
global relations. We do, however, acknowledge the difference in allocation
and would like briefly to say that if the foreign debts were written off we
would have so much more funds to dispense on delivery and to cater for the
needs of our nation. The MF supports the Appropriation Bill.

Mr S SIMMONS: Chair, once again the hon Minister of Finance has
successfully executed his extremely important and difficult task. The
various allocations are evidence of the Minister’s attempt at a fair
distribution of state funds. I wish to compliment the hon Minister,
together with the South African Revenue Service, for the meticulous nature
in which they went about their business which has resulted in the excess of
R30 billion.

Dit is dus duidelik dat die regering se vernaamste probleem nie noodwendig
die beskikbaarheid van geld is nie. Die vraag ontstaan dus nou oor die
regering se onvermoë om die meeste van sy teikens te behaal. Die antwoord
hierop blyk te wees dat die goeie werk van die agb Minister en die SAID
ongedaan gemaak word.

Hierdie Huis het die afgelope tyd keer op keer voorbeelde gehoor van hoe
die regering veral op plaaslike vlak versuim om hul mees basiese funksies
te verrig, ten spyte van voldoende geld. Waar lê die probleem? Daar is
redelike eenstemmigheid hieroor, naamlik dat kapasiteit die primêre rede is
vir die onaanvaarbare bestedingstendense by sekere staatsdepartemente. Nie
eens broodnodige buitelandse finansiële hulp word doeltreffend bestee nie,
met die gevolg dat sulke skenkings, bestem vir maatskaplike en ekonomiese
ontwikkeling, teruggegee moet word, byvoorbeeld die R131 miljoen wat aan
Europese organisasies en die R130 miljoen wat aan die EU teruggegee moes
word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[It is therefore clear that the government’s main problem is not
necessarily the availability of money. Hence the question now arises about
the government’s inability to reach most of its targets. Seemingly, the
answer to this lies in the fact that the good work of the hon Minister and
Sars is being undermined.

Recently this House has time and again heard examples of how the
government, especially at local level, fails to provide the most basic
services, in spite of sufficient money. Wherein lies the problem? There is
reasonable consensus on this, namely that capacity is the main reason for
the unacceptable expenditure trends of certain state departments. Not even
badly needed foreign financial aid is spent efficiently, with the result
that such donations, for example the R131 million and the R130 million that
was meant for socioeconomic development, had to be returned to European
organisations and the EU respectively.]

It would appear those are more or less the same departments that expose
their inability to maintain healthy financial practices. The Department of
Provincial and Local Government’s inability to ensure that municipalities
comply with primary compliance requirements is no longer acceptable. The
hon Minister for Provincial and Local Government is in the habit of being
reactive to matters resulting in little or no corrective measures and
results, for instance his reaction towards the 48% of municipalities not
meeting the submission dates for financial statements as required by the
Municipal Finance Management Act.

HIV/Aids sufferers who form an extremely high percentage of the South
African population are having a devastating impact on all levels of
society, both private and public sectors. Despite the generous financial
allocations for the fight against HIV/Aids, we still have to go a long way
in setting up an adequate infrastructure to successfully fight HIV/Aids.

Agb Speaker, die afgelope kragonderbrekings in die Wes-Kaap is ’n
manifestasie van nie net ’n gebrek aan kapasiteit en die gepaardgaande
vaardighede nie, maar ook die afwesigheid van doeltreffende beplanning op
verskeie vlakke. Die ekonomiese skade wat in die Wes-Kaap aangerig is, word
op R1,5 miljard bereken. Meer kommerwekkend is die feit dat beide die
regering en Eskom nie in staat is om ’n aanvaarbare aanduiding te gee van
wat die omvang van die toekomstige onderbrekings sal wees nie. Hierdie
toedrag van sake bedreig die teiken van 6% ekonomiese groei. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Hon Speaker, the recent power failures in the Western Cape are a
manifestation not only of a lack of capacity and the concomitant skills,
but also the absence of efficient planning at various levels. The economic
damage caused in the Western Cape is estimated at R1,5 billion. Of more
concern is the fact that both the government and Eskom are incapable of
giving an acceptable indication of the scope of future power failures. This
state of affairs threatens the target of 6% economic growth.]

The job well done by the hon Minister of Finance ... [Time expired.]

Ms N R MOKOTO: Hon Chairperson, Minister of Finance, hon members and
members of the public, I greet you all. Minister of Finance, I would like
to congratulate you for the most impressive record set in Budget 2006. The
ANC, throughout its term, has been the democratic leader of government,
which has preoccupied itself with the responsibility of transforming the
South African economy from an economy that has been deeply characterised by
inequality, dispossession, racial exclusion and skewed distribution of
resources into one of the model developing economies of the world.

Our endeavour as the ANC government was to build a strong developmental
economy which would comprehensively and effectively seek to redress the
twin evils of apartheid, that is poverty and joblessness, which continue to
exacerbate the structural gap between the developed few and the
underdeveloped masses of our people.

Key to this economic policy approach has been to ensure that all people
have equal share in the wealth of their country. At the same time, we have
to ensure that we develop and sustain the economy.

We have to acknowledge that our economy is booming to the dismay of many of
our detractors. However, we are prepared to move on to extend the net to
other sectors of our economy and to improve and sustain this positive
outlook on the economy.

For the past decade we have seen an increased growth in the economy by
4,9%. We have seen additional opportunities being made available for the
previously marginalised groups, including blacks, women, youth and the
poor. There has been lower government debt and inflation. Our labour market
reforms have immensely improved our labour relations and there has been
more certainty, high stability and high levels of confidence within our
markets. We are proud to say that we have now decreased the debt burden of
our country.

Today as we journey into the second decade of democracy, we are proud to
highlight impressive breakthroughs made by the government in its effort to
respond to the policy dilemmas and fundamentals.

The Constitution of South Africa places on government the mandated
responsibility to provide basic services to all its people. For the larger
part of society, these socioeconomic rights have never been as justifiable
as they are today.

We have to recall that section 26 of the Bill of the Rights deals with the
obligations of the state to ensure progressive realisation of the right to
housing and section 27 highlights the right to health care, food, water and
social security; whereas the right to education is enshrined in section 29.

The significance of this constitutional provision is clearly enunciated in
the RDP document adopted by the democratic government. This has
successfully highlighted key priorities for government and the impact on
the fiscal system.

For the past ten years government spending has been focused on the
redistribution of resources from the privileged few to the previously
disadvantaged. Specific challenges have been identified with this approach.
However, as long as it satisfied the constitutional obligation, it had to
happen.

Firstly, large chunks of the government’s budget had to be cut and
redirected to address the basic needs of our community. Although this
approach was extremely beneficial to the many who were locked in the
poverty trap and the cycle of unemployment, it had its negative
consequences arising from our slow growing economy, which was steadily
readjusting to the volatile global markets.

But the major challenge lies in the analysis and questions raised by many
of the economies across South Africa. The question of whether our booming
economy is able to effectively respond to the redistributive demands and
obligations that are entrenched in our Constitution and the economic
policies still stands.
It is, however, important to note that the milestones we have achieved in
the first years of democracy have set an outstanding record of performance
for this country, both economically and socially, especially in terms of
delivering the hard services.

Notwithstanding the impact made by these services we must acknowledge that
in some instances it has resulted in unforeseen circumstances, like the
increasing high rate of dependency and the extension of racial
inequalities.

Our social spending has been characterised by the redistributive thrust of
our economy - and in many cases this has had a negative impact - which is
quite often output-oriented, rather than input driven. Half the time,
budget allocations and intergovernmental grants are linked to service
delivery outputs.

It is time that government translates budgeted allocations to actual
service delivery because it will not be sufficient for government to argue
that it has met its obligations in terms of socioeconomic rights through
the allocation of sufficient funds for health, education and other forms of
service delivery. Let me refer to quite a few examples in education, health
and housing. We have seen a dramatic drop in the quality of services
provided to the people. This has been the case despite the fact that
government has increased its allocation of funds to address these sectors.

It is thus clear that redistributing budget allocations does not
immediately result in redistribution of service delivery outputs, as
anticipated initially. Furthermore, it suggests that the binding constraint
was not purely financial, but rather management capacity, especially on
capital projects.

This can be coupled with the inability to spend effectively and this has
been a phenomenon in most of the provinces where high budgetary allocations
did not automatically result in high delivery rates.

In the light of the above it becomes a necessity to consider a budget
reform at all levels especially the introduction of budget reforms in all
spheres of government to specifically oversee the introduction of
performance budgeting, which has a potential to improve public sector
efficiency and effectiveness. The ANC supports the Bill. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Dr P J RABIE: Mr Chairman, hon Minister, hon members, the DA welcomes the
broad set of tax breaks announced in the budget. In particular, we welcome
the reduction of the tax on retirement funds from 18% to 9%. This move has
long been called for by the DA, and will positively affect retirement
funding and increase the present low savings rate.

In my speech I will refer to the retirement industry and the second
economy. Despite the impact of Aids, increasing longevity pushes up the
need for postretirement income. It is generally accepted that pensioners
should be self-supporting as much as possible and not be dependent upon the
state or, in the end, the taxpayer.

The South African retirement industry is fairly sophisticated and the South
Africans that belong to a registered pension fund can consider themselves
fortunate. However, millions of South Africans do not belong to pension
funds. They traditionally rely on extended family support and subsistence
in the so-called second economy.

The plight of the pensioners, especially in the so-called retirement
communities, with life membership is also something of grave concern, and I
believe that the hon Minister and the Department of Finance are
investigating this plight.

The hon Minister, in his Budget Speech, made mention of the fact that
social grants contribute to more than half of the income of the poorest 20%
of households. In a recent study of the bureau for market research at
Stellenbosch university it was estimated that roughly two million people
are employed in the informal sector. Lower-skilled and less-educated South
Africans have no alternative to escape from unemployment and poverty and
are often forced to participate in the second economy.

It is estimated that on its own the second economy employs about 1,72
million people and contributes only 2,1% of GDP. This comprises about 750
individual outlets with an average turnover of R68 000 per month, each
employing between two or three individuals on average. Average remuneration
per employee is around R1 000 per month, half the minimum required to
sustain the average household in an urban community.

Armoede, werkloosheid en lae vaardigheidsvlakke is veranderlikes wat
werklike, reële, ekonomiese groei inhibeer. Die Suid-Afrikaanse bevolking,
soos talle ander, is besig om snel te verouder. Die openbare en private
sektors sal toenemend moet saamwerk om volhoubare ekonomiese groei van
tussen 5% en 6% te laat realiseer.

Dit sal gewis nie maklik wees nie, aangesien die feit dat groot gedeeltes
van die Suid-Afrikaanse bevolking wat hul in die sogenaamde tweede of
informele ekonomie bevind, in die verlede uiters beperkte toegang tot die
formele ekonomie gehad het. Dit is dus gebiedend noodsaaklik dat die
formele sektor deur middel van mentorskappe die hand na die agtergeblewe
informele sakesektor uitsteek.

Lande wat die afgelope drie dekades ekonomies vooruitgegaan het, was
aantreklike beleggingsbestemmings vir beleggers. Internasionaal aanvaarde
ekonomiese norme is geëerbiedig, soos byvoorbeeld vrywillige koper en
verkoper. Korrupsie in geen vorm is geduld nie, met 'n onafhanklike regbank
waar daar geen staatsinmenging van enige aard rakende die administrasie of
regspleging plaasgevind het nie.
Die DA versoek dat daar indringend na wyses gekyk word om die
pensioenbedryf in die algemeen uit te bou, met dien verstande dat meer Suid-
Afrikaners daaraan kan behoort, en dat die informele sektor van die
ekonomie deur middel van aanvaarde internasionale riglyne en sakepraktyke
uitgebou word, sodat ook hier aanvaarbare wins- en groeimarge sal realiseer
wat tot volhoubare ekonomiese groei en welvaart die breë bevolking sal lei.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Poverty, unemployment, and lower skills levels are variables that hamper
actual, real economic growth. Like many others, the South African
population is aging rapidly. The public and private sectors will have to
increase their collaboration in order to achieve sustainable economic
growth of between 5% and 6% percent.

This will certainly not be easy, given the fact that the greater part of
the South African population which participates in the so-called second or
informal economy has had extremely limited access to the formal economy in
the past. Therefore it is vital that the formal sector should reach out to
the disadvantaged informal business sector by means of mentorship
programmes.

Countries that have prospered economically in the past three decades have
been attractive investment destinations for investors. Internationally
acceptable economic standards such as willing-buyer, willing-seller were
maintained. Corruption was not tolerated in any form, with an independent
judiciary where there was no interference from the state whatsoever
regarding the administration of justice.

The DA requests an in-depth consideration of ways to expand the retirement
industry in general, providing that more South Africans will be able to
join, and that the informal sector of the economy will be expanded by means
of accepted international guidelines and business practices in order to
achieve acceptable profit and growth margins here as well that will lead to
the sustainable economic growth and prosperity of the population as a
whole.]

We face a number of formidable obstacles. At present our tax base is
relatively small; approximately 4,3 million out of a population of 44
million people pay income tax. Unemployment is more than 30%. Our domestic
consumer market is small. Our geographic location is not close to the EU,
North America or the East. This contributes to additional transport costs
for our exports.

Furthermore, some of our neighbouring countries, particularly Zimbabwe,
experience an unacceptable inflation rate that runs into the 100
percentiles. The DA, therefore, calls upon government and the private
sector to leave no stone unturned in generating a favourable economic
climate, an essential prerequisite for future sustained economic growth.
The DA supports this budget. I thank you, Mr Chairman. [Applause.]

Ms N C KONDLO: Hon Chair, hon members, the thrust of this debate is about
appropriating money for the state to be able to meet its requirements.
These allocations should be linked to the mandate we received from the
people of South Africa, guided by the Freedom Charter, the January 8
Statement, the national and local government manifestos and, lastly, the
state of the nation address. This mandate is underpinned by the drive to
eradicate poverty, create jobs and ensure that growth is shared amongst all
the people.

The Department of Public Enterprises has a central role to play in terms of
fulfilling this mandate, through its oversight and shareholder/manager role
with regard to state-owned enterprises. The restructuring of state-owned
enterprises seeks to promote economic growth, socioeconomic development and
ultimately a better life for all. The ANC believes that this remains the
role of SOEs in terms of their being central to the development of the
state.

Thus it is important that the state remains the main shareholder in these
enterprises in order to drive the national agenda of democratic revolution.
It is our belief that these strategic areas should not be left to the
market forces as they are unable to, on their own - and have no track
record of doing this – redress historical imbalances.

The ANC believes that our state-owned enterprises can be more effective and
efficient. Therefore we are supportive of the programme to restructure
these entities to meet their developmental roles. However, we are equally
adamant that such interventions should not be to the detriment of our
strategic objectives, namely creating jobs, eradicating poverty and
creating a better life for all.

The Department of Public Enterprises has been on track in ensuring that the
state drives development through the public enterprises. The appropriation
for the Department of Public Enterprises, with the exception of the R2
billion that has just been allocated to Denel, as Comrade Chris Gololo
outlined, has remained more or less constant, which points to the DPE’s
sound financial management.

To a certain degree, the same cannot be said of all the state-owned
enterprises. As we have stated before as the Portfolio Committee on Public
Enterprises, we would have preferred that the various turnaround strategies
be implemented earlier by these SOEs. The case in point is Alexkor, which
the ANC believes can play an important role in contributing to the economic
development of the Alexandra Bay community in particular, and the
Namaqualand region in general.

We are extremely concerned about the financial position of Alexkor and
welcome the Department of Public Enterprises’ continued support for this
vital state-owned enterprise.

Kwaye sinethemba lokuba lo mcimbi waseAlexkor, onxulumene nomhlaba nabantu
balaa ndawo, uya kuthi wakuqukunjelwa urhulumente, esebenzisa iSebe
lezeziMali, akwazi ukunika inkxaso eyiyo khon’ ukuze iAlexkor ikwazi
ukwenza umsebenzi wayo. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[We hope that after the matter regarding Alexkor, which has something to do
with land owned by people in that area, has been concluded, the government
and the Department of Finance will be able to render their support in order
that Alexkor could move forward with the task that is expected of it.]

Whilst we continue to be complimentary of Eskom, we feel that the
developmental needs of the country will require it to increase its
generation capacity. In this context, we welcome their short-term strategy
in relation to recent outages. We also support their long-term strategy to
meet the ever-increasing demand caused by higher-than-expected growth
rates.

We welcome the decision to move SA Airways from Transnet, which allows
Transnet to focus on its core mandate of being a freight carrier.

We further welcome the fact that the relevant unions and Transnet
management are working together to address the challenges arising from the
restructuring process. In seeking to resolve these issues, both parties
should be guided by the mandate that was given to the ANC when it was voted
into power, that is that they should remain aware of the imperatives to
create jobs, fight poverty and promote shared growth.

Ukuxhasa olu hlahlo lwabiwo-mali, singuKhongolozi sithi, Mphathiswa
wezeziMali, kulo nyaka-mali utshintsho kubomi babantu malungqamane neemali
ezabelwe amasebe ngamasebe. Akufuneki ukuba kuthi noxa amasebe
eyisebenzisile imali, ibe inguqu yona inqongophele ebomini babantu.

Kananjalo, ayamkeleki eyokuba amasebe angakwazi ukuyisebenzisa
ngokupheleleyo imali abelwe yona. Silindele ukuba kulo mjikelo amalungu
ePalamente awenze ngokuthe ngqo umsebenzi wawo wokuqinisekisa ukuba
urhulumente wenza kangangoko anakho ukuqinisekisa ukuba iimfuno namalungelo
abantu ... (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[We, as the ANC, would like to support this budget and further say that it
must ensure that it meets and fulfils its developmental roles as allocated
to the different departments. There should be evidence among people and
communities that monies allocated to and used by departments have fulfilled
their intended function, which is to change the lives of people.

Furthermore, it is not acceptable for departments not to use funds
allocated to them. This time we expect Members of Parliament to fulfil
their mandate of oversight to ensure that people’s needs and basic rights
...]

... are met through service delivery to the various sectors of our society.

Xa ndiza kuhlala phantsi, sifuna ukuba kulo nyaka-mali kuthi nokuba
bayahamba okanye bayavuka ooMam’ uMaRhadebe nooTat’uDlamini, baluve
utshintsho oluze nolu hlahlo lwabiwo-mali. Kwaye sihlaba ikhwelo
kubasebenzi bakarhulumente, nanjengabantu ekugqibeleni abangqamene ngqo
nendlela yokuzisa ezi nkonzo ebantwini, ukuba babhinqe omfutshane kuba
kaloku urhulumente ophetheyo akasokuze abheke phambili ngaphandle
kokusebenza kwabo. Sithi ke kulo umjikelo umbhalo useludongeni. Ngalo mazwi
i-ANC iyawuxhasa lo Mthetho usayilwayo. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[In conclusion, I would like to say that before and after the Rhadebes and
Dlaminis have come and gone, they should experience change brought about by
this budget. We call on public servants as the people who directly deal
with service delivery, to commit themselves fully because there shall be no
progress in this government without their support. This time around the
writing is on the wall. With those words I would like to say that the ANC
supports this Bill. [Applause.]]

Debate interrupted.

The House adjourned at 17:04.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                           THURSDAY, 9 MARCH 2006



TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Finance


     a) International Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in
        Customs Matters adopted in Brussels on 27 June 2003: Your Customs
        Johannesburg Convention dated 13 July 2004, tabled in terms of
        section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


     b) Explanatory Memorandum on International Convention on Mutual
        Administrative Assistance in Customs Matters.


2.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


     a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Land Affairs for 2006 to 2009.
     b) Strategic Plan of the National Agricultural Marketing Council for
        2006 to 2011.


     c) Strategic Plan of the Ncera Farms (Pty) Ltd for 2006/07.

3.    The Minister in The Presidency


     a) Strategic Plan of the International Marketing Council (IMC) for
        2006 to 2009.



COMMITTEE REPORTS


 National Assembly

1. Date of Meeting

   The report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Additional
   Adjustments Appropriation Bill (2005/06 Financial Year) [B 4 – 2006],
   published in the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of
   Wednesday, 8 March 2006, on page 282 had an error in that it indicated
   the date on which the Committee met as 6 March 2006. The correct date is
   7 March 2006.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy on the
   Electricity Regulation Bill [B 29B - 2005] (National Assembly - sec 75),
   dated 8 March 2006:
     The Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy, having considered the
     Electricity Regulation Bill [B 29B - 2005] (National Assembly - sec 75)
     and proposed amendments of the National Council of Provinces
     (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 15 February 2006, p
     237), referred to the Committee, reports the Bill with amendments [B
     29C - 2005].


 Report to be considered.


3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Communications on the Annual
   Reports and Financial Statements for 2004/2005 of the Department of
   Communications and its entities, dated 8 March 2006:

    The Portfolio Committee on Communications, having considered and
    examined the Annual Reports of the Department of Communications and the
    National Electronic Media Institute of South Africa (Nemisa), the South
    African Broadcasting Corporation (SABC), the Universal Service Agency
    (USA), the South African Post Office (Sapo), Sentech and the
    Independent Communications Authority of South Africa (Icasa), reports
    that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.

4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Communications on the Annual
   Reports and Financial Statements for 2004/2005 of the Government
   Communication and Information System and its entities, dated 8 March
   2006:

      The Portfolio Committee on Communications, having considered the
      Annual Reports and Financial Statements of the Government
      Communication and Information System, and the Media Development and
      Diversity Agency (MDDA) and the International Marketing Council (IMC),
      reports that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.



                            FRIDAY, 10 MARCH 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS



National Assembly


The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly


     a) The following member vacated her seat in the National Assembly with
        effect from 9 March 2006:

        Zille, H.

     b) The vacancy which occurred owing to the death of Mr S F Haasbroek,
        had been filled with effect from 22 February 2006 by the nomination
        of Mr I F Julies.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


    (a)     Government Notice No 44 published in Government Gazette No
        28411 dated 18 January 2006: Exemptions from Supply Chain
        Management Regulations in terms of the Local Government: Municipal
        Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (b)     Government Notice No R.1105 published in Government Gazette No
        28226 dated 14 November 2005: Amendment of prescribed fees in terms
        of the Pension Funds Act, 1956 (Act No 24 of 1956).

    2. The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


   a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry for
      2006 to 2007.



                            MONDAY, 13 MARCH 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

      The Speaker and the Chairperson, on 13 March 2006, called a Joint
    Sitting of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces,
    as follows:

                   CALLING OF JOINT SITTING OF PARLIAMENT

    The Speaker of the National Assembly, Ms B Mbete, and the Chairperson
    of the National Council of Provinces, Mr M J Mahlangu, in terms of
    Joint Rule 7 (2), have called a joint sitting of the Houses of
    Parliament for Tuesday, 14 March 2006 at 14:00 in order for Mr Kofi
    Annan, Secretary-General to the United Nations, to address the Joint
    Sitting.






    _______________________                        ________________________
    B MBETE, MP                                    M J MAHLANGU, MP
    SPEAKER OF THE                                 CHAIRPERSON OF THE
    NATIONAL ASSEMBLY  NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES


    Date: ____________________                           Date:
    ___________________




TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Social Development


   a) Strategic Plan of the South African Social Security Agency for 2006/07
      to 2008/09.

2.    The Minister of Public Enterprises

    (a)     Amendment to Eskom’s pricing structure, tabled in terms of
        section 42(4) of the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management
        Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003), and supporting documents required in
        terms of section 42(3) of the same Act.


COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Assembly




CREDA INSERT - Insert ATC130306




                           TUESDAY, 14 MARCH 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


 1. Referral to Committees of papers tabled

      1.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Enterprises for consideration:

        a) Amendment to Eskom’s pricing structure, tabled in terms of
           section 42(4) of the Local Government: Municipal Finance
           Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003) and supporting
           documents required in terms of section 42(3) of the same Act.


TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Social Development


  a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Social Development for 2006/07 to
     2009/10.


COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Assembly


1.  Report of the Portfolio Committee on Social Development on the Older
  Persons Bill [B 68B-2003] (National Council of Provinces - sec 76), dated
  10 March 2006:
     The Portfolio Committee on Social Development, having  considered  the
    subject of the Older Persons Bill [B  68B-2003]  (National  Council  of
    Provinces – sec 76) referred to it and classified by the Joint  Tagging
    Mechanism as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B 68C-
    2003].


2. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs on the
  Genetically Modified Organisms Amendment Bill [B 34 - 2005] (National
  Assembly - sec 75), dated 13 March 2006:

    The Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs, having
    considered the subject of the Genetically Modified Organisms Amendment
    Bill [B 34 - 2005] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and
    classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports
    the Bill with amendments [B 34A - 2005].



                          WEDNESDAY, 15 MARCH 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

     1) Diamonds Amendment Bill [B 27B – 2005] – Act No 29 of 2005
        (assented to and signed by President on 10 February 2006);
     2) Diamonds Second Amendment Bill [B 39B – 2005] – Act No 30 of 2005
        (assented to and signed by President on 10 February 2006);
     3) Forestry Laws Amendment Bill [B 24B – 2005] – Act No 35 of 2005
        (assented to and signed by President on 4 March 2006).


National Assembly


The Speaker

 1. Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report:


        (a)      International Convention on Mutual Administrative
            Assistance in Customs Matters adopted in Brussels on 27 June
            2003: Your Customs Johannesburg Convention dated 13 July 2004,
            tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum on International Convention on
            Mutual Administrative Assistance in Customs Matters.

    2.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Agriculture and Land Affairs for consideration:

          a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Land Affairs for 2006 to
             2009.
          b) Strategic Plan of the National Agricultural Marketing Council
             for 2006 to 2011.


          c) Strategic Plan of the Ncera Farms (Pty) Ltd for 2006/07.

    3.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Communications for consideration:

          a) Strategic Plan of the International Marketing Council (IMC) for
             2006 to 2009.

    4.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance and the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local
        Government:

          a) Government Notice No 44 published in Government Gazette No
             28411 dated 18 January 2006: Exemptions from Supply Chain
             Management Regulations in terms of the Local Government:
             Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    5.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance and the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
        Administration:

          a) Government Notice No R.1105 published in Government Gazette No
             28226 dated 14 November 2005: Amendment of prescribed fees in
             terms of the Pension Funds Act, 1956 (Act No 24 of 1956).

    6.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Water Affairs and Forestry for consideration:

          a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry
             for 2006 to 2007.


    7.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Social Development for consideration:

          a) Strategic Plan of the South African Social Security Agency for
             2006/07 to 2008/09.

 2.   Membership of Committees


     1. Ms P Tshwete has been elected as Chairperson of the Ad Hoc
        Committee on Nomination of Persons to Fill Vacancies on the
        Commission on Gender Equality with effect from 15 February 2006.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Trade and Industry for 2006 to
        2009.

National Assembly
1.    The Speaker


     a) Report of the Public Service Commission on the Review of Sector
        Policing and the South African Police Services’ Role in Community
        Crime Prevention Initiatives for 2005 [RP 220-2005].


     b) Report of the Public Service Commission on Evaluation of Service
        Standards in the Public Service for 2005 [RP 69-2005].


                           THURSDAY, 16 MARCH 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly


The Speaker


     1. Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on
        Finance and the Portfolio Committee on Housing:


          a) Report of the Auditor-General on the findings identified
             during a performance audit of the approval and allocation of
             housing subsidies at provincial housing departments, January
             2006 [RP 13-2006].
    2.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration and the Portfolio Committee on
        Provincial and Local Government:

          a) Quarterly Report of the Auditor-General on the submission of
             financial statements by municipalities and the status of audit
             reports as at 31 December 2005 for the financial year ended 30
             June 2005 [RP 16-2006].

    3.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Arts and Culture for consideration and report. The Report of the
        Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African State
             Theatre for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

    4.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Labour for consideration:

          a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Labour for 2006 to 2009.

    5.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Health for consideration:

          a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Health for 2006/07 to
             2008/09 [RP 29-2006].

    6.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Communications for consideration:

          a) Strategic Plan of Government Communication and Information
             System (GCIS) for 2006 to 2009.


          b) Strategic Plan of Media Development and Diversity Agency (MDDA)
             for 2006 to 2009.


    7.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Service and Administration for consideration:

          a) Strategic Plan of the South African Management Development
             Institute for 2005/06 to 2010/11.

    8.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Agriculture and Land Affairs for consideration:

          a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Agriculture for 2006.


          b) Strategic Plan of the Land and Agricultural Development Bank
             for 2006/7.


          c) Strategic Plan of the Commission on Restitution of Land Rights
             for 2006/7 – 2008.


          d) Strategic Plan of the Agricultural Research Council for 2006/7
             – 2010/11.


          e) Strategic Plan of the Ingonyama Trust Board for 2006/2007.
          f) Strategic Plan of the Onderstepoort Biological Products Ltd for
             2006 to 2009.


          g) Strategic Plan of the Perishable Products Export Control Board.


TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


          a) Annual Report of The Office of Consumer Protection for 2004-
             2005.


          b) Report of the Strategic Industrial Projects (SIP) for April
             2002 to March 2005.


                            FRIDAY, 17 MARCH 2006


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1. The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Declarations of  Interests
        by Ministers, Deputy Ministers and  Government  Employees  [RP  19-
        2006].


2. The Minister of Public Works

    (a)      Memorandum  by  the  Minister  of  Public  Works  setting  out
        Particulars of the Building Programme for 2006-2007 [RP 25-2006].


COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Assembly


1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Health on the Foodstuffs, Cosmetics
  and Disinfectants Amendment Bill [B 35-2005] (National Assembly - sec
  76), dated 15 March 2006:

    The Portfolio Committee on Health, having considered the subject of the
    Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Amendment Bill [B 35-2005]
    (National Assembly - sec 76), referred to it and classified by the
    Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill with
    amendments [B 35A-2005].

2. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on  the  Appropriation  Bill
   2006/7, dated 16 March 2006:

    The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered and examined  the
    Appropriation Bill [B2 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec.  77)  and  its
    related documents, referred to it, and  classified  by  the  JTM  as  a
    section 77 Bill, reports as follows:

     1.     Introduction
    The Minister of Finance tabled the Budget  for  2006/7,  including  the
    MTEF for the 2007/8 and 2008/9, on 15 February 2006.

    On 16 February, the Committee, in  a  joint  sitting  with  the  Select
    Committee on Finance and the Joint Budget Committee was briefed on  the
    Budget for 2006/7 and the MTEF forecast by  the  Minister  of  Finance,
    together with the Director-General of the  National  Treasury  and  the
    Commissioner of the South African Revenue Services (SARS).


    Between 7 and 10 March the Committee received further submissions  from
    National Treasury and SARS, invited economists and tax specialists,  as
    well as organised labour and business. These submissions dealt with the
    full range of issues raised in Budget 2006/7, as well as certain  other
    related issues.


    The report is  structured  around  the  following  main  themes,  which
    emerged  from  the  abovementioned  briefings  and  hearings,  and  the
    Committee’s own discussions.


  •     Macroeconomic framework
  •     Fiscal policy
  •     Revenue and tax proposals
  •     Other issues


    These hearings took place within the  context  of  an  emerging  market
    economy faced with the challenges of the shortage of  suitable  skilled
    labour, unemployment and poverty, and the limited uptake of  investment
    opportunities.


     2.     Economic Policy and outlook


    The economic outlook  for  the  (MTEF)  period  remains  positive,  and
    continues to improve. The higher than expected growth  rate  for  2005,
    the expected average of 5% over the medium term, and  the  efficacy  of
    SARS, bodes well for the economy.


    The expansionary stance adopted since 2001 continues, with an  increase
    in real expenditure in pursuit of achieving the Accelerated and  Shared
    Growth  Initiative  South  Africa  (ASGI-SA)  goals.  Social   Services
    received real increases in spending of R871 bn over the MTEF  and  R262
    bn in 2006/7. While social services account for  57%,  in  the  current
    fiscal year, education receives the single largest expenditure in  this
    category.  There  are  also  significant  increases  in  infrastructure
    development  of  R372  bn  over  the   current   MTEF.   Infrastructure
    development  represents  an  annual  growth  rate  of  14,2%  with   an
    allocation of R113 bn for 20006/7. The  renewed  commitment  to  skills
    development seeks to address the constraints to growth in  the  economy
    recognising that these are some of the pillars of ASGI-SA.


    During the hearings Prof S van der Berg  highlighted  the  increase  in
    social spending, noting that fiscal resource shifts did not necessarily
    translate into real  resource  shifts.  He  added  that  the  sustained
    improvement in poverty reduction, through  increased  social  spending,
    requires economic growth and investment in human capital. The  expanded
    grant system had an impact on poverty reduction, but  not  enough  jobs
    were created. Van der Berg points out  that  despite  the  increase  in
    resource allocation, the lack of efficient social spending continues to
    challenge the country. This constraint is also identified in ASGI-SA.


    Underscoring the Government’s main policy aims  of  reconstruction  and
    development is the fiscal stance adopted which offsets  the  impact  of
    the commodity price cycle and the robust consumption. This  is  further
    highlighted through ASGI-SA which identifies that  the  recent  growth,
    although welcome, is unbalanced as it  is  based  on  strong  commodity
    prices,  capital  inflows  and  domestic  consumer  demands,  increased
    imports and strengthened the currency beyond desirable levels.


    The  risk  associated  with  this  unbalanced  growth  has  also   been
    highlighted by the Minister of Finance who pointed out that the current
    boom in commodity prices is not sustainable in the absence  of  support
    on the production side, and that outlook for capital flow going forward
    is important to maintain the higher growth rates.


    The policy choices, faced by government, had to take these risk factors
    into account with an anti-cyclical fiscal stance that supports  growth,
    while moderating the impact of consumption  expenditure  and  commodity
    prices on growth.


    Both economists who appeared before the Committee, Prof B Smit  and  Mr
    Jac Laubscher, identified these risks  as  constraints  to  growth.  Mr
    Laubscher argued, that historically, economic growth has been  followed
    by a period of recession where commodity  prices  and  capital  inflows
    were the major catalyst for growth. The recessions  in  1981  and  1994
    were due to a fall in commodity prices, and capital outflows.


     2.1    Higher growth path


    In the MTBPS, government  presented  an  optimistic  view  of  economic
    growth for the years  2006/7,  2007/8,  and  2008/9.  The  higher  than
    expected growth rate for 2005/6 of 5%, the growth trajectory of 5%  and
    CPIX expected to remain within the target range of 3% to  6%  over  the
    MTEF, further underlines that the economy is on a structurally stronger
    growth path.


    A number of factors underpin government’s positive economic outlook:


  •     Sound and sustainable macroeconomic platform;
     •    Favourable global economic conditions, particularly the  recovery
       in Japan, (significant for South African exports) strong  growth  in
       China (an average of 8,9% to GDP over the last  three  years  and  a
       significant importer of commodities), and robust growth in Africa;
     •    Improved policy coordination between National  Treasury  and  the
       Reserve Bank in keeping inflation within the target range,  moderate
       interest rates and reduced cost of capital; and
  •    Rise in commodity prices.


    2.1.1.  Consumer-led growth


    One of the principle drivers of economic growth has been the high level
    of domestic consumption expenditure. During  the  MTBPS  hearings  last
    year it was identified as a significant weakness of the current  growth
    trend. Government realised that the reliance of  household  consumption
    is not sustainable.


    The extended upswing of the economy did not have a  significant  impact
    on the manufacturing sector. Growth remains modest. Prof B Smit  is  of
    the view that the strong currency is the reason for the decline in  the
    manufacturing sector. Mr Jac Laubscher believes that while the strength
    of the currency has had an impact on this sector, however the effect of
    globalisation  has  had  a   significant   negative   impact   on   the
    manufacturing sector. The upward trajectory  is  expected  to  continue
    within the construction industry.


 2. Commodity Prices


    South Africa being a commodity exporter has benefited from the increase
    in commodity prices. The strong global demand  for  commodities,  as  a
    result of strong global economic growth, is led by developing economies
    such as China and India.


    Mr J Laubscher supports the view of the Minister of  Finance  that  the
    high commodity prices are not sustainable. He highlighted the fact that
    China and India could, in the future, become  commodity  suppliers.  He
    believes that the commodity boom  is  cyclical.  The  risk  factors  to
    economic growth are the collapse of the housing market  in  the  United
    States of America (USA), the current  account  deficit  of  6%  to  GDP
    (USA), the stand-off regarding the Iran nuclear situation and the avian
    flu pandemic that will cause a global economic slowdown. Any  softening
    of the commodity market prices will affect South Africa, but not to the
    extent it will have had in the past, said Mr Laubscher.


    Taking the history of  economic  growth  into  account,  the  Committee
    concurred that commodity prices have in the past negatively impacted on
    economic stability. However it also recognises  that  the  country  has
    shifted from its singular reliance on one or two commodities to a  more
    diversified economy supported by sound macroeconomic fundamentals.


       3. Accelerated growth and labour participation
    Raising the level of economic participation is  key  to  ensuring  that
    government sustains and improves on the growth forecast over the  MTEF.
    Lack of suitable skills has been identified as one of  the  constraints
    of the ASGI-SA.  The 2006/7 Budget continues to remove  constraints  on
    growth  through  broadening  access  to  economic  activity  that  will
    encourage the accelerated increase in the creation of new jobs.


    R372 bn  allocated  to  infrastructure  over  the  MTEF  period,  which
    supports a wide range of public sector programmes is seen  as  part  of
    the new initiative.  The allocation  of  R4  bn  broadens  government’s
    reach through the expanded public works and employment programmes.  The
    targeted land reform initiatives, the agricultural  support  programmes
    and  housing  and   community   investment   should   further   enhance
    participation.


 4. Current account deficit


    The current account deficit has risen to an estimated 4,2% of GDP,  the
    highest since 1980s. This has been fuelled by the strength of the rand,
    growth in imports fuelled by rising incomes and  long-term  accelerated
    growth expectation. Although the deficit widened it has been adequately
    offset by a strong financial account surplus.  Both  economists  raised
    concerns around the growth of the deficit, as they believe it may  have
    an impact on the ASGI-SA.


 5. Household savings


    The Committee is concerned at the low household savings and its  impact
    on the economy. Mr Jac Laubscher concluded that the  household  savings
    rate is the lowest since 1952 and national  savings  the  lowest  since
    1949.  He believes that this brings into question government’s  ability
    to achieve the projected growth rates.


 6. Skills


    The  Minister  of  Finance,  during  the  hearings,   highlighted   the
    importance  of  investment  in  infrastructure   and   human   resource
    development, as key in  expanding  the  growth  opportunities  for  the
    economy. The capacity constraints limit government’s ability  to  spend
    effectively to ensure delivery.


    Government commitment to address this constraint is  reflected  in  the
    significant allocation to social spending that increases by R10  bn  to
    R92 bn in 2006/7 rising to R110 bn in the last year of the  MTEF.  This
    priority is also reflected through additional spending in the 23 SETAs.




    Evidence presented to the Committee by Prof van der Berg, not inclusive
    of data from 2004, suggests that the social outcomes for education have
    not been achieved. Fiscal resource shifts have  taken  place.  However,
    efficient application of these  resources  in  the  process  of  social
    delivery should be the focus, he said.


    3.      Fiscal Policy


    All commentators endorsed the expansionary  fiscal  stance  adopted  by
    government. Since 2001 debt service costs have declined  significantly,
    and released resources to expand the  social  net.  The  fiscal  stance
    outlines support for growth while moderating the impact on  consumption
    expenditure. This could be referred to as the conservative part of  the
    budget and is in line with government’s  anti-cyclical  fiscal  stance.
    This seeks to address the concept  of  a  “boom  and  bust”  by  taking
    account of the risk factors inherent in an expansionary budget.


    Government must be commended that although  they  have  increased  real
    expenditure, they were mindful of the risk that  the  current  economic
    conditions present.


    3.1     Real increases in expenditure


    Government  received  an  endorsement  from  the  Committee   for   the
    expansionary fiscal stance adopted. Positive reactions were received to
    the real increases to allocations to education and skills  development,
    social welfare, R&D, HIV and AIDS, and infrastructure investment.


    3.2     Deficit reduction


    The smaller deficit is due to larger than expected revenue  collections
    of government. During the hearings on the MTBPS the Committee suggested
    that the surplus funds should be utilised to  service  debt.   This  is
    consistent with sound  fiscal  management  that  seeks  to  reduce  the
    deficit during an upswing of the business cycle,  allowing  itself  the
    necessary space when the economy slows down.


    Economists agree that the government is mindful of  the  risk,  through
    maintaining expenditure at the level as  outlined  in  the  MTBPS,  and
    increasing their foreign reserves from US$7,6 bn to US$22 bn at the end
    of January 2006.


    Some economists have  seen  the  deficit  reduction  as  a  measure  of
    government’s success story. Maintaining a low deficit during  the  boom
    time allows for space to increase the deficit  if  economic  conditions
    worsen.  Maintaining  the  low  deficit  is  the  best  indication   of
    government’s intention not to contribute to the boom on the expenditure
    side, despite the tax relief.


     3. Increase in tax revenue to 26,4% of GDP


    Commentators were concerned about the higher than expected increase  in
    revenue of 26,4% as government is committed to keeping it 25%  to  GDP.
    This will not necessarily contribute to sustained growth. The Committee
    recognises that the SARS  depends  upon  other  projections  especially
    those published by Statistics  South  Africa  on  GDP  and  the  actual
    performance of the economy and improved tax collections. The  projected
    decline of tax revenue as percentage of GDP over the MTEF is noted.

    4.      Tax Policy


    Tax reforms over the last decade have bolstered  government’s  revenue-
    raising capacity.  These  reforms  include  broadening  the  tax  base,
    reduction of the marginal tax rate at  the  lower  end,  adjustment  of
    brackets to address bracket creep,  improving  tax  administration  and
    building a culture of tax compliance. These successes are  the  product
    of sound  tax  design  that  took  cognisance  of  societal  realities.
    Increases  in  resources  ensured   that   allocations   infrastructure
    development and social services have increased while promoting economic
    growth.

     4.1    Tax proposals


    The 2006/7 tax proposals will continue to provide the necessary stimuli
    in ensuring an upward trajectory in economic growth.  The tax proposals
    outlined in the budget continue to  build  on  these  achievements  and
    support the  goals  of  the  accelerated  and  shared  economic  growth
    initiatives by promoting long-term retirement savings,  small  business
    development, investment in research and technology, skills development,
    and home ownership.


    Commentators, who however  raised  a  number  of  issues  during  these
    hearings, received these tax proposals positively.


    4.1.1   Corporate Income Tax (CIT) & Secondary Tax on Companies (STC)


    Most commentators supported government’s decision not to reduce the CIT
    rate. Since 1994 to 2005 the CIT rate  dropped  from  40%  to  29%  and
    compares favourably internationally.


    The business community, represented by BUSA and CHAMSA,  expressed  the
    view that an expectation is created that since the 1% reduction in  the
    CIT rate last year, government will have adopted a gradual approach  of
    reducing the rate. They argue that to encourage investment the CIT rate
    should be internationally competitive. The decisions that informed  the
    investor is not only the CIT rate per  se,  but  whether  there  is  an
    efficient tax administration system that is predictable  and  reliable.
    The current tax  system  in  South  Africa  is  not  an  impediment  to
    investment and resource allocation should be based purely on commercial
    and not tax decisions.


    Prof M Katz supported by National Treasury, believes that the reduction
    in the CIT rate without a reduction in the  maximum  marginal  rate  of
    individuals will result in tax arbitrage. The combined rate of CIT  and
    STC of 36,9% ensures that the difference remains 3% and eliminates  tax
    arbitrage. The total tax burden on  the  business  community  has  been
    reduced with the abolition  of  the  Regional  Services  Council  (RSC)
    levies.


    The Business community  calls  for  a  critical  re-evaluation  of  the
    appropriateness  of  the  STC   in   the   context   of   international
    competitiveness of the CIT.


    The Committee shared Prof Katz’s view that there is  a  danger  of  tax
    arbitrage if there is a reduction in the CIT rate without reduction  in
    the maximum rate of individual PIT.


    4.1.2   Regional Services Council levies


    The  abolition  of  the  RSC  levies  is  welcomed.  The  reduction  in
    compliance  costs,  and  lowering  the  tax  burden  on  key   economic
    activities  provides  the  necessary  incentives  to  ensure  long-term
    economic growth. Business received a significant direct tax  relief  to
    the amount R7 bn for 2006/7 and totalling R24 bn over the MTEF period.


    As outlined in  the  2005  MTBPS,  Treasury  is  exploring  alternative
    instruments that will replace the RSC levies. Commentators  noted  that
    no announcement regarding  an  alternative  has  been  made,  and  this
    provided the business sector with appropriate tax relief.  SAICA called
    for the permanent  abolition  of  the  RSC  levies,  but  the  business
    community were in principle not opposed to finding alternative  funding
    arrangements.


    4.1.3   Tax relief – Small Business


    The  Committee  recognised  the  importance  of   broadening   economic
    participation and creating opportunities for  small  businesses.  Given
    that this sector contributed to accelerated growth in  employment,  the
    Committee welcomes the improvement in the economic environment of small
    businesses. The adjustment in the monetary tax thresholds will  promote
    job creation and contribute to economic growth. The Committee  supports
    the decision that “co-operatives that  operate  like  small  businesses
    will enjoy the same level of benefits”.


    The business community raised the concern that no relief  is  announced
    to provide tax relief to the small service sector businesses. SAICA and
    the business community  hope  that  during  the  review  to  amend  the
    definitions  relating  to  “small  business  corporation”  and  “deemed
    employee” it will secure a tax regime that will foster  the  growth  of
    small business in the service sector.


    4.1.4   Tax Amnesty – Small Business


    The announcement of amnesty to small business is welcome, as this  will
    afford businesses, currently outside the tax net, with the  opportunity
    to regularise their tax affairs. The Committee  is  in  agreement  that
    this is a bold initiative that will effectively  achieve  a  broadening
    tax base.


    The Committee welcomes this bold initiative  that  effectively  enables
    small business to take advantage of procurement  opportunities  in  the
    public and private sector.


       4. Tax on Retirement Fund Industry


    In 2004  the  Committee  provided  a  public  forum  to  discuss  costs
    associated with  retirement  fund  instruments.  This  hearing  was  in
    response to a paper presented by Mr R Rusconi at the Actuarial  Society
    of South Africa Conference. In 2005 the Committee  again  provided  the
    necessary forum for the industry and government  to  engage  the  draft
    paper on the Retirement Fund Industry, as it has  identified  the  cost
    factor as a major concern.


    BUSA welcomed the announcement to reduce tax  on  retirement  funds  as
    this tax impacts negatively on the  lower  end  of  employees.  In  its
    opinion the regressive nature of the  tax  has  a  negative  impact  on
    private savings and  therefore  the  reduction  will  improve  savings.
    Various  other  commentators  called  for  the  scrapping  of  tax   on
    retirement funds.


    Government also announced that progress has been made with  respect  to
    regulatory reforms within the retirement industry. A  discussion  paper
    will be released shortly that  will  propose  certain  changes  to  the
    regulatory environment and tax reforms.


       6. R & D incentives


    Broadening of the tax base, minimising expenses,  incentives  and  good
    taxation should always be the  objective  of  tax  policy.   Government
    believes that investment in R & D and innovation is  an  investment  in
    knowledge and human capital. Providing the necessary incentive to R & D
    will lead to economic growth through new technologies, and  development
    of new products. The business community welcomed these measures.


    Prof M Katz was supportive of R & D  initiatives  broadly,  however  he
    raised a concern about  the  proposed  deduction  of  150%  on  R  &  D
    expenditure. He argues that historically,  whenever  an  incentive  has
    been given that gives more than  100%  deduction  expenditure  incurred
    leads to wasteful expenditure, and abuse. Prof Katz is of the view that
    R & D support should not be given through the tax  system  but  through
    the accelerated depreciation allowance for capital expenditure.


     5. Impact of HIV and AIDS on Growth


    Prof B Smit informed the Committee that  clear  benefits  are  emerging
    from government implementation of the government HIV and AIDS treatment
    plan. He argues that SA loses 0,5% growth per year, and  although  this
    is not likely to have an impact on growth going forward, it gains  0,1%
    of growth since the provision of  the  antiretroviral  (ARV)  drugs  to
    sufferers.  The cost of between 15% - 20% is recouped.


 6. Concluding comments


    The resources allocated to infrastructure underpin capital expenditure,
    which is one of the drivers of this expansionary policy. Over the  past
    ten  years  government  macroeconomic  policies   have   developed   an
    environment to encourage investment. The Committee  believes  that  now
    more  than  ever  the  investor  community  should  begin  to  directly
    contribute to radical reduction of poverty and unemployment.


    The significant reduction in the  deficit  and  utilising  the  surplus
    funds in the financial current to increase the foreign reserves  rather
    than  simply  immediately  utilising  these  funds   in   unsustainable
    expenditure was in the Committee’s opinion a wise decision.


    Tax amnesty for small businesses including  cooperatives  operating  as
    small  businesses  supports  their   growth   in   the   reduction   of
    unemployment.
     7. Recommendations


     1. Effective oversight on the Appropriation Bill is directly linked to
        the exercise of oversight on the  MTBPS.  In  future,  to  exercise
        oversight effectively, more time should  be  allocated  within  the
        parliamentary programme for both processes.
     2. To ensure efficient expenditure of allocated  resources  in  social
        services, in particular education and the SETAs to achieve suitable
        skills output, requires:


                 i.      Efficient   and   effective    output    targeting,
                    implementation and management of allocated resources;
                 ii.   Regular tracking as  well  as  timely  and  strategic
                    intervention; and
               iii. Integrated implementation of cross-cutting measures;


     3. The Committee is of the view that the extra 50% proposed incentives
        for R & D requires further discussion.


     8. Oral submissions


    The following people made oral submissions before the  Committee,  some
    in their personal capacity. These submissions are available on  request
    from the Committee Section of Parliament.


     1. Mr T Manuel, Minister of Finance
     2. Mr J Moleketi, Deputy Minister of Finance
     3. Mr L Kganyago, Director-General: National Treasury
     4. Mr P Gordhan, Commissioner of SARS
     5. Mr L Worth, Chief Operating Officer: National Treasury
     6. Mr K Naidoo, Acting Deputy Director-General: Budget Office
     7. Prof S van der Berg, Stellenbosch University
     8. Mr J Laubscher, Chief Economist: Sanlam
     9. Prof B Smit, BER
    10. Ms J Arendse, South African  Institute  for  Chartered  Accountants
        (SAICA)
    11. Mr N Nalliah, SAICA
    12.     Prof M Katz, Edward Nathan & Associates
    13. Mr L Verwey, IDASA
    14. Prof R Parsons, Business Unity South Africa (BUSA)
     15.    Adv A Meiring, BUSA
     16.    Mr D Kruger, CHAMSA
     17.    Ms P Drotskie, CHAMSA
     18.    Mr K Warren, CHAMSA
     19.    Ms G Humphries, Federation of Unions of South Africa (FEDUSA)


Report to be considered.


                            MONDAY, 20 MARCH 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Draft Bill submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    1) Convention on International Interests in Mobile Equipment Bill,
       submitted by the Minister of Transport on 7 March 2006. Referred to
       the Portfolio Committee on Transport and the Select Committee on
       Public Services.


COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Assembly


1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the International
  Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Customs Matters, dated
  14 March 2006:

    The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the request for
    approval by Parliament of the International Convention on Mutual
    Administrative Assistance in Customs Matters, referred to it,
    recommends that the House, in terms of section 231(2) of the
    Constitution, approve the said Convention.


  Request to be considered.


                          WEDNESDAY, 22 MARCH 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Membership of Committees


     (1)    The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
        Committees:


        Budget
        Appointed: Robinson, Ms D.


National Assembly


The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly

    The following member vacated his seat in the National Assembly with
    effect from 16 March 2006:

    Dodovu, T S.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1. The Minister of Defence
    (a)     Strategic Business Plan for the Department of Defence [RP 33-
        2006].

 2. Minister of Communications

    (a)     Strategic Plan for the Department of Communications for 2006-
        2009.

National Assembly

 1. The Speaker

    (a)     Report of the Public Service Commission on Assessing the Role
        of Labour Relations Officers in the Public Service, 2005 [RP 71-
        2005].


COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Assembly


1. Report of the Portfolio  Committee  on  Public  Works  on  the  oversight
  visits to all nine provinces, dated 7 March 2006:

  The Portfolio Committee on Public Works (National Assembly) having
  conducted an oversight visit to the National Department of Public Works
  (NDPW) and the provincial departments of Public Works, municipalities and
  local communities between February and September 2005, reports as
  follows:


   The structure of this report is as follows:


   Glossary
   Foreword
   Introduction
   Findings
   Overview
   Oversight visit to Provinces
   Recommendations
   Conclusion


   GLOSSARY
   BEE                 Black Economic Empowerment
   CBPWP         Community-Based Public Works Programme
   CDW                 Community Development Workers
   CIDB                Construction Industry Development Board
   CETA                Construction Education and Training Authority
   CTM                 City of Tshwane Management
   CHW                 Community Health Workers
   DM            District Municipality
   DORA                Division of Revenue Act
   DPTRW         Department of Public Transport, Roads and Works
   EPWP                Expanded Public Works Programme
   EXCO                Executive Council
   ECD                 Early Childhood Development
   HCBC                Home Community-Based Care
   IDP                 Integrated Development Plans
   IDT                 Independent Development Trust
   ILO                 International Labour Organisation
   IMDC                Integrated Development Management Committee
   ISRDP               Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Programme
   KZN                 Kwazulu-Natal
   LED                 Local Economic Development
   MEC                 Member of Executive Council
   MFMA          Municipal Financial Management Act
   MIG                 Municipal Infrastructure Grant
   MoU                 Memorandum of Understanding
   MPC                 Multi-Purpose Centres
   NDPW                National Department of Public Works
   PEC                 Provincial Executive Committee
   PFMA                Public Finance Management Act
   PMIS                Property Management Information System
   PPWD                Provincial Public Works Department
   PSC                 Provincial Steering Committee
   PTC                 Provincial Technical Committee
   SALGA         South African Local Government Association
   SAWIC         South African Women in Construction


   FOREWORD


   The Portfolio Committee undertook its oversight visit to  the  NDPW  and
   all nine provinces during the 2005/2006 financial  year  and  wishes  to
   extend gratitude to the following:
    • The National Department of Public  Works,  for  its  cooperation  and
      their responsiveness to constructive  criticism  from  the  Portfolio
      Committee and Standing Committee on Public Accounts.


    • The Committee further appreciates the immediate and positive response
      by the Department to the proposals and recommendations  made  by  the
      Committee.


    • The Committee notes the appointments of the Deputy  Directors-General
      for the EPWP and Asset Management respectively.


    • The Committee observes the Leadership Way  Initiative  introduced  by
      the Department in an attempt to redress  administrative  shortcomings
      of the Department during the year under review.


    • The Committee further notes the  improved  financial  and  accounting
      systems that were subsequently complimented by an  unqualified  audit
      report for the 2004/05 financial year.


    • The Committee thanks all provincial MECs, Members of  the  provincial
      legislatures and officials of the departments for their  support  and
      cooperation during the hearings.


    • The Committee also recognises the cordial reception from the Premiers
      of Northern Cape and Limpopo provinces respectively as well as mayors
      of Johannesburg, Durban metropolitan councils and district mayors  of
      OR Tambo, Chris Hani and Alfred Nzo district  municipalities  in  the
      Eastern Cape and Ulundi District Municipality in Kwazulu-Natal.


    • The Committee  further  recognises  the  frankness  and  constructive
      contribution made by representatives of SALGA,  mayors,  councillors,
      beneficiaries and communities during the deliberations.


    • A tribute to South African Women  in  Construction  (SAWIC)  for  the
      seminal role demonstrated in exhorting,  mobilising,  empowering  and
      effectuated South African women to be part  of  the  challenging  and
      lucrative construction industry through the EPWP.


    • The Committee acknowledges with appreciation the support given by the
      IDT to the Department and communities in the  implementation  of  the
      EPWP at Hlabisa hospital and Zibambele road construction  in  Ndwedwe
      in KZN, and at Dutyini, Mount Ayliff in Eastern Cape and Zivuseni  in
      Gauteng.


    •  The  Committee  appreciates  the  contributions  rendered   by   the
      Chairperson of the NCOP Select Committee on  Public  Services  during
      the information sharing in the advancement of the  work  of  the  two
      Committees.


 Not withstanding the above,
    o The Committee during its oversight visit observed with concern that in
      most provinces the intergovernmental and  interdepartmental  relations
      are  still  a  challenge  and  recommends  that  Parliament  and   its
      committees  must  intensify  the  oversight  role  and   promote   the
      understanding, need and the importance of these relations as contained
      in chapter 3 of the Constitution.
    o It is evident that in some provinces the  non-availability  of  public
      representatives directly and indirectly affects service delivery.


    o The visibility of all public representatives at  national,  provincial
      and local spheres of government is paramount in making  the  necessary
      interventions and assists  to  disseminate  information,  monitor  and
      evaluate government programmes.


    o The coordination  of  the  departmental  programmes  (i  e  EPWP)  and
      noncooperation of cluster Departments remains a concern, the Committee
      recommends that designated officials by the NDPW to regional and local
      spheres of government must be capacitated and resourced  in  order  to
      effectively improve the coordination and  the  implementation  of  the
      Programme.


    o The Committee further recommends  that  the  regional  and  provincial
      coordinators of the EPWP constitute a forum to coordinate and  monitor
      the  implementation  of  the  programme  thereby   strengthening   the
      intergovernmental and interdepartmental relations.


    o On assets and asset management the Committee recommends  the  Property
      Management Information System (PMIS) being a  data  capturing  and  an
      early warning system developed  by  the  Mpumalanga,  North  West  and
      Western Cape provinces must be considered as a case study by the NDPW.




  INTRODUCTION


   The report is structured to present a general trend and  a  consolidated
   perspective of all provinces rather than province-by-province.  In  some
   instances a specific mention of a province is highlighted  to  emphasise
   attention and action to be taken.


   The Committee, as required by the Constitution of the Republic of  South
   Africa (1996), must ensure that the Department of Public  Works  carries
   out its mandate and responsibilities viz: -


 o Policy implementation at all spheres of government.
    o Monitor progress on service delivery and meeting  of  targets  by  the
      department as enunciated in the state of the  nation  address  by  the
      State President, the budget speech by Minister  of  Finance  and,  the
      Minister of Public Works’ strategic plan and budget vote speech.
 o Strengthening of the intergovernmental and interdepartmental relations.
 o Management and maintenance of state assets.
 o Monitor the Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Programes



                                  OVERVIEW



   The main focus of the oversight was on the performance of the department
   in key areas of its responsibilities as set out hereunder:
    • The provision and management of land  and  accommodation  to  national
      departments and public institutions,
 •  To  give  strategic  leadership  to  the  construction   and   property
   industries,
 • To co-ordinate and monitor the implementation of the EPWP and,
 • Adherence and conformity to  the  requirements  of  the  Public  Finance
   Management Act of 1999
      (PFMA), Division  of  Revenue  Act  (DORA)  and  Municipality  Finance
 Management Act
      (MFMA).


   The period under review is from 31st  January  2005  and  2nd  September
   2005.


   The  oversight  report  on  the  National  Department  of  Public  Works
   undertaken between 31st January 2005 and 2nd September 2005 is contained
   in the Committee report of the Department’s Annual report (please  refer
   to Committee’s report on the Annual report of the Department).



                                  FINDINGS



   1.   OVERSIGHT TO PROVINCES


      The Committee visited the following Provinces:


   Eastern Cape 31 January – 3 February 2005
     Committee Delegation visited the province:
                                              Party
     Mr F Bhengu, Chairperson                      ANC
     Mr L Maduma Acting Leader of the delegation   ANC
     Mr M Magubane                            ANC
     Mr K Moonsamy                            ANC
     Ms MM Ntuli                              ANC
     Ms NM Mdaka                              UDM
     Mr S Opperman                            DA
    Ms NP Nonkelela                          Support staff
    Ms P Kakaza                              Support staff


     Areas and organisations visited:
     a)     Met with Honourable MEC for Public Works: Mr S Kwelita
     b)     Met with the Department officials
     c)     Met with Amatola District Municipality and Mayor Mr S Somyo
     d)     Met with Chris Hani District Municipality and Mayor Mr M Sigabi
     e)     Visited Alfred Nzo District Municipality and Executive Mayor  Mr
   GG Mpumza:
     f)     Met with Chairperson of SALGA in the Province Mr S Somyo
     g)     Met with OR Tambo District Municipality and Executive Mayor Ms Z
   Capa-Langa


   Free State 7-10 February 2005
   Committee Delegation visited the province:
                                        Party
   Ms CMP Ramotsamai Leader of the delegation      ANC
   Mr HP Maluleka                            ANC
   Mr NJ Gogotya                        ANC
   Mrs TLP Nwamitwa-Shilubana                ANC
   Mr JPI Blanche                            DA
   Mr MT Likotsi                        PAC
   Mr J Leburu                          Support staff
   Mr S Makeleni                        Support staff


      Areas and organisations visited:
a) Met the Honourable MEC Mr S Mohai. (The MEC was part of the entourage.)
b) Met with officials from the department
   c) Met with Thabo Mofutsanyana District Municipality and Executive  Mayor
      Mofumahadi Mathokoana Mopedi
d) Met with the Maluti a Phofung Local Municipality
e) KM Mankwane Construction Road in Qwaqwa
f) Hydroponics (Agricultural) project in Qwaqwa
g) Tswarang Waste Management Project in Qwaqwa


   Gauteng 31 January – 3 February 2005
      Committee Delegation visited the province:
                                             Party
   Ms CMP Ramotsamai Leader of the delegation           ANC
   Mr HP Maluleka                                  ANC
   Mr NJ Gogotya                             ANC
   Mr S Siboza                               ANC
   Mrs TLP Nwamitwa-Shilubana                      ANC
   Mr JPI Blanche                                  DA
   Mr MT Likotsi                             PAC
   Mr J Leburu                               Support staff
   Mr S Makeleni                             Support staff


      Areas and organisations visited:
a) Met with honourable MEC for Public Transport,  Roads  and  Works:  Mr  I
   Jacobs
b) Met officials of the provincial Department of Public Works
c) Met with Mayor of Johannesburg Metropolitan Council: Mr A Masondo
d) Matengteng road and storm water canal project in Stinkwater, Tshwane
e) Zintombeni taxi project in Bronkhorspruit
f) Poortjie Hospice in Region 11 of Johannesburg
g) Almac MPCC (learnership and skill development project) in Ekurhuleni
h) Bophelong Skill Resource Centre in Lekoa District
i) Working for Fire project in Cullinan
j) Working for Water (alien-vegetation-clearing projects) in Silverton


   KwaZulu-Natal 7-10 February 2005
     Committee Delegation visited the province:
                             Party
     Mr F Bhengu, Chairperson      ANC
     Mr L Maduma             ANC
     Mr M Magubane           ANC
     Mr K Moonsamy           ANC
     Ms MM Ntuli             ANC
     Mr S Opperman           DA
     Ms NM Mdaka             UDM
     Ms NP Nonkelela         Support staff
     Ms P Kakaza             Support staff


      Areas and organisations visited:
a) Met with honourable MEC for Transport in KZN Mr H Cele
b) Met with honourable MEC for Public Works in KZN Mr Gwala
c) Met with officials from the department
d) Met with mayor of Durban metropolitan Mr O Mlaba
   e)  Visited  King  George  Hospital  project  Presidential  lead  project
      launched on 14 February 2004 for the rehabilitation and  extension  of
      the Hospital,.
f) Met with Deputy Mayor of Mkhanyakude District Municipality: Mr S Sibanda
g) Visited Zibambele and Vuk’Uzenzel Road maintenance programme in Ndwedwe
h) Visited Jozini – SANDF Base
i) Met with Ulundi Mayor, Ms Z Magwaza
j) Visited Hlabisa Hospital (rehabilitation and extension)
   k) Visited state-owned properties in Ulundi previously  occupied  by  the
      Departments of Justice and Correctional Services
l) Met with Amajuba Local Municipality Mayor Mlangeni in New Castle
m) Beneficiaries of EPWP


   Limpopo 1-3 August 2005
     Committee delegation visited the province:
                                   Party
   Mr F Bhengu Chairperson        ANC
   Mr NJ Gogotya                  ANC
   Mrs TLP Nwamitwa-Shilubana           ANC
   Mr TG Anthony                  ANC
   Mr S Siboza                    ANC
   Mr JPI Blanche                       DA
   Mr J Leburu                    Support staff
   Mr S Makeleni                  Support staff



   Areas and organisations visited:

a) Met with the honourable Premier of Limpopo: Mr S Moloto
b) Met with MEC for public Works: Mr T Mufamadi
c) Met with Provincial Portfolio Committee
d) Met with Greater Sekhukhune District Municipality
e) Visited Mohlaletsi home-based care centre
f) Visited the Gundo Lasho projects
g) Visited the Tzaneen Municipality
h) Visited the agricultural project managed by women in Tzaneen
   i) Visited CHOICE (Organisation  that  caters  for  people  infected  and
      affected by HIV/AIDS) caregivers project in Tzaneen
j) Imbizo in Polokwane (Beneficiaries of EPWP)


   Mpumalanga 6-8 June 2005
     Committee delegation visited the province:
                                              Party
   Ms CMP Ramotsamai Leader of the delegation           ANC
   Mr L Maduma                               ANC
   Mr NE Magubane                            ANC
   Ms PS Sekgobela                                 ANC
   Ms MM Ntuli                               ANC
   Mr S Opperman                             DA
   Ms NM Mdaka                               UDM
   Mr M Nguqu                                Support staff


   Areas and organisations visited:
   a) Met with honourable MEC of Public Works in Mpumalanga, Ms C Mashego
   b) Met with officials of the PPWD
   c) Met with Provincial Portfolio Committee
   d) Visited Thembelihle home community-based care projects in the  Nkomazi
      area
   e)  Visited  Mbuzini  and  Thambokhulu  land-care  projects  in  Mbombela
      district municipality
   f) Visited Gutshwakop-Lubisi Road  construction  learnership  and  Skills
      transfer project in
   g) Mbombela district municipality
   h) Visited  Vukani  Sisebente  Community  project  in  Mbombela  district
      municipality
   i) Beneficiaries of EPWP


   Northern Cape 6-8 June 2005
   Committee Delegation visited the province:
                                  Party
   Mr F Bhengu   Chairperson            ANC
   Mr S Siboza                    ANC
   Mr TG Anthony                  ANC
   Mr JPI Blanche                       DA
   Mr MT Likotsi                  PAC
   Mr J Leburu                    Support staff
   Ms NP Nonkelela                      Support staff


      Areas and organisations visited:
   a) The Committee attended a  provincial  lekgotla  hosted  by  Honourable
      Premier: Ms D Peters.
b) Met with Honourable MEC for Public Works: Mr. F Wyngaard
c) Met with the officials from the PPWD
d) Road-paving project – Upington
e) Road-curbing project – Keimoes
f) Road construction project - Kakamas
g) Gravel road construction at the Kgalagadi transfrontier
h) Beneficiaries of EPWP


   North West 9-10 June 2005
   Committee Delegation visited the province:
                                  Party
   Mr F Bhengu   Chairperson            ANC
   Mr S Siboza                    ANC
   Mr TG Anthony                  ANC
   Mr L Maduma                    ANC
   Mr NE Magubane                 ANC
   Ms PS Sekgobela                      ANC
   Ms MM Ntuli                    ANC
   Ms NM Mdaka                    UDM
   Mr S Opperman                  DA
   Mr JPI Blanche                       DA
   Mr MT Likotsi                  PAC
   Mr J Leburu                    Support staff
   Ms NN Nonkelela                Support staff
   Areas and organisations visited:


a) Met with Honourable MEC for Public Works: Mr H Yawa
b) Met Members of Provincial Legislature
c) Met with officials from the Department
d) Met with Councillors
e) Visited Modimola road Maintenance project 1st and 2nd phases
f) Visited Mmabatho Paving Project
g) Imbizo (Beneficiaries of EPWP)


   Western Cape 1-2 August 2005
   Committee Delegation visited the province:
                                                   Party
   Ms CMP Ramotsamai   Leader of the delegation         ANC
   Mr HP Maluleka      Acting Leader of the delegation  ANC
   Mr L Maduma                                     ANC
   Mr NE Magubane                                  ANC
   Ms PS Sekgobela                                      ANC
   Ms MM Ntuli                                     ANC
   Mr S Opperman                                   DA
   Ms NM Mdaka                                     UDM
   Ms NP Nonkelela                                      Support staff
   Ms N Chaso                                      Support staff


      Areas and organisations visited
a) Met with Members of Provincial Legislature
b) Met the DDG EPWP: Mr B Gxilishe
c) Met HOD:  Mr A Yasir
d) Visited Khayelitsha train station
e) Visited Merrydale primary school
f) Visited Nonkqubela road construction
g) Visited Moreson road construction
h) Visited Droehoewel road construction
i) Imbizo at Robertson City Council (Beneficiaries of EPWP)



   Findings



   DEPARTMENTAL PROGRAMMES


 Asset Management and Maintenance (Movable and Immovable)


a) Mpumalanaga, North West and Western Cape provinces have  developed  PMIS
   in attempt to
      address the shortcomings within their asset management system.
b)    Provincial Departments do not have a consistent and accurate  auditing
system for both movable
      and immovable state properties.
c)    There is a critical backlog on the maintenance of state properties  in
the provincial departments.
d)    In most provinces the government properties are vacant,  not  properly
      maintained, have illegal occupants and are vandalised (i e in KwaZulu-
      Natal Jozini army base and government properties in Ulundi).
e)    The finalisation of land restitution in Limpopo  and  other  provinces
      hinders the compilation and finalisation of the asset registers.
f)    Cognisant of the fact  that  land  restitution  is  still  an  ongoing
      process the finalisation of the asset register  is  dependent  on  the
      completion of the process.


 Recommendations on Asset Management and Maintenance


    o  The  Mpumalanga,  North  West  and  Western  Cape  provinces   asset
      management system initiatives should be taken  as  a  case  study  to
      develop a holistic, accurate and reliable asset management system  by
      the national and provincial departments.


    o Audit of all state properties utilised, underutilised and unutilised,
      including all military bases, must be completed and an interim report
      be tabled in Parliament before  the  end  of  the  first  quarter  of
      2006/2007 financial year. The  Committee  is  conscious  of  and  not
      undermining the fact that the Departments of Public  Works  and  Land
      Affairs are conducting a vetting process.


    o The Committee recommends that a uniform and centralised PMIS must  be
      developed to address this anomaly.


    o An investigation and appropriate legal action  should  be  instituted
      against  all  tenants  who  are  unable  to  produce   title   deeds,
      certificates of occupation or lease agreements on demand.


    o Services in vacant government  properties  that  are  unoccupied  and
      those occupied by illegal occupants must be terminated.


    o Lease and service agreements must be honoured by  client  departments
      and public institutions and defaulters be penalised.
    o A mechanism must be developed to cause individuals who are  occupying
      properties belonging to the  state,  knowingly  and  unknowingly,  to
      declare their occupation  in  order  to  qualify  for  indemnity  and
      failure to disclose be punishable by law.


    o There must be uniformity on the  disposal  of  state  assets  in  all
      spheres of government.


    o The NDPW must, in consultation with  all  other  departments  in  all
      spheres of government, develop a uniform disposal policy of all state
      assets.


    o Any disposal of government property, be it at a national,  provincial
      or local level of government, must  be  by  agreement  of  all  role-
      players.


    o The PDPW must have  a  disposal  strategy  for  old  and  depreciated
      movable properties (i e plants and machinery). When auctioning  takes
      place preference must be given to learner and emerging contractors.


    o The Committee recommends that the maintenance and renovation of state
      properties must fall directly under the EPWP to ensure that  emerging
      contractors and contractors in  the  Incubator  Programme  are  given
      preference.


   Expanded Public Works Programme (EPWP)
    Launch of the EPWP in Provinces:


    •  Eastern  Cape  province  launched  the  EPWP  on  3  September  2004,
      (Infrastructure Sector).
    •  Free  State  province  launched  the  EPWP  on  28  September   2004,
      (Environment Sector).
 • Gauteng province launched the EPWP on 31  August  2004,  (Infrastructure
   Sector).
 • KwaZulu-Natal EPWP launched the EPWP on  28  August  2004,  (Environment
   Sector).
 • Limpopo province launched the EPWP  on  1  April  2005,  (Infrastructure
   Sector).
    •  Mpumalanga  province  launched  the   EPWP   on   30   August   2004,
      (Economic/Agriculture Sector).
 •  Northern  Cape  province  launched  the  EPWP  on   27   August   2004,
   (Infrastructure).
 •  North  West  province  launched  the  EPWP  on   16   September   2004,
   (Infrastructure).
 •  Western  Cape  province  launched   the   EPWP   on   1   April   2005,
   (Infrastructure/ Building
            maintenance).


  2.2.2 The coordination of the EPWP


   The EPWP is driven by four Clusters viz:
    • Infrastructure
    • Social
    • Environmental & cultural
    • Economic
   The coordination  and  performance  of  the  clusters  varies  from  one
   province to another.



   2.3 Infrastructure

      The infrastructure cluster is leading in all provinces  in  terms  of
   performance.


 A     Eastern Cape


    o In Alfred Nzo District Municipality, the Rural Housing Project, which
      manufactures bricks, has employed women and youth with the  exception
      of people with disability.
    o In OR Tambo  District  Municipality,  infrastructure  Projects  (i  e
      Vukuzakhe Project, a rural housing  and  agricultural  project  which
      benefited 30 000 households) were not integrated into EPWP.
    o In Chris Hani District Municipality,  Women  in  Construction  stated
      that they were harassed and discriminated against in the industry and
      at the construction sites.
    o General complaints were levelled against the conduct and behaviour of
      government officials, which does not conform to Batho Pele.
    o Late payments  were  cited  by  emerging  contractors  as  a  general
      phenomenon.


 B     Free State


 Women and youth  with  the  exclusion  of  people  with  disabilities  were
   involved
 in the construction of Mankwe road in Qwaqwa.


 C     Gauteng


    o  Tshwane-Stinkwater  road  construction  in  Hammanskraal  was  badly
      constructed due to non-adherence to specifications by consultants.
    o The Almac local municipality in collaboration with the Infrastructure
      Cluster adopted and supported the multi-purpose  centre  situated  in
      Almac (i e training of carpenters, welding, baking).
    o In Bara taxi and bus terminal,  the  Committee  was  briefed  on  the
      rehabilitation, upgrading and renovation of the terminals.
    o The Zithombeni Taxi Project in Bronkhorsrpuit needs to be constructed
      with a water drainage system.
 D     KwaZulu-Natal province


    o The Zibambele and Vuk’uzenzel road project are labour-intensive  road
      construction and maintainance projects that created job opportunities
      for communities in Ndwedwe.
    o The Zibambele road project deliberately targeted and employed female-
      headed households.
    o Other labour-intensive projects  that  benefited  learners,  emerging
      contractors and communities was the upgrading of King George Hospital
      and Hlabisa  Hospital,  (Hlabisa  Hospital  is  a  Presidential  lead
      project).


 E     Limpopo province


    o The Committee is concerned that the Gundolasho road  was  constructed
      without curbing and this could lead to erosion.
    o The Committee is concerned that most provinces have not budgeted  for
      road maintenance.
    o Across provinces a concern has been raised  by  emerging  contractors
      regarding fronting and irregularities  in  the  tendering  processes,
      which also implicated government officials and that no decisive  pre-
      emptive measures were in place.


 F     Mpumalanga province


    o The  Gutshwakop-Luphisi  learnership  programme  imparted  skills  to
      learners on regravelling, compacting, filling and drainage of  a  300
      kilometre road in Mbombela local municipality.
    o Vukasisebente community project in Mbombela local municipality caters
      for  packaging  facility  of  beverages  and  bakery,  which  imparts
      financial and management skills to beneficiaries.
 G     Northern Cape province


     o Upington road making and road paving
     o Keimoes road curbing
     o Kgalagadi Transfrontier rehabilitation and road construction project,


     o All three projects had a reasonable involvement of  women  and  youth
       but the  Committee  is  concerned  about  the  lack  of  people  with
       disabilities.
     o The Councillors in Kakamas were not actively involved or  unaware  of
       the road construction projects that were taking  place  within  their
       own constituencies.
     o The  Committee  observed  that  in  most  labour-intensive  projects,
       workers are not adhering to occupational health and safety standards.


 H     North West


    o Mmabatho CBD road paving projects (owned and driven by youth) must be
      promoted in other provinces.
    o The Modimola integrated flagship project driven by the Departments of
      Agriculture, Water Affairs and Public Works, has  not  been  properly
      managed.


 I     Western Cape


    o The Saamstaan is a broad programme that includes  road  constructions
      (Nonkqubela,  Moreson  and   Droehoewel   roads),   renovations   and
      maintenance of schools (Merrydale School) in Robertson.
    o The Klipfontein Corridor project  encompasses  the  EPWP  guidelines,
      which benefited 22 learner contractors in the Incubator Programme.
    o The Committee did not complete its visit  and  it  will  revisit  the
      province during the course of the 2006/2007 financial year.


  2.3.1 Recommendations on Infrastructure:


    • Late payments to emerging contractors must be avoided by paying  them
      according to the schedule of the projects.


    •  The  NDPW  should  look  at  the  regulations  of  the  Preferential
      Procurement Policy Framework Act and consider which amendments  could
      be effected to strengthen this Act.


    • The Committee recommends  that  the  co-ordination  and  co-operation
      between NDPW and other departments in all spheres of government  must
      adhere to contractual agreements entered into  and  payment  must  be
      made within the prescribed period.


    • The Committee notes that the department is investigating fronting and
      therefore an interim report should be tabled  in  Parliament  on  all
      acts of fronting that have been investigated and corrective  measures
      taken, on or before the first  quarter  of  the  2006/2007  financial
      year.


    • The department  must  assign  dedicated  inspectors  to  monitor  and
      investigate fraudulent claims  committed  and  shoddy  work  done  by
      contractors  and  appropriate   legal   action   be   taken   against
      perpetrators inclusive of blacklisting.


    • Whilst the Committee appreciates the progress made by the  office  of
      the MEC and the Department of Public Works in  the  Eastern  Cape  in
      addressing the discrimination against women, it is incumbent  to  all
      departments in all spheres of government to act against the violation
      of women’s rights in the workplace.


    • Occupational health standards were not maintained and adhered  to  at
      EPWP projects  i  e  Kgalagadi  Transfrontier  road  and  Chris  Hani
      District Municipality. The Committee recommends that the PPWD  should
      continuously educate workers in construction about the importance  of
      adhering to the occupational health safety standards.


    • The NDPW must ensure that the Department of Labour assigns inspectors
      to enforce safety standards regulations.


    • The Department of Labour should ensure that  protective  clothing  is
      supplied to potentially hazardous projects.


    • The Committee recommends that provinces must budget  for  maintenance
      of completed projects (ie Gundolashu Road Project).


    • The mismanagement of Modimola Integrated  Flagship  project  must  be
      investigated and a report must be tabled to Parliament before the end
      of the first quarter of the 2006/2007 financial year.


    • Consultants have committed to rectifying the  irregularities  on  the
      construction of the Stinkwater road in Tshwane  and  to  comply  with
      Council decision. The Committee recommends that a report be tabled in
      Parliament on this before  the  end  of  the  first  quarter  of  the
      2006/2007 financial year.


    • The Committee is concerned about the age group of youth participating
      in the EPWP projects who are supposed to  be  attending  school.  The
      NDPW  in  collaboration  with  the  Department  of   Education   must
      investigate the socioeconomic circumstances contributing to this  and
      make necessary interventions i  e  in  Kgalagadi  Transfrontier  Road
      Project and other projects in Upington.


4.  Social Cluster


 o Choice is an established organisation in Tzaneen supported by  the  NDPW
   focusing on learnership and skills transfer  to  communities  and  home-
   based caregivers of people affected and infected by HIV/AIDS.

 o It was reported that the university of Southern Africa would  train  the
   CDW and HCBC volunteers.

 o Training of Home Community-Based  care-givers  (HCBC),  Early  Childhood
   Development Educators (EDC) and Community Health  Workers  (CHW)  is  an
   ongoing process.

 o The Committee appreciates the collaboration between  the  infrastructure
   and social clusters in the establishment  of  the  HIV/AIDS  hospice  in
   Poortjie.

 o The Youth of Christ in collaboration with the Social Cluster established
   HIV/AIDS Hospice at Poortjie.
 o The Infrastructure and Social clusters collaboration in support  of  the
   municipality  of  Thabong  in  the   HIV/AIDS   awareness   project   is
   commendable.

 o The establishment  of  Thembelihle  Home  Community-Based  Care  Project
   (vegetable garden) in Mbombela has provided employment and skills to 300
   caregivers and volunteers for/to people with HIV/AIDS.


      2.4.1 Recommendations on Social Cluster

    • The  Departments  of  NDPW,  Agriculture  and  Forestry  must  assist
      communities in Limpopo and  other  provinces  in  fast  tracking  and
      developing community gardens as part of the EPWP.
    • The Committee recommends that the PPWD should  in  consultation  with
      Departments  of  Social  Development  and  Health  establish  and  or
      strengthen social clusters for the realisation of the  objectives  of
      the EPWP.


      2.5 Environment and Cultural Cluster


   The Committee commends the support the NDPW has given to the Working for
   Fire in Culinan and Working for Water and clearing of  alien  vegetation
   in Silverton.


      2.5.1.Recommendation on Environmental and Cultural Cluster


   Disaster management must be devolved to municipalities to form  part  of
   job creation for the local community within the EPWP Guidelines.


      2.6 Economy


    o In Limpopo the agriculture project in Tzaneen  spearheaded  by  women
      has benefited the local community with employment and skills.
    o (In Free State the Hydroponics project in Qwaqwa  has  benefited  all
      involved with life skills and employment.) [Ms Shilubana proposed  it
      be change to reflect the reality on the ground]
    o In Free State the Hydroponics project in Qwaqwa should have benefited
      all involved with life skills and employment and therefore  the  NDPW
      should monitor its progress. (Ms Shilubana’s formulation)
    o Provinces in general are still at the planning stage of  implementing
      the EPWP in the economic sector.



   Incubator Programme



    • The Incubator programme is inconsistent from province to province and
      the coordination and monitoring of the programme by the department is
      crucial in achieving the intended results.
    • Collateral required  by  financial  institutions  from  the  emerging
      contractors is a concern from most provinces and the NDPW  must  make
      necessary interventions.
    • The NDPW, private sector and institutions  of  higher  learning  must
      establish a joint venture whereby  Built  Environment  graduates  are
      placed on internships.
    • The NDPW in cooperation with PPWD in the  Eastern  Cape  must  ensure
      that the CIDB implements the Incubator Programme and further consider
      the reviewal of the programme.
    • The Committee commends the  progress  made  on  the  learnership  and
      skills transfer under the Incubator programme. The Provincial  Public
      Works Departments must from time to time consolidate, synchronise and
      update the data of all beneficiaries of the EPWP.
    • The short-term employment and the  lack  of  sustainability  of  jobs
      created  through  the  EPWP  was  viewed  as  a  constraint   and   a
      shortcoming. The Committee recommends the reviewal  of  the  EPWP  to
      accommodate long-term job opportunities.
    • The Committee recognises the short period that  emerging  contractors
      spent in the Incubator Programme. The NDPW should develop  supporting
      mechanisms that would  ensure  sustainability  of  those  contractors
      through NEPAD initiatives as they exit the programme.



   SALGA and Municipalities



    o The  NDPW,  PPWD  and  SALGA  must  assist,  train  and  support  the
      councillors in order to effectively fast-track government  programmes
      and meet set targets.
    o Most municipalities were not sufficiently trained and briefed on  the
      principles  and  guidelines  of  the  EPWP   and   those   that   are
      knowledgeable are inconsistent in the implementation thereof.
    o The NDPW in consultation with DPLG should assist municipalities  with
      the integration of MIG in the IDPs within the EPWP.
    o The weaknesses observed in the local municipalities are unabated; the
      Committee recommends that the important complementary role played  by
      the CDW must be clearly defined to avert unnecessary tensions at that
      tier of government.
    o The underutilisation and depreciation of the multi-purpose  community
      Centres (MPC) at most municipalities is  common.  The  municipalities
      should budget for the maintenance of the MPCs.



   Imbizo




      Matters and concerns raised at the Imbizos

       • Lack of budget to maintain of EPWP infrastructure projects.
       • That the involvement of the youth and people with disability in the


         construction industry is minimal.
       • Unprofessional,  poor  dissemination  of  information  and  service
         rendered by the department officials is unacceptable.
       • The EPWP guidelines and information  booklets  are  viewed  as  not
         assisting and not user-friendly.
       • Complicated and laborious tender documents were not user-friendly.
       • Fronting and alleged involvement of officials  and  councillors  in
         irregular tendering processes.
       • EPWP Guidelines are  restrictive  regarding  overtime  and  medical
         health benefits that should accrue to workers.
       • The EPWP does not provide sustainable employment.
       • There is lack of clarity and envisaged  support  for  emerging  and
         learner contractors when emerging from the programme.


1. NEPAD PROGRAMMES


   The Committee recommends that the national Department  of  Public  Works
   should develop a clear policy that defines its role in NEPAD.



   4 Conclusion



 o Some public representatives have a challenge in understanding the
   concept and application of the EPWP. The current information booklet on
   the EPWP is inhibitive and lacks details.

 o The role of the four sectors within which the EPWP operates must be
   clearly defined. Presently the work being done by the clusters is not
   well co-ordinated and an immediate intervention is needed.

 o The bridging of the two economies through the EPWP must be clearly
   elaborated in the information booklets and pamphlets.


 o The variance between the Labour Relations Act and EPWP Guidelines must
   be clearly defined. The Committee is of the view that the guidelines
   should be reconsidered to be in tandem with the labour laws.


 o Coordination at all spheres of government is still a challenge with
   regard to the intergovernmental and interdepartmental relations.


 o Section 13-14 of DORA elucidates how provinces and municipalities could
   apply the Act and  mechanisms in the maintenance of the infrastructure,
   which is a perpetual challenge.


 o Some provinces do not have a conclusive and reliable immovable and
   movable asset register. This must receive immediate attention and
   control measures be instituted.


 o Immediate attention as recommended by the Committee  in  addressing  the
   fronting and irregularities in the tendering process must be considered.




 o The Committee notes that all provinces are  striving  to  implement  the
   EPWP by putting  more  emphasis  on  learnership  and  skills  transfers
   through CETA.


 o The Committee further notes  the  commitment,  enthusiasm  and  benefits
   received by beneficiaries of this programme.


 o The Committee commends the training received and quality of work done by
   beneficiaries in  various  provinces  despite  logistical  and  teething
   problems experienced.


 o The Committee observed that some communities are continuing  to  benefit
   from the EPWP objectives by establishing own businesses i e job creation
   and poverty alleviation.


  o The NDPW must give effect to the involvement of women, youth and people
    with disabilities in the EPWP as emphasised by the Committee.


  o The municipalities must take control, full ownership and responsibility
    of maintaining the multi-purpose centres.


  o The Committee urges and encourages departments and municipalities at
    local levels to optimise the utilisation of the multi-purpose centres.


  o The Tugela dam as a resource could benefit the  communities  with  water
    provision as immediate necessity  and  the  creation  of  jobs  for  the
    construction of the water infrastructure.


  o In the Northern Cape Province coordination of the programme  is  in  the
    office of the Premier, which is commendable.


  o Due to the vastness of the Northern Cape province, provincial  officials
    travel long distances from one region to another. To save on  travelling
    expenses, the Committee recommends that the existing regional offices be
    resourced and subregional offices  be  established  where  they  do  not
    exist.


  o As part of the EPWP the role played by Departments of Public Works, Land
    and Agriculture, Forestry and Water Affairs  and  Provincial  and  Local
    Government  in  establishing  agricultural  projects  to   benefit   the
    communities is encouraged.


  o Those departments that are not within the EPWP  clusters  must  identify
    and commit programmes that will complement the EPWP.


  o In the Free State province the Provincial Steering Committee (PSC) has
    been established to coordinate the implementation of EPWP and see to it
    that the EXCO takes the total responsibility of the implementation of
    the programme.


  o It is with appreciation that the empowerment of women is taking place i
    e one woman with no formal education in Mpumalanga supported by her
    child went through the learnership programme of the EPWP and graduated.
    She has established her own construction company that provides job
    opportunities for her community.


  o The Committee commends the Mpumalanga province for data capturing of all
    contractors and subcontractors as a best practice in monitoring and
    exposing corrupt tendencies where some beneficiaries who were tenders
    were repeatedly awarded tenders at the exclusion of new applicants.


 Report to be considered.


2. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services on  its  Visit
  to the Private Prisons, dated 1 February 2006:

   The Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services  having  undertaken  an
   oversight visit to the Kutama Sinthumule Private Prison in Makhado on 04
   August 2005 and to the Mangaung Private Prison  in  Bloemfontein  on  18
   August 2005, reports as follows:



      Introduction



        The  Portfolio  Committee  on  Correctional  Services  decided   to
        undertake an oversight visit to the Private Prisons  on  04  August
        2005 and on 18 August 2005.


  B.  Delegation



        The following members of the Portfolio  Committee  on  Correctional
        Services formed part of the delegation.

         • Mr DV Bloem (ANC) (Chairperson)
         • Ms LS Chikunga (ANC)
         • Mr NB Fihla (ANC)
               • Mr S Mahote (ANC)
         • Ms MW Makgate (ANC)
         • Mr MS Moatshe (ANC)
         • Mr MJ Phala (ANC)
         • Mr LJ Tolo (ANC)
         • Mr ET Xolo (ANC)
               • Ms SA Seaton (IFP)


  C.  Objectives



        The objectives of the visit were:


         • To  gain  first  hand  knowledge  of  how  the  private  prisons
           operated. The  Committee  wanted  to  understand  what  security
           measures  the  prisons  have  in  place  and  to  ascertain  the
           programmes offered at these institutions and  the  effectiveness
           of rehabilitation.
         • To interact with the inmates incarcerated at the private prisons
           to find out what problems  they  experience,  successes  of  the
           institutions and to find solutions to the problems.
         •  To  establish  whether  the  institution  complies   with   the
           requirements of the Act.



   D. Findings





        The following are  the  findings  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
        Correctional Services:



1 Kutama Sinthumule Private Prison




             1.1  Background



             The Kutama Sinthumule prison was named  after  two  traditional
             leaders of the area of Makhado. The prison is being managed  by
             the  South  African  Custodial  Management  (SACM)  under   the
             directorship of Mr S Korabie. The  Department  of  Correctional
             Services has awarded a 25-year contract to SACM.



             The Kutama Sinthumule prison is the second largest private
             prison in the world and has 3 024 bed spaces. A total number of
             550 staff members, previously unemployed and from the local
             area, are employed at the prison.






             The focus of the facility is to set a benchmark for
             Correctional Services on this continent. The facility has
             received many awards for its effectiveness.





             The facility is divided into 3  prisons.  Two  of  the  prisons
             accommodate 1  152  inmates  and  the  other  accommodates  720
             inmates. The prisons are also  colour-coded  and  inmates  wear
             blue, green and yellow uniforms. Each prison  is  divided  into
             distinct subunits e  g  the  Blue  prison  is  divided  into  3
             subunits. Each subunit is divided into 4 blocks and the head of
             the block is called the unit manager. The facility  holds  many
             inmates with long sentences (one inmate serves a sentence of  1
             100 years + 27 life sentences).

             1.2  Security

             The facility is a keyless  facility  where  the  movements  and
             activities of staff and inmates are  monitored  and  controlled
             from a central control room.  The  entrance  and  exit  control
             systems are highly effective and the  efficiency  of  staff  on
             duty ensures that no one leaves or enters the facility,  unless
             authorized to do so.


             All inmates are  assessed  and  vetted  when  admitted  to  the
             facility. Sentences are also verified  every  24  hours.  Daily
             searches are conducted at the facility. Access is controlled by
             fingerprint verification. The facility also has  an  electronic
             surveillance system. Inmate counts are conducted 4 times  daily
             at 06h00, 12h00, 18h00 and at 20h00. The facility is  patrolled
             on a twenty-four hour basis and staff  make  use  of  equipment
             called the “zapper snapper”, which helps staff  to  stay  awake
             (the equipment makes a noise in the ear).


             All staff are briefed on the current security situation in  the
             facility before they start with their duties on a  daily  basis
             and they are debriefed after lock-down. A security manager will
             debrief the staff in the  event  of  normal  operations  and  a
             psychologist or social worker  after  a  serious  incident  has
             occurred.


             1.3  Escapes


             The facility has had no escapes thus far. The management stated
             that they consider the human rights and dignity of all inmates.
             The facility attempts to keep inmates constructively busy.


             1.4  System of Penalties


             The facility is monitored by  the  Department  of  Correctional
             Services through a fixed penalty system. A penalty of R300  000
             is given if any  escapes  or  unnatural  deaths  occur  at  the
             facility. The management can pay up to R20 000  for  breach  of
             service  levels,   building   infrastructure   or   maintenance
             problems. The facility can also be penalized for  its  security
             environment, cell environment and food services.


             This system keeps management on its toes  and  has  up  to  now
             received no penalties.

             1.5  Health Care

             The facility has 2  permanent  doctors,  1  dentist,  1  dental
             assistant, 24 senior  professional  nurses,  a  pharmacist  and
             medical assistant personnel. The  facility  also  has  a  fully
             equipped dental room. The hospital has dealt with a  number  of
             medical emergencies.


             1.6  Food Services


             Food services are provided by Royal Foods Correctional Services
             who have demonstrated their capacity and efficiency to  provide
             more than 9 500 meals per day to inmates and staff.


             A total of 92 inmates work in the  kitchen  on  four  different
             shifts. The inmates  working  in  the  kitchen  receive  formal
             training on food and related services. Once qualified, they are
             rotated to provide an opportunity for others to be trained.


             Meal times:
             07h15 - Breakfast;    12h15 - Lunch;  16h30 - Supper


             1.7  Staff


             The staff component consists of ninety percent (90%) previously
             disadvantaged  individuals  who  were  recruited  locally   and
             through this process contribute to socio-economic upliftment of
             the staff and the town in general.


             All  staff  have  to  undergo  an  annual  40-hour   compulsory
             refresher training programme to provide them  with  the  skills
             and competencies to face the challenges ahead.


             1.8  Black Economic Empowerment (BEE)


             The facility complies with all the principles of BEE and it was
             mentioned that the SACM is an equal  opportunity  employer  and
             employs a number of disabled  individuals.  The  upliftment  of
             women in society is also a key aspect and a  number  of  female
             officers were placed in supervisory positions to take  care  of
             maximum security inmates.


             1.9  Programmes and Training


             The rehabilitation and development of inmates form  a  critical
             part  of  the  operational  management  of  the  facility.  The
             programmes  provided  by  the  facility  are  embedded   in   a
             structured day programme, which starts from 06h00 until  18h00.
             All programmes that inmates attend  are  specifically  designed
             for their  own  development.  Ten  inmates  attend  a  specific
             programme at a time. The facility has  a  total  number  of  35
             teachers and 32 social workers.


             The following programmes are offered at the facility:


             (a)  Educational programmes.
              a) Spiritual Care – many  religious  leaders  offer  spiritual
                 programmes at the facility.
           b) Textile training – the uniforms of inmates  are  manufactured
              at the facility.

6  Motor mechanics – this programme is facilitated by an inmate. Tools used
             during the programme are locked away in a cabinet specifically
                 made for it. Routine checks on tools are also being done.


7 Sport – when inmates return from the sports fields, they must sit on a
                 body chair which scans their bodies for any strange objects
             they might have picked up.



             Other programmes offered  at  the  facility  include  woodwork,
             horticulture and art. The facility also has  a  fully  equipped
             laundry which  is  run  by  the  inmates.  The  fully  equipped
             gymnasium and computer room assist in keeping inmates busy.

             The facility is a cashless prison  and  things  bought  at  the
             kiosk are deducted from monies in the inmates’  trust  account.
             Inmates are allowed to make phone calls only on  Saturdays  and
             Sundays. An inmate can register up to 10 numbers that  he  will
             telephone. Each phone call is recorded.  Inmates  can  purchase
             airtime vouchers to make their calls and this is  also  debited
             from their trust accounts.


             1.10 Inmates


           a) Though each housing unit has a  grievance  box,  the  inmates
              complained that  their  grievances  are  never  attended  to.
              Inmates are also scared  to  register  their  complaint  with
              their Unit  managers,  as  they  fear  victimization  at  the
              facility.
           a) Many of the inmates complained that they are  very  far  from
              their hometowns e.g. Cape Town or Durban and therefore  never
              get family visits or  even  correspondence  from  home.  They
              apply for transfers, but this never materializes.
           b) Though the Committee was informed that the facility  has  two
              full time doctors, many inmates complained that they only see
              the  doctor  a  month  after  registering  their  complaints.
              Medication is not easily obtainable and inmates often do  not
              receive the required medication.
              a) The inmates stated that they do not  have  enough  clothing
                 such as socks.

        2. Mangaung Private Prison
             2.1  Background


             The Mangaung Private Prison situated in Bloemfontein is managed
             by a company called GSL Correction Services. The facility has
             bed space of 3 000 and at the time of the visit accommodated 2
             928 inmates.





             GSL Correction  Services  manages  the  facility  through  unit
             management, sentence management, direct  supervision,  personal
             officer scheme and relaxed regime. GSL is in  partnership  with
             Liberty Adult Education as a benchmark for ABET portfolios.


             The prison consists of six (6) housing units, which provide 488
             available prisoner places. Each  unit  consists  of  eight  (8)
             streets and provides sixty-four (64) available prisoner  places
             per street.


             The Department of Correctional Services has awarded  a  25-year
             contract to GSL.

             2.2  Employees and Employee Development

             The facility has 2 permanent doctors who are on duty 24 hours a
             day;  18  professional  nurses,  10  social   workers   and   2
             psychologists employed by GSL, and 2 psychologists from  Afrox,
             render services to inmates.


             Training  and  development  must  be  planned,  monitored   and
             measured, otherwise it stands little chance of adding value  to
             the company and the skills and knowledge of the employees.  GSL
             Correction  Services   recognizes   that   the   training   and
             development of employees is an important element  in  providing
             quality service to customers. Training, development and skills-
             broadening  are  often  used  interchangeably,  but  they   are
             different and meet different needs.


             GSL is committed to training at all levels with the emphasis on
             life-long learning and satisfying contractual obligations.  The
             outcomes for education and skills development for the  facility
             can be summarized as follows:
         a)      Improvement of the quality of life of employees and  their
             prospect for mobility.
       a) Improvement in the productivity and  delivery  of  quality-assured
          prison service.
          b) The encouragement of employees to participate  in  the  active
             learning environment of GSL.
       c) The provision of the opportunity to gain  work  experience  to  be
          multi –skilled.
       d) Bursaries were awarded to 40 employees to further their studies.


             Training and development programmes.


             The following training and development programmes  are  offered
             to employees:


             Refresher training, life skills training,  diversity  training,
             personal financial planning, time management, hostage training,
             computer literacy, stress management as well as  a  health  and
             safety empowerment programme.


             2.3  Inmate Care and Empowerment


                 All inmates are assessed to determine  which  courses  they
                 qualify for.
                  a) Education
                     An average of 503 inmates attend daily education
                     programmes such as ABET Level 4, Grade 12 and FET.


                  b) Vocational Training
                      An average of 308 inmates attend vocational courses
                      daily. At the vocational training centre inmates are
                      provided with skills training, which can be utilized
                      upon release. The service providers from the community
                      assess these training courses. Vocational Training
                      courses include:


                     Basic tool skills, office machine operator, home care,
                     vegetable  propagation,  leather  work,  wood  skills,
                     cleaning  services,   gardening   maintenance,   basic
                     business skills, candle making and garment making.


                     The vegetables produced in  the  horticulture  gardens
                     are donated to the community (1 074  bags  –  29  tons
                     since opening). Training  on  sustainable  gardens  is
                     also presented to community groups.


                     Clothing that was made in the tailoring  workshop  was
                     donated to the homeless children in Bloemfontein.


                  c) Social Work programmes
                     520 inmates are involved in case work per month and 100
                     groups per month attend inmate development programmes.


                     Programmes that are provided  can  be  categorized  as
                     follows:
                     •  Offending  behaviour:  sexual  offenders   treatment
                       programme,  substanceabuse  treatment,   intermediate
                       treatment programme and homicide.
                     •   Development   programmes:   Life   skills,   stress
                       management,   anger   management,   social    skills,
                       induction counselling, HIV/AIDS treatment.
                     • Prevention programmes: HIV/AIDS prevention, substance
                       abuse  prevention,  release  preparation   and   good
                       citizenship.


                  d) Community Projects and Programmes
                      The community is also very involved in programmes
                     offered to inmates    e g crime prevention project,
                     prevention of violence against women and children and
                     the NICRO arts project.


                  e) Religious Care
                     An average of 336 inmates takes part in religious care
                     programmes per day.
                     Religious activities include:  religious  orientation,
                     Church and Faith services,  prayer  meetings,  choirs,
                     counselling individuals and counselling groups.


                  f) Library Programmes
                     111 inmates are involved  in  library  activities  per
                     day. The library has active membership of 2 824  (99%)
                     inmates. A library advisory committee consisting of 12
                     inmates and 6 employees  assists  the  librarian.  The
                     library trained and certified 12 inmates to facilitate
                     library trolleys in the units. The library activities,
                     apart from library visits, include:
                      Book discussions, video discussions, debates and
                     information sessions.


                  g) Work activities
                     2 056 inmates are involved in work activities at the
                     prison. Work activities include industries, kitchen,
                     cleaners, grounds, laundry and maintenance.


                  h) Other activities
                     412 inmates  take  part  in  activities  daily.  These
                     include:   soccer,   touch   rugby,   indoor   soccer,
                     badminton, table tennis, gymnasium, aerobic exercises,
                     soft ball, basket ball, board games, art/painting  and
                     drawing, drama and debating.

             2.4  Inmates

                 Due to time constraints the Committee could not engage with
                 the inmates incarcerated  at  the  facility.  However,  the
                 Committee was informed of one inmate who committed  suicide
                 whilst in segregation.
                 The Committee was also informed by the  management  of  the
                 facility that all avenues were explored to  assist  inmates
                 with  psychological  behavioural  problems.  One   specific
                 inmate had behavioural problems and was then  placed  in  a
                 single cell. The  inmate  tried  various  ways  of  hurting
                 himself and was then placed in the “Silent Room”. This room
                 is  only  used  when  it  is  absolutely   necessary.   The
                 management also said that an inmate does not  stay  in  the
                 “Silent Room” for more than four hours and  regular  checks
                 are done.  The inmates named this room the “ Dark Room”  as
                 the lighting of this room is controlled from the outside by
                 the officers. There is only a mattress  in  the  room,  but
                 despite this, the inmate hanged himself  with  his  clothes
                 from an iron handle above the door.


                 The Independent Prison Visitor informed the Committee  that
                 this  information  was  forwarded  to  the  Office  of  the
                 Inspecting Judge and the Office of the Chairperson  of  the
                 Portfolio Committee, but both  of  these  offices  did  not
                 receive this information.


        3. Transfers


             The Department of Correctional Services  decides  who  will  be
             incarcerated at private prisons. Whilst the  facility  provides
             many  services  and  activities,  inmates  still  want  to   be
             transferred. Inmates stated that they needed to  be  closer  to
             home where they will at least have frequent visits  from  their
             families. The  Committee  was  informed  that  because  of  the
             commitment, passion and tight  security  at  these  facilities,
             smuggling, such as the smuggling of substances, does not occur.
             This is extremely problematic for  inmates,  especially  during
             the first six months.



    E.     Comments and Recommendations





        (1) The Portfolio Committee strongly  recommends  that  the  Private
            Prisons should accommodate only juveniles, as this  environment
            is more conducive for the development, education, training  and
            rehabilitation of juveniles.


        (2)      Rehabilitation is the key in preventing recidivism. Whilst
            the private prisons have  many  programmes  and  activities  to
            occupy  inmates,  family  visits  are  an  essential  part   of
            rehabilitation. The Committee recommends that the Management of
            these facilities develop a system where inmates  can  regularly
            communicate either in person, telephonically or  by  mail  with
            family members.


        (3)      The Portfolio Committee requests that the coordinators  of
            the Department of Correctional Services at the private  prisons
            provide the Committee with quarterly reports on the functioning
            of the private prisons and any irregularitries that may occur.


        (4)       The  Portfolio  Committee  recommends  that  the   Prison
             Directors  at  Kutama  Sinthumule  and  Mangaung  speedily  and
             expeditiously handle all grievances at these facilities.


        (5)      The DCS should furnish  the  Portfolio  Committee  with  a
             report on the unnatural death of  an  inmate  at  the  Mangaung
             Private prison and that the “Silent Room” not be  used    until
             the investigation is finalized.  The  Committee  expects  these
             institutions to explore all avenues available before placing an
             inmate in segregation.


        (6)      The Portfolio Committee  commented  that  the  Independent
             Prison Visitors have a duty to report any irregularities to the
             Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons. If this is  not  adhered  to,
             the Judicial Inspectorate should take  serious  action  against
             such employees.



    F.     Conclusion


        In conclusion, the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services
        commends the management and staff at the private prisons. The
        Department of Correctional Services can learn a lot from these
        facilities, especially in terms of security. Juveniles in prisons
        always remain the priority of the Committee and the Committee will
        ensure that juveniles benefit from these facilities rather than
        adults with extremely long sentences. The Committee will monitor
        these facilities to ensure compliance with the Correctional
        Services Act and the White Paper on Corrections.



