---
title: 'National Assembly - 01 June 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-06-01
---

THURSDAY, 1 JUNE 2006
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members  to  observe  a  moment  of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


Debate on Vote No 8 – National Treasury (Intelligence):F

The MINISTER FOR INTELLIGENCE: Madam Speaker, hon members, may I greet
everybody in the name of International Children’s Day and may we secure a
bright future – a secure future – for them.

During the past year our country was wracked by a severe intelligence
crisis. Grave misconduct by rogue elements within the National Intelligence
Agency, the NIA, included unauthorised surveillance of citizens; unlawful
interception of the communications of members of the public and Parliament;
the fabrication of bogus e-mails as part of a political conspiracy; and
evasions and lying to the President, the Minister and the Inspector-General
for Intelligence.

These actions were a gross abuse of state power and resources. In the words
of the inspector-general, Mr Zolile Ngcakani, they posed the risk of
undermining constitutionally protected party-political freedoms. The
misconduct has unquestionably damaged the credibility of the domestic
intelligence agency in the eyes of the public.

My speech today is necessarily devoted to commenting on that crisis and to
presenting various initiatives aimed at preventing a recurrence.

Let me begin by summarising the facts. In September 2005 I received a
complaint from a prominent businessman, Mr Sakumzi Macozoma. He claimed
that he was under surveillance by the NIA. I immediately asked the then
Director-General of the NIA, Mr Billy Masetlha, for an explanation. The
report I was given was completely unsatisfactory and evasive. I therefore
requested the inspector-general to investigate the matter, as provided for
in terms of the Intelligence Services Oversight Act.

The inspector-general completed the first phase of his investigation by mid-
October. He found that there was no legitimate basis  for  the  surveillance
and concluded that the operation was  unauthorised  and  unlawful.  He  also
noted with concern senior management’s attempts to conceal  information  and
mislead both his investigation  and  the  Minister.  On  the  basis  of  the
inspector-general’s report, the NIA officials responsible for  the  unlawful
activities were suspended.

During this phase of the investigation, the inspector-general was informed
about a project known as Avani. On the information at hand, he believed
that it was necessary to ascertain whether this project was linked to the
unlawful surveillance operation. Accordingly, I extended his terms of
reference.

The inspector-general completed the final phase of his investigation in
March. He found that the then director-general had manipulated an
intelligence project utilising concocted e-mails that purported to portray
the existence of a political conspiracy.

These e-mails, which the inspector-general proved were false, were used by
the former director-general to launch unauthorised and unlawful operations
against the supposed authors of the e-mails. These supposed authors
included government Ministers, state officials, politicians, journalists
and businessmen. The inspector-general’s final report was endorsed by
Cabinet.

President Mbeki has dismissed the Director-General of the NIA citing a
breach of trust. The inspector-general recommended that there be criminal
prosecutions and the Police Commissioner subsequently announced that a
criminal investigation was under way.

The Police Commissioner, the Chief of the Defence Force, the Head of the
National Intelligence Co-ordinating Committee and the Directors-General of
Defence, Justice and the secret service have publicly endorsed the report
and condemned Masetlha’s conduct. The inspector-general has presented his
report to the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence.

Our perspective on this scandalous abuse of power should be grounded in the
founding document of our democracy, the Constitution, which differentiates
between our country’s oppressive past and its democratic aspirations.

Nowhere was this more necessary than in relation to the security services.
According to one of the members of the Constitutional Assembly, and I
quote:

    Our starting point was the horrendous role that was played by the
    security forces of this country in the past ... Our mandate and
    objective was to ensure that our country would never again be subjected
    to security services that are above the law and the Constitution.

How shameful that this brave ideal has been violated, and within a mere 10
years of that proclamation. What is expected is crystal clear. In terms of
the Constitution, the intelligence services are fully subject to the law
and the jurisdiction of the courts. No one may issue an illegal order and
members must disobey a manifestly illegal order. The intelligence services
are obliged to respect the Bill of Rights, which affirms the democratic
values of human dignity, equality and freedom.

In order to ensure legitimate conduct, the  Constitution  insists  that  all
members of the security services must be taught to act  in  accordance  with
the Constitution and the law. It states emphatically that  the  intelligence
services may not further, in a partisan manner, any interest of any  of  our
political parties, and that it may not prejudice a political-party  interest
that is legitimate in terms of the Constitution.

The intelligence services may have no loyalty to a political party or a
faction within a party. Their allegiance is to the Constitution and the
law; to the state and the executive authority; and to the citizens of our
country. Their mandate is to act in the national interest by contributing
to the security and wellbeing of all our people, irrespective of colour,
creed or party affiliation.

Because of their power and the inherent risk of abuse, the security
services should be subject to extensive controls and oversight by the
elected and duly appointed civil authority. The underlying need is captured
by the question posed by the Roman scholar Juvenal: Quis custodiet ipsos
custodes? Who will guard the guards? Who will police the police, and
supervise the spies?

Our Constitution answers this question by providing for executive oversight
through the President and the Minister for Intelligence. The Minister has
political responsibility for the control and direction of the services. The
other pillars of oversight are the multiparty Joint Standing Committee on
Intelligence and the Inspector-General for Intelligence, whose appointment
by the President must be approved by two thirds of the members of this
Assembly.

I have highlighted these constitutional provisions in order to make three
points in relation to the recent events. The first is to assert the primacy
of the Constitution. Regardless of our place in society – whether
President, Minister, parliamentarian, intelligence officer or member of the
public – we are bound by this law. We are obliged to act according to its
rules and within its boundaries.

Second, it is patently clear that the former Director-General of the NIA
and some of his colleagues violated the Constitution. The seriousness of
the matter is heightened by their seniority as state officials. Third, the
executive has acted decisively against the wrongdoers because we are
obliged to protect and defend the Constitution. We have demonstrated our
determination to uphold the rule of law.

It is consequently misguided to compare what transpired in our country with
the Watergate scandal in the United States of America. As one analyst has
put it:


    Richard Nixon sought to hide the illegal conduct of his officials, while
    the South African government has flushed it out and stamped on it.

[Applause.]

Similarly, it is nonsense to claim that our laws provide a blank cheque to
spy on anyone for any reason. In the current case, the rules were flouted
precisely because the perpetrators could not have pursued their dirty
tricks within the parameters of the law. And I have shown how the various
oversight mechanisms provided for in law were used to identify and stop
that conspiracy.

Most strangely, some critics have suggested that those of us who took
action against the rogue elements in the NIA are the real conspirators and
that we were pursuing our own partisan agenda. This is an Alice in
Wonderland subversion of the truth.

The facts of the matter are not in doubt. On the one hand, there was a
small group of intelligence officers who transgressed the Constitution. On
the other hand, there is a large group, including the President, the
Cabinet, the inspector-general and the heads of the security services, that
was opposed to the transgressions and acted accordingly.

This does not make them partisan or part of a conspiracy. Turning a blind
eye to malfeasance by intelligence officers would have taken us down the
slippery slope to perdition. Let me make this absolutely clear.

It is one thing for members of political parties to manoeuvre against each
other as they jockey for power within their party, whether in a democratic
fashion or otherwise. It may not be pretty, but it generally occurs in
political parties throughout the world. It is quite another thing for state
officials to participate in such intrigues. This is an abuse of office, of
power and public trust. It is subversive and unconstitutional. It is akin
to muttering with Shakespeare’s Richard III, “plots have I laid and schemes
to set my brother and the king in deadly hate”. Our government will not
tolerate such intrigue.

I now turn to the broader question of transformation. It is imperative that
we use this lamentable episode to undertake fundamental reforms that go
beyond simply dealing with a few rotten apples to improving the overall
quality of the barrel and making it as rot-proof – or rat-proof, if you
like - as possible.

Our aim must be to ensure that intelligence abuses do not occur again. We
must strengthen legislation, regulations, operational procedures and
control measures, as well as oversight mechanisms wherever necessary.

We must re-examine some of our mandates. We must attend to the perfidious
mentality that enabled these dirty tricks to take place. And we must place
our reforms in the public domain to rebuild public confidence and trust.

In the wake of the flagrant abuse of intelligence resources I imposed
interim ministerial control measures on the authorisation and conduct of
surveillance operations and interception of communications. We are working
towards finalising improved procedures and measures, which will replace my
interim measures. I can report on three key initiatives in this regard.

Firstly, members will recall my announcement last year of the formation of
a legislative task team to provide assessment on a range of policy and
legal issues. Following the discovery of this skulduggery within NIA, I
expanded the team’s brief to review the legislation, internal regulations
and operating procedures in order to identify changes that would help to
prevent abuses occurring in the future. The task team has completed its
work and presented me with an extensive report.

The report contains important recommendations for strengthening oversight
and control and for reviewing the so-called political intelligence mandate.
I am currently considering the recommendations and will discuss them with
key stakeholders before releasing relevant aspects for public comment in
consultation with the parliamentary committee for intelligence.

I want to make the following pledges, however. Firstly, we will place the
National Communication Centre under tighter rein so that its capacity can
only be used in the national interest and not, as was done, to violate even
the sanctity of this Parliament by unlawfully intercepting telephonic
communications to numbers within this Parliament. Secondly, we will ensure
that the newly established Office of Interception Centres is effectively
run and controlled. Thirdly, I also wish to add that further control
measures will be guided by the findings of an internal inquiry into what
was actually an utterly botched surveillance operation on Mr Macozoma,
which apart from being unauthorised, was utterly deficient in its command
and control aspects and was akin, by the way, to the behaviour of the
Keystone cops.

I turn now to a second major initiative that will soon be embarked upon. We
intend launching a comprehensive public intelligence review. The
intelligence services have not had the benefit of a public review, such as
occurred within the military and the police post-1994. More than ten years
after the formation of our services, it is necessary to take stock of our
experiences. A review of this kind will only be fruitful if there is strong
involvement from Parliament and civil society. I believe this can be done
without compromising the need for secrecy where merited. In due course I
will announce the terms of reference for the review as well as the persons
nominated to serve on the review panel. These issues will be discussed with
the JSCI, which must be a prominent stakeholder in the process.

As the conduct of certain dishonourable members of the NIA demonstrated,
control systems alone do not suffice since there are those who will seek to
subvert them. Consequently, we must seek ways to strengthen the commitment
of our members to sound moral values and a professional work ethic.

This brings me to our third major initiative. Shortly after the inspector-
general presented his findings in October last year, I announced my
intention of establishing a civil education programme to make sure that all
intelligence personnel respect and adhere to the law and democratic norms.
I can report that preparations are under way and I have already
participated in a workshop with my top managers to conceptualise the
programme. It will be conducted through a series of workshops for which the
service heads will be responsible. Aspects of the programme will also be
incorporated into the training conducted by the South African National
Academy for Intelligence.

We have identified the main themes of the curriculum. They include an
understanding of intelligence legislation and the Constitution,
particularly the Bill of Rights; the implications of the new approach to
security outlined in the Constitution; defining intelligence
professionalism in the context of a democratic South Africa; and
understanding the role of the oversight bodies. Civil society experts will
be invited to help us prepare and deliver this curriculum, which will be
unclassified and therefore open to public scrutiny. Such training will be
undertaken by the newest recruits and the most senior managers. In the
final analysis everything depends on the sound character and wisdom of our
intelligence officers.

I turn now to comment on how our recent problems have confirmed the
appropriateness of the approach we adopted in 2004. I refer here to our Ten-
Point Programme. This approach focuses on building the professional
capacity of the intelligence services to enable them to meet the complex
challenges of the 21st century in a post-Cold-War world.

We maintained that our ability to deal with the new global situation
depends to a large extent on the capacity of our services to forewarn and
render useful advice to decision-makers. We therefore prioritised the need
to enhance our core business capacity and highlighted the need to realign
our budget spending ratios away from the rising remunerations account in
favour of operational expenditure and capital investment needs. The core
business is summed up in the expression we coined to help focus our effort
on the three main pillars of the intelligence cycle, namely the holy
trinity of collection, analysis and decision-making.

Technical skills, analytical rigour and proper values are integral to this
approach. The importance of building such professionalism was emphasised by
President Mbeki when he criticised the quality of the intelligence he
receives. He highlighted the dangers of compromising the truthfulness of
intelligence and argued that professional officers should uphold the values
of integrity, objectivity and credibility. The President stated that a
professional intelligence organisation promotes high standards and prizes
the development of balanced, quality products.

In working to meet the President’s injunctions, our capacity-building
strategy over the past two years has emphasised the need to develop
professional officers able to set aside any bias and preconceptions. These
officers must protect our services against manipulation, mischief and
abuse.

We have held numerous meetings with the staff. This included a keynote
address by President Mbeki to all members, which was tantamount to the
reading of the riot act. I held a four-day lekgotla with the heads of
services to review progress. We also developed a set of Principles of
Professional Intelligence Officers, which must become ingrained as second
nature. The role of the Academy is central to inculcating the necessary
values as well as the tradecraft skills. Much needs to be done to
strengthen our Academy and training programmes and I have instructed the
service chiefs to provide more dedicated support if we are to get things
right.

It is said that every cloud has a silver lining. Recent events have
revealed the effectiveness of our oversight mechanisms. In this regard I
acknowledge with gratitude the inspector-general whose integrity is beyond
question and whose contribution has been exemplary.

I also want to thank the new Director-General of the NIA, Mr Manala
Manzini, and his team who have ably steered the ship through troubled
waters and are determined to overcome the setbacks. My thanks go to the
Director-General of the SA Secret Services, Mr Tim Dennis, and to the
National Co-ordinator of NICOC, Mr Barry Gilder, who throughout the
difficulties have displayed a high calibre of service and commitment.

Appreciation must be conveyed to the principal, Mr Mphakama Mbete, the new
Chairperson of the Intelligence Services Council, Ms Miriam Sekati, the
newly appointed NCC manager and directors of Comsec and the OIC. In
addition, I salute the head of the Ministry, Ms Sandy Africa and the
ministerial staff for their valuable support so graciously rendered.

I must express deep appreciation to all the committed men and women of our
services, the vast majority of whom go about their business with dignity
and integrity. It is in the nature of intelligence work the world over that
mistakes attract public attention while the good work goes unnoticed. I
refer to such commendable achievements as the success of our local
government elections, countering terrorist and proliferation threats,
outstanding work in Africa, particularly with regard to conflict
resolution, securing special events at home and even abroad. The last
augers well with respect to securing the 2010 Football World Cup. We
acknowledge the improved co-ordination between our civilian and defence,
crime and finance intelligence structures.

We need to be frank and honest about setbacks. I can confidently declare on
behalf of my top team that we are determined to put things right. These are
professionals who can handle fair weather and foul. They recognise that the
sacred trust vested in them has been damaged. They will rebuild this trust
by abiding by an ethos, which reflects the Constitution and conforms to the
professionalism that the President has called for and that our people
respect. They are determined to prove their mettle and demonstrate they are
worth investing in, can provide value for money and at the end of the day
show they can make a difference.

As Juvenal’s guardians of the guards, those of us entrusted with oversight
must ensure that we diligently exercise our duty. Here I must thank the
Chairperson of the JSCI, Dr Cwele, and hon members for their co-operation.

To the greatest extent possible, we should engage in transformation in an
open fashion. While secrecy is necessary for aspects of intelligence, it is
not essential for everything. As the drafters of our Constitution
understood full well, openness is the oxygen of democracy and excessive
secrecy will suffocate it. We really need to create a society where when we
talk about intelligence it’s not in hushed whispers, looking over our
shoulders and with a feeling of suspicion.

I would like to close with the following quotation, which was made at the
end of the Second World War by somebody who played a very important role in
intelligence during that war:


  Intelligence is essential, but if it is being secret, most dangerous.
  Safeguards to prevent its abuse must be devised, revised and rigidly
  applied. But as with all enterprises, the character and wisdom of those
  to whom it is entrusted will be decisive. In the integrity of that
  guardianship lies the hope of free people to endure and prevail.

I would like to recognise the Premier of the Western Cape, Ebrahim Rasool
who is here; and Judge Serite, who ensures that there is control over the
interception of our telecommunications. [Applause.] Thank you for your hard
work.

Perhaps just a parting shot: My media officer has printed the Principles of
our Professionalism and it is being produced as a fridge magnet. I,
however, want to assure all members here that this magnet is not a tracking
device. But just to play safe, I would recommend that you only keep it on
your fridge! [Laughter.] Thank you, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Dr S C CWELE: Somlomo, maLungu ahloniphekile ePhalamende, nami ngisukuma
egameni lenhlangano kaKhongolose ukusekela lesi sabiwomali soMnyango
wezobuNhloli. [Speaker, hon members of Parliament, I also rise on behalf of
the African National Congress to support this Budget Vote of the Department
of Intelligence.]

I rise to support this Budget Vote fully aware of and in no way to
undermine the response to the recent events in the National Intelligence
Agency. It might have raised public concerns about the conduct of
intelligence in South Africa. The Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence
has completed its consideration of the inspector-general’s report into the
NIA.

We hope to have a very vibrant debate on these issues, once all the
statutory processing requirements have been made for the report to be
tabled in this Parliament. As the Minister has indicated, the JSCI, we can
say even at this stage, is concerned primarily about some of the very
critical allegations of abuses; particularly in relation to the
interception of communication, the financial controls and abuse of funds
and the lack of co-operation with the oversight structures such as the
inspector-general.

In support of this Budget Vote, we must attempt to answer the following
fundamental challenges. The first one is, what is the role of the
intelligence services in a democratic society like ours? What should be our
common national security concerns as South Africans? What must we do to
move towards that common national security doctrine as South Africans?

How secret and how open should our intelligence services be? I think the
Minister has started to address some of those concerns. We must answer the
question, if we say the intelligence services are the guards of our
security and prosperity, who should guard the guards? How can we improve
our current oversight mechanisms?

I hope that we all agree that intelligence is an essential ingredient in
sustaining our constitutional democracy, and ensuring that South Africans
can go on with their lives in conditions of peace and stability without
fear or want. The Freedom Charter was one of the biggest consultative
processes on the aspirations of the South Africans for a democratic state.
They made a call that all people shall have the right to be decently
housed, and bring up their families in comfort and security.

They called for the provision of basic services, and that no one should go
hungry. They called for peace and friendship among all our people and among
nations. The role of the intelligence services is to forewarn us against
internal and external threats to our democracy in order to reduce our
vulnerabilities. It must warn us, among other things, against threats to
our constitutional democracy and our integrity; to the maintenance of peace
and stability of our political, social, environmental, and economic system;
to the maintenance and promotion of our national values and interests and
to our human rights, our quality of life and justice for all.

It is against this backdrop that we assess the performance of our
intelligence services for the past financial year. As the Minister has
said, the recent setbacks of the national intelligence services have put us
in conditions we were never exposed to before as a country. But despite
that, as the Minister has said, the intelligence officers are supposed to
be professionals. These are men and women who are not generally rogue
elements. These are men and women who are specially selected according to
certain criteria to be in those services. We honestly believe that they
will rise to the occasion, and restore the confidence of the community in
their actions.

However, despite the recent setbacks, the National Intelligence Agency has
worked tirelessly in assessing our peace and stability, our national
integrity, and delivery of the basic services to our communities,
particularly the poor. Some even complain about what the intelligence
services are doing at the local government level. It is their function to
assess whether there are any threats to the delivery of these services,
particularly to the poor people on the ground.

The successful and peaceful March local government elections can also be
attributed to their efforts, as the Minister has said. The South African
Secret Service continues to forewarn us about threats to our quest for a
peaceful Africa and a peaceful world. South Africa, under the leadership of
the President, hon Thabo Mbeki, has made significant strides in
consolidating peace, democracy and development of Africa and the poor
nations.

The National Co-ordinating Committee remains crucial in harnessing our
intelligence activities in order to produce better intelligence products
and reduce unnecessary duplications. Various structures such as Sania,
Comsec, NCC, ICC, etc, are essential to give support to our intelligence.

We support the call for an intelligence review. However, we must build on
the experiences of the past 12 years. We must assess if the current
structures and their mandate are still relevant in producing effective
intelligence product for the current phase and for the future.

The ANC calls upon all our services to strive for excellence and ensure
that the principal clients, in particular, receive high quality products.
We have noted with concern, as the JSCI, that our principal client, the
President, is not satisfied with the quality of some of the intelligence
products.

In addition, we must look at developing effective feedback mechanisms
between the clients and our services. In this respect, we hope that our
services will rise to the challenge.

The second challenge is to continue to define our common national security
concerns. The ANC starts from the premise that there can be no national
security without human security or individual security. Human security
encompasses freedom from fear and freedom from want. This means that we
should find effective mechanisms of engaging all sectors of our society in
developing our national security doctrine.

We call upon Nicoc to expedite the process initiated by government in this
regard. The JSCI is looking forward to engaging the public on this
important subject, once the draft documents or the review documents are
produced or made available.

The third challenge is to review and strengthen our oversight mechanisms.
We must effectively address that question, who will guard the guards?
Intelligence, by its nature, operates in secrecy. The main argument for
this is that they cannot disclose their activities to the public without
disclosing them to their targets at the same time. Their budgets are
generally secret all over the world, their operations are secret and their
assessments are secret. Yet democracy advocates openness and
accountability.

The question remains, how secret or open should our intelligence services
be in South Africa? We have to find a middle ground to ensure effective
operations of these services, while ensuring accountability. We live in the
real world, and we cannot fully be open unless others take advantage of our
democracy. At the same time there can be no total secrecy if we want to
prevent intelligence abuse.

We must also know that Intelligence has no advocacy in public, except this
Minister and those who are involved in their oversight. In this regard, the
JSCI continues to balance this adversarial role in ensuring that the
services account for their activities at one end, and with that of the
advocacy role on the other, so that we can have the common understanding of
what they are doing and the support they deserve from the public.

We are assisted by several other oversight structures in conducting our
oversight, such as the Auditor-General’s office, the inspector-general’s
office and the judge responsible for issuing interception directions.

The Auditor-General has developed a close working relationship with the
committee over the last few years. We have to pay more attention to the
capacity of the agencies to spend their budgets - the Auditor-General has
raised this on several occasions - and in accordance with their strategic
plans. We may have paid particular attention to the capacity of the
financial administration of some agencies, particularly the National
Intelligence Agency and Sanai. The Office of the Inspector-General has a
close working relationship with the committee. They have set up the system
for their functioning and reporting. We hope the intelligence department
will co-operate with the certification function process of this office, as
it is very critical in giving the necessary assurance to the activities of
the services.

There are several concerns that have been raised by the judge, and some of
my colleagues will expand on this. They range from the term of the office
of these judges - of late there seemed to be very short terms for and a
high turnover of these judges who are supposed to carry out these important
functions - to a lack of administrative support and record keeping.

We hope to discuss this matter with the executive, including the Minister
of Justice and the Minister for Intelligence. This is more urgent,
particularly in the face of the recent revelations of abuses by the
inspector-general.

In conclusion, oversight is not only a challenge to South Africa alone, but
it is a worldwide problem, particularly of the intelligence services. As
the committee, we are liaising with other structures from the rest of the
world. Later this year the Office of the Inspector-General and the JSCI
will be hosting an international intelligence oversight conference. We are
humbled by the enthusiasm of many countries for this conference, including
those who will come for the first time, particularly from the East and
Africa. We hope that this conference will also assist us to sharpen our
oversight function.

We would like to call for the strengthening and the review of our
intelligence structures, as the Minister has indicated. We would like to
call for an inclusive process of developing our national security doctrine.
We therefore say there can be no development in the absence of peace and
stability. The ANC supports this Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]
Adv P S SWART: Madam Speaker, during last year’s debate on this Budget Vote
I remarked that, and I quote:

  An area of concern is the so-called political intelligence. NIA claims
  this mandate is to ensure political stability, but that can easily be
  abused. An obvious question is: Would NIA keep Tony Leon and Mangosuthu
  Buthelezi, or even the PAC, under surveillance?

The Minister of Intelligence gave assurances that under his political
leadership such abuses would not happen. Today I must at least applaud him
for his openness on what has since taken place. Because we were both very
naive at that time, little did we know that my remarks may have been
wrongly interpreted by the then Director-General of NIA, the National
Intelligence Agency, as asking for a demonstration of such possible abuses
I alluded to, and then some more; because that’s exactly what we saw last
year, not even the ruling party was spared such abuses.

Today we sit in the aftermath of the biggest intelligence scandal that has
faced our youngest democracy, an incident with international repercussions.
Whereas I returned from the 2004 International Intelligence Review Agency’s
conference in Washington feeling proudly South African, under the illusion
that in terms of intelligence oversight we were leaders in the world, I now
stand here ashamed. This is because there I reflected on the irony of a
conference being held in the USA when their intelligence failures, with
particular reference to 9/11, were being dealt with.

This October we will host the next conference in this very city, the same
city in which allegedly some of Parliament’s phone calls were unlawfully
intercepted by our own intelligence agencies thus abusing, amongst other
things, their so-called political intelligence mandate. Stripped of pride
and filled with shame, we will have to face the world.

I will not, like the Minister, pre-empt the debate when the Joint Standing
Committee on Intelligence tables our special report on the investigation by
the Inspector-General of Intelligence Services. Then we shall give this
matter our full attention. Although I have to say, Minister, you have
almost said it all.

There is another matter, however. While touching on the interception of
communications, there may be a serious matter, Minister, and I respectfully
request that you listen carefully to what I’m about to say now. While the
appointment of a designated judge to deal with such applications rests with
the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development, it does impact on
your line function. You should, at the very least, ensure the validity of
such appointments.

The problem may be this, that such applications and the appointment of a
designated judge to deal with them are regulated by the provisions of the
Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision of Communication-
related Information Act, Act 70 of 2002, which commenced on 30 September
2005; except for sections 40 and 62(6), which deal with information to be
kept regarding cellular phones and sim cards.

In this Act a designated judge is defined as, and I quote:


   Any judge of a High Court discharged from active service under section
   3(2) of the Judges Remunerations and Conditions of Employment Act, or any
   retired judge who is designated by the Minister to perform the functions
   of a designated judge for purposes of this Act.

This Act also repeals the Interception and Monitoring Prohibition Act, Act
127 of 1992, with a proviso in section 62(2) that, and I quote:

  Any judge whose designation in terms of the Interception and Monitoring
  Prohibition Act of 1992 to perform the functions of a judge for purposes
  of that Act is still in force on the fixed date, that is the date of
  commencement of this Act, must be regarded as having been so designated
  in terms of this Act.

Now, the current designated judge was appointed by your colleague from
Justice only in January 2006, after the Act had commenced. The current
incumbent is still on the Bench; he is an active judge, neither discharged,
nor retired.

There may be an acceptable explanation for this, which I would very much
like to hear. The point is that in terms of the Act this sitting judge does
not qualify to be appointed a designated judge.

I do not only have an administrative concern. If I’m correct, it also
brings into question the lawfulness or not of all approvals or applications
by that judge since the appointment. We may sit with a lot more unlawful
interceptions than just those I have referred to above, but enough on that.

Every year, as custodians of our taxpayers’ money, this House appropriates
very large amounts to our various intelligence structures, be it for
defence intelligence, crime intelligence or the intelligence structures
such as NIA, SASS, the SA Security Service, and others. And unlike other
departments, Parliament’s oversight is effectively limited to the Joint
Standing Committee on Intelligence. Often this debate is the only insight
the rest of the House can get on whether we are getting value for our money
from our agencies.

The relevance of our own Spygate scandal to today’s debate lies exactly in
this, that for at least the past nine months this overshadowed intelligence
in this country in such a way that a question mark hangs over the
efficiency with which the so-called normal activities, in particular in NIA
and its connected agencies, have been executed, if at all.

So let’s go back to the basics. Against this background, I will again
revisit the Minister’s 10 priorities to assess if there has been any
progress over the past year, since our last debate.

We have, of course, made no progress in bringing the Scorpions within the
legislative oversight framework with regard to intelligence gathering.
Whilst we await the President’s response to the Khampepe commission’s
report and conclusions, a year later they are still gathering intelligence
outside of oversight. I won’t even speculate on what might happen there.

Hon Minister, your first priority score card: underspending; lack of
financial controls; failure to implement strategic plans; nonadherence to
policy frameworks; Auditor-General’s qualifications and matters of
emphasis; management letters ... Let me rather stop here and just conclude:
I cannot honestly say that any visible progress has been made to achieve
optimum utilisation of resources. As is the case with the next five
priorities, all are broad-based goals.
President Mbeki remarked on 24 November 2005, when he addressed the
community on intelligence services day, and I quote:

   I must say that for many years now I have been concerned about the
   quality of a significant proportion of the intelligence information I
   have been provided with.

If the primary client can say this, then we are far from reaching and
realising these priorities, including the proper functioning of Nicoc, the
National Intelligence Co-ordinating Committee, and the other co-ordinating
bodies.

The establishment of a proper, functioning, national early-warning centre
was another urgent responsibility, as was the proposed national
counterterrorism centre. What progress was made on these, and on Comsec and
the OIC? Or did everything come to a standstill when we started with the
unlawful interception of communications and, at least, unprocedural
surveillance of politicians, amongst others; and when we started conceiving
and constructing conspiracies to deal with or cause political instability?

As I continue, Minister, you will see how the current crisis has not only
paralysed your priorities, but has almost wiped them from the intelligence
radar screen.

Our border integrity is another priority. We desperately need proper border
security. The situation over the past year has only grown worse. We again
need to remark on unrestricted entry into South Africa.

Some of the problems at our borders were caused by the officials of Mr
Masetlha’s previous department, and last year I wished him success in
addressing these. But, alas, he is no more, and during his short term as
director-general he thought of more urgent things to do. The result is that
our borders are more open; illegal immigrants are streaming in and killing,
raping and robbing our people. Minister that is a recipe for anarchy and
political instability, if you need more problems.

MISS, the Minimum Information Security Standards that all government
departments must adhere to, remains a big problem. I still fail to
understand the reluctance or inability of departments to comply with these
standards. Again, I ask for punitive sanctions to be taken against
noncompliers.

You also made the intelligence academy another priority. But we are
training cadets from other countries in Africa, whilst we cannot address
our own needs. There are serious problems, both in terms of capacity and
even financial controls.

Notwithstanding the qualities and dedication of the principal, who I
respect very much, I cannot but come to the conclusion that your
predecessor’s plans for the academy left you with another well-intended
disaster.

The SPEAKER: Order! There’s a point of order.

Mr H P CHAUKE: Will the hon Swart take a question on the issue of illegal
immigrants who are coming into the country?

The SPEAKER: Hon Swart, are you willing to take a question?

Adv P S SWART: Madam Speaker, if I can finish before my time has expired,
I’ll be more than willing to do so.

Minister, your last priority was our vetting capacity, an insurmountable
problem for our proper solutions. Now we need to rethink the whole concept.
Your ex-director-general, early in his unfortunate term in office, came up
with a revised strategy. He failed, of course, whilst still busy with other
matters of national security importance, to make any progress on the fact
that apart from some few exceptions, we might as well consider vetting, a
foreign and unknown concept in this country.

With no proper border integrity or compliance with MISS, unvetted officials
and a lack of well-trained and skilled members in our services, the rest
will all come to no avail. Two years into this term we have made no
progress on these pressing needs. Things seem to be worsening. What an
indictment on us all!

I do, however, want to welcome the Minister’s announcements today. We need
action and we need to move forward. But then we now have task teams
reviewing legislation, policy procedures and what have you.

We will come up with new strategies, plans and priorities to spend the next
two years on whilst that which is of utmost importance, intelligence
gathering of unquestionable quality and integrity to ensure national
security and pre-empt threats to it, will stay on hold.

The recent events seriously curtailed our ability to function properly.
Both national security and democratic transparency have been compromised,
and only the future will tell if we have learnt sufficient lessons to put
proper safeguards in place to prevent this recurring.

Some consolation is that SASS functions reasonably well despite
undercapacity. Crime intelligence still manages to fight organised crime
and syndicates, with some very impressive successes. But I have no idea
what is going on in military intelligence. I think I will have to study all
the management love letters to them from the Auditor-General.

Allow me, lastly, to thank the Minister for his openness and frankness here
today. That is something I came to admire him for
since he took office: the willingness to be transparent in terms of matters
of intelligence. I do know that he’s been through a difficult period in the
past year, and he does have my sympathy.

I, however, need to remark on what’s going on and for basics in our
community, because it is seriously a case of us having been paralysed over
the past nine months by these things. We need to move on. I trust that when
we table our special report we will have a proper debate on what took
place. We can move forward and at least see how far we can get.

So the best of luck with that, Minister, and to all the senior members of
the community. They are dedicated people in our intelligence services. I
want to thank their staff and their officers, at all levels, for their
efforts to make this country and its people secure and safe from threats,
be they criminal or otherwise.

May your work in secret be so transparent that we achieve a properly
functioning and democratic South Africa.

Lastly, allow me to thank the members of the committee under the able
leadership of the hon Dr Cwele.

It has also been a very trying time for us over the past many months, which
also took our attention away from a lot of the basic things. We intend to
get back on track urgently, but the good remark I can make about the JSCI
is that we do function in a way that is free of party politics, because we
all have the security and the safety of this country at heart. [Applause.]

We will continue to try to be as transparent as possible in our oversight.
Minister, I will leave after the function and look for the magnifying glass
you gave me last year, so I can read these principles of professionalism,
on which I must congratulate you. Unfortunately, this is just a little
object and we need to take it to heart - in all the agencies and all the
people involved - so that we can really adhere to this. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms H C MGABADELI: Madam Speaker, hon Minister Ronnie Kasrils, hon members,
honourable guests from all walks of life, members of the intelligence
community, comrades, friends and patriots, we greet you all and you are
welcome.

This debate on this Budget Vote of 2006 is dedicated to the following: the
children of our universe in general and of our country in particular on
this day in celebration of International Children’s Day. Secondly, it is
dedicated to the hands that are responsible for their upbringing and their
wellness in order for them to be better human beings in the future - we
dedicate this debate to them.

Those hands include the hands of the nurses, of the midwives, of the
mothers, of the baby-sitters, of the crèche caregivers, of the teachers,
and also the hands of the intelligence officers whose roles and
responsibilities are to ensure that our children find their land, the
Republic of South Africa, and its people secure and safe for themselves and
for generations to come. Also included are those who moulded our characters
when we were still young. They enabled some of the intelligence officers
and civil servants, including some of the MPs present here, to be what they
are and to have such distinguishing features and qualities.

These moulders of our characters are the following, among others: the likes
of the late Dr Sibusiso Nyembezi from Pietermaritzburg whose books left an
indelible mark on the nation while the nation was still growing. Those
books are Kunyenyeza Esikhotheni [Whispering in the thick, long grass of
all sorts]; Masihambisane [Let us walk together]; Inkinsela
YaseMgungundlovu [The tycoon of Pietermatitzburg] and others.

An HON MEMBER: it's C C Ndebenkulu.

Ms H C MGABADELI: Yes, that character is called C C Ndebenkulu. Thank you,
colleague.

Secondly, it is also dedicated to the author of the book called A Man For
All Seasons. Unfortunately, this glorious book of mine, together with other
books, was taken away during those days of the searching and taking away of
books, which was tantamount to stealing. [Laughter.]

It is also dedicated to a particular Mr van der Merwe, not our Mr van der
Merwe, but the author of the poem Muskietejag. It is dedicated to the Bible
with its parable on the harvesters who planted one thing and found another,
and regarding the parable of the ant and the lazy person. Later, ladies and
gentlemen, I will tell you why I dedicate it to all these writers and to
the Bible.

What are some of the critical factors that these forebears of our moulders
instilled in us? Some of these factors and characters are the ability to
advise, to foretell, to forewarn, to forecast, to predict, to hypothesise,
to prevent rather than to cure, to focus, etc.

Yes, indeed, in their line of duty, as the mission statement and legal
mandate of the SA Secret Service says, which I am called upon to look into,
they do need these characteristics and these qualities; these critical
success factors.
What did the likes of the late Dr Sibusiso Nyembezi and all those listed
earlier do? Why do I liken this big day of intelligence officers with the
children? I will explain. Firstly, it is because moulding is done better
when one is eager to learn - Sibusiso Nyembezi saw that – during the early
stages of development and early training.

Secondly, a person who learns the most is the one who allows himself or
herself to be told, just like the child listening to the bedtime stories -
izinganekwane. Dr Nyembezi and others did that. We will give you only a few
cases from his books, because there is no time.

Case number one from Kunyenyeza Esikhotheni is a case that is based on this
book which was full of survival strategies. Together with the survival
strategies, he would give us Masihambisane, which was for language, through
short stories.

The first case is “imbizo of the carnivores” to discuss the herbivores.
This imbizo in Kunyenyeza Esikhotheni was the imbizo of the carnivores, not
all of them, but those with horns. The reason why it wasn’t for all of them
was because carnivores are highly untrustworthy; they eat each other
sometimes! [Laughter.]

Unogwaja [the hare] heard that it was their day. Because kwakunesomiso
[there was a drought] and the carnivores wanted to eat the herbivores. So
nogwaja [the hare] told the herbivores, that guys, kuyabheda [things are
bad].

Then the herbivores said ...

... “Ngoba uzwile besihleba, hamba uyolalela laphayana.” Wathi,
“Ngizokwenze njani ngoba anginazimpondo nje?” Bathi kuye, “Hhayi, hamba
uthathe inhlaka. Thina sizohamba siyobheka izinyamazane esezafa, sithathe
izimpondo zazo sizifake lapha, bese uyosilalelela wena.” (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[...“Because you heard them gossiping about us, just go there and
eavesdrop.” The hare then quipped, “What I am going to do, I do not have
horns?” And they said to him, “No, man, just go and get some resin. We will
then go and look for horns from dead bucks and put them on you, and then
you can go and eavesdrop for us.”]

Indeed it happened. I won’t go further, because I don’t have time. But, at
the end of the day, wozela unogwaja [the hare fell asleep].

In the middle of the conference ...

... zamsinda izimpondo kwase kucaca ukuthi akuzona ezakhe ngempela. Kwathi
lapho sezizowa wayibona ingozi, njengoba futhi vele phela wayehlakaniphile.
Wezwa sengathi ikhanda lakhe seliwa phansi. Ngesikhathi ezwa lokho sabona
esinye isilwane esidla inyama ukuthi sengathi unogwaja nje loya. Wabaleka
unogwaja. Wathi uma ebaleka wafica umfula ugcwele. Wabona ukuthi ngeke
akwazi ukuwela nakhu unesikhumba esithambile.

Wahlakanipha ngokushesha wabona itshe elihle, kwazise wayebazi labo
abamjahayo ukuthi bathandani. Wazishintsha waba yileli tshe elihle wase ema
lapho babezodlula khona ababemjaha. Bathi uma sebesesigodini, washizintsha
waba yitshe.

Ngenkathi labo ababemjaha sebefika kulelo tshe, bafika balithanda ngoba
bethanda izinto ezinhle. Bathi, “Uma ngingakubona okungunogwaja,
ngingakushaya kanje.” Bajilikijela ngaphesheya komfula. Washintsha unogwaja
ngale komfula wathi, “Ehhe, waze wangiweza phela”. Emva kwalokho wabaleka
basale benxapha. Yiziphi izifundo esizifundayo-ke lapha? [Uhleko.]
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[... the horns became too heavy for him and it became clear that they were
not his originally. When the horns were about to fall off, the hare
immediately saw the danger looming, for he was very shrewd. He felt like
his head was going to collapse. When he realised that his horns were about
to fall off, one of the carnivores immediately realised that the animal in
question was a hare. The hare then ran away. He then came to the river,
which he found to be full. He immediately realised that because of his soft
skin he would not be able to cross the river.
He thought quickly and saw a beautiful precious stone, and he knew exactly
what his chasers would like. He would turn himself into this beautiful
stone and wait where his chasers were to pass. When they reached a shallow
valley, he turned himself into a precious stone.

When his chasers reached that precious stone, they immediately fell in love
with it, for they loved beautiful things. They then said, “If we find this
bloody hare, we can throw this stone at it, like this.” They threw the
stone across the river. Immediately after being thrown across the river the
stone turned into a hare, and he said, “There you are, you’ve made it
possible for me to cross.” He then ran away, and they were left standing,
uttering clicks of annoyance. What lessons do we therefore get from this?]
[Laughter.]]

What are the lessons from this case in Kunyenyeza Esikhotheni? You must
know your terrain. You are in esikhotheni [wild thicket] outside the
country, watching for us and working for us. Know your terrain.  Nature
should be your classroom. Have your ears on the ground, otherwise you will
be eaten. Blend in with the environment and with your surroundings; look
like them. Be vigilant; sleep like unogwaja [the hare], don’t sleep
permanently. Use the opportunity at your disposal. Know your enemy: what he
or she likes.

Unogwaja wayazi ukuthi laba ababemjaha abacushwa ngezinto ezinhle. [The
hare knew that his chasers could not control their love of beautiful
things.]
Do not give up until you have fulfilled your mandate. Unogwaja [the hare]
was sent to go to listen, so he had to take back the report. In the veld
out there, dog eats dog, regardless of their all sharing the same terrain.
If they were really carnivores, why did they not smell the meat from
unogwaja [the hare]? So, obviously, they were not real carnivores. Kukhona
nokwakungashayi kahle. [And there was something fishy.]

Be able to distinguish between the real thing and the Fong Kong. Be
flexible; be creative.

The second case is of the jackal and the lion in the farmer’s kraal. Again,
it was dry and the farmer had a lot of goats, so the jackal and the lion
went ...

... beyofuna ukudla base bengena ocingweni. Ujakalase wayelokhu edla bese
eyozikala ukuthi usakwazi yini ukuphuma embotsheni. Ibhubesi lona lethembe
ukuthi liyisikhondlakhondla langaya ukuyozikala. Njengoba ujakalase
wayelokhu edla bese ehamba eyozikala, wathi uma efika embotsheni okokugcina
wabona ukuthi ngeke esaphuma ngoba wayesenonile, esezidle kakhulu izimbuzi.
Ibhubesi lasala kwathi ujakalase wabaleka. Lafika iBhunu labhekana
nebhubesi lase lilidubula. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[... looking for food, and they went through an opening in the fence. The
jackal would eat a little and then go to the opening to see if he had not
eaten too much, lest he should not be able to get out through the opening
in case of an emergency. The lion trusted its powers and did not care about
checking its stomach against the opening. As the jackal constantly went to
the opening, he realised upon going there the last time that he was getting
too full after eating a lot of goats. The jackal ran away, and the lion was
left behind. When the farmer arrived, he faced the lion and shot it.]

The lessons from this are: Know yourself. Keep checking whether it is still
you, or have you added more bargains and the hole is becoming too small.
[Laughter.] [Applause.] Do not be greedy. You may get stuck and end up
being caught and lose everything.

Then we proceeded to high school. In high school we read Inkinsela
YaseMgungundlovu. Having acquired this knowledge from Kunyenyeza
Esikhotheni, we found Inkinsela YaseMgungundlovu in which a fraud, a so-
called filthy rich somebody went to the rural areas. In our case, I would
say he went to a Third World country, and displayed himself as being so
big. And, within the SASS legal mandate, we will request that they must be
very sharp about this, because C C Ndebenkulu was discovered – I won’t
dwell on it, time does not allow it.

However, the lessons learnt are the following. People from rural areas and
Third World countries, just like ourselves, need more of SASS and its legal
mandate than those from the First World. To be stupidly humble leads one to
be the subject of outside tsotsis. Please, we need vigilant guides like
Themba Sithole ...

... wakulo muzi wakwaSithole lapho kwangenisa khona uNdebenkulu. [... from
the house where Ndebenkulu sought refuge.]

A young boy saved the whole community from being stripped of their economic
mode of survival by Ndebenkulu. Young people are not always stupid.

The fourth parable is from the Bible and is about the ant and its energy -
planning methods without any supervision. Those of you who read the Bible
would know this very well. What are the lessons? Hide during the times of
danger and be warm somewhere, but do not starve.

The other parable is the one of the gardeners who went to cultivate.

Uma bethi uma bayovuna, bafica kukhona enye into evelile okungeyona
abayitshala. Baya kuJesu beyobuza ukuthi yini lena? Wathi kubo abayeke
kukhule nokhula kungaze kusiphuke nalokhu esikutshalile. Bayeka kwamila
nokhula. Bahamba bayovuna base bekuthola okungesikho okwabo. Bafowethu
nodadewethu bakwa-Sass, anokubheka okuwukhula. Ningakusiphuli kusekuncane
ngoba kuzonimosha, kodwa nikubheke nje. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph
follows.)

[When they went to harvest, they found weeds amongst the wheat. They went
to ask Jesus what that was. He told them to leave it, lest they root up the
wheat with it. They let the wheat and the weeds grow together. When they
went to harvest, what was not wheat was immediately exposed. So my brothers
and sisters from the SASS, watch out for the weed. Do not uproot it whilst
it is still young; for it may endanger you. Just watch it closely.]

The last story is about Sir Thomas More in A Man For All Seasons. There was
King Henry. Those who are from the Anglican Church will know which King
Henry – the first, the second, the third, or the fourth. I don’t remember
which King Henry because those people, who did the raiding, stole my book.
[Laughter.] This King Henry wanted polygamy, and he argued that the church
was bigger than the state. Sir Thomas More was saying that it could not be.
King Henry wanted everybody to say, “Yes, I’ll take another woman”. Sir
Thomas More said ... [Interjections.]

... ayenzeki leyo nto [that will not happen]; let’s stick to this thing.

Ngesikhathi esezomhenga esekhathele ukumncenga ... [The King was tired of
pleading with him, and was about to hang him ...]
... but he praised him. He said, though I don’t remember this very well:
“There are those who follow me just because I wear a crown, there are those
who follow me because they follow any object that moves, and there’s you,
Sir Thomas More.”

Wamshiya kanjalo wase emlengisa. U-Van der Merwe-ke yini inkinga ayenza? U-
Van der Merwe wayengamfundanga uKunyenyeza Esikhotheni, wayengafunde lutho.
Wabanga umsindo ebangela umiyane engakasondeli nakuye futhi engakamenzi
lutho. Lowo miyane wawutshela ukuthi uzowushaya kanjani, ewubiza ngento
ehluphayo. Wambuka nje umiyane wathi ngeke aze awuthole. Wathi esathi
uzowushaya, wathi umiyane, “Uhlale ukwenza.” Wasuka wabaleka. [Uhleko.]
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[He left him like that and hanged him. And then, what wrong did Van der
Merwe commit? Van der Merwe did not learn from the book named Kunyenyeza
Esikhotheni. He had in fact learnt nothing. He made a lot of noise about
the mosquito before it even came close to him. He told the poor mosquito
how he was going to beat it up, calling it a useless nuisance. The mosquito
simply looked at him and it knew he would never get hold of it. When he was
about to beat it up the mosquito simply said, “Not me”, and flew away.]
[Laughter.]]

Don’t be loud and don’t be noisy before you do something. Let us, as the
ANC, support this budget for the intelligence officers to do the following:
to be able to talent-spot well, nurture the talent you spotted, train
people in line with what the Constitution of the country and your mission
and vision statement are saying. We thank you. [Applause.]

Mnu M J BHENGU: Somlomo, angibonge ukuthi ngithole leli thuba. Angiqale
ngibongele umfowethu uManzini, ongene esikhundleni sokuthi abe ngumphathi
woMnyango. UManzini uyazazi izinkinga okufanele abhekane nazo.

Angiqale ngokuthi i-IFP iyasemukela lesi sabelo sezimali bese ngisho
nokuthi kunzima Ngqongqoshe ukuthi umuntu kulesi sikhathi esikusona
njengamanje angakhulumi ngalesi sehlo ubukhuluma ngaso esenzeke kwi-
National Intelligence Agency.

Angikusho ukuthi ukukhuluma ngalezi zehlakalo akusiyona neze injabulo kithi
naseqenjini lami kodwa kungukuhlupheka ngoba siyazi ukuthi lezi zinto
ngesinye isikhathi sibuye sikhohlwe ukuthi zisho impilo nokufa kwethu.

Sikhuluma lokhu ngoba siyazi ukuthi akuyona into elula ukuphatha izwe.
Angikusho futhi Ngqongqoshe ukuthi ngijabulile ukuthi kukhona izinto
ezintsha othe uzoziveza ezinhle futhi eziyinqubekela phambili esizozibona
uma seziqhamuka. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr M J BHENGU: Chairperson, thank you for this opportunity. Let me start
by congratulating my brother Manzini, who was appointed as the director of
the department. Manzini knows the problems that should be dealt with.

Let me start by saying that the IFP supports the budget, and let me also
say that it is difficult, Minister, in the current situation not to comment
on the incident which took place in the National Intelligence Agency.

Let me say that talking about these incidents is no joy at all for my party
and for us; it is painful because we know that sometimes we forget that
these are matters of life and death.

We say this because we know that it is not easy to lead the country.
Minister, I must also say I am very happy that you promised new, beautiful
things to show which developments we will see as they appear.]

Having said that, I must say that the current crisis in the National
Intelligence Agency or NIA, challenges us all to grapple with a host of
higher-level policy questions. What has recently happened within NIA,
regarding the issue of the much talked about emails, will certainly go down
in the annals of our country’s intelligence history.

Just over a decade after the advent of our fledgling democracy, we find
ourselves having to engage in a critical debate around the sensitive issues
of intelligence. What happened was engrossing and deeply troubling. It was
an incident of despair that resulted in an epoch of disillusionment, and
the citizens of this country were left confused and feeling insecure.

It was troubling and engrossing in many ways, particularly because it
threatened the national security of our country, our national security
doctrine which aims, among other things, at promoting a society that is
free of violence and instability, and that must engender a sense of respect
for the rule of law and human life. This is the philosophy that should
guide our intelligence community.

These are matters, as I have said, of life and death, and they challenge us
to be frank and be very honest. Where does the problem lie here? Does it
lie with the NIA or somewhere else? Whatever the case may be, the fact of
the matter is that the officials of the NIA must not ever engage themselves
in party politics.

It is unfortunate that the internal conflicts of the ruling party resulted
in the NIA and its intelligence structures being affected. The authenticity
or falsity of the emails still remains a mystery.

These intelligence upheavals are an indication that we are on a learning
curve, so we need to expect such things to happen. We have seen such things
happening in countries such as Israel and in the USA.
It is the seriousness of these matters that have forced our State
President, who is the principal client of NIA, to lament and say:


   You cannot allow any compromise about the quality of intelligence and its
   truthfulness, you can’t afford a situation where people manufacture
   intelligence and lie in order to please the President.


Clearly, this is a lament that the Minister of Intelligence and the entire
intelligence community should heed as a warning and take some drastic steps
to correct; because it is a lament that comes from the entire community of
South Africa.

The challenge therefore, is: How does the NIA address the question of
producing quality intelligence? This is not only demanded by the President,
but it is also demanded by every South African citizen. The important
lesson we need to learn from all of this is that if the party intervenes in
everything, it will not help the people to understand the importance of the
rule of law.

This is a question between the party and the government. Political leaders
need to remember that our intelligence services are a national asset,
mandated to help ensure the security and the wellbeing of all the people.

As the Minister pointed out before, the intelligence services must
therefore be politically nonpartisan, and they may not carry out operations
that are influenced to undermine, promote or influence any political party,
faction or organisation at the expense of another.

Intelligence services are expected to uphold the important values of
integrity, objectivity and credibility. In short, they must put aside their
personal views in the interests of the country as a whole. In this respect,
intelligence should enhance national security and protect and promote the
interests of the state and the wellbeing of its citizens.

Perhaps, it is time that we revisit the code of conduct for intelligence
workers. I have always found that there is a lot that they can get out of
the code of conduct. I am also happy that the Minister is doing something
in this regard to correct all that has happened.

Mr Minister, you know very well, perhaps better than any one of us here,
that conventionally the intelligence business is generally confined to
hushed whispers. I must say that I am one of the people who was actually
confused to see that about 50% of the information concerning the issue of
emails and the IG’s report, was leaked to the press, even before it was
submitted and discussed by the JSCI. I support the Bill. [Time expired.]

Mr L T LANDERS: Chairperson, on this International Day of the Child, we
dedicate this debate to all those courageous women, mothers and sisters,
who 50 years ago, marched to the Union Buildings in Pretoria. One of the
objectives of that historic march was the attainment of freedom for their
children. Today we enjoy that freedom and civil liberty.

That hard-won civil liberty for which many of our iconic and courageous
leaders like Helen Khuzwayo, O R Tambo, Nelson Mandela and Walter Sisulu,
amongst others, were willing and prepared to sacrifice their lives, must be
fiercely protected and defended.

Section 14 of our Constitution provides that, and I quote: “Everyone has
the right to privacy, which includes the right not to have the privacy of
their communications infringed.”

Any attempt, therefore, to infringe on this right, any action which seeks
to contravene this right, must be condemned in the strongest possible
terms. I make this point not only in the context of the highly
controversial e-mails, but also in relation to the unlawful loading of
telephone numbers belonging to private citizens and lawful political
organisations onto the National Communications Centre’s system. The hon
Minister has referred to this extensively and it will form a large part of
my address to this House.

The latter part of 2005 saw the National Intelligence Agency, NIA, plummet
to its lowest point yet. Abuses committed by some of its most senior
members were exposed, which culminated in extensive investigations by the
Inspector-General for Intelligence Services. Such events, in which members
of the NIA were directly or indirectly involved, have led me to the view –
as they have the hon Minister – that South Africa needs a comprehensive
review of the underlying principles that underpin our national security
doctrine and our intelligence dispensation. And in that regard, hon
Minister, we welcome the plans that you’ve put forward in order to address
these matters.

And this includes the comprehensive review of the White Paper on
Intelligence, as well as the attendant oversight structures and the
relevant checks and balances, to ensure that they are still appropriate and
adequate. Perhaps at this point it is appropriate in this debate briefly to
revisit the essential provisions of the White Paper, in order to put the
recent abuses into the proper context.

One of the goals of the above-mentioned White Paper which first saw the
light of day in 1995, was the creation of an effective, integrated and
responsive intelligence dispensation that serves our Constitution and the
government of the day, through the timeous provision of relevant, credible
and reliable intelligence. This should be in line with the new, nonracial
democratic order in which much weight is given to the rights of the
individual, as set out in the Chapter on Human Rights in our Constitution.

The mission of the intelligence community, therefore, is to provide
evaluated information with the following responsibilities in mind: firstly,
the safeguarding of our Constitution and secondly, the upholding of the
individual rights enunciated in our Constitution.

Recent events that culminated in the abuses referred to by our Minister
have clearly demonstrated that we have drifted way off course in relation
to that stated mission.

A significant provision in the White Paper is a code of conduct for members
of the NIA and the intelligence community in general. This code of conduct
emanates from the Transitional Executive Council’s Subcouncil on
Intelligence, of which I had the privilege and honour to be a member.

This code of conduct makes provision for, amongst other things, all members
of our intelligence services to -


   Openly declare their loyalty to the Republic of South Africa, our
   Constitution and the laws of the country. Respect the norms, values and
   principles in our democratic society, including the basic human rights of
   individuals. Strive, in the execution of their duties, to attain the
   highest degree of objectivity, integrity and professionalism. Commit
   themselves to the promotion of mutual trust between policymakers (that is
   our President and his Cabinet) and professional intelligence workers, as
   well as co-operation with all other members of the intelligence
   community.

One of the most important principles set out in the White Paper is that of
the political neutrality of our intelligence services. A national
intelligence agency – we’ve said this before and we repeat it today - is a
national asset and shall, therefore, be politically nonpartisan. It goes on
to say, and I quote:


   No intelligence or security service or organisation shall be allowed to
   carry out any operations or activities that are intended to undermine,
   promote or influence any South African political party or organisation at
   the expense of another, by means of any Acts, or by means of
   disinformation.

By virtue of his position as head of state, our President of South Africa
is the chief client, or if you like, the commander in chief of all the
country’s intelligence agencies. When the chief client expresses his
concern at the quality of intelligence provided to him by our intelligence
services, then it is time for us all not just to express grave concern; it
is time to take stock.

We concur wholeheartedly with his view when he said at the intelligence
services day on 24 November 2005, and I quote:
   The intelligence services of our country have come a long way, as has
   done our young democracy. Hard and dedicated work has resulted in many
   important breakthroughs, which made it possible for us all to confront
   threats to our society and thereby strengthen our democracy.

And then he went on to make the startling point about the quality of the
intelligence he has been receiving, to which other hon members, including
the Minister, have already alluded to. This statement by the chief client
of our intelligence services is reason for us all to pause and take stock.

The Intelligence Services Oversight Act places a clear obligation on all
members of these services to co-operate with the inspector-general on any
investigation he conducts. Refusing to do so is a punishable offence. It is
disappointing, to say the least, to be informed that certain senior members
of the NIA blatantly refused to do so. We want to say that such members
must face the full might of the law.

When the telephone numbers of private individuals are loaded onto a
powerful resource like our national communication centre, this shows clear
intent, in my view, to intercept their private communications in
contravention of the law and in contravention of all the tenets of our
democratic dispensation.

This action took us all back to those dark, fearful days, when one was not
sure just who one’s friends were, or who one could trust. Nothing that is
happening in South Africa’s body politic today can justify this action. So,
we agree with our President when he said, and I quote:


   I would like to make it clear to all of us that any action taken by the
   intelligence services designed deliberately to interfere with the normal
   political processes of parties or organisations that are engaged in
   lawful activities, are expressly forbidden.

To this end, therefore, we add to the President’s statement by saying that
anyone and everyone responsible for these actions must be brought to book.
We make this demand, because it is legally and morally the correct thing to
do; because it is expected of us as Parliament’s oversight body, but we do
so also because these abuses have had a profoundly negative and
demoralising effect on the morale of members of the intelligence community.

What this means is that years of team-building has been destroyed and will
require the collective leadership skills of the top management,
particularly of the NIA, to help bring this organisation to the healthy
level of proficiency and effectiveness it once enjoyed.

It is commendable, therefore, that the NIA have already initiated a review
of the agency’s operational policies and procedures and that a process is
under way to reconceptualise the concept of “political intelligence”.
Whilst the committee welcomes these steps, we will however be closely
monitoring the progress of these new measures.

Chairperson, we welcome the Minister’s statement with regard to the
national communication centre and his promise of a tighter rein and control
and we look forward to engaging with the Minister and the services on the
provision of the task team’s report.

Just one comment to the hon Paul Swart, with regard to Minimum Information
Security Standards, MISS: It is my personal view that it is the
responsibility of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence to hold
those departments and other state-owned entities to account when they fail
to comply. Chairperson, we support this budget. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, hon Minister, firstly, on a lighter note, the
closest I have come to being part of the intelligence community is with my
medical aid number, which begins with the numbers 007. [Laughter.]

I trust that I’ll be able to make an intelligent contribution to the debate
today, not being privy to much of the activities of the joint standing
committee. I first want to commend the various components of our
intelligence services for the good work they have performed both inside and
outside the Republic, often at great personal risk and sacrifice, and
obviously subject to severe budgetary constraints. The ACDP salutes you.

Hon Minister, you quite correctly focused much of your speech on the recent
scandals in the NIA. You spoke very frankly and used strong language such
as ``skulduggery’’, ``rogues’’, etc. The ACDP agrees that the scandalous
abuse of power has resulted in what you said is a sacred trust being
damaged.

The ACDP welcomes the initiatives you have announced to guard the guards,
and will be closely monitoring, as far as we are able, the efficiency of
such initiatives, particularly regarding political intelligence mandates.
We must ensure that our intelligence services are operating lawfully and
within the confines of the Constitution at all times.

The ACDP agrees that control measures alone do not suffice. We need sound
moral values and a sound work ethic, as you pointed out. What we need is
character and conscience. The guards must guard themselves.

Let us take a leaf from the value statement of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, FBI; not from their intelligence-gathering capabilities, but
from their motto, ``FBI’’, standing for fidelity, bravery and integrity.

Having dealt with the scandal, the stark statement in the 2006 budget
estimates speaks volumes as to the achievements of the intelligences
services. I just want to quote from it. It says: “In 2004-05, many
international and domestic terrorist cells were infiltrated.” This is
remarkable, speaks volumes and must be applauded.


  This division also focuses on criminal investigations involving drugs,
  trafficking of firearms, etc. I want to conclude by saying that whilst we
  commend our intelligence services on their achievements, the question
  that arises is: Are they succeeding in the crime intelligence aspect in
  the ongoing fight against crime? Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr I VADI: Chairperson, an interesting article on the Central Intelligence
Agency in last weekend’s edition of the New York Times raised a profound
question. It asked whether or not the CIA would continue to be the
principal source of strategic intelligence analysis in the United States.
It pointed out that CIA analysts, led by instant news spawned by media
networks such as CNN, are producing instant analysis and that has
suffocated and stifled thoughtful strategic analysis. What appears to
underlie this weakness in the CIA is the nature of intelligence training
since the emergence of global electronic media, coinciding with the end of
the Cold War.

The bitter struggles over the future of the CIA after the disastrous
intelligence failure of 9/11 foretell what might become our greatest
challenge over the next few years. That challenge can be reduced to a
single question: What kind of intelligence training is required so that our
intelligence services offer the best possible intelligence analysis to our
government in order to advance our national interests and to secure our
people? I suppose a related question is whether or not the SA National
Academy of Intelligence, Sanai, is discharging its mandate in providing
adequate training to our intelligence personnel.

Our national academy was formally established in February 2003. It is three
years old. Its vision is the creation of an excellent intelligence
training, development and research institution that contributes to the
professional development of our intelligence officers. Its mission is to
develop a cadreship of loyal, competent and knowledgeable intelligence
professionals who are capable of and committed to serving our country and
the African continent.

The academy has three key objectives: Firstly, to present continuous
training to our intelligence officers so as to ensure that their knowledge,
skills and capacity are on par with the ever-changing global environment;
secondly, to produce independent, relevant and quality research on the
dynamics and changes within the international and domestic intelligence
communities; and finally, to design and develop a relevant curriculum aimed
at the professional growth of our intelligence officers.

After three years of existence, it might be appropriate for us to evaluate
the performance of Sanai. Is it realising its mission and achieving its
objectives? Is it on track in fulfilling its key mandates?

In its short lifespan, Sanai has developed into a viable intelligence
training institution. Its location on the scenic outskirts of Mafikeng is
ideal for its cadre training programme. It offers perfect facilities for
training programmes for foreign intelligence services, notably from the
African continent.

Sanai has some really dedicated and experienced intelligence trainers who
have sacrificed the joys and comforts of living in a metropolitan city.
They have relocated themselves and their families to work in relative
isolation at the academy. We must express our appreciation to them for
their dedication and commitment.

Sanai’s intelligence research institute has launched an academic journal
called Intelligence Perspective. To date, it has published several issues
dealing with topics such as current intelligence, early warning
intelligence, lawful interception of telecommunications, and the
similarities and differences between intelligence analysis and academic
research.

The institute has also published a thought-provoking book on the Hefer
Commission of Inquiry, drawing out lessons for our intelligence services on
the tensions between secrecy and transparency in a democracy. These are all
noteworthy achievements for a new intelligence institution such as Sanai.
What then are the key challenges confronting Sanai?

Firstly, Sanai must be led by a united and cohesive management. Its
leadership must share a common vision and have a passion for learning,
teaching and training, and it must provide effective leadership to a new
and growing institution. The management must also ensure that Sanai has
developed the capacity for proper financial administration and control.

Secondly, management must ensure that Sanai’s staffing is skewed in favour
of its core function, namely teaching and training. Currently, it does seem
that it has too many noncore staff members, and possibly a top-heavy
management structure with too few actual trainers. So, a more considered
balance needs to be struck between management and actual trainers employed
at the institution.

Thirdly, Sanai’s distance from our intelligence headquarters is not
conducive to line function training. It is located too far from its main
client base. Owing to its distant location, it appears that not many
subject matter specialists and best-practice experts want to travel all the
way to assist with training. This tends to limit the potential for the
effective contribution to training programmes from highly experienced
members working in line functions.

A rigid adherence to the view that all training must be done at Sanai will
not help to resolve this difficulty. A more pragmatic and flexible approach
is necessary. Sanai will have to consider offering programmes at multiple
sites of learning. So, while certain core programmes may be offered at
Sanai, others will have to be delivered closer to where people actually
work, either at headquarters or in the provinces.

Fourthly, the academy itself is not suitable for conducting practical
training based on real-life situations. Trainees, particularly new
recruits, need to gain practical training in large cosmopolitan cities so
that they get a hands-on feel of operational activities and intelligence
trade craft.

While I do not have an immediate solution to offer in this regard, I do
believe that it is a matter that requires further attention by the Sanai
staff. In general, this also implies that an appropriate balance must be
struck between theoretical development and mastering the operational
aspects of intelligence activity.

Finally, Sanai must urgently develop its capacity to train intelligence
officers in cyber forensics, border intelligence and counter-terrorism, as
crimes related to these pose a serious threat to our national security.
While the academy’s own capacity is being developed in these fields, it
might consider forging partnerships with academic institutions and other
service providers with expertise in these fields of study. I welcome the
Minister’s proposals around introducing new elements to the curriculum to
enhance professional accountability and professional integrity.

An intelligence organisation’s capacity to provide policy-relevant and
unique intelligence to the national client can only be achieved when
intelligence officers are properly trained and equipped with the necessary
skills and knowledge. Quality training thus plays a central role in
ensuring that our intelligence services are made up of officers who
correctly know, understand and interpret the political and security needs
of our country and the African continent, and who offer the best policy
advice to our government. While Sanai has laid a strong foundation for
this, much more work needs to be done. For that to happen Sanai needs more
money and, therefore, the ANC supports this budget. [Applause.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Voorsitter, ek wil begin deur vir die agb Minister te
sê die VF Plus steun sy benadering dat, wat Intelligensie betref, daar meer
deursigtigheid moet kom. Die dae is lankal verby toe nasionale
intelligensie-agentskappe honderde agente wêreldwyd moes ontplooi om
inligting te bekom.

Ons leef in die tyd van tegnologiese ontwikkeling, van die media en van
inligting. Enigeen van ons kan vandag gaan en ’n presiese, mooi foto kry
van die Uniegebou, ons kan ’n mooi uitleg en foto kry van die Parlement.
Ons kan deur die wêreld reis en ons kan volledige foto’s en al die nodige
inligting bekom van bakens wat in die verlede altyd bekendgestaan het as
nasionale strategiese punte.

Ons kan vandag televisie kyk, en as ons CNN, Sky News of wat ook al kyk,
sal ons verbaas wees om te sien watter inligting ons kan kry om te sien wat
gebeur in ander lande en watter konflik daar plaasvind. Wat ek hiermee vir
u sê, is dat die moderne tegnologie van so ’n aard is dat ons meer
deursigtig kan wees ten opsigte van intelligensie in Suid-Afrika.

Daarom steun ons hierdie standpunt van die agb Minister dat daardie
openheid moet kom, en ek dink die eerste stap wat die agb Minister, en ook
die Gesamentlike Staande Komitee oor Intelligensie, kan doen, is om baie
van hulle vergaderings oop te stel vir die media, sodat die media kan kom
insit by die komitee, daar waar al die politieke partye verteenwoordig is,
en kan sien wat bespreek word en insae kan kry in die werking van die
Gesamentlike Staande Komitee oor Intelligensie.

Ek kom by ’n ander aspek en dit is al die probleme wat daar tans in die
intelligensiegemeenskap is. Soos ons almal weet, is dit ’n kwessie van tyd,
dan sal elke individu wat ’n selfoon het daardie selfoon moet laat
registreer. As hy van daardie selfoon ontslae wil raak, sal daar kennis
gegee moet word na wie toe dit gaan, ensovoorts.

Die publiek daar buite wil die vertroue hê dat hulle privaatheid
gerespekteer gaan word. Hulle wil die vertroue hê dat hulle private
gesprekke nie afgeluister sal word nie. As ons gaan kyk wat onlangs in
Intelligensie gebeur het, sien ons dat van die senior amptenare -
inteendeel, die top-amptenare – betrokke was by afluistering en het sekere
disinformasie rondgestuur, nie vir die beveiliging van ons land nie, maar
vir hul eie persoonlike motiewe.

Dan is die vraag: watter vertroue het die publiek daar buite dat hul
private gesprekke nie ook vir eie private doeleindes en motiewe gebruik
gaan word nie? Dit is die taak van die Minister – dit is op u skouers, agb
Minister – om te verseker dat die publiek die vertroue kan hê dat hulle
privaatheid gerespekteer gaan word. Dit is ’n groot taak op u skouers, maar
ek wil u verseker die publiek, en ons almal, hou u dop om te sien of u
daardie vertroue gaan herstel. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Chairperson, I want to start by saying to the hon
Minister that the FF Plus supports his approach that, as far as
Intelligence is concerned, there should be more transparency. The days are
long gone when the national intelligence agencies had to deploy hundreds of
agents worldwide to gather information.

We are living in times of technological development, of the media and of
information. Any one of us can go today and get a precise, good photograph
of the Union Buildings, we can get a good lay-out and photograph of
Parliament. We can travel through the world and can obtain detailed
photographs and all the necessary information on landmarks, which, in the
past, were always known as national strategic points.

Today we can watch television, and if we watch CNN, Sky News or whatever,
we will be surprised to see what information we can obtain to see what is
happening in other countries and what conflicts are taking place there.
What I am trying to say is that modern technology is of such a nature that
we can be more transparent in respect of intelligence in South Africa.

For that reason we support this standpoint of the hon Minister that that
transparency must come, and I think the first step that the hon Minister,
and also the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence, can take is to make
many of their meetings accessible to the media, so that the media can come
and sit with the committee, where all the political parties are
represented, and can see what is being discussed and get an idea of the
workings of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence.

I want to discuss another aspect, and that is all the problems at present
being encountered in the Intelligence community. As we all know, it is a
question of time, then every individual who has a cellphone will have to
register that cellphone. If he wants to get rid of that cellphone, he will
have to give information on the person to whom that cellphone is going,
etc.

The public out there want to be confident that their privacy will be
respected. They want to believe that their private conversations will not
be tapped. If we look at what happened in Intelligence recently, we see
that some of the senior officials – in fact, the top officials – were
responsible for phone-tapping and the distribution of certain
disinformation, not for the safeguarding of our country, but for their own
personal motives.

The question then is: What faith does the public out there have that their
personal conversations will not also be used for private purposes and
motives? It is the task of the Minister – it rests on your shoulders, hon
Minister – to ensure that the public can have the faith that their privacy
will be respected. An enormous task is resting on your shoulders, but I
want to assure you that the public, and all of us, are watching you to see
if you are going to restore that faith. I thank you.]
Mnr S ABRAM: Agb Voorsitter, ek wil net vir die agb lid Groenewald sê dat
ek juis later daaroor gaan praat in my toespraak, en wel oor die publiek en
hoe hulle tans voel. Ek wil hom ook herinner dat hy hier gepraat het van
deursigtigheid. Ek wil my graag wend tot die agb lid Swart, by wie
deursigtigheid ernstig ontbreek het. Die agb lid het hier gepraat van die
“aftermath” van sy toespraak verlede jaar. En ek wil hom graag herinner aan
’n ander “aftermath” en dit is toe mnre Bush en Blair met hul nagemaakte
intelligensie en voorwendsels, Irak binnegeval het en hoe die agb Swart se
party ondersteunend was van daardie inval. Hulle het daardie verwronge perd
opgesaal en saam met die ander lande wat die inval ondersteun het, gesê dat
Saddam Hussein in die bek geruk moet word.

Nou vier jaar later, na die dood van duisende burgerlikes, insluitende
kinders in hierdie week waarin ons Internasionale Kinderdag vier, en die
dood van jong soldate en ’n vernietigde land moet daardie leiers nou
eerloos, broekloos, tenkloos en wapenloos, gewetenloos - en eersdaags
Downingstraat 10-loos en Wit Huis-loos -met bebloede hande Irak verlaat.
[Applous.]

Daar is ’n ander gevaarlike neiging in die toespraak van die agb lid Swart,
waar hy en sy party ... [Tussenwerpsels.] Ek wil net graag vir juf Smuts
sê: sy hou daarvan om hier te kekkel; sy sal tuis voel op my plaaswerf met
al my geveerde gaste. [Applous.] Dit is waar dat hulle glo en dit het die
agb lid Swart nou gesê ... (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)
[Mr S ABRAM: Hon Chairperson, I just want to say to the hon Groenewald that
I shall be discussing the matter of public opinion later on in my speech. I
also want to remind him that he spoke here about transparency. I would like
to turn to the hon member Swart, in whose case transparency was sadly
lacking. The hon member spoke here about the “aftermath” of his speech last
year. And I would like to remind him of another “aftermath”, namely that
when Messrs Bush and Blair invaded Iraq with their false intelligence and
pretexts, the hon Swart and his party were supportive of that invasion.
They saddled that misshapen horse and, together with the other countries
who supported the invasion, said that Saddam Hussein had to be forced into
submission.

Now, four years later, after the death of thousands of civilians, including
children, during this week in which we are celebrating International
Children’s Day, and the death of young soldiers and a country destroyed,
those leaders will have to leave Iraq with bloodied hands, devoid of honour
or conscience, without uniforms, tanks or weapons, and soon without the
support of 10 Downing Street and the White House. [Applause.]

There is another dangerous tendency in the hon member Swart’s speech, where
he and his party ... I just want to say to Miss Smuts: She likes cackling
here; she will feel at home in my farmyard with all my feathered guests.
[Applause.] It is true that they believe and the hon member Swart has said
this now ... ]
Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairperson, one has to be somewhat amazed at the speech
of the hon Abram. I am rising on a point of order: The remarks that he made
to Ms Smuts and about Ms Smuts certainly border on foul language. And I
would suggest that they are very much unparliamentary.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon member, may I appeal to
you that if you made some unparliamentary remarks that you withdraw them
and continue with your speech?

Mr S ABRAM: Hon Chair, what I said is general talk in Afrikaans.

Ons kekkel en kraai, en so aan. [We cackle and crow, and so on.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman that is absolutely unacceptable.

Mr S ABRAM: We always call the hon member Van Niekerk, “Kraai” and that
doesn’t mean that he is crowing! [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon Ellis, please take your seat.
I’ll study the Hansard and I will give a report.

Mnr S ABRAM: Waar die agb lid Swart sê dat Afrikane uit ander dele van die
kontinent - en hy sê in Engels ... [When the hon Swart says that Africans
from other parts of the continent, and he says in English that ...]
... cross our borders to rape, rob and murder our people ...

...hierdie woorde is xenofobies, en “rassisme” en “xenofobie” is twee
woorde wat onparlementêr verklaar is in hierdie agb Raad. Ek vra u graag
dat u na die Hansard sal kyk en ’n beslissing daaroor op ’n latere stadium
sal gee. My tyd is kort.

Aangesien daar in die jongste tyd veel gesê, geskryf en bespiegel is oor
die onlangse gebeure en doen en late in ons Nasionale Intelligensiedienste,
het ek dit gerade geag om hierdie geleentheid te gebruik om die vrese van
die breë burgery – en ek is jammer die agb lid Groenewald is nou nie meer
hier nie – te besweer en sodoende om hulle gerus te stel. Die ANC-regering
het sedert sy bewindsoorname 12 jaar gelede, ver gevorder om uiting te gee
aan deursigtigheid en dit wat in ons Vryheidsmanifes staan. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[...these words are xenophobic, and “racism” and “xenophobia” are two words
which have been declared unparliamentary in this august House. I would like
to ask you to peruse Hansard and give a ruling in this regard at a later
date. My time is limited.

Since a lot has been said, written and speculated of late about the recent
happenings in our National Intelligence Service, I thought it wise to avail
myself of this opportunity to allay the fears of the general public – and I
am sorry that the hon member Groenewald is not here any more – and, in so
doing, reassure them. Since the ANC came into power 12 years ago it has
done a lot to promote transparency and the principles contained in our
Freedom Charter.]

It states: “There shall be work and security. There shall be houses,
security and comfort for all.”

I now want to ask the question: what is intelligence? In terms of the
Intelligence Services Oversight Act, the definition is that -


  Intelligence means the process of gathering, evaluation, correlation and
  interpretation of security information, including activities related
  thereto as performed by the Services.

Sir, if you put my brains on a scale, and yours, mine will outweigh yours a
hundred times. [Laughter.] You must not think that because you are in the
DA and had the privileges of studying and all the doors of learning were
open to you, that you are in any way superior to us seated on this side.
[Applause.] And you, you will never become an honorary white. Do whatever
you want.

Jy kan ook kekkel soveel soos jy wil. [You may also cackle as much as you
wish.]

What is oversight? Oversight is the process and means by which accountable
persons are called upon to account. What is accountability? It is an
obligation to answer to someone with authority for the execution of one’s
assigned responsibilities; or accountability is an obligation to
demonstrate and take responsibility for performance against agreed
standards.

Intelligence, therefore, is vital to a stable democracy and includes, inter
alia, military, crime, national and domestic, departmental and economic
intelligence. Intelligence can also be a threat to democracy, if services
do not act in accordance with the law and most importantly, if services are
not subjected to robust and transparent civilian oversight by Parliament.

Section 199, subsection 8 of the Constitution provides as follows:


  To give effect to the principles of transparency and accountability,
  multiparty Parliamentary committees must have oversight of all security
  services in a manner determined by national legislation or the rules and
  orders of Parliament.

This section was given effect to by the promulgation of the Intelligence
Services Oversight Act, Act No 40, which provided for the establishment of
the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence by the President, the
oversight mechanisms and procedures governing reporting by the JSCI to
Parliament and the appointment of inspectors-general in respect of each
service.

It is therefore necessary in order to allay the fears of the broad civilian
population, that we look at the Provision of the Regulation of Interception
of Communications and Provision of Communication- Related Information Act,
Act No 70 of 2002, which has a range of provisions under chapter 3 thereof,
dealing with governing interceptions.

The complex world in which we live, sir, with its advanced digital
technology networks poses equally complex challenges. The Act provides for
the creation of an office for interception centres and further provides for
an applicant who, inter alia, means a member as defined in section 1 of the
Intelligence Services Act, if the member concerned obtained in writing the
approval in advance of another member of the agency or the service, as the
case may be, holding a post of at least general manager, to apply to a
designated judge, for the issuing of an interception direction. Such
applications must be in written form but the Act also provides for an
application to be made orally by the applicant, if he or she is of the
opinion that it is not reasonably practicable, having regard to the urgency
of the case or the existence of exceptional circumstances, to do so in
writing.

The applicant has to provide the designated judge with exhaustive
information and the designated judge may call for further information to
enable him or her to apply his or her mind thoroughly before approving or
rejecting the application. When approving applications, the designated
judge may specify conditions or restrictions relating to the interception
of communications authorised therein and permission may be issued for a
period not exceeding three months at a time.

Finally, members of the public, inter alia, who are aggrieved by any
alleged transgressions by any of the services can access the Office of the
Inspector-General, whose functions are prescribed in the Intelligence
Services Oversight Act, Act No 40 of 1994. Amongst those functions are: to
monitor compliance with the Constitution, applicable laws and policies on
intelligence, and also, to receive and investigate complaints from members
of the public and members of the service on alleged maladministration,
abuse of power, transgression of the Constitution, laws and policies
related to intelligence and counterintelligence and improper enrichment of
any person through an act or omission.

In view of the fact that my time is very limited, I would like to call upon
the public to make use of this particular avenue, which provides safeguards
for the civilian population. If anybody feels that their rights have been
violated by the engagement in some or other activity of the services, then
they are very welcome to make use of these services. I just want to remind
my friends here ...
Wanneer ek daar anderkant sit, dan sien ek die donker kolletjies gou raak.
[Tyd verstreke.] [When I am sitting over there, I can see the dark spots
easily.][Time expired.]]
Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, hon Ministers and members, when debating this
Budget Vote today, I would like to speak on the need for secrecy by
intelligence services versus the importance of transparency in our
democratic state.

It goes without saying that, in order to effectively neutralise national
and international threats against the security of our government and the
nation, the need for secrecy in our intelligence services becomes an
imperative. However, secrecy without sufficient transparency and
accountability to the appropriate authorities and oversight structures
would in itself become a threat to our present government. A case in point
is the suspension of the former NIA Director-General and the Head of
Operations for being involved in the unlawful surveillance of ANC
businessman, Mr Saki Macozoma. The FD would like to use this opportunity to
commend the Minister for Intelligence and the inspector-general for their
swift intervention.

One cannot use the resources of the state to settle political scores and to
promote one’s own political agenda. The purpose of NIA is to defend and
protect this government and the nation against crime syndicates, drug
lords, money launderers and any person and organisation that intends to
destabilise our democracy.

Another case of concern is the mysterious disappearance of Khalid Mahmood
Rashid, a Pakistani national. It has been alleged by several national
newspapers that the SAPS Intelligence Unit has handed Mr Khalid over to
foreign intelligence agents and that Mr Khalid has been secretly flown out
from Waterkloof Air Force Base to Guantanamo Bay, a torture camp, because
there were claims that he was a member of Al-Qaeda.

Now, if Mr Khalid was in the country illegally, he should have been
deported to Pakistan, his country of origin; and if foreign agents wanted
to arrest him for alleged international terrorism, they should have done so
in Pakistan, not here.

Hon Minister, this information is in the public domain. If it is untrue,
please correct this perception. The FD supports this Budget Vote. [Time
expired.]

Mr D V BLOEM: Baie dankie, Voorsitter. Jy sien dié is nie ’n sirkus nie.
[Gelag.] Dié is ernstige goed. Mnr Green, as jy hier kom praat moet jy
feite hê. Moenie goed in die koerante lees en dan ... Gaan sit, gaan sit!
[Gelag.] [Thank you very much, Chair. You see, this is not a circus.
[Laughter.] This is serious stuff. Mr Green, when you come and speak here
you must have facts. Don’t read things in the newspapers and then ... Sit
down! Sit down! [Laughter.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Agb Bloem, u is nie hier om te sê wat
in die Huis moet gebeur nie. Ek sal sorg dat daar orde is. [Hon Bloem, you
are not here to say what should happen in the House. I will see to it that
there is order.]
Mr D V BLOEM: Baie dankie. [Gelag.] Laat ek eers begin, dan sal ek terugkom
na julle toe. [Thank you very much. [Laughter.] Let me just begin, and then
I will return to you.]

Chairperson, Minister, Members of Parliament, Inspector-General, Directors-
General – our beautiful Directors-General, ladies and gentlemen - I am
rising to support the Intelligence Budget Vote.

I believe it is only correct for all of us never to forget the contribution
that people like Comrade Joe Nhlanhla has made to bring this country to
where we are today. [Applause.] I am saying we must never forget the
sacrifices comrades like him have made for all of us to sit here in this
House as South Africans; South Africans with different opinions, but who
are able to talk about our differences without fighting.

We know that comrade Joe is not well, but I want to wish him a speedy
recovery. I want to say to Comrade Joe, “I salute you, Comrade Joe”. In the
same breath I also want to say to our Minister that when the President
decided to appoint you as Minister for Intelligence, I am sure that he had
full confidence in your ability to execute your duty with the commitment
and loyalty that you have displayed over these very difficult years of
struggle. Minister, let me express my appreciation for the work that you
have done for this country.

I am mentioning this unselfishness of this great South African who never
climbed up the mountain looking for recognition and praise. He knew very
well that he was working for a better South Africa where all South
Africans, black and white, will live together as brothers and sisters. Can
you imagine what would have happened without people like Comrade Joe
Nhlanhla? Yes, I am mentioning this, because these men and women sitting
here and in the gallery today are doing very difficult work.

Every day when we switch our television sets on you will hear of syndicates
for cars, drugs or any other thing that have been uncovered. Many people
have been arrested. You read in newspapers about syndicates dealing with
passports or ID documents - listen up, hon Chauke - or ID documents, being
arrested. These are men and women who don’t want to be seen. Who don’t want
to pose in front of cameras or appear on television. No, the only thing
that they are interested in is the safety of the citizens of this country.
[Interjections.] Selfless South Africans, I also want to take this
opportunity to salute all of you, my brothers and sisters, for this very
good job that you are doing. [Applause.] The only way to motivate these
people is to give them the necessary resources they need.

Let me start with NICOC, the National Intelligence Co-ordinating Committee.
I am asking whether NICOC co-ordination in South Africa is effective or are
we paying lip service to the intelligence co-ordination? We have the
legislation in place to ensure intelligence co-ordination, but are we
applying this effectively?

The National Strategic Intelligence Act, for example, makes provision for
the Minister to regulate the co-ordination of intelligence as an activity,
as well as to regulate the co-ordination of crime intelligence and counter-
intelligence. Is it not time for the Minister for Intelligence, without
legislating our intelligence service, to regulate co-ordination of
intelligence as an activity?

The measures put in place after 9/11 by governments globally to strengthen
intelligence co-ordination demonstrated that the intelligence co-ordination
needs some level of attention, whether this be by law or by regulation, as
it is not possible to achieve effective intelligence co-ordination simply
through the goodwill of the participants.

I want to raise a very serious problem I am having, something that has been
troubling me for some time now - Minister I am sure that you are listening.
It is the matter of the media reports about the President of the Youth
League, Mr Mbalula. It was reported that he complained to you that he was
under surveillance by NIA and that you did not respond in the same manner
as you responded to the complaint by Mr Macozoma.

Minister, this is a very serious allegation, and in particular the charge
that there is evidence that you were treating these two complaints
differently. You must please respond to this one, because it is a worry to
me. I think we must not choose sides. We must be very straightforward and
honest when we are dealing with these types of things. [Interjections.]

Mr L M GREEN: The hon Bloem was accusing me of using newspaper quotes and
he is doing exactly the same. Is that acceptable, Chairperson?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Green, for a start, I was not
here when you were being accused, so I cannot ...

Mr D V BLOEM: Thank you very much. I am saying he is a Reverend. I will
never go to his church, because he is not speaking the truth. [Laughter.]
[Interjections.]

To what degree has NICOC succeeded in centralising the strategic analysis
function? Have we reached the point where our intelligence agency
centralised all strategic intelligence critical to our national security,
or are we still stove-piping the production of intelligence assessments? A
situation where the client of intelligence received different products on
the same issue is not acceptable. We need one integrated intelligence
assessment drawing from all the different intelligence structures.

NICOC should be able to provide government with an objective view and
provide an important counter way to the understandable desire of
intelligence agencies to push their product to policy-makers. An
independent filter between the intelligence officer who writes the report
and the ultimate intelligence customer who contributes to maintain
objectivity and common standards is required.

Integrated assessments that draw on a full range of intelligence,
diplomatic, government and overt reporting would offer policy makers a
better analysis and comprehensive view of issues. If NICOC is not yet
playing this role, then this is a cause of concern.

NICOC must ensure that they make use of all the information available to
government in preparing a strategic integrated intelligence assessment from
within the intelligence community, within government as a whole, from open
sources and from experts outside government. Against the background of the
recent developments in the civilian intelligence community, emphasis is
placed on the need for intelligence analysis to be guided by the highest
standard of impartiality, integrity, honesty and confirmation of the
intelligence picture. [Time expired.]

The MINISTER FOR INTELLIGENCE: Hon Chairperson, if I might immediately
start with a question posed by the hon Bloem, and to immediately state that
I first learnt of the ANC Youth League’s president’s complaint in the
media. He had phoned me and I didn’t recognise his voice or understand who
it was. He was rather angry that I had dealt with Mr Macozoma’s complaint.
He asked me what I was doing about his.

When I saw in the press the next day who in fact it was, I did contact him.
We had an interview with him. In fact, the acting Director-General of NIA
came in with me to find out what in fact the complaint was. We asked the
youth league leader to please provide us with a written statement so that
that could be investigated.

Of course, I would say this to all the members of the public out there,
that on any complaint, follow the course of Mr Macozoma. He wrote to me and
phoned me, and we received the lawyer’s letter. He gave us the facts, and
we could follow up the matter on that basis.

I must say that to date, six months later, Mr Mbalula has failed to send us
a written statement. Nevertheless, the Director-General of NIA has followed
through the complaint. It was difficult because there were no real facts –
the matter was very flimsy - but he was able to establish that, certainly,
in as far as the National Intelligence Agency is concerned, there was no
operation against him whatsoever.
There are a couple of other very important questions, which I want to
respond to immediately, in the public interest. From the hon Groenewald,
the question of assuring the public that they are safe when they talk on
their phones, when they send e-mails, when they are on the Internet, when
they use their cellphones and faxes and so on, we can indeed assure the
public of this.

The office for interception centres, the OIC, which is being set up to deal
with all these, operates under very strict control, dealing with the
interception of all those communication forms. The law-enforcement agency
must first obtain - and that would be near the police, defence and so on -
a warrant from the judge before the OIC can then go and request an
interception from the service provider. Without a warrant, the service
provider will not load a number into its system to enable the OIC to then
intercept it.

The entire warrant process, up until and including the interception, can be
clearly audited by any of the oversight institutions, namely the inspector-
general and the parliamentary Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence.
With all our new procedures, which I have outlined, and given the shock and
the setback we found and faced from the infringements that have occurred
this past year, we have tightened up all these controls.

I’ve been to the OIC. I’ve met with the staff and I have spoken to them
about the importance of the Constitution and legality, etc. I’ve seen their
system. No one can guarantee 100%, whether you are the FBI, CIA, MI6 or the
old KGB, that there might be no violations. But we are moving everything
that we can in this country to ensure that we tighten things up, because we
don’t want these violations at all.

Coming to hon Swart’s question - I thank Judge Seriti for remaining with us
up to this point - the present judge, Judge Seriti, was appointed
correctly, in terms of the old monitoring Act of 1992, which is still in
force. Therefore there is no problem regarding the legality of his
appointment or the warrants that he signs. This will take us to 1 July,
when the new Act becomes enforced and the OIC begins to take over all the
operations. This is why the present judge was only appointed for this
interim period, since he is not retired.

I do want to say to hon Swart that his is an important question, and I have
checked this very carefully with the Justice department, and I want to
assure you that this is what I fully understand. The judge is extremely
legal in everything he has been doing.

I quickly want to deal with a few questions from Adv Swart. He posed a
number of challenging questions, such as, to what extent the intelligence
services - NIA in particular, but this has affected everybody – had been
derailed by these unlawful acts which have scandalised this country. “What
happened”, hon Swart asked me, “to the normal, ongoing activities of the
services?”

I could have chosen to simply come here and ignore this scandal and address
the ongoing work in terms of my 10 priorities, which were outlined two
years ago. I reported on them last year. I will still report to the
standing committee regarding that progress.

Quite frankly, I had to weigh up whether to come here and use my 30 minutes
simply to go through the routine work, as important as it is, because there
has nevertheless been tremendous progress notwithstanding. But, clearly,
owing to public interest, with Parliament representing the public, it was
incumbent on me to come here and explain as thoroughly as I did.

I did, you will note, at the end of my speech, say that notwithstanding all
those problems, the services have kept their eye on the ball. They have
maintained their commitment to the ongoing work and indeed to the
priorities. Of course, these are young services, which are only 11 years
old. You can talk about other international services making all sorts of
mistakes; services that have been in the business for decades and some for
centuries. That is what we need to bear in mind.

You have posed six to eight questions in relation to the priorities, and I
will be giving written answers to all the questions that have been raised
here, as you know I do. But I want very quickly to say to you that
regarding the budget factor, the first priority is to get the expenditure
items into alignment.

I noted two years ago that we were spending far too much on remuneration,
at the expense of core basic business, the rock face of operations and the
necessary investment into capital, into property, equipment and so on. I
can tell you that NIA, for instance, has reduced its personnel expenditure,
from the previous year to this, from 74% to 67%. We are beginning to see
the turnaround and I regard this as extremely significant.

In relation to the early warning centre, enormous work has been done. We’ve
been helping the region and the continent. You’ve referred to vetting and
to misregulations. The Minister for the Public Service and Administration
has to ensure that the services and her department work together in order
to ensure that new regulations are brought to Cabinet to replace the
existing regulations. Hopefully, we will be able to report back before the
end of the year.

With regard to vetting, the previous Director-General had been given that
task. I was hopeful in this past year that I would come and look at this
with the standing committee and present a Cabinet memorandum. The
presentation made to me was so weak that, quite frankly, I tossed it out
and I said, “Go and start again”. Of course, I didn’t realise - perhaps in
our naivety at that stage - that the reason a very hard-working individual
was not giving me the product I desired was because his mind and his
fingers were in other activities. So we live and learn. I don’t mind saying
that I learn from mistakes at my late age in life. There’s hardly any time
left, but ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I’m going to give you three minutes.

The MINISTER FOR INTELLIGENCE: Thanks, that’s very kind of you,
Chairperson. I really appreciate it. The hon Green made reference to the
deportation of Rashid Khalid, Home Affairs, the SA Police Service and
Safety and Security. I want to assure him that it is not true that our
services, whether from Home Affairs – Minister, thanks for your presence -
or from police, connived with other parties and sent this individual to
Guantanamo Bay.

The individual concerned was in this country and had false documentation. A
question was asked. The Department of Home Affairs, with assistance from
crime intelligence did a tremendous job and were able to track this
individual down. The individual was then deported back to his home country,
which is Pakistan.

Once an individual is back in their home country, in this case Pakistan,
what then happens does not involve us, but involves that home country and
any other country. I cannot say this in a guaranteed way: My understanding
is that the gentleman is still in that country.

Certainly, what we need to answer - and I work with responsible Ministers –
is whether we sent this individual back to his home country. If any member
here is saying we are wrong in acting against individuals who come into
this country illegally on false documents, then, please, raise that and we
will gladly discuss it with you.

I really think that I have dealt with the most substantive of those
questions. Certainly, hon member Vadi is absolutely correct in his focus on
the academy and training. That is certainly something we are giving much
attention to, including the flexibility. We are in the process of ensuring
that an element of training must take place closer to our services in
Pretoria, without undermining the academy in Mafikeng and the important
work it is doing there.

You made reference to something we are very proud of, that whatever
weaknesses we might still have, we feel that the curricula, the training
and management must be improved. Many an African country is very, very
pleased with the kind of training we’ve been able to give them in terms of
the start-up for what, in many countries, are very young services.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Minister, your time has now
expired.

The MINISTER FOR INTELLIGENCE: Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Before any member thinks that I was
indulging the Minister, he was actually using his allotted time, which the
clock didn’t indicate.

Debate concluded.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


Debate on Vote No 22 – Independent Complaints Directorate and Vote No 27 –
Safety and Security:

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, hon members of the House,
the current strategic thrust for policing in South Africa is the reduction
of crime by between 7% and 10% annually. We shall review this strategy at
the end of 2009 and make whatever changes may be necessary in the
circumstances. As hon members will appreciate, any strategy requires a good
set of tactics for it to work. In our case, we believe that we have to
deploy our resources, both human and material, in such a way that they
become a well co-ordinated vehicle for service delivery.

Recent visits to police stations by SAPS managers revealed that a flatter
organisational structure was required, rather than the many layers of
command and control, for better service delivery to our people on the
ground. It was obvious, therefore, that restructuring the service was
necessary as a way forward to better policing and improved services, using
the local police station as the crucible of such delivery.

The revised structure will incorporate the advantages of decentralisation
of work and authority, along with specialised skills that will be available
at station level.

The focus of the restructuring was directed towards the following: reducing
the current four policing levels to three, in other words, national,
provincial, and station level, which is in line with the Constitution of
the Republic of South Africa; reducing the provincial and national
structures to improve co-ordination and the provision of functional
policing and the support services; redeployment to station level of certain
specialised operational policing functions to ensure crimes are
investigated where they occur; moving of national, provincial and area
skilled persons to stations to increase the leadership, management,
decision-making and skill levels at stations to deal with the stations’
unique crime challenges; empowering station commissioners to render a
comprehensive service and effectively manage all resources and amend
accountability frameworks effectively to assess the performance of stations
and station commissioners in terms of standardised performance indicators.

The restructuring process will not result in job losses, nor will it result
in massive displacement of personnel. The moving of skilled personnel will
be done with due regard to their field of competence. Personnel will be
moved within close proximity of their current place of employment,
depending on the prioritisation of station precincts.

The revised structure will also ensure that police-community trust is
enhanced and that it also will improve the morale of SAPS personnel.
Government’s intention to establish one-stop service centres will benefit
from the changes we are making, as many of the complaints we receive will
be attended to at station level without reference to other layers and
structures.

The necessary preparations have been completed for the first phase of the
redeployment to commence during the last quarter of this year.

The most fundamental of the changes to be effected will be the dissolution
of the area offices. Resources from those offices will be devolved to the
various police stations as part of the station empowerment strategy. The
advantages that will flow from the new arrangement will include the
following: elimination of wasteful duplication; improved service delivery
on the ground; improved command and control of all resources; improved
interaction, communication and participation; and quicker responses to the
needs of the communities.

The management of the police stations will be the key to success. We have
therefore been training our station commissioners better to discharge that
function. We have introduced a station management learning programme,
comprising six modules, that will see all station commissioners undergoing
intensive training over the next three years. The programme, which is
staggered, will end on 31 March 2009.

The investigators that will be deployed at the police stations will be a
combination of experienced members, some of whom will be redeployed from
the former area offices, and well-trained detectives who have emerged from
our new training programmes. This year the detective service will be
enhanced by an additional 1 000 newly trained members. The addition to the
detectives is a means of consolidating our effort to reduce shortages in
the service, among others things, by deploying to the detective services
30% of trained police constables directly after they have completed their
basic training.

We have streamlined the career path of detectives so that we retain
experienced members in operations and have them promoted within a three-
level system, while they continue to do functional police work, rather than
to promote them into administrative, managerial positions.

We are currently taking our general investigators through multilevel
specialised courses to give them capacity to investigate every type of
crime. It goes without saying therefore that the allocation for the current
and subsequent financial years will be directed in the main to the
improvements that the restructuring is ushering in. This is on the basis of
the philosophy of more and better resources to the front.

We started pilot projects a couple of years ago to test the effectiveness
of clustering police stations for improved command and control and co-
ordination. We are now ready to roll it out to all provinces. The strategy
will define a process within the clusters where police will unite often in
joint projects to deal with cross-station precinct crimes and threats. The
biggest station in the cluster will be the accounting station. Located at
the accounting station will be a structure that will be the supply chain
for the needs of the various stations in that cluster. This will replace
the area structures.

Some of the specialised units of the police will be shifted to selected
accounting stations. Among those will be the family violence child
protection and sexual offences, crime combating units, as well as members
from the serious and violent crimes units. In all respects, the strategy
will be to shift more and better resources to the front, at the coalface of
the fight against crime.

In the past two months this country has been gripped by the kind of
violence that we last saw in the late 80s and early 90s, before the
democratic breakthrough of 1994. This violence is happening on the back of
a strike by workers in the private security industry.

No worker or worker leader should be happy to see fellow workers dying as
they are in the course of the strike; worse still, when their death is
caused by other workers. There was confrontation yesterday in Port
Elizabeth between striking and nonstriking workers. At the end of that
incident, one worker lay dead from bullet wounds and several others were
injured. The police arrested seven workers and confiscated eight firearms.

More than 20 workers have been murdered during the strike, the great
majority having been thrown out of moving trains, as happened before the
advent of democracy in South Africa. More than 256 workers have been
arrested on charges of murder, attempted murder, assault, public violence
and intimidation. Others were arrested for violating the Regulation of
Gatherings Act.

The police will continue to apply the law and will act firmly against those
who commit crimes during the strike. There is no place in our democracy for
hooliganism and anarchy and there is certainly no place for crime and
criminality. In order for us to protect our democracy, we need to adhere
strictly to the dictates of our law. Anyone who engages in activities that
seek to undermine our rule of law, will face the full might of the law. It
does not matter who it is. You act like a criminal and you will be dealt
with like one.

The national commissioner met the Satawu leadership on two occasions to
discuss the incidence of violence. Senior officers of the police have
continued to interact with the worker leaders. The police are also
interfacing with the employers to encourage all concerned to find a
settlement. The private security industry is notorious for bad conditions
of work and very low wages. That obviously is at variance with government’s
concept of a better life for all. The workers in the industry, therefore,
have a right to struggle for a better work dispensation. There are 4 923
security companies that are registered with the Private Security Industry
Regulatory Authority. The companies employ 306 407 workers, who work as
security guards. During the last financial year, the PSIRA conducted 6 527
inspections at security establishments and compiled 1 738 dockets for
improper conduct against some of the companies, in terms of the statutory
code of conduct.

In the process we have discovered 718 unregistered workers. It is our view,
though, that the contingent of unregistered workers in the industry is very
big. The great majority of them are undocumented foreign nationals. That
matter is receiving focused attention by the law enforcement agencies and
more inspections will be launched in the period under review.

We will continue to improve our tactics regarding crime prevention to stop
crime in a manner of speaking from happening. Of course, our main thrust in
this respect is social crime prevention. The Deputy Minister, the hon Susan
Shabangu, is going to speak to that issue later on.

The key to crime prevention always is to address crime generators of every
kind, including negative socioeconomic conditions. Substance abuse is one
of the crime generators we are going to pay particular attention to during
this financial year.

Gun ownership in South Africa continues to be an emotive issue. Guns in
South Africa continue to be the main weapon of choice in the commission of
serious and violent crimes. But gun violence is not just a South African
phenomenon. As Sarah Brady argues in the introduction to the book The
Global Gun Epidemic by Wendy Cukier and Victor W Sidel, published this year
by Praeger Security International:

  Just as guns know no borders, gun violence has become a global epidemic;
  killing hundreds of thousands of people each year and injuring more. The
  toll is staggering. Experts estimate that there are 35 000 annual gun-
  related deaths in Brazil, 10 000 in South Africa, 20 000 in Colombia and
  30 000 in the United States.

But Brady goes on to make the following observation:


  Virtually every illegal gun begins as a legal gun. And unregulated
  ownership of guns fuels crime. Because weapons tend to flow from
  unregulated areas to regulated areas, international co-operation is
  critical.

She adds the following:


  Since 1998 there has been an emerging global movement to control the
  illicit trade and misuse of guns, and many countries have moved to
  strengthen their gun laws in an effort to combat this global epidemic.

We are among the governments of the world that are looking at proper
firearms control and given that this matter is again before Parliament, I
will not engage further with it at this time.
It is appropriate, though, to leave you with the following observation by
Cukier and Sidel:


  South Africa is one of the few countries that have allowed widespread
  carrying of handguns for self-protection by civilians. Despite the
  emphasis on problems associated with post-conflict military weapons, the
  vast majority of firearms recovered in crime in South Africa, are
  pistols, revolvers, rifles and shotguns, and not military weapons.

I want to repeat that the Firearms Control Act and the Firearms Control
Amendment Act are intended to assist the SA Police Service in preventing
the proliferation of illegal firearms and removing them from society, as
well as to control legally owned firearms.

Between 1 April 2003 and 31 March 2006 we have collected 187 772 firearms
in South Africa. It is extremely disappointing to note that South African
gun owners over the last three years lost 50 864 firearms. It is obvious
that the great majority of those weapons have become part of the illegal
guns that are in circulation at this time.

We will continue to accredit nonofficial and official institutions such as
training entities and shooting ranges to ensure that potential firearm
owners receive the necessary mandatory training. In the past 12 months
since April last year, we accredited 586 non-official firearm institutions,
including 151 shooting ranges and 232 training facilities.

Significant strides have been made by the Criminal Record Centre and
Forensic Science Laboratory in the fight against crime. The CRC has
procured 108 live-scan booking stations capable of capturing
finger- and palmprints electronically. This will improve the quality of
prints that will be added to the Afis database that will enhance our
ability to arrest identified suspects.

More than 2 800 digital cameras, 23 plan-drawing programmed computers, 29
digital capturing systems and 89 lift scan systems for the scanning and
printing of folien have also been obtained to assist in criminal
investigations.

The Forensic Science Laboratory has installed an automated DNA analysis
system to double the daily analysis of samples. The unit is expected to be
fully operational by next month. The Ibis system used by the ballistics
units is currently being improved to help solve firearms-related cases. A
video spectral comparator infrared apparatus has also been acquired to
assist in the differentiation between inks and documents and detection of
alterations, additions and obliterations on documents.

The gas chromatograph mass spectrometers were also purchased to assist in
analysing drug-related cases. The Craig Micro Spectrometer was also bought
for colour analysis of various materials, such as fibres and paint samples.

The crime rate in the areas close to the borderline where SAPS members are
deployed showed a decrease during the past financial year. Cross-border
crime, affecting farmers next to the Free State borderline, involving
attacks on farmers and damage to their property has declined drastically.
Farmers in this area are increasingly sharing information with SAPS as a
result and consequence of this.

During the current financial year, the following will continue to receive
priority attention. The land borderline control continues to be executed
within six provinces. The priority for the current financial year is the
Lesotho land borderline, including KwaZulu-Natal, Free State and the
Eastern Cape.

Regarding the sea borderline control, the Western Cape’s sea borderline
control to deal with transnational crime within the maritime environment
was launched on 4 January this year.

The operational area entails the sea borderline from Cape Town in the
Western Cape to the Green River Mouth in the Northern Cape province. The
deployment includes the policing of the various maritime zones, namely,
South African territorial waters, continuous zones and exclusive economic
zones, and the radius of 20km inland of the shoreline.

In December 2005 the air borderline control was established with South
Africa and Zimbabwe, and South Africa and Mozambique. To achieve this
objective, the airstrips and smaller airfields in the Limpopo province are
policed. Operations in respect to air borderline control were rolled out to
the provinces of Gauteng, North West, Northern Cape and Free State.

The protection and security service of the SA Police Service is paying
focused attention within the environments of railway policing, ports of
entry and the government’s security regulator. All the pilot sites are now
fully operational. Members have been deployed at the Johannesburg
International Airport, Metro Rail system in Cape Town, and a big contingent
of others is being trained for permanent deployment in the railway police
environment in Gauteng and KwaZulu-Natal. The national mobile training unit
will also be part of the redeployment.

The other protection and security members are deployed at the Durban
Harbour and the Beit Bridge border post. The protection and security
services established a counterassault team geared for rapid deployment in
high-risk operations within the VIP protection environment.

I am proud to announce that it includes the only female, Captain Thandeka
Majola, ever to complete the freefall course in parachuting at the SA
National Defence Force. [Applause.]

The process to transfer to SAPS excess SADNF personnel to do police work
commenced last year. Two-hundred-and-ninety-six members have already
completed their conversion training. They will be part of the protection
and security service.

In my Budget Vote speech last year, I indicated that an alternative system
would be put in place by SAPS to address the phasing out of the commando
system to avoid a security vacuum. Increasing reservist numbers was one of
the identified strategies to do that. A new system has been in force since
April. It entails a call-up of reservists by the provincial commissioner on
a rotation basis for which they will be paid.

The basis of the call-up will be the prevailing crime trends identified at
the given station level. They will also participate in the rural safety
programme. Despite the new system, the philosophy of the reservist system
that it is by nature voluntary remains intact.

An amount of R265 million has been approved for the call-up of reservists.
It will be allocated as follows during the current financial year: R60
million for the call-up of 8 000 reservists, and the following financial
year we will have R80 million for the call-up of 10 000 reservists. In the
last financial year of the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework cycle, R125
million will be available for the recruitment of 15 000 reservists. Almost
17 000 reservists were recruited during the last financial year, of which
130 were commando members, recruited in respect of the exit/entry strategy
between the SANDF and SAPS. It is anticipated that the recruitment of
former commando members will increase, as the units that are due for
closure are comprised of fully active members.

The SAPS training continues to use best practice to produce skilled
functionaries in the service. In the last financial year, the primary focus
was on functional and operational interventions. During the year under
review, it is on operational command and control, management and leadership
development.

A scarce skills policy was developed and approved in 2004, designed to
retain scarce skills and pay the requisite remuneration for such skills. We
started paying allowances in April this year, in keeping with our intention
to retain scarce skills.

The National Secretariat for Safety and Security and the Independent
Complaints Directorate continue to service the Ministry for Safety and
Security. In the previous Budget Vote I indicated that both those entities
would be restructured for maximum effectiveness. Work in that direction has
already been done. However, attention was focused at national level only as
a means to kick-start the process.

The next phase will be the structural review and design of the secretariat
at the provincial level, a matter that is receiving attention between the
Ministry and the members of the executive council responsible for community
safety in the provinces at one level, and the Department of the Public
Service and Administration on the other.

An increase of approximately 17,5% marks the budget allocation this
financial year of the Independent Complaints Directorate. This has enabled
the directorate to continue to improve its internal capacity to investigate
complaints and to raise the level of its administrative ability to deal
with the implementation of obligatory legislation and to strengthen
corporate governance. Thank you very much, Chair. [Applause.]

Ms M M SOTYU: Hon Chair, hon Minister and members of Parliament, I send my
greetings to all those kids in the gallery. The ANC strategy and tactics
document points out that: “The battle against crime cannot be separated
from the war on want.”

The President, in his opening address, put the safety and security of South
Africans as a priority in the evolving democratisation of society. We
welcome the increase in the Department of Safety and Security’s budget for
2006-07.

The strategic plan of the South African Police Service for 2005 up to 2010
directs strategic and operational planning for the five-year period. This
broad five-year plan is informed each year by one-year planning
information, which focuses on a few details, that is the strategic
priorities, measurable objectives and targets for that year.

As mentioned by the Minister of Safety and Security, this process of the
redistribution of skills to the police stations is to correct the past
skewed distribution. The new redistribution will see most of the police
stations staffed with better skilled, trained and experienced personnel,
strengthening the current understaffed personnel, lack of skills and
training.

This process is not about demoting high-ranking police officers, but about
addressing the problem of lack of management skills at police station
level. Members of the Police Service need not be misled by the media and
those who think they know better. There is nothing like that.

This exercise has also allowed for the identification of gaps, the
development of appropriate skills and retraining of SAPS members,
especially those at operational level.

We want to assure members of SAPS that the ANC-led government has no
intention of retrenching the police, nor are we demoting them. We cannot
afford to lose skilled police officers. However, we desperately need these
skills at station level, where crime is happening 24 hours a day. Those who
are opposed to the transformation of the police need not be frightened.
Sihlalo, le ngxolo ingaka yenziwa ngaba basekunxele kwam -andibhekisi kuwe
Baw’ uNdlovu - nabamaphephandaba ngohlengahlengiso phakathi kweli sebe ize
ingamtyhafisi uMphathiswa, uMkomishinala uSelebi, uMkomishinala uHlela
noSekela-Mkomishinala uSingh, nabanye ookhomishinala abasebenza nabo.
Kaloku kwabona aba bangavumelaniyo nolu hlengahlengiso ikwangabo abathi
izikhululo zamapolisa azinawo amandla okulwa nezinye iindidi
zobundlobongela ngenxa yokungabikho kolwazi lokuphathi kwezinye zezi
zikhululo.

Uthe ke, Mphathiswa, xa uzama ukulungisa lo ndonakele yaqala inyakanyaka.
Amapolisa mawayeke ukuvuma ukulahlekiswa ngamaphepha nabantu abangena nto
yokwenza, abasoloko bebalekela emaphepheni bengenalwazi lupheleleyo,
besithi urhulumente kaKhongolozi uza kubalahlela ngaphandle.

Ze bakhumbule kaloku ukuba sathi xa sasilungiselela unyulo lowe-1994
baqhathwa abemi beli ngoo “siyazi”, kwathiwa mababophe imithwalo yabo
balifulathele eli kuba kaloku abagrogrisi abayi-ANC baza kubuyisa izitya,
kodwa sisahleli nabo apha phakathi nanamhlanje, khange sizibuyise zitya.

Siyazi ukuba utshintsho asinto ilula, yinto ebuhlungu, kodwa ukuba kulo
kuza kuxhamlisa wonke ummi woMzantsi Afrika, makube njalo ke; malwenzeke.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, this big noise about transformation within the Police Service
comes from those sitting on my left and the media - I’m not referring to
you, Mr Ndlovu. May the Minister, the Police Commissioner, Mr Selebi,
Commissioner Hlela and the Deputy Police Commissioner, Mr Singh and other
commissioners involved, not be discouraged. Those people who are against
this transformation are the ones who complain about some police stations
not having the capacity to combat certain crimes because of their lack of
management skills.

The Minister said though that when you start doing damage control, they
bring about this confusion. The police must not allow themselves to be
manipulated by the media and those people who have nothing to do, who
always approach the media with inadequate information, claiming that the
ANC-led government will abandon them.

They should remember that before the 1994 elections those “certain
individuals” manipulated the citizens of this country by saying they must
flee the country because the ANC-terrorists will take revenge. But even
today, they are still among us, and the ANC did not avenge themselves. We
know that transformation is not easy. It comes with pain and it is good if
it benefits all the citizens of South Africa, so let it take its course.]

Chairperson, the fight against crime cannot be the responsibility of the
police or government alone. Community involvement is also of vital
importance in the prevention of crime. Perpetrators, victims, and witnesses
of criminal activities are known to the members of the community. It is,
therefore, the responsibility of the community, in partnership with the
police, to prevent and expose criminal networks. Communities are encouraged
to take an active role in the fight against crime, in co-operation with law
enforcement agencies.

This is not an encouragement for communities to take the law into their own
hands or to embark on street justice or vigilante activities, but for them
to become involved and support their local police stations in anticrime
programmes.

Let me commend the police for the good work they do. It is unfortunate that
only negative things are being highlighted about them, and we seem to
forget that even our very own lives depend on these men and women to whom,
in my language, we refer as “Amadelakufa” [Those who do not fear death].

The ANC is opposed to any form of violence, which sacrifices the safety and
security of the people of South Africa.

Sihlalo, linyala into yokubulawa kwabantu ngendlela engenalusini,
bakhutshwe koololiwe ababalekayo. Akakho umntu onokuthi ephilile
engqondweni, athi uyalithanda ilizwe lakhe, kodwa aziphathe ngendlela
esibona abantu beziphethe ngayo.

Mphathiswa, ndicinga ukuba kuza kufuneka sikhe siyiphande le nto, kuya
kuthi kanti inonyawo lwemfene. Amazwe onke ajonge apha kuthi njengokuba
siququzelela indebe yomhlaba yowama-2010. Baza kuthi abantu bamanye amazwe
xa bebona into eyenzekayo, abantu bephoselwa ngaphandle koololiwe, bazibuze
ukuba ngaba ubomi babo kwakunye notyalo-mali lwabo luya kukhuseleka na
kweli lizwe lethu. Ndingathanda ukuthi emapoliseni ... (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, it is such a disgrace for people to be killed in such a
brutal manner – to be thrown out of a moving train. No person with a clear
conscience can claim to be patriotic but then conducts himself in such a
despicable manner.

Minister, I think we have to investigate this matter; maybe there is
something behind this. All the countries are looking at us as we prepare to
host the 2010 Soccer World Cup. When people from other countries see our
people being thrown from moving trains, they will be concerned about their
safety and their investments in this country. I would like to say to the
police ...]

... well done for the recent arrest of the murderers of the two Cape Town-
based artists, and for the arrest of the murderers of the Mbhele girls in
Mamelodi, the arrest of crime perpetrators in Gordon’s Bay in less than a
week, and that of the murderers of train commuters.
We also welcome major drug busts netting drugs valued at hundreds of
millions of rands, the arrest of the suspects involved in the Johannesburg
International Airport foreign currency heist, and the swift Interpol move
in pursuance of the Boeremag escapees. Those are some of the beautiful and
good achievements of the police, on which no one ever compliments them.
[Applause.]

Mphathiswa, njengokuba ukuba amapolisa esenza lo msebenzi mhle kangaka,
masizame siqinisekise ukuba iindawo asebenza kuzo zinomtsalane ukuze
bakhuthazeke. [Minister, since the police are doing such a good job, let us
try to make sure the police stations are attractive, in order for us to
build their morale.]

Chairperson, let me then take this opportunity and thank those Members of
Parliament who now and then visit their police stations and come and report
to the portfolio committee. [Applause.] Most of the members who visit these
police stations are highly impressed by the improvements and the programmes
in some of them. [Interjections.] If you want to know, you must visit your
own police station.

I will mention some of the police stations that had problems when we
visited them in the past two years, but of which Members of Parliament have
recently reported that the situation has changed 100%. Amongst these is the
Mitchells Plain police station. No one can say to me that Mitchells Plain
has not changed, because it has. Another is Cape Town Central, just across
the street, but none of you visited that police station because you are not
interested. However, those people are the ones who protect your lives.

There have also been changes in the Bloemspruit and Theunissen police
stations in the Free State, and the Mamelodi police station in Gauteng,
etc. We encourage Members of Parliament to visit police stations so that if
there are problems, they can report these to the portfolio committee so
that the committee can try and assist those police stations.

Thank you and well done, Comrade Jackie, Comrade Hlela and your team for
the good work. Thanks to all those senior and junior members of SAPS who
always respond positively to the calls of the portfolio committee. Let me
not forget some of our entities, Sita, ICD and the national secretariat,
and of course the portfolio committee. Thank you very much for your
support, Bab’ uNdlovu. We support the budget. [Applause.]

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Chairperson, most people in South Africa do not have a
platform to state their case to the Minister of Safety and Security. I will
speak on their behalf. I would like to start my speech with some comments
from hundreds of letters, emails and faxes that the DA receives on crime in
South Africa. We, in the DA, believe that the general public should guide
our decision on whether or not to support budgets.
I submitted a parliamentary question to the Minister of Safety and Security
last year regarding a murder. The wife of the victim had the following to
say about the unsatisfactory reply:

  Die SA Polisiediens se antwoord op my navraag is seker die mees
  onbevredigende terugvoering denkbaar wat die Minister van Veiligheid en
  Sekuriteit kon uitdink om aan die naasbestaande van ’n moordslagoffer te
  gee. Die niksseggende antwoord is nie die papier werd waarop dit gedruk is
  nie. Die Minister se terugvoering is absoluut betreurenswaardig, om die
  minste te sê, en die antwoord word verwerp met die minagting wat dit
  verdien. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

  [The SA Police Service’s answer to my enquiry is surely the most
  unsatisfactory feedback imaginable that the Minister of Safety and
  Security could have thought of giving to a close relative of a murder
  victim. This meaningless answer is not worth the paper it is written on.
  The Minister’ s feedback is absolutely deplorable, to say the least, and
  the answer is rejected with the contempt it deserves.]

The brutality of criminals is expressed in another letter, in which a
victim of hijacking states that after being hijacked:


  The man, who attacked Mrs T, stole her handbag and bit off her finger on
  her left hand to steal her diamond ring.
After being robbed at gunpoint, a young student wrote the following:


  Ever since the incident I have been thinking of getting on a plane never
  to return. The government is always wondering why all the educated youth
  are leaving the country. The answer is that because in another country,
  unlike this one, they will be able to have a future without having to
  look over their shoulders and worrying when a criminal is going to strike
  or harm them or their loved ones.

Another person wrote to me about a girl of 15 who was raped by an
individual on 4 April 2005, in Soshanguve. The alleged perpetrator was
caught by the community and taken to the police. He was released three days
later. The writer states that –

  On 23 June she was gang raped and again the police at Soshanguve didn’t
  want to do anything. Her mother had to stop police from another station to
  get them to react and try and get Soshanguve to do something, which until
  now did nothing. I do not know the full medical condition, but believe it
  is very bad.


A concerned parent explained how children and a teacher at a school were
held at gunpoint and robbed. The parent states that:


  The most concerning factor to arise from the terrible incident was when
  the children dialled 10111 for help, they were told to come to the police
  station.

I have files full of such comments from the public. Each one of these
comments is a motion of no confidence in this government’s ability to deal
effectively with crime in South Africa. On this Minister’s beat, 51 people
are murdered and 151 rapes are reported every day in this country. Families
are torn apart and lives are destroyed by criminals.

In the last year, in this country, babies and elderly women have been raped
and killed in a most brutal fashion. People are thrown off trains, and an
elderly man was recently even tortured with boiling water. How many such
cases have taken place this year? We don’t know, because the Minister won’t
give this country regular updated crime statistics. Who, except the ANC,
can support a budget when the department has not met its own targets and
without knowing what the reported crime situation in South Africa really
looks like?

South Africans have a right to know the type and frequency of crimes
committed in their neighbourhoods. Government’s response to crime is
silence on crime and statistics, closed briefings on police restructuring
that includes the closing down of child protection and other specialised
units, and the deployment of the responsible Minister for peacemaking in
the Great Lakes region leaving no one in charge of dealing with crime in
South Africa.

Very important to our fight against crime is that someone is seen to be in
charge of this effort. The Minister needs to prioritise his activities.
Victims of crime need to know that their government cares and our police
need visible government and active support. It does not help either when a
national police commissioner blames his members for every bungle or wastes
energy on criticising the Independent Complaints Directorate and even MPs
when they carry out their oversight functions.

He needs to be disciplined and kept focused on his job. The government’s
primary duty is to protect its citizens from harm. This is the social
contract that exists between the government and its citizens. It is however
the government that is not carrying out its side of the contract. Citizens
have a natural right to protect themselves when the government fails. The
problem is that they are paying billions of rands to do so and government
continues to tax them for something that it is failing to do. This is no
less than fraud.

Individuals and businesses should at least receive a tax rebate for the
money spent on private security. People who cannot afford private security
often take the law into their own hands by participating in vigilante
groups to protect their communities from criminals; this, out of pure
frustration. The lack of confidence in government is further illustrated by
an Isa Survey that indicated that up to 50% of certain categories of crimes
are not even reported.

The state is slowly losing its grip on society with potentially devastating
consequences for our democracy, never mind the 2010 Soccer World Cup. Last
week my colleague the hon James Selfe told us about the overflowing jails.
I am more concerned about the thousands of criminals who are not detected
or convicted who continue to prey on society. The certainty of detection
and punishment is one of the best deterrents to would-be criminals.

The shortages of personnel and equipment and huge caseloads in the
detective services affect their ability to investigate crimes, apprehend
criminals and obtain convictions in our courts. Our economic hub, Gauteng,
has a 28% vacancy rate in its detective services and 46% in visible
policing. This is why the government has failed to meet its own targets of
bringing down contact crimes by between 7% and 10% per annum.

The conditions of employment for police officials is also cause for
concern. We require a well-motivated, well-paid and professional police
service. Every crime scene or accident scene that our police officers deal
with leaves a scar on his or her memory. There is currently inadequate
psychological support for our police officers. Aspects such as back pay,
transfers that exclude family circumstances and racial discrimination in
areas such as promotions and even disciplinary hearings is causing many
dedicated police officers further stress and many leave the service.

A sergeant in the police writes the following in this regard:


  I am a sergeant and I have been up for promotion to inspector since 2001.
  I have been told that the reason why many others and I cannot be promoted
  is because there is not enough representation in the service.


Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms A VAN WYK: Dankie, Voorsitter. [Thank you, Chairperson.] Chairperson,
hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, Members of the House, last year the
Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security tabled before this House a
special report on the Independent Complaints Directorate, ICD. The report
followed concerns raised by members of the portfolio committee over a
number of years. The report, which was adopted by this House, highlighted
serious shortcomings and challenges that face the ICD. Some very specific
recommendations to improve the operations of the ICD were also made.

Die rede hoekom die komitee die verslag ter tafel gelê het, is dat ons –
spesifiek dié van ons in die ANC – glo dat die Onafhanklike
Klagtedirektoraat, OKD, ŉ deurlopende belangrike rol in die uitvoering van
die transformasie-agenda van die ANC speel. Die verslag het tot die slotsom
gekom dat die OKD se kernfunksies nie ten volle suksesvol uitgevoer word
nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The reason why the committee tabled the report was that we – particularly
those of us in the ANC – believed that the Independent Complaints
Directorate, ICD, plays an ongoing and important role in the execution of
the transformation agenda of the ANC. The report concluded that the ICD’s
core functions have not been successfully executed.]

The report strongly indicated that the capacity of the ICD at provincial
level needed to be improved. We are grateful that the Minister in his
restructuring of the ICD took this point on board and now he intends to
establish satellite offices in most of the policing areas. The
establishment of satellite offices will only be fully realised in the 2007-
08 financial year.

Furthermore, investigative capacity will be made accessible to the
provinces and the national office will be transformed into an
administrative support in the execution of the duties of the ICD. This, we
believe, will go a long way in addressing the case backlogs in the
investigation and improve the accessibility of the ICD to a greater part of
the population.
National Treasury expressed concern over the ICD’s inability to fill
vacancies in its establishment. This has also been a concern raised by the
committee in its report. The ICD itself continuously identifies
insufficient capacity as its biggest challenge. A shortage of investigators
is stated as the main reason for the huge backlog in the finalisation of
cases.

Over the past few years the ICD budget increased on average by 13,78% per
annum. This is far above the inflation rate, yet compensation over the past
years consistently reflects underexpenditure and in some instances was even
used for capital expenditure. With the assistance of the Treasury and the
Department of Public Service and Administration, a career pathing strategy
for investigators will be put in place to address this problem. The
committee will follow developments with keen interest and expects to report
an improvement in this regard next year.

Die OKD het nie sy meetbare doelwitte en finalisering van sake bereik nie.
Verlede jaar het die komitee aangedui dat die doelwitte na ons mening
onrealisties is en aangepas behoort te word. Dit is nou gedoen en die OKD
het die komitee verseker dat met ekstra mannekrag die agterstand in die
finalisering van sake binne die volgende twee jaar ingehaal gaan word.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The ICD has not achieved its measurable objectives and finalisation of
cases. Last year the committee indicated that the objectives were
unrealistic in our opinion and that they should be amended. This has been
done now, and the ICD has assured the committee that with extra manpower
the backlog regarding the finalisation of cases could be eliminated within
the next two years.]

The ICD awards a huge number of bursaries per year with very few of its
employees successfully completing their studies. While we encourage further
studies, we believe that these studies should not take the place of
training within the ICD and we would request that more thorough screening
of bursary candidates be done and that the internal training of the ICD be
improved. A lot can be achieved through skills development of the existing
staff.

The ICD did indicate to members that they were experiencing problems in
terms of co-operation from the side of the SAPS in terms of the
implementation of the Domestic Violence Act. The ICD indicated that it had
taken the matter up with the area and provincial officers of the SAPS, but
that co-operation was still lacking. It is not clear to the committee why
they did not take up the issue with the national office of the SAPS, as we
know that violence against women and children is a priority for the SAPS,
and we are sure that they will receive the necessary support from the
National Commissioner and his management team. The ICD is encouraged to
take that route and the committee also undertakes to assist where possible.
For the first time in many years the ICD tabled some of its mandatory
reports in Parliament. This in itself is already a great improvement. Two
further reports that were undertaken by the ICD were also tabled; one
dealing with factors relating to backlogs in cases and the other with the
complainants’ level of satisfaction.

The report on the complainants’ level of satisfaction further vindicated
the committee’s report to Parliament last year. Seventy per cent of
complainants indicated that they were not satisfied with the services of
the ICD. What is most interesting about the research is neither the
satisfaction nor the dissatisfaction of complainants, but rather the
profile of complainants.

Seventy-two per cent of the complainants interviewed were men, and only 28%
female. Eighty-four per cent of the complainants come from urban areas.
Minister, this is a clear indication that accessibility to the ICD still
remains a problem and that the decision you took to open satellite offices
in the policing areas is the correct one.

The ICD needs to be congratulated though for the courage that they showed
by conducting this research and for putting in place the necessary
corrective measures. It is after all women who suffer and who need the
assistance of the ICD.

Chairperson, allow me to touch on the Secretariat for a moment. We welcome
the restructuring of the Secretariat by the Minister and especially the
fact that they are now within his office. This is where we believe they
belong and where they can play an important advisory role. We would also
like to urge the Secretariat and the ICD to meet and to sort out how best
they can assist one another in the fulfilment of their duties. We believe
that the ICD can provide some valuable information to the Secretariat,
which can inform their policy suggestions that they made to the Minister.

There can be no doubt that the Police Service of today is more credible and
acceptable to the majority of the community than they were in 1994. But
exactly because of that, it can be said that issues of service delivery and
police performance are now more prominent than they were 12 years ago.
Therefore, in order for the SAPS to maintain and further improve its
legitimacy, the ICD needs to fulfil its role as set out.

Police accountability, notwithstanding the achievements and the reforms
already achieved, should remain a priority. The success of the SAPS
strategy is very strongly based on community involvement through community
police forums and in-sector policing. In order for any police service
anywhere in the world to receive that necessary co-operation, that police
service needs to be perceived as credible and legitimate.

Accountability to the state, including Parliament, the constitutionally
created bodies such as the ICD, the Public Protector and other Chapter 9
institutions, as well as the internal mechanisms of the SAPS dealing with
discipline, evaluation and performance, and the broader civil society such
as the media and communities at large, all play an important role in the
oversight of the SAPS. The success and the way in which it is done is an
important indicator of the political and social order of a state.

In fact, there is an increasing trend within international communities to
establish independent police oversight bodies - this is in policing
agencies far more established than our own. Two examples that I would like
to raise here is that of the Police Integrity Commission, PIC, of
Australia, New South Wales, and the independent Police Complaint
Commission, PCC, in England and Wales.

The PIC of Australia was established in 1996 to detect, investigate and
prevent serious police misconduct. While the police service retains first
responsibility for investigating most complaints, the PIC oversee these
investigations, can institute their own investigations or joint
investigations or even refer cases back to the police for further
investigation.

In England and Wales the PCC became operational in April 2004. The
commission is responsible for assisting the public to make a complaint,
keep the complainant informed about progress, make sure that the police
handle it with a high standard of competence and themselves investigate the
most serious cases, using their own investigators.

Over and above this the PCC can supervise or direct investigations by the
police and approve the police’s choice of investigator. The police must
comply with its findings on appeal matters, including taking disciplinary
measures if instructed. Furthermore, the commission can issue statutory
guidance and set standards for the police on how to handle complaints.

There should thus not be any doubt in the mind of any person or body over
the need for and existence of the ICD. Rather, we would suggest that it be
considered yet another tool towards the overall effective management of the
SAPS. For is it not true that every corrupt police officer exposed and
removed from the system, no matter by whom, improves the service delivery
and the credibility of the total police service?

The ICD has had a rough time since this very committee subjected it to a
lot of pressure. We hope that they now understand that the reason for that
is not one of undermining their work, but rather because we would like to
see them fulfil their task in a
much-improved manner. We will become their biggest ally, along with the
National Treasury, but we need them to demonstrate to us in no uncertain
terms a commitment to the important role they have to play within our
country.
Chairperson, I still have a few minutes left and I would like to use them
just to respond to the hon Jankielsohn.

Ek vind dit ongelooflik arrogant dat ŉ mens kan opstaan, agt minute op ŉ
podium deurbring en nie een positiewe bydrae in daardie agt minute lewer
nie. Hulle sê goeie leierskap is om namens jouself te praat en nie namens
ander nie. Dit is maklik om op ŉ emosionele en sensasionele wyse debat te
voer as jy niks het om by te dra nie.

Ek wil graag weet, en ek daag enigiemand uit om vir my een sin te wys in
dié lid se bydrae wat positiewe kommentaar is, wat sê, Minister, ek stel
voor pleks van om dit te doen, doen die volgende”. Daar was nie een sin
daarin wat dit gedoen het nie. Inteendeel, dit het by tye vir my geklink of
ek na ŉ klankbaan van die Daily Voice of Son luister. Dit is ŉ sensasionele
geplunder van wat in werklikheid ŉ realiteit vir mense op die grondvlak is.
Ons stel belang om daardie probleem aan te pak. Indien jy ernstig is
daaroor, sal jy óók kom met voorstelle oor hoe dit gedoen kan word.
[Applous.]

Ek wil dit onomwonde stel dat die agb lid die Huis mislei het, aangesien ek
nie die woord “leuen” mag gebruik nie. Die Kinderbeskermingseenheid word
nie toegemaak nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] Die Kinderbeskermingseenheid se lede
word na die plaaslike polisiekantore afgewentel, sodat hulle dáár kan wees
waar die misdade plaasvind, sodat hulle vinniger en doeltreffender kan
optree téén die misdadigers wat ons kinders te na kom.

Minister, die lid praat van die land wat nie vertroue het in u leierskap en
in die ANC as regering nie. Sy geheue is kort; 2004 se verkiesingsuitslae
strek net twee jaar terug en die plaaslike regeringverkiesingsuitslae is
selfs nog meer onlangs en na my mening is dít die geleentheid wanneer die
publiek die kans het om te sê: “Ek vertrou julle nie meer om my lewe veilig
te hou nie.”

Ek wil graag afsluit deur te sê dat die ANC onomwonde die veiligheid van
ons mense eerste stel en alles sal doen om seker te maak dat dit gebeur.
Dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[I find it unbelievably arrogant that someone can stand up, spend eight
minutes on the podium and not make one positive contribution in those eight
minutes. They say good leadership is speaking on one’s own behalf and not
on behalf of others. It is easy to debate in an emotional and sensational
manner when one has nothing to contribute.

I would like to know, and I challenge anyone to show me one sentence in
this member’s contribution where there is positive commentary or that says,
“Minister, I propose that instead of that, the following should be done”.
There was not one sentence in there to that effect. On the contrary, on
occasion it sounded to me as if I were listening to a soundtrack of the
Daily Voice or the Son. This is sensational plundering of what is in
reality happening to the people at grassroots level. We are interested in
tackling that problem. If you were serious about it, you would also come up
with proposals about how it can be done. [Applause.]

I want to state unequivocally that the hon member has misled the House,
since I may not use the word “lie”. The Child Protection Unit will not be
closed. [Interjections.] The Child Protection Unit’s members will be
devolved to the local police stations, so that they can be there where the
crimes happen, so that they can act more quickly and more efficiently
against the criminals who transgress against our children.

Minister, the member said the country has no confidence in your leadership
and in the ANC as government. He has a short memory; we had the election
results of 2004 just two years ago and the local government results are
even more recent, and in my opinion this is when the public has the
opportunity to say: “I do not trust you any longer to safeguard my life.”

I would like to conclude by saying unequivocally that the ANC puts the
lives of our people first and will do everything to ensure that it happens.
Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr V B NDLOVU: Sihlalo neNdlu ehloniphekile, mhlonishwa nePhini lakho
nabahlonishwa bonke abakhona ... [Chairperson and the honourable House, hon
Minister and your Deputy and all hon members present ...]

... this year we have observed that the budget allocated for Safety and
Security is higher than usual. Big allocations are always absorbed by the
administration and includes salaries for the personnel. It is therefore
encouraging that members of the police will now get better salaries than
before. This of course is an incentive for them to provide the public with
much-needed improvement in service delivery.

Still on the issue of service delivery, I would like to congratulate the
police on two cases, which as far as I am concerned, were well managed: The
quick arrest of the murderers of Judge Ngoepe’s
Granddaughter and the crowd control outside the Jacob Zuma trial. This is
what the public needs to see more often, and it is highly appreciated.

However, I am worried about the high-profile cases. These appear to get to
court sooner than expected, yet other cases never see the court door. A
case is a case, mhlonishwa [the hon member], no matter who is involved. The
arrest of the child killers here in the Western Cape was noted but the
police still have to do much more because the abduction and murdering of
children is proving to be a big problem, and this is totally unacceptable.

Again the department has adopted federal thinking by devolving powers of
the police to the station commissioners. I must congratulate them for
listening to the IFP policy, mhlonishwa, [the hon member] of devolution of
powers to the local level. Debating this matter was long overdue, and the
whole safety and security portfolio has agreed with me. Ngiyabonga,
Sihlalo. [Thank you, Chairperson.]

Members of the police must not be afraid because we are not implementing
resolution surveys but devolving the powers to the station commissioners.
All specialised personnel will be accommodated at local levels where they
are needed most.

The increasing employment of the police and detective service is welcomed
because the department has reduced the burden of detectives carrying 150
dockets each. This stress results in many of our policemen and women
committing suicide. The department must employ more psychologists to
service a large number of police who need it.

It must also be seen that police stations around the country improve their
environment where victims, particularly those of rape and child abuse, feel
comfortable, secure and more accommodated when they report their ordeals.
The department must deal with corrupt officials in order to clean the
department’s standing. Corrupt police are not wanted in the service. The
quicker the disciplinary measures are implemented, the better.

In conclusion, mhlonishwa, nawe sihlalo [the hon member and Chairperson],
the comment by the national Commissioner on the incorporation of the
Scorpions into the police and maintaining of the same department was
unfortunate. That was the Kampepe commission.

The national Commissioner’s comment about the Independent Complaints
Directorate in the NCOP was also unfortunate. This comment ties up with the
article in the Mail & Guardian about the national Commissioner having links
to the late Brett Kebble, and is very disconcerting.

I am not sure whether the article is true or not. However, I stand to be
corrected by the national Commissioner himself, not his deputation, led by
Mr Hlela. This case is a serious one, and we are still waiting for the
arrest of the killers of Mr Kebble.

The revamped ICD should open satellite police offices in rural areas. This
is a much-needed service in these areas. The employment of more detectives
as heads of offices to investigate cases should be completed soon.
At metro level, the investigation of Metro police action must be increased
to ensure that Metro police are not involved in crime. I urge the ICD to be
independent, not to rely on the police while investigating them. The
department must look at amending the Act in order for the ICD to take
decisions and implement it themselves, and not to rely on the police to
implement the ICD decisions.

I applaud the decision of the National Commissioner for the KwaZulu-Natal
inquiry into the police. I hope our province will now know where their
powers end.

Akufanele bagagamele ezintweni ezingaqondene nabo. Hlehla bheseni,
akukaphakwa. [Uhleko.] [They must not exaggerate things that do not concern
them. Just wait a bit.] [Interjections.]]

Let us reduce crime, Mr Minister. Let us make sure that South Africa is
safe. Let us be prepared for 2010, physically and psychologically. I thank
you.

Ngiyabonga, Sihlalo. Cha, angibonge. Ngisheshe ngaqeda isikhathi
singakapheli, Sihlalo. [Ihlombe.] [Thank you, Chairperson. Thank you. I
have finished before time, Chairperson.] [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, Minister,
chairperson of the portfolio committee, members of the portfolio committee,
Members of Parliament, commissioners present here with us, senior managers
and all visitors, today there are young people who have come to this House.
They are our special invitees and have been invited by the Minister of
Safety and Security, in keeping with our programme in celebrating the 30th
anniversary of the Soweto uprisings.

All these young people come from the nine provinces. We have Siphosethu
Ndalase from Eastern Cape, Sonia Molautse from Gauteng – can they stand up
as I call their names. Then there is Mamelo Octavia Makgatha from Free
State, Albertina Cheou from Limpopo, Esther Matsege from North West, Unathi
Dyani from Western Cape, Mary Nokukhanya Hlangu from KwaZulu-Natal, Siphiwe
Skhosana from Mpumalanga and Grace Kokore from Northern Cape. [Applause.]
These are our young people who are indeed our aspirants and our future
leaders. Thank you very much. You can sit down.

Four of the girls, Siphiwe, Nokukhanya, Grace and Unathi participated in
the drafting my speech and were also part of the editorial team that
“cleaned” my speech, which I am reading to you today. It is indeed a
reflection of the potential that our young people do have.

I also want to acknowledge our most important young people and I want to
thank the police officers that were involved in this project. We have 66
children who are accompanied by their families. These children have been
integrated with their families. May I ask the families and the young people
who are present here with us to stand up. [Applause.] Thank you very much.

I am going to relate the stories of all these young people, which I think
are important to all of us, and indicate that it is possible for all of us
in this House and the community at large to play a critical role in making
sure that our children are part of us and live with us. These young people
were referred to as “kids living in the streets”. I always refuse to refer
to them as “street children” because I believe that there is no street
which bears a child. Children are born out of a man and woman. Therefore no
street has a child.

I would once more want to say that I dedicate this budget speech to the
youth of ’76 and also to these children who are with us today. To all our
youth in South Africa, we are celebrating the 30th anniversary of the
Soweto uprising. It was 1976 when we ... I am saying “we” because I am part
of that youth and I am proud to be part of that youth and be counted with
the class of ’76. That is the youth which bravely resisted the oppressive
yoke of apartheid in general and the inferior education in particular. We
pride ourselves for the sterling contribution to our democracy and freedom.

Regarding the hon Jankielsohn, who stood in front of us today and said he
represents the people of South Africa, I want to know which ones. As I
stand here, as a youth of ’76, the vision and the hope of South African
people lies with me. It’s in me, it flows in my bloodstream.
[Interjections.] I say I don’t know what it means.

An HON MEMBER: You have never been hijacked.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: I don’t think, for me, it’s
about being hijacked. You were hijacked because you lived in this country
behind high walls. You were never part of us during the apartheid era, when
our people were killed every weekend and your police and your system did
not respond to the black people of this country. [Interjections.]

I must indicate I am proud to be a South African. I can stand against crime
in this country and fight against it because I know how it is. My parents
used to be victims of mugging. Your police were never there. We are proud
to have transformed ... [Interjections.] You can’t tell me anything. You
lived and enjoyed your education.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Deputy Minister, please
take your seat. [Interjections.] Order, order, hon members! Please proceed
hon Deputy Minister.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you, Chair. That’s the
pain of reality. Secondly, I would also like to honour the women who braved
the cold and all the weather conditions in 1956 and marched to the Union
Buildings. I am proud today to celebrate with those women the 50th
anniversary of the time they stood up and said, “enough is enough” and
ensured that we are able to enjoy the democracy which we see today.

We are able to enjoy democracy together with everyone because those women
were never selfish. They made sure they fought for everyone, even for those
who were oppressing us. They made sure that slavery in this country came to
an end. They boldly said: No more oppression; no more slavery in our
country. We need to honour those women and we need to honour the women who
fought for us as the current generation.

Our policies and strategies continue to focus on crime as part of
government’s agenda to provide a better life for all. Social crime
prevention becomes the focal point for the creation of a crime-free
environment in law-enforcement and policing. The context in which the youth
programme is currently being run needs to be reviewed in order to include
partnerships with police stations and sector policing. The role of the
station commissioners in co-ordinating cross-cutting matters regarding
schools within their precinct need to be strengthened. We need also to
welcome your bold step, Minister, in restructuring and taking the police
service to the people.

We need to appreciate the Business Against Crime for their continuous
support through the implementation of Tiisa Thuto in order to address
safety matters in the schools. This enhances our partnership with the
Department of Education on an ongoing basis. An illustration of this is
that, recently, a successful drug reduction programme in schools was
launched in Gauteng and the Western Cape with the assistance of Tiisa
Thuto.

Recently a three-year-old boy disappeared in Wallacedene whilst in the
company of his uncle. The little boy was not found for days and his mother
appealed to the communities to help her find her son. The boy was found
days later in a children’s home in another area. He had been found
wandering in the streets.

A similar incident occurred in the Free State where a two-year-old girl
from a farm outside Bloemfontein disappeared without a trace. The little
girl disappeared after she had been left with her siblings in the care of
neighbours. Her parents had gone to look for wood. The little girl has not
been found. It’s a challenge that is not only facing the police; it’s a
challenge for all of us as different members of the communities. We cannot
continue to condemn when we don’t have any action and contribution to make
towards changing these ills.

These two incidents are just the tip of the iceberg of the challenges of
missing children handled by police daily throughout the provinces. In the
Western Cape, we have formed a child rapid response unit, which has a high
recovery and success rate. It shows partnerships with communities do work
and can be possible. The fact that the child in Wallacedene was found
unharmed is the proof of the turnaround strategy we have piloted and
implemented, with regard to dealing with missing children.

The Western Cape has a child rapid response programme which works hand-in-
glove with Bambanani volunteers in the efforts to deal with issues of
missing children. This has resulted in huge success regarding missing
children who were found. The children’s programme was launched in July
2004, following the concerns that the situation of children living and
working in the streets renders them vulnerable to involvement in crime,
either as victims or offenders.

Workshops on homeless children and provincial capacity were held by SAPS.
These workshops were aimed at providing the members and other stakeholders
with skills to deal with children living on the streets. The social crime
prevention component is in the process of developing a policy and
guidelines for SAPS with regard to children living in the streets.

Despite the effort that I have indicated, I must mention that we continue
to review our means of addressing matters concerning children living on the
streets in order to forge partnerships with other relevant structures.
Shelters for children living on the streets continue to be a challenge to
government and communities.

The Safety and Security Ministry has participated in the Inter-Sectoral
Child Justice Committee with the view of addressing the challenges faced by
the police in ensuring their constitutional and legal obligation to limit
children kept within police custody.

We tabled a report on the situation of children being kept in custody in
Mpumalanga, Limpopo and the North West. I am happy to announce that in the
report there is a reflection that the integrated justice system is starting
to yield results.

As we are gathered here today, we are in the process of reviewing and
continuing to see whether the training on domestic violence is indeed
effective and efficient. A domestic violence training package has been
compiled and we hope that this will form part of the commitment in
improving service delivery and also making sure that we nurture and improve
our own understanding in the police service.

We need to render a quality service to victims of domestic violence and
continue to improve in a concerted, integrated multidisciplinary and
preventative way. The SAPS continues to participate in the
interdepartmental management team for the antirape strategic framework.
This framework focuses on prevention, the criminal justice process and
support to victims.
Although the prevention and the process will be conducted and focused
mainly with an intention of prevention, the component will also co-ordinate
the implementation of the responsibilities of the SAPS in terms of the
approved strategic framework.

One of the key achievements in Gauteng was the launch of the women’s centre
at Orange Farm during May 2005. The centre provides for preventative
advisory services and victim services to be provided for in an integrated
fashion.

Last year during the women’s month, the antirape strategy was implemented
in different provinces. The continuous intervention of social crime
prevention at station level enables a better understanding and
implementation of the antirape strategy.

Part of the preventative action includes a review session on the antirape
strategy, public awareness campaigns on rape and sexual offences and
workshops with regard to abuse aimed at improving service delivery. We will
continue to work with other departments and communities in order to improve
services to victims of rape and engage in preventative actions.

I also want to indicate that we have increased our victim facility centres
at various stations and we are happy to say that that has yielded results.
But one of the key issues is that we want to establish uniform standards
that would ensure all the victim-friendly facilities at various stations
are safe and acceptable to the victims themselves.

I want to touch on one of the critical issues, the issue of drug and
substance abuse. The challenge for all of us is the people who take alcohol
and then drug abuse comes up often and remains a thorny and contributing
factor to contact crimes and violent crimes in our country. This problem
manifests itself in many ways.

We also want to revisit the legalisation of taverns and shebeens, which
continue to pose a threat to our communities and schools, and contribute to
contact crimes and domestic violence. Hence, we believe a partnership with
the Department of Health, given that they have passed a law which regulates
smoking, will assist us.

The big challenge for some of our children is that they begin to experiment
with smoking especially when they witness their own parents and elderly
smoke, and then they think it is cool! The experimenting leads later to
much stronger drugs and, indeed, without realising, they end up being
addicted to the drugs.

We want to make sure that all this is addressed in a way that improves and
touches the soul of our communities. We need to declare war against drug
peddlers and drug lords, who continuously destroy the soul of our
communities and destroy our children as future parents and leaders.
It is therefore imperative that local authorities must also exercise their
duties in enforcement of their by-laws in their entertainment places and
leisure industry. We can no longer afford to sit back and see the moral
fibre of our society and communities going down. We need to act against
crime. I must indicate that as the police we have adopted the Act Against
Crime Together campaign, because we believe that any form of crime and any
form of abuse needs the partnerships from all of us.

We are more mindful of the need for an intensive and extensive
communication and awareness programme with regard to social crime
prevention, focusing on our members and the community. The Act Against
Crime Together campaign will be extended to other provinces.

We need to increase public awareness about the safeguarding of our
children, but also the responsibility of parents especially during the
Child Protection Week, Youth Month and, indeed, throughout the year by
focusing attention on crimes in selected areas where some have been
identified as hot spots.

Another major goal for us is to strengthen partnerships between the public
and law enforcement agencies in ensuring a safe and secure environment. We
would be more satisfied if no other messages imprinted themselves on the
memories and hearts of communities than the following:

  We can no longer afford to have our children living in the streets. We
  can no longer tolerate not responding when crimes are committed against
  our children and women.

Therefore, there is a need to hasten and make sure that through our
efforts, in an integrated way, we are able to implement the restorative
justice system so as to make sure that our children don’t turn into
criminals later.

We are proud to indicate that last year we ran a campaign, which addressed
the abuse of women in our country. That operation was termed Operation
Basadi during the 16 Days of Activism, which coincided with the United
Nations’ No Violence Against Women campaign. I am proud to announce that
the operation was successful, but also to indicate that this is the
operation, that led to the arrest of a person in the Western Cape, who
happened to have raped someone 20 years ago and was, indeed, arrested when
he thought everything was gone.

To the members, rest assured, we need to indicate, you can run but you
cannot hide from the law. The long arm of the law will catch up with you.
We want also to declare and confirm that as women, through Operation
Basadi, which is going to be rolled out nationally, we will make sure that
all perpetrators of violence against women are being sent to jail and
incarcerated because we don’t want those individuals within our
communities.
Our operation as the JPCS cluster is a way of making sure that the
partnerships protect women. This programme will not be left lying in the
files also collecting dust. We will ensure that they are able to be
unpacked and implemented in the way that meets our needs as a country.

As for the 66 children, may I indicate to everyone in this House, that
these are children who were referred to as street or homeless children. We
are proud to say, as the Department of Safety and Security, that these
children have been reintegrated with their families; but not only that, we
have succeeded as the police to make sure that they go back to school.
[Applause.]

The success of this project in the Western Cape shows that it is possible.
The police are committed to removing all the children from the streets, but
what is very important is that we want to ask everybody today to partner
with the police in identifying those children and being able to reunite
them with their families.
Today, while it is cold in Cape Town, those children are warm. They are
guaranteed their supper and to laugh again and enjoy the cuddling of their
mothers, fathers, sisters and brothers. [Applause.]

I need to indicate that because of the stress faced by our members because
of the complexities that we face in this country, we intend to revisit the
Employee Assistance service programme. We know that our Employee Assistance
Programme indeed enjoys a high-priority focus because it is a proactive and
reactive measure for our members.

Our programme intends to enhance members’ wellbeing while the reactive
programme serves members who need emotional support. The programme also
provides telephonic counselling services. We are going to review all the
services rendered to our members. I want to indicate that ubaba Ndlovu is
correct. We are addressing this matter. One of the critical issues is to
see to what extent we can make sure that the members at the station level,
who are at the forefront of fighting crime. indeed are attended to before
they become stressed and depressed, and at the end of the day we end up
with those who are no longer in our country because of the stresses which
we are facing.

We will be able to come back next year with a programme, which is positive
and acknowledges these things. But it will also improve the service in such
a way that the families of those individuals will continue, like all of us,
to have parents; wives can have husbands; children can have fathers, as all
of us, brothers, sisters and uncles, without losing them during the process
of the jobs. [Applause.]

Mnu G T MADIKIZA: Sihlalo, baPhathiswa abahloniphekileyo, malungu ale Ndlu
ahloniphekileyo kunye neendwendwe zonke, mandinduluke ngokuqala ndithi i-
UDM iyalwamkela uhlahlo lwabiwo-mali lweli sebe. Ndingaba ndisilele ukuba
andingedluli ndibulele, ndincome umsebenzi omkhulu nomhle kangaka owenziwa
ngamapolisa kweli loMzantsi Afrika. UMphathiswa uthe gqaba-gqaba ngezigaba
zotshintsho; nazo mandizincome ngoba ziyathembisa. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraph follows.)

[Mr G T MADIKIZA: Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members of this House and
our guests at large, firstly, I would like to say that the UDM supports
this department’s Budget Vote. I would be failing in my personal capacity
if I cannot commend the wonderful job being done by the police in South
Africa. The Minister has highlighted some changes which I also appreciate
because they are promising.]

A total of R 32,5 billion is a very large budget indeed. It reflects the
vast safety and security challenges that we as a country are facing. That
amount seems so large in comparison to the budgets for most of the other
departments. One thus, therefore, expects an overwhelming indication of
service delivery in terms of safety and security. But the problem is that
somewhere between the large national budget and the reality at station
level something goes wrong. Can we blame an inadequate budget or should we
perhaps blame individual officers of the South African Police Service? I
believe that neither of these propositions is correct; the problem must lie
somewhere else.

If we take the R32,5 billion and we cannot ensure that every police station
is functioning with the proper levels of basic equipment such as vehicles
and bulletproof vests, then there is a very big management problem. How can
we expect delivery from ill-equipped and overworked police officers? The
evidence of how this affects individuals and station morale is reflected in
the intolerably high rate of suicides, family murders and other violent
incidents involving members of the SAPS. [Interjections.] [Time expired.]
Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr M S MOATSHE: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, members of
the South African Police Service, comrades and friends, the governing
principles in the Constitution, Chapter 11, section 198(a) states that -

  National security must reflect the resolve of South Africans, as
  individuals and as a nation, to live as equals, to live in peace and
  harmony, to be free from fear and want and to seek a better life.

Section 205(3) of the Constitution further outlines that –


  The objects of the police service are to prevent, combat and investigate
  crime, to maintain public order, to protect and secure the inhabitants of
  the Republic and their property, and to uphold and enforce the law.
Surely, all South Africans must celebrate the Constitution on its 10th
anniversary with pride.

To ensure the realisation of these principles, the police must be
capacitated and resourced to meet the challenges of transformation
throughout the country. In line with these challenges, the portfolio
committee as the driving component in this process developed and launched
the station-monitoring tool to improve oversight of police stations. This
station-monitoring tool takes the form of a questionnaire that covers a
range of issues and includes questions relating to the infrastructure and
material resources of the station, staffing, the work of the detectives,
the relationship with the community and training on various aspects within
the station.

We view this monitoring tool as a mirror for the portfolio committee,
Parliament, the police and the safety and security services in general to
look at and reflect on service delivery to better the lives of all South
Africans. We urge Members of Parliament, including those in provinces, to
use this tool in their constituencies whenever visiting police stations.

Sediriswa se sa tlhokomediso diteišheneng tsa mapodisa, se akaretsa go bona
diphetogo di obamelwa, di tlhaloganngwa e bile di dirafadiwa. Go lebilwe
diphetogo di tshwana le tekatekano mo tirong go se kgetololo go ya ka bong
le fa e le go ya ka mmala jaaka e le maikaelelo a puso.
Ka nako ya kgetololo, tlhaolele, mapodisa a ne a katisiwa ka mokgwa wa
mogwanto le tshidilo ya mmele, thuto kgolo ya bona e le go tshwara e seng
go tlisa kagiso le tshireletso. Makgowa a ne a tlhatlhosiwa go nna bo
kapotene, sajene, majoro sajene, lefotenente, borikadiri, fa ma Aforika a
tlhago a ne a felela mo bo sajeneng. Puso e e eteletsweng pele ke mokgatlo
wa ANC e tlisitse diphetogo ka go aga sepodisa se le sengwe, se katisiwa ka
mokgwa o le mongwe o o tswanang. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs
follows.)

[The purpose of the campaign with regard to this monitoring tool at police
stations is to ensure that transformation is embraced, understood and
implemented. The changes that are expected as part of government policies
include, among other things, employment equity, gender equity and, last but
not least, racial discrimination.

During the apartheid era police officers were given physical training
whereby they only performed marching exercises, which was the main feature
of their training course. Another focus was on how to teach them to make an
arrest. Peace and security were not the main concerns of their training
course. In the past, whites were promoted to the rank of captain, major-
general, lieutenant and brigadier, while indigenous Africans were only
confined to the rank of sergeant. The ANC-led government has transformed
the police service into a nonracial service, which uses one common training
method.]

Key areas for training are problem-oriented policing and a focus on human
rights. The training methodology seeks to build competencies and consists
of lectures, case studies, role-playing, simulations and group work
focusing on training for reality. All learning programmes are needs-based
and are being aligned to unit standards leading through credit accumulation
to qualification on the national qualification framework.

In terms of the Domestic Violence Act, every police station must have a
domestic violence register detailing all domestic violence incidents that
are reported at the station. The police station is also required to compile
a list of organisations that can offer counselling and other support
services to complainants of domestic violence.

During 2005, 273 complaints were received against police officials
allegedly not complying with their duties in terms of the Act. In most of
these cases disciplinary action was taken against members. In the rest of
the cases the Independent Complaints Directorate, ICD, instructed that no
disciplinary action must be taken. To reduce these case loads, more members
need to be trained - hence the support of this budget by the ANC.

A total of 227 victim-friendly facilities have been established at some
police stations. SAPS aim to establish an additional 150 new facilities by
this financial year – hence the support of the ANC for this budget.

In a new upgraded police station, provisions are made for private
facilities where victims can provide statements and access information.
Many of these facilities still need furniture, equipment and transport for
those who will need to be transported to hospitals, clinics or other places
of safety.

The SAPS victim support programme has been reviewed to ensure that SAPS
training and guidelines support the victims’ charter of rights.

The youth crime prevention and development programme that defines SAPS
roles and responsibilities has been developed and it is linked to the
training of SAPS members to deal with child offenders and youth crime
prevention.

Some 1 771 commanders and trainers are trained to train remaining members
on the Department of Veterans Affairs, DVA, implementation. Since 2000,
training on domestic violence forms an integral part of the basic training
programme for new recruits.

During 2005-06, 11 000 new recruits underwent the basic training on
domestic violence. Seventy per cent of all members attached to the family
violence, child protection and sexual offences units completed specialised
training including handling and investigating cases involving domestic
violence. Twenty-four trainers from nine provinces have been trained in
2005 on how to present a course and will therefore present training
throughout the country. Some 1 568 members were trained on the handling of
domestic violence incidents during specialised courses in 2005.

In conclusion, allow me to congratulate the super-cop of the Elite Free
Falling Squad, Captain Thandeka Majola, who became the first policewoman to
excel in free-fall parachuting. She is now a member of the counterassault
team subsidiary of the SAPS protection and security services division.
Captain Thandeka Majola is the first member of the SAPS and the South
African National Defence Force to have successfully completed the basic
free-fall course with the world-renowned 44 Brigade of the SANDF. The ANC
supports the budget. Thank you. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairperson, as we are debating the safety and security
Budget Vote this afternoon, a nine-year-old girl is in a coma, fighting for
her life after being raped and brutalised to the extent that a hysterectomy
was being considered at one stage.

On the SABC 3 news bulletin of 30 May, it was stated that the affected
community has lost its confidence in the police as far as the protection of
their children is concerned. It is a crime against humanity to target
defenceless children, sexually violate them and rob them of their
innocence. While some are blaming parents for crimes committed against
their children, it is nevertheless the responsibility of the police to keep
our communities safe and to teach criminals that crime does not pay.

If it had not been for a recent meeting that I had with Commissioner Jackie
Selebi, where he presented me with an enlightening account of the
difficulties and constraints, which the police are facing on a daily basis,
then we would have voted against this budget to register the ACDPs’
protest, disapproval and unhappiness about the failure of the police to
make our streets, communities and trains safer.

It is because of this understanding and sympathy that we have decided to
encourage the committed, loyal and hard-working members of the police by
voting for this budget. The ACDP’s plea to the hon Minister is to
continually help the police with their investigative skills and abilities
to ensure that their cases obtain convictions.

Amongst those whose convictions we want to see, are the cruel thugs who
threw passengers out of moving trains and those who this week hanged a
security guard on a tree in Germiston for choosing to exercise his
constitutional right to work while others chose not to work.

The hon Minister must ensure that only the most efficient and capable
police investigate these heinous crimes to enable judges to convict and
impose the harshest sentences possible – sentences that will send a clear
message to would-be criminals that such acts will not be tolerated in this
country. I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr S MAHOTE: Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister for Safety and
Security, hon members, officials of the Department of Safety and Security,
invited guests, this Budget Vote before us in this august House today comes
against the background of intense clamouring for both human and material
resources, immense scrutiny by stakeholders within the safety and security
sector, and the customary hysteria of the opposition, particularly the DA,
as to how our ANC-led government should ensure the safety and security of
all and sundry in South Africa.

At the same time, our populace is not spared any respite by a media that is
consumed by the fallacious notion that crime sells. As a government elected
by the overwhelming majority of the people and - this is where we have to
make a distinction - the majority who had historically borne the brunt of
social crimes because of apartheid and social engineering, we are morally
obliged to be sensitive to their concerns, but in a truthful manner.

Moreover, in recent weeks a dangerous phenomenon has taken root within the
ranks of those on my left here, who, through their propaganda machinery,
have created a psychosis of fear in the minds of our citizens. Quite
frankly, this is indeed very dangerous.

Allow me to elucidate a few things here today. Firstly and most
importantly, President Thabo Mbeki has, in his state of the nation address
on 3 February 2006, underscored once again the critical importance of the
safety and security of all South Africans. In this regard he mentioned, in
particular, the challenges in relation to social crime prevention measures.


To give further credence to government’s commitment, the President alluded
to other measures, that is, integrated law enforcement in priority areas
such as drug trafficking and substance abuse. Yes, Chairperson, suffice to
say that as a member of the Safety and Security Portfolio Committee, I
align myself with the measures and objectives articulated by the hon
Minister Nqakula in his opening address here today.

Allow me to focus on the strategies the SA Police Service has adopted and
implemented to ensure that our people, firstly develop and understanding of
crime and its causes, and secondly, to allow our communities a meaningful
role in crime prevention. Obviously, at the heart of these initiatives is
the vexing question of delivery. Everyone present here today will agree
that crime permeates all strata of society, hence the need for concerted
programmes.

One such programme is sector policing, which was introduced in 2002-03.
Central to this is the objective to discourage the occurrence of all crimes
through the provisions of a proactive and responsive policing service.
Furthermore, it augments visible policing and has, since its inception, not
only ensured increased police visibility, but also gave communities a
greater sense of safety and security, particularly in areas of social
crime. Moreover, it seeks to reduce opportunities to commit crime.

In terms of this programme the most skilled and competent police officers
are deployed at police stations, because ultimately it is where an
investigation succeeds or fails. As the ANC we believe that sector policing
can and should reduce the still too high incidents of crime against women
and children, as well as ensure the proper investigation of sexual offences
such as rape and indecent assault.

Any democratic society is measured by the extent to which the people
contribute to efforts or lack of it of government. In South Africa, by
extension, the SA Police Service is no exception. In this regard I believe
we have made great strides in relation to community development, community
policing forums and the building of community safety centres.

In regard to crime prevention development programmes, we have, as a
portfolio committee, witnessed some of the successes of the development and
implementation of community-based crime prevention strategies.

It has made significant contribution towards intersectoral operations. It
serves as a tool for local service providers such as local government to
integrate community-based crime prevention strategies in their core
business. In some communities we have seen participation through the
application of indigenous knowledge.

Ewe, Sihlalo, nangona iintatheli namaphephandaba ezama ukunika umfanekiso
ongemhlanga, thina njengombutho i-ANC sikhuthazwa ngakumbi ngumsebenzi
omhle owenziwa zezi ngala maqonga eliso lomzi. Aba ngabahlali
abaqhelekileyo, abancama ixesha, amandla kwanokhuseleko lwabo besilwa
ubukrelemnqa. Baqinisekisa belumkisa ngeenkqubo ezikhoyo, bemanyene
nabahlali ekulweni ubukrelemnqa. Bancedisana namapolisa ukwakha ubudlelwana
noosomashishini kwakunye nabanye ababandakanyekayo ekuhlaleni, bebonisana
ngeendlela zokulwa ubundlobongela. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[Yes, Chairperson, although the media is trying to paint the wrong picture,
the ANC-led government is encouraged by the good work from these community
policing forums. These are ordinary citizens, who sacrifice their time,
energy and safety to fight crime. They ensure that proper procedure is
followed with regard to the existing programmes, while working with the
communities in fighting crime. They also liaise with the police in building
relations with businessmen and other stakeholders in the communities to
find ways of combating crime.]

In fact, independent research shows that they are the real unsung heroes
and heroines in areas where there is a decline in particular in social
crime. Indeed, it is precisely these CPFs, as they are popularly known, who
will be able to provide any respected crime reporter with accurate
information on the extent of crime and even delinquency in their areas.
These are the brave individuals who encounter the material life of misery
of the masses, which remains the breeding ground of crime in our country.

Before we distort crime figures, for whatever reason, let us spare a
thought for them. As a portfolio committee we are naturally concerned at
the persistent levels of brazen and violent crimes that still dominate the
headlines. However, we are also aware, and independent research attests to
this, that the SA Police Service’s success ratio on this front is indeed
increasing. We have to commend them, and we are naturally excited, but also
cautious.

These achievements should serve as an illustration of our ANC-led
government’s commitment proactively to block the modus operandi those
criminals employ against our people. In this regard, however, we would like
to see a streamlined, integrated approach between the agencies of safety
and security, justice, social development and correctional services.
In conclusion, we want to reiterate our viewpoint and in terms of our
oversight and monitoring role, declare that all of these initiatives will
in fact be hollow if our people do not have faith and trust in the SA
Police Service. Hence we want to impress upon the leadership of the SA
Police Service, to ensure that mechanisms are put in place to revive their
flagging integrity. The ANC supports the budget. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Voorsitter, in 1993-94 het Suid-Afrika ’n nuwe bedeling
betree. Ons spog graag met ons nuwe Grondwet en hoe wonderlik dit is. In
artikel 205(3) van die Grondwet word bepaal dat die doelstellings van die
polisie is om misdaad te voorkom en die inwoners van die Republiek en hul
eiendom te beskerm en te beveilig.

Die vraag is egter of hierdie grondwetlike plig nagekom word. Kyk ons na
die misdaad in Suid-Afrika sedert 1993-94 dan sien ons dat misdaad teen
individue skrikwekkend toegeneem het. Aanranding met die opset om ernstig
te beseer het toegeneem met 15,6%. Gewone aanranding het toegeneem met
33,7% terwyl roof met verswarende omstandighede met 50% toegeneem het.
Gewone roof het toegeneem met 178%. Geweld teen veral vroue is uiters
kommerwekkend, want sedert 1993 het verkragtings met 23,1% toegeneem.
Verlede jaar is 55 114 vroue verkrag. Dit beteken dat daar elke 10 minute
’n vrou in Suid-Afrika verkrag word. Na die tydsduur van hierdie debat moet
ons weet dat daar 16 vroue in Suid-Afrika verkrag is – dit maak van Suid-
Afrika ’n gevaarlike plek vir vroue.
Die afgelope vyf jaar was daar 4 106 plaasaanvalle en 560 boere is op hul
plase vermoor. Dit maak boerdery in Suid-Afrika die gevaarlikste beroep,
nie net in Suid-Afrika nie, maar in die wêreld. Intussen gaan die regering
voort en hy sluit kommando-eenhede.

Die agb Minister het netnou hier gesê dat daar begroot is om 8 000
reserviste te kan ontplooi om landelike beveiliging te doen. Ek wil vir die
agb Minister vra: hoe gaan 8 000 reserviste dieselfde werk kan doen wat 25
000 kommandolede gedoen het? Dit is ontmoontlik. Die regering gaan voort,
wetende dat die polisie nie die infrastruktuur en die mannekrag het om
behoorlike landelike beveiliging toe te pas nie.

Van huisbrake wil ek nie eens praat nie. Hoeveel keer moet ’n mens nie in
die media verneem van mense wat sê dat die polisie sê hulle kom nie eens
uit vir inbrake nie. Dit is direk strydig met artikel 205 van die Grondwet.
Die agb Minister en die polisie het die stryd teen misdaad verloor. U kom
nie u grondwetlike plig na nie, agb Minister. Dit word verder weerspieël
dat volgens die SA Instituut vir Rasse-aangeleenthede sekuriteitsbeamptes
sedert 1997 met 150% toegeneem het. Tans is daar drie sekuriteitsbeamptes
vir elke polisiebeampte. Die publiek moet nou al so ver gaan om ’n
privaatmaatskappy te huur om sekere moorde te ondersoek, bloot omdat die
polisie nie genoegsame kundigheid het nie. Agb Minister, u kom nie u
grondwetlike plig na nie.

Ek wil die stelling maak dat as die sekuriteitsindustrie môre toemaak, het
ons algehele anargie in hierdie land. Die ontstellende feit is egter dat
slegs 8%-9% van misdade suksesvol in ons howe vervolg word. Dit beteken dat
misdadigers ’n 92%-kans het om weg te kom met misdaad in Suid-Afrika.

Die ergste nog is dat as lede van die publiek hulself verdedig, dan kan
hulle gearresteer word, byvoorbeeld as hulle ’n misdadiger sou doodmaak in
hul huise. Dit het in Pretoria gebeur. Die polisie sê vir die misdadigers:
moenie bekommerd wees nie, ons sal julle beskerm.

Van die VF Plus se kant af wil ek wel vir daardie lede van die polisiemag,
daardie manne en vroue wat uit hulle pad uitgaan om hul land te dien,
dankie sê dat hulle ten spyte van die moeilike omstandighede en ten spyte
van die stres wat op hulle geplaas word, steeds puik diens lewer. Vir die
ander wat nie hul werk doen nie, is dit tyd om die mag te verlaat. Dankie.
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Chairperson, in 1993-94 South Africa entered a new
dispensation. We like to boast about our new Constitution and how wonderful
it is. In section 205(3) of the Constitution it is determined that the
objects of the police are to prevent crime and to protect and safeguard the
citizens of the Republic and their property.
However, the question is whether this constitutional obligation is being
fulfilled. If we look at crime in South Africa since 1993-94, we see that
crime against individuals has increased alarmingly. Assault with the
intention to do grievous bodily harm has increased by 15,6%. Ordinary
assault has increased by 33,7% while assault with aggravating circumstances
increased by 50%. Ordinary robbery increased by 178%. Violence against
women, especially, is extremely worrying, as rape has increased by 23,1%
since 1993. Last year 55 114 women were raped. This means that in South
Africa a woman is raped every 10 minutes. We should know that during this
debate 16 women will be raped in South Africa – this makes South Africa a
dangerous place for women.

During the past five years there were 4 106 attacks on farms and 560
farmers were murdered on their farms. This makes farming South Africa’s
most dangerous occupation, not only in South Africa, but also in the world.
In the meanwhile the government continues to close down commando units.

The hon Minister said a short while ago that they budgeted for 8 000
reservists to be deployed to undertake rural safeguarding. I would like to
ask the hon Minister how 8 000 reservists are going to do the work that 25
000 commando members used to do? It is impossible. The government
continues, knowing that the police do not have the infrastructure and the
manpower to implement proper rural safeguarding.
I do not even want to talk about housebreaking. How many times does one not
note in the media that people say the police do not even come out to them
if a break-in occurs? This is in direct conflict with section 205 of the
Constitution. The hon Minister and the police have lost the fight against
crime. You are not complying with your constitutional duty, hon Minister.
This is further reflected by the 150% increase in security guards since
1997, according to the SA Institute for Race Relations. At present there
are three security guards for every police officer. The public now have to
go so far as hiring private companies to investigate certain murders,
simply because the police do not have enough expertise. Hon Minister, you
are not complying with your constitutional duty.

I would like to state that if the security industry closed down tomorrow,
we would have total anarchy in this country. The most upsetting thing,
however, is that only 8% to 9% of crimes are successfully prosecuted in our
courts. This means that criminals have a 92% chance of getting away with
crime in South Africa.

By far the worst thing is that if the public defend themselves, then they
can be arrested, when for example they kill criminals in their homes. It
happened in Pretoria. The police are saying to criminals: Do not worry, we
will protect you.

From the side of the FF Plus I would like to say to those members of the
police force, those men and women who go out of their way to serve their
country, thank you for providing excellent service, despite the difficult
circumstances and the stress which is placed on them. To those who do not
do their job, it is time to leave the force. Thank you.]

Mong M T LIKOTSI: Modulasetulo Mokgahlo wa PAC o amohela tekanyetso ena. Ha
e fete tekanyetso ena. Lefatshe la rona le tletse botlokotsebe. Ke ka
mokgwa oo re hlokang seponesa ho sereletsa setjhaba. Seponesa sa rona se
hloka tshehetso yohle ho rona re le setjhaba ho hlakola botlokotsebe.
Bahlomphehi re tlameha ho hlahola botlokotsebe ka metso.

Re tlameha mmoho ho fedisa boqitolo bo etswang ke ditlokotsebe naheng ya
rona. Re tlameile ho hana ho buswa ke ditlokotsebe. Mmuso o tlameha ho fa
maponesa matla a ho bontsha ditlokotsebe tsena moo motlwang wa pula o
tswang teng. (Translation of Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairperson, the PAC accepts this Budget Vote. Let this
Budget Vote be passed. There is a lot of crime in our country. That is the
reason we need the police to protect our community. Our police force needs
all the support from us as a community so that they can eradicate crime.
Hon members, we have to uproot crime.

We have to stop the crimes that these criminals are committing in our
country. We should not allow criminals to rule our lives. The government
should give the police the powers to deal accordingly with these
criminals.]

Bahlonitshwa masiyeke ukudlala apha. Masiqeqeshe bonke aba bantu
baziindlavini apha ekuhlaleni. [Hon members, let us stop playing games
here. Let us train all these people who are ruffians in our communities.]

The police need our support. We cannot be seen to be giving criminals an
upper hand over the law-abiding citizens. If we as the nation are serious
about uprooting crime, we have to work closely with the police and nip
crime in the bud. We reiterate as the PAC that there should be no place for
criminals in our country - blue, white or any colour of criminal.

Maponesa a etsa mosebetsi o kgabane, ke bo mautlwela, ba thusa ho fedisa
ditlhekefetso tsa basadi le bana. Ba sereleditse naha ena ka maphelo a
bona. Maponesa a re thusitse ho tshwara baferekanyi ba Boeremag ba neng ba
itlhophisitse, ho hlokisa naha ena ya rona botlokotsebe.

Maponesa a eleng ditlokotsebe ha a emise ka botloko tsebe, hore re tsebe ho
re re ba tshehetse jwalo ka setjhaba. PAC e kgothatsa seponesa hore se tie,
se matlafale. PAC ere setjhaba se se thuse ho thibela polao ya maponesa ka
hore se fane ka sebaka sa ho ipata ho ditlakotsebe. (Translation of Sesotho
paragraphs follows.)
[The police force is doing a great job, they are spies, and they help to
curb the abuse of women and children. They put their lives at risk to
protect us in this country. The police helped us by arresting Boeremag
villains who were prepared to subvert our country.

Policepersons that are involved in crime should stop, so that we as a
nation can give them support. The PAC encourages the police force to be
strong and powerful. The PAC appeals to the community to help them to stop
this carnage of our policemen and policewomen by furnishing them with
information about these criminals’ hiding spots.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Chairperson, greetings to all our children today.
As reported in the South African Yearbook for 2005-06 in September 2005,
the SAPS released the crime statistics of 2004-05 showing a decrease in
most crimes, but an increase in rape and drug-related crimes. These
statistics have certainly been altered as a result of the security strike.
The MF called for the immediate settlement of the security guard issue to
restore balance to the crime situation in South Africa.

The MF applauds the SAPS for the strong role it plays in reducing crime in
South Africa, so as to be a bigger deterrent for rape and drug-related
crimes. We hereby ask for more intense punishment to be imposed on
criminals of this nature as possible deterrents. We suggest looking at the
criminal justice system abroad that has successfully managed to reduce
crime and introduce pilot projects in line with these lessons learned to
deter crime and bring justice to South Africa.

As noted in the President’s state of the nation address and in the MT
Budget Policy Statement in October 2005 of the Minister of Finance and in
his budget speech for 2006:


   Safety and security remains a priority in the South African agenda. Crime
   is notably a serious problem and in South Africa government is determined
   to tackle it.


We are pleased that the border line issues are being addressed as well as
the updating of SAPS vehicles and facilities, especially IT. We believe
that the budget allocated to the department, together with the department’s
intention, will address, redress and transform the SAPS and reduce crime in
South Africa. We will have even better statistics to report next year.

The MF will always stand by you, Minister, in assisting to curb crime. The
MF supports the Budget Vote. Thank you.

Mr S E KHOLWANE: Somlomo, Ndvuna kanye neliSekela lakho, malunga
eSishayamtsetfo, bokhomishane bemaprovinsi labakhona kanye nalabachamuka
eTiko Letekuphepha ... [Speaker, Minister and Deputy Minister, hon members,
provincial delegates, and everyone present, including visitors from the
Department of Safety and Security ...]

... I also want to take this opportunity to greet the young people, men and
women who have visited us today in this Parliament. You are more than
welcome. [Applause.]

Our first democratically elected President, Nelson Mandela, will not only
go down in history for the 27 consecutive years he spent in prison, without
ever forsaking his ideals. He will also be remembered because he was
capable of stripping from his heart all the venom that such unjust
punishment can cause to accumulate. He will also be remembered for his
magnanimity and the wisdom he showed in brilliantly leading his self-
sacrificing and heroic people when the hour of victory could no longer be
contained. He was deeply convinced that South Africa couldn’t be built on
hatred and revenge.

We cannot lose sight of the fact that structural inequalities built over
years into the fabric of our society by colonial and apartheid policies
have contributed to the high levels of poverty and inequity in our country.
It also undermined the position of women, and ultimately played a major
contributing role to our high rate of crimes against women and children.

The 51st National Conference of the ANC - not the DA - resolved that we
needed to intensify our campaigns to reduce crime against women and
children, the abuse of the elderly and family violence. Indeed, the SAPS
strategic plan for 2005-2010 focuses exactly on the reduction of the
incidence of crimes against women and children. We are pleased about that.

With regard to the detective services, there must be an intensive
investigation and analysis of crimes and assaults of a sexual nature. The
forensic science laboratory services rendered could assist the court trial,
particularly in matters involving women and children, in order to secure
convictions.

Notwithstanding the fact that women and children are often lumped together
as vulnerable groups, it is important to separate them. Of course, this is
precisely because their needs and interest are not the same and present
different behavioural challenges in policing itself.

As we engage in this Budget debate, we should note that this week is
children´s protection week in South Africa, whilst noting that today is
International Children´s Day. Therefore, I want to add my voice of support
to all abused children whilst sending a stern warning to those who continue
to abuse our women and children.

Lesimo sebantfwana sinenselele lenkhulu emphakatsini kanye nangendlela
umbutfo wetekuphepha kufanele usebente ngakhona. Kufanele sisho kwekutsi
umtsetfo kanye neMtsetfosisekelo uyabavikela bantfwana kungakhatsalekile
kutsi ngibo yini nome cha laba labagangile okanye labahlukunyetiwe.
(Translation of Siswati paragraph follows.)

[The plight of children is a very serious one in our society, but so are
the strategies adopted by the Department of Safety and Security to combat
crimes against women and children. I must mention that both the law and the
Constitution protect the rights of children, regardless of whether they had
been abused before or were in the wrong.]

We are aware that although tough crimes against children occur in all
communities, it’s clear that children in poor communities are more at risk
due to structural features of poor environments that raise the risk of
abuse.

We know that we are staying in overcrowded areas and sometimes we bring
nonfamily members into our homes so that we are able to increase our income
at the end of the day, and that results directly in the abuse of children.

The 1956 women’s march was a turning point in the history of the matters of
women in this country, hence the 50th Anniversary celebration this year.
Since then women in South Africa have waged a gallant struggle and as a
consequence they counted a lot of gains in terms of rights enshrined in the
Constitution.
Siyabonga bomake ngeligalelo lenu emzabalazweni, silapha lamuhla ngenca
yenu. Alibongwe! [We thank the women for their continued efforts in the
struggle; we are here today because of you. Praise!]

HON MEMBERS: Igama lamakhosikazi! [The name of women!]

In South Africa women were once treated as second-class citizens, destined
to serve the wishes of others rather than to achieve their own goals.
Today, all South Africans enjoy equality under the law, and we work each
day to make equality a fact of life for every man and woman in this
country.

Today South African women work together to speak out on the difficulties
they face. And even more important, they offer solutions to those problems
and do not just speak up about them.

Malunga eSishayamtsetfo, ngekwetibalo teLitiko Letekuphepha kuyakhanye
kutsi lizinga lemacala ekugetjengwa kwabomake liyehla ngaphandle kwekutsi
lizinga lemacala ekudlwengulwa kwabomake liyenyuka. Uyaye uve labanye batsi
ngendlela bomake labagcoka ngayo, ngiko lokubabangela kutsi badlwengulwe.

Kodvwa mine ngishaya ngendvuku phansi ngitsi cha, loko akusilo nani
liciniso. Labobabe labagagadlela timbuti, tinkhomo, netinja tisuke
tigcokeni loku lokuheha labo bobabe? Nangabe ukhona lonemphendvulo yaloko
mhlayimbe natsi singavuma-ke kutsi lokugcoka kwabomake ngiko lokuyinkinga.
Siyati kutsi tinkhomo netimbuti nato setiyagagadlelwa, sifundze kanyenti
emaphepheni ngaloko. Akusilo nani liciniso kutsi ngulokugcoka kwabomake
loku lokwenta kutsi bagagadlelwe.

Siyayibonga kakhulu iWestern Cape Nethiwekhi mayelana nekulwa nekugetjengwa
kwabomake, nekuchumana netinhlangano kanye nebantfu bonkhana labasebentela
kucaphelisa bantfu ngekugetjengwa kwabomake, kanye naletinye tinhlangano.
Sitsi kufanele tichubeke tente njalo. Umphakatsi wetfu kufanele wati kahle
hle kutsi bomake kanye nebantfwana akusibo bantfu bekugetjengwa, nabo
banelilungelo leligcwele njengatsi sonkhe lekutsi baphile kuleNingizimu
Afrika yetfu. (Translation of Siswati paragraphs follows.)

[Hon members, according to the statistics of the Department of Safety and
Security it is clear that the rate of crimes committed against women is
decreasing despite the fact that the rate of rape cases is on the rise.
This is commonly blamed, though wrongly so, on women dressing
inappropriately.

I disagree! That is in no way correct. What about those men who commit
bestiality by raping goats, cows, and dogs? What would these animals be
wearing to seduce these men? If there is anyone who can answer that, then
maybe they can convince us that women are raped as a result of the way they
dress.

We would also like to thank the Western Cape security network for
vehemently taking up the fight against crimes committed against women, and
working together with organisations and the community at large to educate
people about these crimes. We urge them to continue the good work. Society
needs to have a clear understanding that women and children are not to be
abused as they have rights that protect them, just like the rest of us in
South Africa.]

Hon members, the government’s intervention by creating sexual offences
courts for cases of assaulted, abused and raped children should be
applauded by all of us, including the opposition. The SAPS has a very
informative website, though most of our people cannot access that
information.

Therefore the critical role of communication technologies cannot be
overemphasised in empowering women with information to defend themselves
against the perpetrators of crimes. Therefore, the roll-out of MPCC becomes
critically important, including the radical reduction of illiteracy in our
society.

One must say that we should ensure that we are being more generous, more
fraternal and more humane. Let all of us, MPs in particular, move out of
our trenches and support the effort of the department. In fact, we should
be the catalyst for ensuring that the war against this crime is won
decisively.

There is no use in coming to this podium and blaming the department or the
SAPS. We should be playing a critical role as MPs, including the
opposition, so that when we go into our constituency period we ensure that
we talk and educate our communities to assist the police in the difficult
tasks that face them every day. The ANC supports the Budget. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson ... [Interjections.] Chairperson, I can see the
hon Bloem is still in the House. I want to say to him that he knows I like
him very much. Regarding our altercation, we will deal with it outside this
House. So nothing is taken seriously, and I understand the spirit in which
he addressed me.

Chairperson, hon Minister and members, the SA Police Service is rendering
one of the most important services in our nation and they should be
commended for their hard work. They prevent, combat and investigate crime;
maintain public order; protect and secure the inhabitants and their
property; and they uphold and enforce the law.

One of the most serious issues that must be addressed, hon Minister and
your department, is the salary scale of police officers. A constable with
less than two years’ service earns R1 600 a month, a sergeant earns between
R3 000 and R3 500, and an inspector earns between R4 500 and R5 000 per
month. This, hon Minister, is unacceptable. Most police officers,
especially detectives, have a massive workload. The entire Athlone police
detective branch have opted, according to a report, to join a patrol unit
rather than face piles of case dockets, often amounting to about 700 new
cases each month.

There are many police officers who have left the SAPS to start their own
security companies, and that is why we have a proliferation of such
companies. With reference to Programme 2, Visible Policing, the FD would
like the police to become much more visible in our communities. Just a week
ago I reported a case of domestic violence to the Phillipi police station
about a lady who had a court interdict against her husband, and absolutely
nothing was done about this. With these few words, hon Minister, the FD
supports your Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr R J KING: Voorsitter, Suid-Afrika ry tans die golf van finansiële
sukses soos selde tevore wat betref groei, die randwaarde, goudprys,
aandelemarksuksesse, lae rentekoerse en hoogtepunte weekliks op die
geldmarkte; en ons Minister van Finasies deel geskenke uit wat selfs
Kersvader blosend laat.

Selde nog was omstandighede só gunstig vir beleggings, vir bou en vir
regmaak wat verkeerd is. Die regte tyd is nou. Wie nie ‘n oorlog wen onder
optimale onstandighede nie, sal sekerlik faal as die gety teen hom draai,
en tog is hierdie regering besig om die stryd op twee dodelik belangrike
fronte sienderoë te verloor - en ‘n land wat dié geveg verloor, sal nooit
‘n wenland wees nie.
Suid-Afrika verloor die stryd teen armoede en Suid Afrika verloor die stryd
teen misdaad: die twee euwels wat in simbiose hand aan hand loop. Agb
Jankielsohn het met maar enkele gevalle aan u probeer voorhou die trauma en
wanhoop wat opklink uit die letterlik honderde skrywes van
misdaadslagoffers wat op die DA se lessenaar beland.

Die inhoud van hierdie skrywes vertel saam gelees ‘n rillerverhaal van ‘n
rampokkerland waar misdaad onbeheers floreer. Daar is deurlopend ernstige
klagtes oor die gebrek aan dienslewering by menige polisiekantore en
gevolglik indringende vrae oor die polisie se betroubaarheid en
integriteit.

Ek wil vandag vir die minister sê, ’n polisiediens wat nie die vertroue en
die agting van die gemeenskap kan wen nie, kan nie wenners teen misdaad
wees nie, en slaag nie die mees basiese toets van ‘n suksesvolle
polisiediens nie. Ons het ‘n polisiediens getreiter deur ‘n vertrouensbreuk
met die kliënte wat hulle moet bedien enersyds, en wat ál meer die
slagoffers is van direkte, arrogante aanslae deur misdadigers andersyds.

Ons wil u help, minister, want verloor ons hier, verloor ons almal saam.
Moenie verder wegskram van misdaadstatistiek nie. Ons moet vir ons polisie
vars mikpunte kan stel waarby streng gehou moet word. Ons soek ten minste
150 000 aktiewe polisielede op straat wat goed en mededingend besoldig word
en vir wie meriete en goeie diens bevordering beteken.
Haal politieke oorwegings uit polisiebesluite. Laat die demografie in die
polisiekantoor lyk soos die gemeenskap wat hy bedien en laat die polisie
die taal praat van die omliggende gemeenskap. Daar moet metodes gevind word
om die publiek te vergoed vir die astronomiese uitgawes om misdaad te
bestry en slagoffers van misdaad sal gehelp moet word met fisieke en
geestelike bystand.

Die vernietiging van die kommando’s hét toe ‘n liederlike leemte in die
veiligheidsnetwerk geruk. Plaasmoorde neem weer toe. So pas hierdie week
was daar die gruwelik gewelddadige moord, op die Van Tonders in Bethlehem.

Kyk asseblief na die DA se plan vir landelike veiligheid, minister, en stel
‘n spesialisafdeling in vir grens- en landelike veiligheid soos ons in die
voorlegging aan u uiteensit. Elke koerant, elke nuusberig, elke persoonlike
gesprek, elke dag - misdaad, moord doodslag.

Ons nasie word afgestomp aan trauma en hartseer, en die agb lid Van Wyk kom
sê waaragtig vir ons sy verstaan nie die simpatie van my agb kollega
Jankielsohn nie. Ek kan alleen u minagting en verontwaardiging met agb
Jankielsohn se aanhalings van misdaadslagoffers se noodoproepe verstaan,
indien dit beteken óf dat u self nie sulke skrywes ontvang nie, óf dat u
geen simpatie met die slagoffers van misdaad het nie. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Dan dink ek dis werklik u plig om vir die Parlement te sê waar lê u
simpatie as dit nie by die slagoffers is nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] En verwag u
regtig van ons in die DA om die slagoffers van misdaad te versaak? Die
skrif is aan die muur, minister. U kan waaragtig nie weer soos laasjaar u
hande in die lug gooi en verantwoordelikheid misken nie. Iets baie drasties
sal gedoen moet word voor hierdie gety gaan omswaai. [Tussenwerpsels.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr R J KING: Chairperson, rarely before has South Africa ridden the wave
of financial success as at present with regard to growth, the rand value,
gold price, stock market highs, low interest rates, weekly peaks on the
money markets; and our Minister of Finance is handing out presents that
even has Father Christmas blushing.

Rarely before have circumstances been as favourable for investments, for
construction and for repairing what is wrong. The opportune time is now. If
you cannot win a war when optimal circumstances prevail, then you will
certainly fail if the tide turns against you; and yet this government is
visibly losing the battle on two very important fronts, and a country that
loses this battle will never be a successful country.

South Africa is losing the battle against poverty, and South Africa is
losing the battle against crime: two evils that share a symbiotic
relationship. Hon Jankielsohn, by making mention of but a few cases, has
tried to present the trauma and despair that resounds from the literally
hundreds of letters from victims of crime that land on the DA’s desk.

The contents of these letters, read together, tell a frightening story
about a gang-infested country where crime flourishes uncontrolled. There
have been continual serious complaints about the lack of service delivery
at many police stations and as a result penetrating questions have been
asked about police reliability and integrity.

I want to tell the Minister today that a police service that cannot gain
the trust and respect of the community cannot beat crime, and does not pass
the most basic test of a successful police service. We have a police
service that is tormented by a breach of trust with regard to the clients
they must serve on the one hand, and that are increasingly becoming the
victims of direct, arrogant attacks by criminals, on the other hand.

We want to help you, Minister, because if we lose here we all lose
together. Do not avoid crime statistics any longer. We must be able to set
new targets for our police that they must strictly adhere to. We want at
least 150 000 active police members on the streets, who must be paid good
and competitive salaries and for whom merit and good service mean
promotion.

Remove political considerations from police decisions. Let the demography
in the police station resemble the community it serves and let the police
speak the language of the surrounding community. Methods must be found to
compensate the public for the astronomical cost of fighting crime, and
victims of crime must receive physical and spiritual assistance.

The destruction of commandos did indeed cause very serious deficiencies in
the safety network. Farm murders are on the increase again. Just this week
we had the extremely violent murder of the Van Tonders in Bethlehem.

Please look at the DA’s plan for rural safety, Minister, and establish a
specialist section for border and rural safety, as we explained in our
submission to you. Every newspaper, every news report, every personal
conversation, every day – it’s just crime, murder, homicide.

Our nation is becoming numbed by the trauma and sorrow, and the hon member
Van Wyk actually tells us that she does not understand my hon colleague
Jankielsohn’s sympathy. I can only understand your contempt and indignation
with regard to hon Jankielsohn quoting crime victims’ cries of distress if
it means that either you have not received such letters yourself, or you
have no sympathy with the victims of crime. [Interjections.]

Then I think it truly is your duty to tell Parliament where your sympathy
lies if it is not with the victims. [Interjections.] And do you really
expect us in the DA to forsake the victims of crime? The writing is on the
wall, Minister. You cannot actually throw your arms in the air and ignore
your responsibilities, as you did last year. Something very drastic must be
done before this tide will turn. [Interjections.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon members, please, I am battling to
hear the speaker, and I’m sure so are you. Please keep your comments at a
lower level, thank you.

Mnr R J KING: In belang van oorlewing, minister, doen iets, of gaan in
hemelsnaam na die President, en neem sommer u Adjunkminister saam, en
versoek hom om u te onthef en te vervang met ‘n minister wat die
misdadigers aan die strot kan gryp en Suid-Afrika kan wegruk van die
afgrond van selfvernietiging. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Die oorgrote meerderheid van ons polisiemanne en -vroue is lojale,
hardwerkende en eerlike beamptes wat onder uiters moeilike omstandighede
hul werk verrig. Die DA bring hulde aan hulle, ons eer julle en assosieer
ons graag met julle en ons salueer julle. Doen asseblief so voort, ons land
kan nie sonder u klaarkom nie. Baie dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr R J KING: In the interest of survival, Minister, do something, or in
heaven’s name go to the President, and take your Deputy Minister along with
you, and request him to discharge you and replace you with a Minister who
can grab the criminals by the throat and wrest South Africa from the abyss
of self-destruction. [Interjections.]

The great majority of our policemen and policewomen are loyal, hard-working
and honest officials who work under very difficult circumstances. The DA
pays tribute to them. We honour you and we willingly associate ourselves
with you and we salute you. Please continue in this vein; our country
cannot manage without you. Thank you very much. [Applause.]]

Mr M S BOOI: Madam Chair, hon Minister, our good policemen and
policewomen, the chairperson of our committee, I’m definitely sure that we
need to do some good work today in order for us to give some perspective on
the issues that have been raised. These issues are not new and they are not
issues that we don’t know of. They are issues that as South Africans, it is
important that we talk to one another about.

As one of the members has said, it is important that we don’t talk and
politicise issues that are related to crime. But, as always, we, in the
ANC, ask: How honest are you? How prepared are you to assist us to fight
the battle against crime committed by those, whom nobody, even the Minister
of Safety and Security, have asked to commit such brutal murders. Nobody
here has done so.

It is within that context that we are saying that the police are doing a
very good job. They are also human and also have families, and are quite
committed, as South Africans, to helping us to combat crime. As they are
seated here wearing their uniforms, they are not asleep. They are quite
active for 24 hours, listening to everybody, taking up every other
complaint.

It becomes very difficult when politicians come here and start spitting
fire, generalising and hitting hard at other human beings, who have decided
to take upon themselves the responsibility of protecting us. As South
Africans and as the different political parties, we should really feel that
we sometimes do have a responsibility to praise them and to stand with
them.

We don’t want to do that in the ANC, but the type of role we have played in
society is known. And that is the type of role we are going to be able to
stick to as we continue explaining and enunciating the policies that we
think are the challenges that confront the police themselves.
[Interjections.]

I’ve said to the hon Jankielsohn, during committee meetings, that I do not
dispute that many people write letters and I do not have a problem with
that. It’s very important for any public representative to receive letters
and for them to interact with the communities. That is our responsibility.

From the type of analysis that he gives and the type of anonymous letters
that he reads out, which are not contextualised, you can’t tell whether it
is his party members or family members that are writing these letters. They
leave us with a lot of suspicion. And we are saying, be genuine, tell South
Africans that “I received a letter, because I work in Crossroads, in which
the residents of Ward 36, Crossroads, are complaining about the police.” I
would then listen to you. I have no problem with you doing that. But when
you come to this platform and say that you are a messiah, and want to
create the impression that you are the only one who can solve the crisis
around crime, then you are creating a problem for all of us.

Firstly, you are not basing it on policy and, secondly, you are not basing
your statement on the issues confronting the police. Thirdly, you don’t say
to the police: These are the things that you are doing and this is what you
are not able to do well.

These policemen are available to listen to anybody. That is the reason the
plan that has been outlined by the Minister says: Let’s transfer the
managerial structure from the national level and take it down to the
station level.

The plan shows a clear understanding of issues. And more than that, we are
bound by the Constitution to continue exposing ourselves to communities,
and this is what the Minister is outlining. Both speakers from the DA
showed no appreciation of the situation. They don’t care what the Minister
is saying, that this is progressive policy and that these are the things
that we are fighting over.

The ANC introduced the Community Police Forums and now it says: Let us take
the powers away from the national level and continue strengthening police
stations. Lets take the resources away from the national level and continue
putting them in the stations where the communities are, so that you are
able, as a Member of Parliament, as a councillor and as a community forum
person to interact with the police and be seen as a responsible South
African.

That is transformation and that is good, but they don’t talk about it. They
talk about letter-writing; love letters that they receive from different
people that you can’t account for.

You should be able to say to the chairperson that concerning the monitoring
work that you are doing, as a Member of Parliament, these are the issues
that you are confronted with. However, that is not happening here. Now, we
are left wondering, as the ANC, what it is that we need to do? How do we
come to the rescue of the other hon member, because we treat him as an
honourable member. We want to work with him, but if he is not responsible
in front of the public here, it then creates a particular problem.

Hon Groenewald, you and I are on the defence committee, and I’ve made this
point to you before, and I’m going to make it again. Maybe it will explain
why I think we might be involved in an ideological battle here.
[Interjections.]

The point is, you come here and you argue about private security companies.
After we had presented the antimercenary Bill a private security company,
Omega, was accused of planning a coup in the DRC. [Interjections.] We
looked into that. [Interjections.]

Let’s look at the private security industry. [Interjections.] I’m coming to
you. I’m telling you the truth. We allowed ADT, a private security company,
to continue gathering information in our country, but urged them to work
with the people in the country. Today they do not even respect the labour
market and our labour laws. They do not even assist us.

Now, you ask yourself: Is there someone on a counter-revolutionary path
here, or are these just actions of innocent people? Now, you are saying to
me that private security companies are trustworthier in fighting crime than
the structures of government. You must explain that to me.

I know for sure that there are private security companies that are there at
the airport at this particular moment, that stake out for information, sift
through it every day and horde it, without even sharing it with NIA and the
different institutional structures that have been created in the country.
Now, you want me to entrust those private security companies with the
responsibility for the security of South Africans? [Interjections.] I am
saying that is very difficult.

That explains that you do have a problem, or you are saying to us that
these private security companies are not playing a genuine role within our
country. Their aim is not to help state institutions, because they go
against governments and they prove continuously that their role within the
African continent is not a genuine one.

The President of the country, Comrade Mbeki, plays a particular role of
trying to unite all of the African countries. However, the private security
companies that today you say are helping in fighting crime are the ones
that are destabilising African countries. [Interjections.] In this day and
age - I’m not talking about before the 80s - they assist in destabilising
countries. And you want to say to me, today, that South Africans should
trust those private security companies?

They are not trustworthy, and I will continually say to you that what you
have presented here is not factually correct. It is something that you are
thumb-sucking from somewhere else.

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Chairperson, is the hon member willing to take a
question? It will be a very easy question. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member?

Mr M S BOOI: Let me proceed. I will give you another minute before I
finish.

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Does it mean you don’t want to answer an easy question?
Mr M S BOOI: The one important thing that the Deputy Minister has said is
that it would be very important for South Africans, when they deal with
issues of statistics, to use the statistics to reflect reality on the
ground. It’s not that the Minister or anyone of us is afraid of dealing
with statistics.

I want you to go and read Crime Quarterly, where it talks about the
limitations of statistics, and then compare and debate the two
presentations made by the two different institutions therein. At the end of
the day, what that analyst says is that the statistics that you could be
better able to relate to in the country today are only the police
statistics. They are correct and they are not generalising, as you were
doing here. [Interjections.] You came here to explain ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon members, this is a debate for
general consumption and not for the two of you. So, please speak through
the Chair.

Mr M S BOOI: Chair, it is not between him and me. I’m talking about
statistics. He said that of the statistics from MRC and SAPS, the correct
statistics, and which have continuously been proven so, are the ones from
SAPS, even in relation to the ages of people and to death in South Africa.
He said these are the correct statistics that you could make use of.

But what the Deputy Minister says is that we should not stick to
statistics, because they are not correct when you want to deal with the
number of dead people. The hon member says that this is what the police are
supposed to be doing. She says: let’s continue finding solutions and to
engage on these matters.

Hon Jankielsohn presented some statistics here, yet there was no clarity as
to where those statistics came from and how they are going to benefit
people. They aren’t beneficial to any of us, even if I, as the one who was
listening to you, would want to make use of them. [Interjections.]

Even when we have a workshop, I’m always prepared, but it’s not about you.
Overall, hon Jankielsohn, the challenge that we are confronted with, as the
ANC, is that as South Africans, the progress that has been made with regard
to policing in the past 10 to 12 years is supposed to be really
commendable.

We have been able to allocate resources continuously, even in the face of
the few resources that we have. If you were listening carefully to the
Minister, the way you gave powers to detectives in the past was haphazard,
and nobody cared about them. Today they have offices and they do know that
at least they have so many cases to follow up, etc.

The problem is that you are generalising; you say that crime is going up,
and you can’t explain to us what type of crimes you are talking about. It
is this generalisation that is creating the confusion.

Nobody disputes that tomorrow morning I’ll get a report of a murder
committed, on the first pages of newspapers. Nobody feels proud of that,
and no South African ever will. But what we are saying is: What do you do
as a South African? How do you try to help all of us, including the police,
combat crime, if you do not pinpoint the crime you are talking about?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, your speaking time has
expired.

Mr M S BOOI: We sit here discussing campaigns to fight rape, and we point
out that these are the challenges that we are confronted with. Thank you.
[Time Expired.] ... [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Deputy Chairperson, one of the things
that I hated with a passion when I was growing up was being patronised. I
still hate being patronised! And, the police hate being patronised. Just
listen to the hon King. He stands here, and everything he said is against
the police. And when he leaves the podium he says, ``these are people we
can work with, I love them’’. That is patronising and it is disgusting in
the extreme. [Applause.]
There is something I want to deal with here, and I hope they are going to
listen very carefully. When you are a politician, you must be able to read
the signs. You must be able therefore to understand what is happening in
the body politic of the country where you are. There were 17 speakers here
- apart from the Deputy Minister and I - and the great majority of those
speakers spoke very well in support of the police service.

But who did not do that? It is someone who is called hon R Jankielsohn. It
is someone who is called hon P J Groenewald. It is someone who is called
hon R J King. Those are the only people who have spoken against the police,
essentially. Of course, we understand why they do this. Anthony Al Bekker
explains their situation in an article in the Sunday Times:


  It’s possible then that the overall decline in some crimes, notably
  murder, obscures an increase in crimes committed in the communities in
  which my friends live. Since most of them are middle class and white and
  live in the suburbs, if victimisation rates of people in that demographic
  are rising, my friends’ increased fearfulness is perfectly understandable.


He goes on and says:


  What seems clear is that violent crime in the suburbs, especially robbery,
  is much more common than it was in the 1980s and early 1990s, largely
  because apartheid ensured that its beneficiaries enjoyed a degree of
  insulation from predatory criminals.

There is someone else who understands their situation. And this is Clive
Swan of Bonaero Park in Kempton Park who says:

  We seem to have become a nation of whingers, sending our offspring to seek
  paler climates as soon as they graduate. The US have traversed a crippling
  economic depression, unbelievable crime waves of gangster warfare in the
  1920s, followed later by decades of mafia outrages. If they had followed
  our hand-wringing ethos, most of their population would have emigrated,
  but instead warts and all, they patriotically rolled up their sleeves and
  took charge of their country’s destiny. For goodness sake, South Africans
  get a life, get away from the negative call to skin colour attitudes. Join
  hands and make this country great. Then maybe your kids can come home to a
  bigot-free zone.


[Applause.]

Mr Jankielsohn has said certain things here, and I want to help him. It is
our responsibility to help people who do not understand what we are doing
in this country. Mr Jankielsohn is unhappy about the fact that the
President has asked me to help the people of Burundi to overcome their
difficulties. He says I must be here and fight crime. I thought that my
responsibility was political and that those people over there and in the
streets, as we speak, are fighting crime at the coalface of the problems
that we have. But he can’t understand this. Firstly, the ANC has always
been an internationalist organisation. And that being so, we have learnt to
know the world as it is.

It is not you fault, hon Jankielsohn, that your own vision of the world is
South Africa and ends in Zimbabwe. [Applause.] The fault is with your party
that is not teaching you people to understand politics. A wise president
would of course deploy a Minister of Safety and Security in his country to
be proactive. You stop people who otherwise would flow into South Africa as
a consequence of problems in their own countries from coming here. And what
you then do is that you are deployed to deal with those situations,
particularly because our own vision for the advancement of this country is
peace and stability on the basis of one of the Freedom Charter’s clauses
which says: ``There shall be peace and friendship!’’[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Order! Hon members, please keep the
noise levels down. You may proceed, hon Minister.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: I am sorry, Deputy Chairperson that
you were going to be extended in trying to keep them in check, but this is
the only thing they best know and I think that they must be allowed to
continue to do it.

In terms of the Freedom Charter, we are enjoined to help stop problems in
the countries, particularly those that are part of the African continent.
Our vision of peace and stability has as one of its key elements safety and
security. Therefore, if you allow masses of people to emigrate from their
own countries because there are conflicts and when they arrive here there
is no work for them, then there is a problem there. If there is not going
to be accommodation for them, then there are problems there. If there is
not going to be food for them, then there are problems there. And if you
don’t understand therefore that the only resort they will have is crime,
then my goodness, we have a bigger problem than I thought we had. Of course
you won’t understand this because you don’t have a policy that deals with
matters like that.

Again, somebody from their ranks came here and told a lie about police
salaries. What a big lie! For goodness sake, these things are public. Just
go to the records and you will find these answers. A police constable’s
salary is R67 000 per annum. Go and check. These figures are available.
Don’t come here and lie. Don’t do that.

Again, my other friend, the hon King, policing in South Africa must not be
politicised. The hon Sotyu said that, the hon Ndlovu said that, the hon Van
Wyk said that, the Deputy Minister said that, Mr Madikiza said that, hon
Moatshe said that. All of these persons were all saying, let’s help the
police because this is not an ANC government structure, but it is a
structure for all our people. As the hon Likotsi was saying ``to protect
our people, let’s all come and help’’. [Applause.]

But what do they do? They go into politics about policing, including Mr
Jankielsohn who says he gets letters and that there is a particular
sergeant who came to him and said, “I am not getting any promotion as a
consequence of the racism in the police”. You know, Mr Jankielsohn, I don’t
know what the unions think about the position that you have assigned to
yourself as their spokesperson. [Laughter.] There are members here from the
unions – Popcru and Sapu - that are working in the police. But what do we
deal with all the time? Even during question time, they ask me: Will you
indicate why so and so has not as yet received his retirement money? Why so
and so has not been promoted? Those are matters for the unions, and if you
believe that the unions are not equal to that task, I tell you as a person
who works there with them, that they are equal to that task.

Regarding the many things that you people come and talk about here, that
this restructuring is negative and what have you, I am going to tell you
what one person from Popcru said the other day. He said, “Minister, we
support the restructuring that is happening in the police because it will
make things much better for our people because service delivery will be
assured.” The hon Ndlovu has said the same thing and many others here have
done the same. He said, “The problem that you are confronting is a problem
of people who are in comfort zones and do not want to leave those comfort
zones.” [Interjections.]

Of course, they have support from the hon members on that side of the
House. Therefore every time they come to them they speak with authority on
things that they don’t even understand. They will not understand these
things because they don’t have policies. Or do they have policies? No, they
have policies. What they do is that when we come here and place the
strategies of our Ministry and the police before the House, two or three
years later they regurgitate those same things and say, “Here is our
policy”. So they do have policies. The fact that their policies come two or
three years later all the time has nothing to do with us. It is their
problem. It is not our problem.

You talked about racism in the police. I think you will be in trouble one
time. There are many, many black police officers who have been constables
for a long time, not as sergeants that you talked about. They have been
constables for a long time. They want promotion. If you go to the next
level you will find a broad band of black officers who want promotion. Of
course, you are not bothered about them. You are bothered about the
sergeant who wrote you a letter. That’s the person you are bothered about.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order, please, hon members!

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: To the members who spoke on behalf of
our people who solely require protection from the police, I want to give
this report. There is someone who spoke here about police officers who
become criminals. I have said this in the past; my predecessors, Steve
Tshwete and Sydney Mufamadi also said it in the past, that those people in
effect are not police persons, because the person who becomes and is
registered as a police official is a peace officer. Their function is to
ensure that they create conditions for peace and security in our country.
Those are police officers. Those who become criminals get arrested and
locked up. There are a number of them who are serving long terms of
imprisonment as a result of criminality.

On 24 May there were people who went to Benoni police station and broke
into a safe there that contained money. That is money that had been taken
from crooks who robbed an aircraft that was coming into the country. We
arrested those people and we continue to investigate that case. But the
money that was retrieved had been locked away in that particular safe. Of
course, we have arrested people with respect to the theft of that money
from the Benoni police station. We have arrested nine suspects. Three of
them are members of the police. We recovered some money but I won’t tell
you how much. There are further investigations that are happening.

Those people, every one of them who was involved in this theft, are going
to be arrested by the police. They do not belong to this country where we
are defining circumstances for our people to live in peace and security.
They do not belong to that effort in which, collectively, all our people
are involved to ensure that indeed, in the end, we shall have put in place,
in South Africa, a programme so that all our people can benefit. Those who
are therefore undermining that programme are people we are going to deal
with.

Of course, there are those whom we are unable to deal with because
essentially they are not committing any crime. So those can continue to
whinge away. They can continue to attack everything that we do. They can
continue to be as negative as they want. In the end, it is the many people
out there, who for many years have been crying for peace and stability in
South Africa, who determine who rules this country. The whingers can do one
of two things: They can continue to whinge until they are blue in the face
and they can continue to be as negative as they want to, or they can simply
leave this country so that all of the peace-loving South Africans, good
South African people who want to make this a successful country, continue
with their work.

As Clive Swan said:

  For goodness sake, South Africans, get a life! Get away from the negative
  call to skin colour attitudes. Join hands and make this country great.
  Then, maybe your kids can come home to a bigot-free zone. Thank you very
  much.

[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 19:13.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)


    (1)    The JTM has reconsidered the classification of the Deeds
         Registries Amendment Bill [B 5 – 2006], and has, on 31 May 2006, in
         terms of Joint Rule 160(3) classified it as a section 75 Bill
         (original classification, see Announcements, Tablings and Committee
         Reports, 19 May 2006, p 725).

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)     Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain
         Laws Amendment Bill, 2006, submitted by the Minister for Justice
         and Constitutional Development on 1 June 2006. Referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development and
         the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs.


3.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


          a) Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
             Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B 11 – 2006] (National Assembly –
             sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
             introduction published in Government Gazette No 28898 of 31
             May 2006.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
         and Constitutional Development of the National Assembly, as well
         as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 1 June 2006.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    a) Activity Report of the Auditor-General for 2004-2005 [RP 231-2005].

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


CREDA INSERT REPORT - T060601e-insert1 – PAGES – 963-1046


National Assembly

CREDA INSERT REPORT - T060601e-insert2 – PAGES 1047-1092


