---
title: 'National Assembly - 05 June 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-06-05
---

MONDAY, 5 JUNE 2006
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:01.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 9 – Public Enterprises:

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Madam Speaker, hon members, guests,
ladies and gentlemen, I have brought along with me this afternoon my “girl-
child”, Xolelwa Ntozini, who’s sitting up there in the gallery. She is a
Grade 11 student from Langa High School. [Applause.] Today we have such a
wide range of activities, which I hope will broaden her understanding of
the work of the department and our aligned state-owned enterprises.
Welcome, to our Budget Vote day, Xolelwa.

I’ve also got some other guests, some young people; I’ve got a big gallery
there to support me today: Thabiso Msiza and Ntombi Sibanyo, who are joined
by their principal Mokamola Selesho from Gauteng Comprehensive High School.
They are up there in the gallery. There they are. [Applause.]

I also have Hanneke van der Walt and Gerhard Hermann Janse van Vuuren,
joined by their principal Dr Carel Scheepers van der Merwe from Menlo Park
High School. They are somewhere in the gallery. [Applause.] Nkululeko
Sibiya from Pretoria West Pre-Primary School is joined by her mother,
Ntombi Sibiya, and Lethabo Lengweng from Sunnyside Primary School is joined
by her guardian Lizette Goosen. [Applause.]

We’ve invited these young students, accompanied by their teachers, and two
children of members of my own department, as part of our contribution to
public education and development. By exposing the learners to the processes
of Parliament and the mandate of the Department of Public Enterprises, DPE,
and its strategic intent, we hope to contribute to the creation of a more
informed and active citizenry.

I personally find it hard to believe that this is my third opportunity to
present the budget of the Department of Public Enterprises to the National
Assembly. [Interjections.] I am sure it’s a great pleasure. To the young
people who couldn’t hear what he was saying, the hon member was just saying
that it’s a great pleasure to be addressed by me again. [Applause.]
[Laughter.]

This is, indeed, a salutary thought, since in accelerating and sharing
growth time is of the essence. However, I do believe that we are making
progress. This is due to the excellent work of the boards, the chairpersons
sitting up there in the gallery, management and employees of the state-
owned enterprises.

It is also due to the efforts of my young, capable and delightfully
impatient department, under the leadership of director-general Portia
Molefe. It is due, I believe, to the constructive oversight of the
portfolio committee and its chair, the ever-questioning and supportive hon
Yunus Carrim.

I strike this positive note at the outset because I believe that the
positive does indeed far outweigh the negative and gives confidence in
dealing with the immense challenges that lie ahead. The past year has not
been plain sailing by any stretch of the imagination. I hardly need to tell
this House, located in the fairest, but at times darkest Cape, what some of
our challenges have been. Let me assure this House this afternoon that I
intend no more bolts from the blue.

Appended to the written copies of this speech is a summary of progress on
all the issues that I raised in the last budget speech, and we are moving
forward since in virtually all cases the projects have expanded, and whilst
some may not be meeting the time lines envisaged, their implementation will
be more beneficial than was originally conceived.

There are some exceptions - very few, I must say - and these are set out. I
will not spend too much time on detailing these programmes, as I think it
is more useful to concentrate on certain key issues that will impact on
future progress.

I would like to focus on the following: Communication of our plans;
capacity in the department and in the state-owned enterprises; progress in
the governance system and key developments in each of the SOEs; and
finally, the impact of the infrastructure programme on our industry. In the
process I will also welcome into the fold our newest charge – a nuclear one
at that – the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor.

The electricity problems we have and may experience in the Cape have driven
home some lessons. A key one is that of communication and reliable
information. There are a number of aspects to this matter. The first is a
consistent message on growth and the investment required to meet and
facilitate that growth.

What the last two or three years have shown is that this economy is indeed
capable of a higher growth rate and that this is a very robust and
competitive economy. It is now time for both the public and the private
sectors to internalise this reality and adjust their decision-making
accordingly.

In the public sector, from the local through to the national level, full
attention has to be paid to every aspect of infrastructure and to efficient
and continuous maintenance of that infrastructure. In the private sector
the supplier industries, where investment lead times are longer, business
leaders must have the confidence and foresight to invest now. Hesitancy and
timidity are an obstacle to the growth that we can achieve.

This is not an incitement to reckless planning, but a call to courage. The
leaders of both the public and the private sectors must now take personal
responsibility for the training of our talented and capable people. They
are, indeed, the bedrock assets of the economy.

For our part, we in the DPE and the SOEs will attempt to improve our
communication with the stakeholders so that more information is available
for decision-making. As I will discuss later in this address, interaction
with potential suppliers in the investment programme is important both to
facilitate such a large programme and to open up opportunities for the
largest and smallest of enterprises.

With the change in emphasis regarding the work of the DPE and the increased
level of activity in the SOEs, we have had to build new capacities within
the department. During the second half of 2004 and throughout 2005 the
department redesigned its operational areas and embarked on an active staff
recruitment programme. More than 30 technically skilled senior management,
middle management and professional staff were recruited within the
department, and we now exceed employment equity targets for race and gender
at all levels.

Four line function branches were established to improve internal operating
efficiencies. An analysis and risk management unit was formed to monitor
and manage key risks and vulnerabilities, both at enterprise level and
across the enterprises as they impact on the wider economy. The corporate
strategy and structure unit, which oversees the contribution of SOEs to
government’s strategic and economic objectives, was augmented.

The legal, governance and secretariat unit, responsible for ensuring SOE
policy and regulatory compliance, and the corporate finance and
transactions unit, responsible for transactions execution and management,
were merged to tighten enterprise accountability for transactions. A
specialist position, to deal with special projects such as the resolution
of Aventura and the transformation of Alexkor, was established.

With the focusing of the SOEs on their core areas and the increased
workload, it became evident that there were a number of areas where a joint
endeavour by the SOEs and the DPE could give rise to important initiatives
that were not within the current core work of the SOEs, or fell outside
their future work.

This realisation resulted in the formation of the joint project facility,
and currently the unit is focusing on six projects: Firstly, identifying
and finding a coherent strategic approach to investment by the SOEs in
Africa and outside South Africa. Secondly, examining the current use of
pipelines within the SOEs and possible future uses to establish synergies
with port, rail and energy development.

Thirdly, identifying the skills needs of the SOEs and defining possible
areas of co-operation in skills development both for the SOEs and the wider
economy. This project links up well with the Joint Initiative on Priority
Skills Acquisition.

Fourthly, examining the optimal strategic deployment of the ICT
infrastructure of the large SOEs and its role in the second network
operator and enhanced broadband capacity in our economy. Incorporated in
this project is the development of business process outsourcing capacity in
populated but poor areas. More information on this last project is
contained in the appendix to the speech.

Fifthly, the process to optimise the disposal of noncore properties in
order to maximise value, provide broad-based Black Economic Empowerment
opportunities and support developmental initiatives. Finally, to achieve a
positive impact on the domestic economy through enhanced local production,
the revival of dormant capital goods industries and the creation of
opportunities for empowerment in the areas of SMMEs, broad-based Black
Economic Empowerment and women-owned enterprises.

The work programme of the DPE is now considerable and the progress that we
have made in addressing that workload is, I believe, positive. With regard
to the SOEs, they too have had to pay attention to building new capacity.
The investment programme is large. It requires new skills and indeed new
management structures and processes to implement it.

I believe that the SOEs are making excellent progress in this regard. The
work of the boards and management has indeed been Herculean. The management
teams, especially the newer ones, are settling in and I am confident that
we will increasingly see the benefits of this process.

I’m also confident that we are building a professional and dedicated
managerial cadre for the economy as a whole. I will continue to provide as
much support as possible for this healthy development and, along with the
boards, find the optimal balance between nurturing new talented management
and demanding the highest performance from them.

With regard to the employees as a whole, we will continue to find every way
we can to improve their skill and efficiency and to make the SOEs employers
of preference. This requires a robust but healthy working relationship
between management and the unions. I know that all boards and managements
are striving for this, and I’m confident that we will achieve this
relationship to a measure greater than the present basically good
situation. Differences will occur and maybe even future strikes, but I
believe that there is now a great deal of common ground regarding what the
state-owned enterprises can and should achieve.

The strategic and significant roles of SOEs in the economy necessitated the
institutionalisation and stabilisation of governance systems to balance
enterprise, sector and economic developmental imperatives whilst
maintaining sound corporate governance practices, and commercial and
financial viability.

Key to the developmental role of the SOEs is their ability to deliver goods
in an efficient, reliable and cost-effective manner. Like any other
structure that operates in the economy, we expect SOEs to raise finances,
to cover costs, to maximise efficiency and to maintain healthy, independent
balance sheets. By providing well-priced, effective services, the SOEs can
enhance national competitiveness and contribute to economic growth and job
creation.

Capturing the depth and profound macroeconomic impact of SOEs in the form
of shareholder compacts is indeed a challenge. We have come a long way in
fostering a common understanding between the department and SOEs around key
deliverables and the expected rate of return on equity. The process of
formulating shareholder compacts has been lengthy, but it is the quality of
the end product that is important.

The shareholder compacts will provide clarity to the SOE boards regarding
our expectations in respect of compliance with systems of corporate
governance and the developmental objectives of the state. We have
exceptionally competent and professional boards with good management teams
that, given clear shareholder management compacts, will be able to drive
implementation.

Our role is thus primarily to provide support and oversight. We will
continue to strengthen the shareholder–board relationship through regular
chairperson and chief executive officer fora; formulating a SOE-wide
dividend policy; establishing remuneration guidelines; conducting board
induction programmes and an annual board evaluation; and revising the
transaction management guidelines.
To tighten our shareholder management function the department also
established processes to ensure the systemic review of businesses,
corporate and investment plans and financial forecasts. To strengthen our
risk management capacity, the HOLT valuation system was introduced to
develop financial indicators, and the cash flow return on investment
framework formed part of an initiative to benchmark SOE performance.

A risk management questionnaire was developed to measure SOE compliance
with the Public Finance Management Act, and performance risk analysis
reviews are conducted quarterly. All of this will occur within the context
of a robust shareholder management framework. We are working with the
National Treasury and the Department of the Public Service and
Administration to amend the Public Finance Management Act to better align
the current performance measures with government’s strategic economic
intent.

Greater clarity on the nature and role of SOEs has laid the foundation for
the formulation of legislation on shareholder management, which we hope to
table before this House next year. We will also be engaged in government-
wide consultations to establish co-operative governance protocols to
improve co-ordination across the three spheres of government.

For us the primary focus for the year will thus be to closely monitor the
streamlining of SOEs and the implementation of investment plans to ensure
that they take the economy to the leading edge of efficiency in the
operations of infrastructure. I will now speak briefly about the key
developments in each of the SOEs that report to the Department of Public
Enterprises.

Transnet will continue its process of transforming from a diversified
conglomerate into a focused freight transport company. With regard to the
reassignment of noncore functions and services, Metrorail was transferred
to the Department of Transport on 1 May this year, and Shosholoza Meyl is
in the process of being transferred. On Monday, 29 May, the Transnet Group
successfully launched a process to sell a majority stake in Cape Town’s
Victoria and Alfred Waterfront, which we hope to conclude by September
2006.

It is anticipated that the transfer of SA Airways will be completed within
the current calendar year. Our primary undertaking following the transfer
of SAA will be to stabilise its short-term financial position and develop a
pragmatic airlift strategy. Developments in the airline industry are taking
place at a rapid pace. SAA will not be an exception to this, and we can
expect a number of important and positive announcements in the year to
come.

The rate of growth of container traffic has necessitated a rapid expansion
of ports. The expansion and redesign of Pier 1 and the widening of the
entrance to Durban harbour and the construction of the container terminal
at Ngqura are on track. The delays being experienced at the Cape Town
Container Terminal in respect of environmental impact assessments are a
matter of concern, which we hope to resolve shortly. A long-term plan for
ports that speaks to the strategic industrial requirements of different
regions of our country and ensures greater specialisation between and
amongst ports is being developed to optimise the impact of our
infrastructural investment programme.

In the case of Eskom, the underestimation of economic growth and the
consequential underinvestment in infrastructure in the first decade of
governance has required us to adjust and accelerate the implementation of
Eskom’s building plan. I am very happy with the progress to date.

The massive capital expansion requirements will, quite clearly, require
funding from sources beyond government. In order to address new capacity
requirements, as indicated in 2004, Eskom will build 70% of future new
capacity whilst independent power producers or IPPs will provide the
remaining 30%. Furthermore, Eskom’s ability to go into the capital markets
and raise private capital at very competitive rates is of huge
macroeconomic importance.

The first residential mortgage-backed securitisation in the public sector,
to the value of R1,6 billion, was settled on Wednesday, 31 May, this year.
The securitisation of Eskom Finance Company (Pty) Ltd’s home loan book is a
momentous event, having been 3,5 times oversubscribed and clearing at what
is called Jibar plus 36 basis points. That is a very competitive interest
rate. The success of the event highlights the opportunities that the
proceeds of restructuring can present to the infrastructural investment
programme.

Eskom will invest R97 billion over the next five years: R65 billion will be
invested in the generation sector - this amount includes the new building
and the return to service of the mothballed plants, and will add about 7
579 MW to the current 37 500 MW available in the system; R10,9 billion will
be invested in strengthening the transmission sector; and R15 billion will
be invested in the distribution sector.

Included in these plans is the provision for a coal-fired power station
codenamed ‘Project Alpha’, which is expected to add 2 100 MW to the total
power available by 2012. The first phase of that project is included in the
first figure I gave you of 7 579 MW. A pump storage project codenamed
‘Project Hotel’ will also be ready in 2012 and will provide a further 1 300
MW to the system.

As regards additions to current capacity, Eskom will commission
1 050 MW of open-cycle gas turbine plants at Atlantis and Mossel Bay by
2007, while the IPPs will commission another 1 050 MW of open-cycle gas
turbine plants in KwaZulu-Natal and Port Elizabeth by 2009.

As indicated by the Minister of Minerals and Energy on 25 May, Cabinet has
agreed that we need to establish a national distributor that encompasses
the municipalities outside of the metropolitan areas and financial
modelling is being run by EDI Holdings to look at its viability. Cabinet
also acknowledged that Eskom will need to play a critical role in this
regard and we are currently consulting with Minerals and Energy, Provincial
and Local Government and the National Treasury on how we will implement the
Cabinet decision.

Eskom has continued to exceed its electrification targets. For the year
ending in March 2006, Eskom electrified 135 868 additional homes,
surpassing its 85 000 target, and has now electrified 3,346 million homes
since the inception of this programme. This is quite a staggering
achievement. [Applause.]

The energy sector brings me to the newest acquisition of the department,
the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor, which was transferred from the Department
of Trade and Industry to the Department of Public Enterprises in March this
year. The increasing demand for energy and the need to combat global
warming have resulted in nuclear energy re-emerging as an attractive
alternative. Currently 30 nuclear plants are being built in 12 countries
and over 50 are in the pipeline.

Given the urgent demand for large-scale, clean, affordable energy and South
Africa’s lack of primary fuel sources in its coastal regions, providing
coastal towns and cities with electricity requires either the construction
of very long and expensive transmission systems, or the setting up of the
logistics capability to supply coastal power stations with either natural
gas or coal. Both of these solutions are expensive.

The Pebble Bed Modular Reactor provides a plausible and cost-competitive
alternative solution. PBMRs can be situated close to the point of use so
that there is no need to upgrade either transmission or rail
infrastructure. The PBMR modules use uranium in small quantities with the
resulting advantages in waste management. In addition, South Africa has an
abundance of uranium, negating security of supply concerns. Having
innovated significantly from its original German-based technology, the PBMR
design can be regarded as the most efficient high temperature reactor in
the world at present.

The department will assist in the establishment of this entity by
introducing a governance system that is compliant with the Public Finance
Management Act, supporting the construction of a demonstration power plant
and pilot fuel plant, and facilitating the timely processing of the
environmental impact assessment.

Last year we reported that Denel was facing a funding crisis and that it
was not viable under its current model. The recent R2 billion cash
injection and a strategic refocus based on establishing Denel as a systems
integrator rather than a systems developer is bearing positive fruits
despite the challenges.

Denel has identified four key measures to improve its profitability and
long-term viability. Firstly, Denel will consolidate its business units in
order to reduce duplication and to focus on supplying niche capabilities.
This process includes the assessment of the viability of each business unit
and a decision to either fix or exit the particular business. The
assessment of the businesses has largely been completed. Denel will
consolidate and reduce the number of its product lines. In addition, Denel
is in the process of disposing of its noncore business units and assets.

The second central measure of the strategy is the identification of global
alliance partners and the conclusion of business partnerships at business
unit level. Selective equity partnerships and alliances with global prime
contractors will be established. These partnerships will result in Denel
achieving greater market access, global supply chain integration and world-
class capabilities and productivity. Our first partnership deal in the
aerospace sector with SAAB is currently under way. We are also actively
seeking new partnerships in the developing or emerging world. My recent
visit to Turkey was to advance this objective.

Domestic demand is the nucleus for success in the defence market. As its
third measure Denel is seeking to secure at least 70% of local defence
spending. Interdepartmental task teams involving the Department of Defence
and the Department of Trade and Industry have been established to ensure
further alignment of the defence acquisition policy with the objective of
further developing the local industry. This may require changes to the
current Armscor Act and the alignment of Department of Defence requirements
with the strategic capabilities of Denel, as indicated by the Minister of
Defence during the debate on his Budget Vote.

Lastly, Denel will raise its capabilities and productivity to world
standards. It will identify, initiate, co-ordinate and manage interventions
to ensure capability and productivity gains. Where required, their business
alliance partners will inject new technology, processes and skills into
Denel, resulting in a leading technological edge and improved efficiencies.

The department will closely monitor the implementation of Denel’s business
strategy and its performance with respect to joint venture partnerships. We
are also working closely with the National Treasury to monitor the balance
sheet requirements of Denel, especially after the R2 billion injection.
Furthermore, we will work with the Department of Trade and Industry and the
Department of Science and Technology to develop a defence sector strategy
and ensure policy alignment.
In order to streamline the activities of national organisations to support
the Department of Defence, Denel, Armscor and industry with research and
testing services, the Department of Public Enterprises will also play a key
role in establishing the Defence Evaluation and Research Institute, or
Deri, which will fall under the Department of Defence.

With regard to Alexkor, I am very pleased to see three leading members of
the community there ...

Goeiedag, mense. [Applous.] [Good day, people. [Applause.]]

Let me tell you that they are “baie taai” [very tough] negotiators, but
great leaders.

As regards Alexkor, the significance of community participation in decision-
making on matters pertaining to their economic wellbeing cannot be
underestimated. We have therefore dedicated significant time and resources
to engage the Richtersveld community on developing a comprehensive and
beneficial resolution to their concerns.

An agreement has been reached between the community and myself and a
memorandum of agreement was signed on 10 February, but the legal teams are
still negotiating a few outstanding concerns. It is expected that a
settlement will be concluded with the Richtersveld community shortly. This
will allow for the recapitalisation of Alexkor to be expedited and Alexkor
will then be in a position to implement its short-term turnaround plan and
drive its exploration and expansion programme.

We will announce the agreement with the community in more detail later, but
I believe it is a historic opportunity for this community, which I hope
will be of great benefit to them. In the meantime, however, the department
is proceeding with the transfer of community services such as the hospital,
the school, the airport and other noncore services currently managed by
Alexkor, to the relevant authorities. A consultant has been appointed to
support the establishment of a municipality and the Northern Cape
provincial government is in the process of taking over the functions, which
should reside with them.

As regards Safcol, Safcol’s Komatiland Forests is the last remaining
forestry package that was to be disposed of under the forestry-
restructuring programme. The Bonheur consortium has withdrawn from the
competition tribunal process and the Komatiland Forests transaction,
providing the department with an opportunity to review the transaction. A
study of high-level international best practice in forestry revealed
opportunities within the wider forest, timber, pulp and paper industries
for greater contributions to the Asgisa objectives of skills development,
the cost of intermediate inputs for industry, expansion and development of
SMMEs, and maintaining the competitiveness of the South African industry. A
new strategy is currently being developed, which will be finalised within
the current financial year.

Expanding and modernising the country’s logistical infrastructure will
improve the quality and efficiency of services, thereby contributing to
overall economic growth. This will ensure that the spending on
infrastructure does indeed result in the desired outcomes.  Furthermore, an
investment dashboard is being introduced to track the outputs of capex-
related projects, thereby increasing transparency, accountability and
effective implementation.

The capex programmes will also provide opportunities for the development of
domestic industries and for job creation. The total government
infrastructural spending over the next five to seven years is estimated at
R360 billion, of which a third will be driven by Eskom and Transnet.

The capex programmes spending by Transnet and Eskom, which translates to
1,5% of 2004’s GDP per annum over the next five years, will have a
significant positive impact on the economy. It will result in an increased
demand for outputs, focused industrial development of important sectors
such as capital goods and transport equipment, and the crowding in of
private sector investment.

Let me say that many industries, I believe, will unfold out of this
programme, including that of the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor, and many
opportunities will arise. I would urge members to have a look at the small
booklet we are releasing today from Eskom and the Department of Public
Enterprises. It sets out how the Eskom contracts will be managed and how
one can try to become a supplier to Eskom. So the small booklet that was
available in the presentation is really worth looking at, and I would
encourage members to ensure that they spread this information to those
businesses and companies that would be interested in participating in this
major programme.

Madam Speaker, we table before you a Budget Vote request of R683,4 million.
In the current financial year the department will oversee the continued
shedding of noncore activities of SOEs and the accelerated implementation
of building plans through the stringent application of shareholder
management and governance frameworks. I would like to impress on the House
the enormity of the responsibility that rests on the department and its
reporting SOEs.

Madam Speaker, we embrace the challenge because we know that we have a
competent team within the department and within each SOE and its board,
teams that are committed to the expeditious realisation of government’s
developmental objectives.

Allow me once again to thank the chief executive officers and board
chairpersons and members, Director-General Portia Molefe and all the
energetic young people in my department, and the portfolio committee
chairperson, Yunus Carrim, and members of the portfolio committee for their
contributions to the remarkable progress made by the department.
Congratulations also to Maria Ramos, who I believe is up there, on the
extension of her contract as Transnet’s chief executive officer.

Finally, to my special guests who I announced at the outset, the young
people sitting there, I hope that they have seen enough to be able to learn
something and that the information may have opened exciting opportunities
for you to consider in your career to come.

Madam Speaker, this is a sign of our efficiency: I have no time left.
[Applause.]

Mr Y I CARRIM: Madam Speaker, comrades and friends, it seems to me that we
need to look at the rules of Parliament because I have a flu emerging and I
have been allocated a limited amount of time. If you have flu it slows you
down. I sincerely think that we need to look at situations like mine,
although I have no doubt that the hon Butana Komphela and others will
always have flu when they are about to speak before this House. So, we
should add a rider that says you must produce a doctor’s certificate, which
I can produce - and hopefully the next time around when I do get a flu,
which I hope I do not ever get, you will be sympathetic and extend my time
by a few minutes.

But having said that, let me say that our committee feels that three key
interrelated issues that emerged in our consideration of the department
luckily apply to the DA too. If you have flu, it does not matter which
party you are from.

What we say in our report is that there are three things really: Firstly,
government is becoming increasingly clear about the nature and the role of
the SOEs in a developmental economy; secondly, while different SOEs have
different challenges, and are in different states of readiness, there is a
general movement away from clarifying visions, strategies and plans to
implementation; and thirdly, the portfolio of the department seems to
constantly increase with expanded programmes and new projects, but there
has not been a commensurate increase in personnel and resources.

In short, the department has, with modest resources, come quite some way in
12 short months and we convey this in our report on the budget published in
the ATCs of 31 May. Essentially I will provide an overview of the report
and other members will focus on specific aspects of that report and develop
them further.

Our overall view of the Department of Public Enterprises - DPE - as set out
in our report is that, given the scope and complexities of the department’s
portfolio, we feel that the DPE has made significant strides since the last
budget briefings. It is much clearer on its role and current programmes and
it has budgeted appropriately for the achievement of its targeted outputs
in this financial year.

The new strategic plan for 2006 to 2009 is commendable and there is a much
better fit now between the plan and the budget than there was in previous
years. We will be able to assess this better after we have considered the
DPE’s annual report for the last financial year, which we will consider
later this year. But, at this stage, we feel that the DPE has made
effective and productive use of last year’s budget.

Of course, major challenges persist. But, the Portfolio Committee feels, at
this stage anyway, that the department certainly has the potential to meet
most of these challenges. The department’s senior managers are new, young
and enthusiastic and hold a lot of promise. The skills level of the DPE has
improved since the last budget sittings, although challenges remain. It was
a more confident department that we engaged with this year.

Minister Erwin and the new director-general, Portia Molefe, must be
commended for putting together such a potentially good team. The challenge,
of course, is to create a productive harmony of this new team and most
effectively deploy their skills and passions - and here too, the signs are
promising. Of course, given the nature of the interaction between
departments and parliamentary committees, for a variety of other reasons,
there are aspects of a department’s role and functioning, usually negative,
that we are unable to see.
But, with this qualification, we are very clear that the DPE is doing well
and is poised to do better. Of course, time will tell.

So, as you can see, we are very positive but also cautious. A lot has been
done during the past twelve months, and we hope it is sustainable. There is
a lot of promise - we hope it will be fulfilled. On both counts, at this
stage at least, the signs are that our expectations will be realised.

We feel that there is a fairly high level of synergy between the Minister
and the DG’s approach to their portfolio. And this is also reflected in the
approach of the senior managers. This, too, suggests the clarity being
forged in attending to this portfolio.

The committee feels that the new strategic plan is much clearer on the role
of the department and its programmes, measurable objectives and structures.
The plan also provides greater clarity on the nature and role of the state-
owned enterprises - SOEs - and what is required of each of them.

The committee was interested to hear that the DG feels that the
department’s mandate, vision and mission should be further refined and made
clearer and even more concrete, although there have been improvements since
last year. The DG wants these functions to be more concise and in simpler
language. This is surprising, frankly, coming from a senior manager in a
government department.

MPs have often complained about the bureaucratic-speak and unnecessarily
technocratic language used by department officials, which often tends to
hide – or to use a more precise but big word, obfuscate - issues. And, we
have really had to struggle to get anywhere with the departments officials
on this. So, the DG’s attitude is a breath of fresh air.

Of course, there is no denying that the complex technical work of some
departments sometimes requires technical language, which is not easy to
simplify. But, in general, there is certainly room to be more precise and
concise and to use simpler language. This, too, we think, should be a
measure of a department’s progress.

As the SOEs stabilize and their new roles become clearer, the DPE is
increasingly focusing on the long-term economic and developmental needs and
goals of the country - and this, too, is to be welcomed.

To the committee it also seems that there is an increasing coordination
between the DPE and the policy, regulatory and other relevant departments.
Of course, this coordination can be challenging, but the committee notes
the progress and hopes to see more. To ensure that there is effective
coordination within the DPE and across departments and that the message
given to SOEs by different parties is consistent, the DPE is working on a
governance workflow model. The committee welcomes this.

Now that greater clarity is emerging about the nature and role of SOEs in
our developmental state and economy, the stage is set for legislation on
the new shareholder model. The committee looks forward to the tabling of
this legislation. And, we have heard from the Minister a moment ago that to
ensure a more focused and integrated role in transactions, the DPE has
merged two previous programmes and a new programme has emerged - all of
which, it seems to us anyway, will make for a more effective implementation
of the department’s mandate.

There was much else in the department’s programme that titillated us:
Firstly, a new procurement guide that encourages local content in
procurement through the SOEs capital expenditure programme; secondly the
department’s focus on the role of the SOEs capex programme in revitalising
dormant industries; and, thirdly, the role of the SOEs in establishing call
centres.

The committee was also impressed to hear that 63% of DPE staff are women.
Of these, 47% are at senior management level. [Applause.] However, there
are no people with disabilities employed at the DPE. The department hopes
to employ 15 people with disabilities over a two-year period. That not a
single person with disabilities is employed at the DPE is surely not
acceptable and the committee will monitor progress in this regard.

The Minister explained that the department had a relatively small budget,
but was changing somewhat from being an administrative department to having
a budget that reflects transfer payments for capitalisation of SOEs. The R2
billion allocated to Denel in the last financial year is an example. Of the
department’s budget of R683,4 million for this financial year, R580 million
comprises transfer payments – the largest, of course, being to the Pebble
Bed Modular Reator - PBMR. In effect, the DPE’s budget is R102,3 million,
which includes R10 million for the Joint Project Facility, previously
funded by the SOEs.

In the past financial year, the department underspent by 0,2%. This rises
to 4,77% if the transfer to Denel is excluded. The reason for this is that
the R3,1 million due to Diabo Share Trust was not transferred because its
audited financial statements were not available. The committee feels that
the underspending is understandable. Other committee members will deal with
this, so we shall quickly deal with them as an overview.

Obviously the challenges in electricity delivery, especially in the Western
Cape, have to be met more effectively. Of course, we accept that the higher
than anticipated economic growth and the massive rollout of electricity to
the poor, explain the current challenges. But, the underinvestment in
infrastructure in these past ten years is also responsible for the current
challenges. The committee welcomes the Minister’s statement that the power
outages have highlighted the underinvestment in infrastructure. We feel
that there should be great acknowledgement of the consequences of this.

We feel, too, that the executive must take its fair share of responsibility
for this underinvestment and draw the necessary lessons. But, Parliament
too, Madam Speaker, cannot escape its responsibility for this and our and
other parliamentary committees need to also draw lessons and become more
effective in fulfilling our oversight responsibilities.

However, in respect of the new generation of electricity programme, Eskom
seems very much on track and we welcome this. The PBMR is new to us –
Comrade Wang will speak about that down the road.

Transnet, we note, is making constant progress and the committee commends
this. The committee also congratulates the Transnet management and the
trade unions on the amicable settlement of the strike. Of course, the
committee does not understand the full complexities of the dispute but
hopes that both sides have drawn lessons from this experience and that
other SOEs will do so too.

The committee feels that as Denel has been allocated R2 billion from the
national fiscus and is likely to be allocated more to meet its R5,1 billion
recapitalisation target, we should be more rigorous in monitoring its
progress in the implementation of its turnaround strategy and financial
recovery. Since the budget briefings, the committee has received a briefing
from Denel and was impressed with Denel’s greater clarity of vision,
strategy, programmes and structures and the progress it has made in the six
months since we last saw it - the considerable challenge notwithstanding.

But, our committee has its own challenges. We need to be more rigorous in
our oversight role. The report we have presented focuses on plans,
strategies and programmes but not enough on concrete details of the budget.
We need to develop our skills further in this regard and we also have to do
a whole lot of things that I am afraid I do not have the time to comment on
– but it is more about us rather that the executive.

By way of conclusion, though, I would like to thank Minister Erwin, the
Director-General, Portia Molefe, and all the senior managers in the
Ministry and department for their cooperation. I know that this has been a
particularly positive picture of the Ministry and the department and I
sound like “imbongi” [praise singer] Carrim – but I want to say that this
is the picture we see.

This is not, let me assure you, because Portia Molefe is my home-girl as it
were, or because the Minister, the DG and I were at some stage attached to
the then University of Natal – nor, indeed, because we all happen to be
Zulus. But, it is because of the picture we see. [Laughter.] It may, of
course, fade or become more beautiful – let us see.[Laughter.] But
oversight certainly, Madam Speaker, does not just mean criticising for the
sake of criticising.

Finally, let me say thank you to Reneva Fourie and Dudu Mhlongo from the
Ministry’s parliamentary liaison office and to Ms Gaynor Kast who is
somewhere here. I should not be saying this, Gaynor, in the public domain,
but thank you very much, in particular, for sending me all the statements
that the Minister issues before they go to the press. That is why I am so
positive. But, on a more serious note, thank you, Gaynor Kast, for sending
us the press releases on time. It goes out to the Chairperson of the
Committee at the same time it goes to the press. So, let me once again say
thank you.

I want to say one final thing. I think the House is going to acknowledge
this in a moment, but I would like to take this opportunity very quickly to
say that the hon Yusuf Bhamjee, a member of this House who has been at the
provincial legislature in KwaZulu-Natal from 1990, suffered a severe loss
on Friday. Many of you read about it in the press. We extend our sincerest
condolences to him. His wife, who was a very progressive gynaecologist, was
killed in the medical centre in the middle of Pietermaritzburg at about
noon on Friday - which is quite a severe indictment of what is happening in
our country. And, I think we as a committee and, I am sure, the Speaker
empathise with this. We want to extend our sincerest condolences to him and
wish his family the very best in these difficult circumstances. I thank you
all. [Applause.]

Mr J J M STEPHENS: Madam Speaker, may I say on behalf of the DA that we
associate ourselves in every way with the condolences expressed by the hon
Carrim. The Minister will be happy to hear that the DA supports this Budget
Vote, and we are not calling for his resignation! [Laughter.]

I wish to use the opportunity of this, my first budget speech as DA
spokesperson on Public Enterprises, to review the status of the debate on
SOEs, specifically to identify those matters upon which there is agreement
and those upon which we take issue with the government. I’m indebted to my
DA predecessor the hon Rabie for his 2005 budget speech in which he
initiated this process and on which I shall attempt to build further.

I begin with those matters upon which I believe the government and we are
in agreement. Let the decks be cleared of such nonissues. Firstly, SOEs
must be self-funding business enterprises that deliver economic returns on
capital employed. There is no room for loss-making SOEs that persist as a
drag on the fiscus. Loss-making SOEs must be turned around post-haste.
Secondly, unlike private firms, SOEs cannot merely be profit-maximising
agents. They must achieve certain strategic socioeconomic goals and
therefore they must maximise economic rates of return.

Thirdly, SOEs must be efficient. The product or service that they are
supposed to deliver must be delivered time-efficiently, cost-efficiently
and capital-efficiently. Consequently, SOEs must be fully corporatised.
International studies have concluded that SOEs gain far greater efficiency
from corporatisation than from the privatisation of their ownership.

These points could form three pillars of an emerging national consensus on
state-owned enterprises. There are other areas of agreement as well, but
they require further interrogation.

The subject of state-owned enterprises forever raises the question of the
relative roles of public and private enterprise. It is a debate with deep
roots in South Africa. The earliest and most tempestuous such debate
occurred during the mid-1920s around the establishment of Iscor.

Die destydse Eerste Minister genl Hertzog het die totstandkoming van die
destydse Yskor as ’n staatskorporasie in die Parlement ter tafel gelê. Hy
is gesteun deur sy alliansievennoot in regering, die Arbeidersparty. Namens
die ou Sappe het genl Smuts, destyds die leier van die opposisie, die skep
van ’n besigheid in staatsbesit heftig teengestaan en dit uitgekryt as
blatante sosialisme.

Genl Hertzog het betoog dat Britse geldmagte nie beheer oor hierdie
strategies belangrike nywerheid van Suid-Afrika moes kry nie. Buite
staatsbesit, het hy gesê, sou net Britse kapitaliste dit as ’n private
nywerheid kon stig en bedryf, tot nadeel van maatskaplike opheffing in Suid-
Afrika en die ontluikende plaaslike nywerheidsektor.

As ’n staatsonderneming was die ingryping juis daarop gemik om werk en
opleiding te verskaf aan veral armblankes, merendeels arm
Afrikaanssprekende blankes, om sodoende hulle nypende armoede te verlig.
Hertzog het duidelik ’n ekonomiese ontwikkelingsdoelwit nagestreef.

As ’n staatsonderneming het Yskor dan, tesame met ander staatsinstellings
en –ondernemings, ’n sleutelrol gespeel in die bou van ’n sterk plaaslike
nywerheidsektor en die uiteindelike oplossing van die armblankevraagstuk.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The then Prime Minister Gen Hertzog tabled the establishment of the then
Iscor as a state corporation in Parliament. He was supported by his
alliance partner in government, the Labour Party. On behalf of the old Saps
Gen Smuts, at that time the leader of the opposition, vehemently opposed
the creation of a state-owned enterprise and denounced it as blatant
socialism.

Gen Hertzog argued that British moneyed interests should not gain control
over this strategically important industry of South Africa. He said that if
it was not state-owned only British capitalists would be able to found and
operate it as a private industry, to the detriment of social upliftment in
South Africa and the budding local industrial sector.

As a state enterprise the intervention was, in fact, aimed at providing
work and training for poor whites in particular, for the most part poor
Afrikaans-speaking whites, in order to alleviate their grinding poverty.
Hertzog was clearly pursuing an economic development objective.

As a state enterprise Iscor, together with other government institutions
and enterprises, then played a key role in the building of a strong local
industrial sector and the eventual solution of the poor-white problem.]

The more things change, the more they remain the same!

Yskor was ’n belangrike element in die ekonomiese bemagtiging van blanke
Afrikaners. Genl Smuts is nooit vergeef vir sy opponering van Iscor nie.
Afrikaners het dit beskou as bewys van sy afkerige, minagtende houding
jeens hulle en hulle belange, en sy voorkeur vir Britse kapitaliste.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Iscor was an important element in the economic empowerment of white South
Africans. Gen Smuts was never forgiven for his opposition to Iscor.
Afrikaners viewed it as proof of his disinclined, contemptuous attitude
towards them and their interests and his preference for British
capitalists.]

Now in the shape and form of Mittal Steel, this privatised monopoly
represents an economic disaster. The previous positive downstream
externalities are all lost. Mittal is a negative for the local
manufacturing industry and is fuelling the very high cost of construction,
while the economy haemorrhages monopoly-sized profits offshore.

This situation can only be tolerated if rigorously regulated and price-
capped. Urgent government action is required. The country is bleeding. Cap
Mittal’s prices at export parity and be done. They can live with that very
handsomely. Hertzog was right, you see, and Smuts was wrong! I suggest
there are valuable lessons for all of us in this piece of history.

Privatisation has many facets, of which ownership is but one. There is room
for private participation in SOEs on a multitude of bases. The more such
opportunities are created, the wider the benefits of public enterprises can
be spread. With the unlamented demise of the Washington consensus – never a
consensus much beyond Washington anyway! – a new global consensus is
developing, often referred to as the New Santiago Consensus.

The new consensus retains its stress on market-based development and
limiting government’s role in direct production, but it takes cognisance of
market failures that at times cannot be addressed without a significant and
ongoing role for government. Very importantly, it emphasises that
government has the responsibility to reduce poverty and inequality and to
ensure that there is shared growth in the economy.

Fundamentally, government has no business being in business, yet there are
valid reasons for SOEs, as is demonstrated by the Iscor saga. If the
enterprise is a natural monopoly or if it delivers any social welfare,
nationally strategic or public policy benefits that cannot be delivered in
any more efficient way, or if it requires investment of a magnitude beyond
the ability of private enterprise there is a case for state ownership.

Unfortunately SOEs have suffered from a lack of capital investment during
the past decade. Now an urgent need for a massive capital injection exists,
with enterprise restructuring and spinning-off of noncore assets resulting.
This lack of foresight has cost the country dearly in jobs and a loss of
social welfare.
The need to place SOEs on a sound financial footing is fundamental, but it
must be understood that, as all shareholders do, South Africans expect our
investments to grow, to prosper and to deliver what they are intended to
deliver. As we expect of private enterprise, so public enterprise must
create and maintain economically viable jobs. We need growth in productive
employment opportunities, not restructuring excuses.

Employees must have job security, whatever their race or gender; they must
not fear tomorrow. Everyone must know that there is no glass ceiling to
prevent their advancement in the organisation. Only then will SOEs become
the vibrantly viable, efficient and proudly South African enterprises they
are supposed to be.

We await the department’s strategic three-year plan with bated breath. The
anticipated shareholder compacts will direct the nature of the future
debate. Greater clarity on the relative roles of the department and the
SOEs, clearly measurable objectives for each SOE and their expected
contribution to Asgisa are urgently required. Let us therefore do what
wisdom demands, but let us do it with speed and courage. Do not let
procrastination born of timidity delay us any longer. The people are
waiting. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S E KHOLWANE: Madam Speaker, Ministers and Deputy Ministers present, hon
members, officials from the DPE and the captains of the SOEs, the leaders
of the community of Alexkor, guests and comrades, when the Cuban President,
Fidel Castro, was addressing this House in September 1998, he said:

  There are still today two South Africas, which I ought not to call the
  “white” one and the “black” one; that terminology should forever be
  dropped if a multiracial and united country is meant to be created.


  I would rather put it this way: two South Africas, the rich and the poor,
  one where an average family receives 12 times the income of that of the
  other ... one where 100% of the people know how to read and write, another
  where illiteracy is more than 50%; one with almost full employment,
  another where 45% are unemployed ... one that has accumulated and has
  almost all the technical and managerial knowledge, the other doomed to
  inexperience and ignorance; one that enjoys wellbeing and freedom; the
  other having been able to conquer freedom but without wellbeing.

The above still holds true even today. The challenge of making a
substantive dent in the level of unemployment and poverty remains.
Furthermore, the government has to forge an effective developmental state
that can both accelerate and share economic growth.

Asgisa, as elaborated by the President in the state of the nation address
and by the Deputy President in various subsequent forums, is a direct
response to the structural constraints that have limited our progress in
achieving our developmental programme.

As reflected in the 50th national conference, our mission as the ANC
continues to be the fundamental transformation of the South African economy
in order to empower black people, in particular, and those who were
previously disadvantaged, to eliminate poverty and the extreme inequalities
generated by the apartheid system, to generate productive employment
opportunities for all our people at a living wage and ensure balanced South
African economic development.

Furthermore, I must indicate that the recent management innovation special
report for the Boao Forum for Asia Annual Conference 2006, reflects that as
China embarks on its eleventh five-year guidelines, state-owned enterprises
are being called on to take the lead in increasing China’s capacity to
innovate.

China’s large and medium-sized SOEs have made significant gains in economic
strength over the past 30 years, and have been a major driving force of
that country’s economic growth. Some SOEs have made it to the top rank -
even the top five - and some are leading in their disciplines. This proves
to us that the position of the executive that we use our SOEs to develop
our economy and also to transform, was a well-informed position to take.

We all know that Eskom and Transnet will be embarking on a massive R130
billion project over the next few years. That means that both SOEs will
require the necessary skills and capacity to deliver and that in turn will
mean that the department must also have the capacity to monitor that.

This does not exclude us as the portfolio committee either, Chairperson
Yunus Carrim. We must also have the capacity to do our oversight, because
if we don’t we are not going to be able to ensure that this programme
becomes a success.

Furthermore, as has been indicated by the chairperson, we would like to
indicate that the department has moved further in terms of ensuring that
the issue of gender balance, which we are so passionate about as the ANC,
is addressed. If one looks at the department, it is well represented.
Indeed, what pleases me is that the youth representation is also huge in
that department, thanks to the DG and the Minister. [Applause.]

The need to reassert the importance of rural development cannot be
overemphasised. In 1992, in our ready-to-govern policy we stated that
apartheid had distorted the social and economic environment of the rural
areas and accordingly the new democratic state must implement a policy to
redress these distortions and create opportunities for rural people through
balanced and sustainable development.
We welcome the project about the call centre and the property projects,
which have been driven by the SOEs. We hope that the programme which they
are developing to ensure that all the communities do participate in the
capex projects will be presented to the portfolio committee very soon so
that we can engage with it.

Ngalesikhatsi sichumana netakhamiti singemaLunga eSishayamtsetfo, basebenti
labasebenta etindzaweni tetingodvo njengase Barberton, eSabie naletinye
tindzawo, Ndvuna, bakhombise ngalokusebaleni kwekutsi batjelwe bacashi babo
kutsi kwentiwa yini lokutsi kubete tingodvo kuleto timboni ngobe umgomo
wahulumende we ANC nguwo lobangela kutsi kushode leto tingodvo.

Kodvwa-ke lesifuna kukusho tsine, kulabo basebenti labatsintsekako kanye
nemindeni yabo, kutsi loko akusilo nani liciniso. Liciniso kutsi lemililo
leyahlasela emahlatsi etfu, ngemnyaka wanga 2003 ngiyo leyaba yimbhangela
leyenta kutsi kube nekushoda kwetingodvo. Ngeke lohulumende we ANC
lobatsandza kangaka bantfu baseNingizimu Afrika afake imigomo letakwenta
kwekutsi bangakhoni kuvikela imisebenti yabo. Sitsi leso simo siyetsemba
sitawulungiseka masinyane. (Translation of Siswati paragraphs follows.)

[When we met with the public as members of the National Assembly, the
workers in the timber industry, Minister, explained to us very clearly that
they were told by their employers why there was a shortage of raw material.
This, they said, was a direct result of the ANC-led government’s policies
on the forestry industry.

Notwithstanding that, what we want to say to you today and inadvertently to
those workers and their families is that there is no truth in that. The
truth is that the fires that struck our forests in 2003 are the direct
cause of the shortage of timber. The ANC that loves the people of South
Africa so much will never allow policies that will hamper progress in the
industry. And we hope that this situation will be resolved speedily.]

In conclusion, we want to congratulate the captains of the SOEs, Eskom,
Transnet, Denel and the rest. We know that the work they are doing is not
easy to do. It is easy for us to come here and lambaste them, without
acknowledging the work they do.

Furthermore, we cannot exclude the work done by the department,
particularly the DG and the top management. We think that they are doing
very well. Keep it up. We cannot underestimate the problem that we
inherited and we acknowledge that we will not overcome this in a short
period. We still have a long way to go, particularly in the transformation
of the economy of our country. [Interjections.]

Don’t worry; I will not say that we don’t support the budget. We as the ANC
will support this budget, because it’s one of the most progressive budgets,
which also addresses the issue of the shareholder management system that
will enable the state-owned enterprises to deliver as is expected. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Prof E S CHANG: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, the chairperson of the
committees and hon members, and all the hon guests sitting on the gallery,
this is the first time that I stand here with my very cold hands - I don’t
know why they are so cold. But I can guarantee you; I am going to give a
very warm speech. [Laughter.]

The IFP believes that one of South Africa’s biggest challenges is to attain
sustainable economic growth and development. Clearly, we have not yet
achieved the growth rate required for sustainable development. Coupled with
this, a number of issues have to be dealt with head on.

The first issue is Denel. State-owned enterprises in South Africa are
characterised by massive financial investment as well as investment in
labour, technology and infrastructure. Denel, which is South Africa’s
defence-related industry, operates within the context of increasing global
consolidation. It is a repository of cutting edge technology and
intellectual capital.

We need to deal with the question that has been put as to whether Denel is
a viable state-owned enterprise. Denel’s CEO, in a recent presentation to
the portfolio committee, said that Denel suffered a 23% decline in revenue
and was expecting an operation loss of between R1 billion and R1,8 billion.
He also said that the government’s commitment was needed if it was to ward
off insolvency.

The chairperson of our committee stated recently that overseas defence
companies flourished when they had political support. It is with the above
point in mind that we urge government to give clarity on the type of
support they will provide Denel in order to make it viable.

The second issue is Eskom. It is said that Eskom is one of the most
efficient and lowest cost producers of energy in the world. Although this
might be true, and we do acknowledge that Eskom has provided electricity to
millions of South Africans, the power shortages that parts of the Western
Cape experienced have caused great inconvenience and financial losses for
many. We therefore hope Eskom has learnt from this unfortunate incident,
which has tarnished its image, and is able to prevent similar incidents
from occurring, as well as meet the growing demand for electricity.

Another issue that is also critical is that of violence on trains. There is
no doubt that the security guard strike has had a huge impact on Metrorail
and its mode of operations. We have seen too many images of people being
thrown off trains and the violence that accompanies it. This cannot be
allowed to continue and government and this Ministry have to take
responsibility.

This brings me to yet another area of concern, that of the Airports Company
of South Africa. We cannot ignore the continuous stream of complaints about
baggage theft at our airports. I think this situation is clearly out of
hand and with the Soccer World Cup in 2010 this does not augur well for our
national carrier. We need to know exactly what measures are in place to
eradicate this serious problem.

Transnet has to become a focused and efficient organisation. Here I would
like to commend the work of Maria Ramos. However, this year we saw the
Transnet strike. Here again it is imperative that there should be open and
clear lines of communication. It is understandable that workers together
with unions want to protect their rights and interests, and rightly so.
There is no doubt that the strike has cost us millions of rands. But our
focus should be on growth and employment and these should be our essential
objectives now.

Inefficiency and underinvestment by Transnet is very costly for the whole
economy. Better lines of communication are essential with those in the
bargaining chamber. Lest we forget, part of our mandate is to act as the
responsible shareholders of the entities that we have an interest in.
Government and the Department of Public Enterprises are supposed to be
totally committed to the advocacy, promotion, implementation and
development of a culture of sound corporate governance within state-owned
enterprises.
Yet there are times when the state-owned enterprises’ independence, their
clearly defined mandate, accounting and reporting in line with the Public
Finance Management Act, corporate governance issues that relate to the
remuneration of board members, and the disclosure of remuneration to the
executives, and so on, have to be questioned. The IFP also believes that
our state-owned enterprises subscribe to the values that are expected of
responsible corporate citizens in South Africa.

In order to guide the state-owned enterprises in achieving the above, the
department must actively promote and institute sound corporate governance,
ethics and probity. I cannot begin to emphasise how important this is.
Reports have to be submitted timeously, and the state-owned enterprises
must comply with the Public Finance Management Act. Rigorous performance
monitoring of the state-owned enterprises is where our mandate as the
portfolio committee comes into play, in terms of our constitutional
oversight and monitoring.

Another challenge to the Ministry is black economic empowerment. It is
imperative that the public sector plays the leading role in the process of
broad-based black economic empowerment. Thus far in the restructuring of
state assets, significant contributions have been made toward BEE, but here
again we need to know about the beneficiaries. Is it some elitist group,
and those who are well connected? Is it those who are already empowered?
Coming to the budget of the Department of Public Enterprises, I would just
like to touch on the issue of new skills for the personnel complement. In
view of the high level of skills needed to engage with the complex
financial, corporate and strategic issues ahead, it will be critical to
bring in specialists both to assist with the required expertise and to
build capacity in the public service. Clearly, we need to build capacity in
the fields of energy, logistics and the defence industry. The IFP supports
the Budget Vote. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms N D NGCENGWANE: Madam Speaker, hon Minister and Deputy Ministers, hon
members, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, it is, again, that
time of the year when public representatives and government departments
account to the public on how the budget they were allocated by National
Treasury was spent. This is to check progress on and achievement of the
priorities that we set ourselves, and whether the resources allocated were
used optimally.

In 2005 we celebrated the 50th anniversary of the Freedom Charter, a
guiding document and almost a bible of the ANC, which says:  “The people
shall share in the country’s wealth.” It is in this context that the ANC-
led government ensures growth and development of our economy, thus
providing a means to achieve the broad goals indicated in the Freedom
Charter.

Colonialism and the apartheid system robbed people of their land and of
their country’s wealth. Now the time is ripe to fast-track the inclusion of
the previously marginalised in the mainstream economy, thus restoring their
dignity.

We keep referring to the past because a lot of damage was done under the
apartheid system. It is important to know your past in order to prepare for
your future.

The economy of this country was built on systematically enforced racial
divisions in every sphere of our social life. Be that as it may, the ANC-
led government has shown commitment in addressing the microeconomic issues
of this country by trying to bridge the gap between the rich and the poor,
whilst at the same time trying to address unequal income and wealth
distribution, as well as macroeconomic issues.

South Africa, our country, has seen a growth in joblessness for quite some
time, and it is up to us, as public representatives, to come together and
take advantage of the limited resources we have and start boosting the
second economy.

There are crosscutting activities in different departments, eg the Expanded
Public Works Programme, which is going to assist with infrastructure
development. These could be utilised optimally in labour-intensive
activities to reduce unemployment and thus fight poverty, of course with
targeted initiatives for women and the youth. This could also assist with
the implementation of infrastructure investment programmes.

The reduction of the cost of doing business and the strengthening of the
key sectors of the economy are some of the efforts to boost the second
economy, using Asgisa as a tool for infrastructure development in our
country.

The main objective of the corporate strategy and structure programme is to
ensure delivery by the state-owned enterprises on the government’s economic
growth objectives.

Regarding the transport unit, Transnet and SA Airways should manage the
government’s investment in the transport industry. Coming to energy, the
implementation of government’s energy policies is aimed at improving
delivery on economic growth objectives, including rural electrification,
through Asgisa.

The main objective of the economic research unit is to make sure that state-
owned enterprises’ capital expenditure is in line with government’s
overarching economic objectives, with greater emphasis on fiscal risk
exposure.

Industrial efficiency and effectiveness should be developed through
projects that would improve the capability of SOEs to benefit the whole
economy of South Africa. All this should be done, guided by the Companies
Act and the Public Finance Management Act of 1999, with additional
requirements of transparency.

The Department of Public Enterprises embarked on certain projects to design
a governance framework to enhance its ability to implement the
shareholders’ management framework, namely: firstly, drafting legislation
to define accountability and transparency; secondly, strengthening
government-wide consultancy to improve management through co-operative
governance protocols; thirdly, strengthening the relationship between
shareholders and the board; and, lastly, improving information related to
transactions.

One of the major steps the Department of Public Enterprises –DPE has taken
is the separation of SAA from Transnet. We hope that the high oil prices
and the strong rand will not impact negatively on this national carrier.

Furthermore, the recapitalisation of Denel should boost the morale in this
SOE. However, portfolio committee members would like to see transformation
and skills transfer at Denel. We all know that change does not happen
without inconvenience, even from worse to better. So let’s join hands as we
are building this country for future generations.

Xa umbutho wesizwe, i-ANC, wawulwela inkululeko, wawungalweli kuphela
ukukhululwa emakhamandeleni kwabantsundu, koko wawulwela wonke umntu weli
lizwe loMzantsi Afrika, nkqu ne-DA. Namhlanje bayakwazi ukuthetha ngenkqubo
yohlengahlengiso, i-transparency. Kanti ukuba bebefuna ukulubona lusenzeka
olu hlengahlengiso, bebethulele ntoni yonke le minyaka?

Iingcebiso ezazivela kwi-DA zazisithi: “Thengisa, thengisa onke amashishini
karhulumente ukuze kukhule uqoqosho lweli lizwe.” Yaba nkulu kakhulu le
ngxoxo, yade yaya kufikelela nasezindlebeni ze-Cosatu, nayo yathi
iyayinyova. Emva kothetha-thethwano, yaye yacaca ukuba ayikho loo nto, koko
kwakuza kuthengiswa impahla engengondoqo ukuze kubekho iinguquko ezaziza
kwenza ukuba la mashishini enze inzuzo nengeniso kuqoqosho lweli lizwe
loMzantsi Afrika.

Umbuzo omkhulu ke ngowokuba: Ngubani owayeza kuzuza ngokuthengiswa kwala
mashishini? (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[When the ANC was fighting for democracy, it was not only fighting for the
liberation of black people, but for everybody, including the DA. Today the
DA can speak of restructuring and transparency. If they were so keen on
this, why were they quiet all these years in seeing restructuring being
implemented?

Their advice was that all government financial institutions should be sold
to enhance economic growth. This became a big debate and even Cosatu
expressed its opposition to the idea and embarked on mass demonstrations.
After intense negotiations it was made clear that the intention was not to
privatise but to restructure the enterprises, so that they can make a
profit and become self-sustainable.

The question is: Who stood to benefit from privatisation?]

Who benefits from privatisation in developing countries? And what happens
to the poor people of that developing country? How do they benefit from
privatisation? Honesty is the first chapter in the book of wisdom, so let
us be honest if we want to build this country.

This ANC-led government continues the struggle both to ensure higher rates
of economic growth and to meet the objective of a better life for all the
people of this beautiful country.

Xa ndigqibezela, ndifuna ukuthi huntshu kweli qobokazana, uPortia Molefe,
eliphethe eli Sebe laMashishini akwaRhulumente, nakwiqela lalo labantu
abatsha. Maqobokazana angalala endleleni yazini kunyembelekile! Ndithi
malibongwe igama lamakhosikazi. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[In conclusion, I want to congratulate Portia Molefe, who heads the
Department of Public Enterprises, and her team. Young women never sleep on
the side of the road; if they do, then you should know that there is a
problem. Let the name of women be praised.]

You do us proud. We all know how difficult it is to manage a team. It’s
like holding a dove in your hands. You squeeze too hard, and you kill it;
and you try not to squeeze too hard, and it flies away. The ANC supports
the budget. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr H B CUPIDO: Hon Speaker, hon members, the ACDP takes this opportunity to
lend its support to the corporatisation of state-owned enterprises.
Corporatisation will ensure the streamlining of capacity, increase
productivity and maximise the contribution of state-owned enterprises to
the development of the economy.

It is particularly with regard to Denel that corporatisation will have a
visible impact. The recapitalisation of this enterprise should make
significant inroads into the establishment of human resource practices that
are comparable to international standards.

Government’s failure to purchase from Denel has been attributed to a lack
of capacity with regard to an effective marketing department at Denel.
Human resource objectives that are aligned with international
corporatisation standards will ensure that such obstacles to the growth of
SOEs are removed.

The disposal of the noncore assets of state-owned enterprises will make an
additional contribution to the high degree of positive change that this
country is currently experiencing with regard to its SOEs.

We wish to emphasise that both corporatisation and the frameworks for the
disposal of noncore assets will be enhanced by the establishment of
improved communication mechanisms between the department’s SOEs and the
strengthening of the department’s oversight capability.

We further take this opportunity to urge the department to speed up the
reintroduction of the apprenticeship system, as the ACDP strongly
encourages measures aimed at increasing the number of people with technical
skills. The ACDP supports this budget. [Applause.]

Mr Y WANG: Madam Speaker, before I start my speech I just want to say that
my friends asked me yesterday what posters I was going to put up today. I
regret that I forgot them at home, so there are no posters today.

Today I would like to focus on Programme 4: Corporate Strategy and
Structure. The objective of that programme is to optimise the contribution
of state-owned enterprises to economic growth through the delivery of our
core SOE mandates, projects ensuring our industrial efficiency and the
leveraging of SOEs to catalyse broader development.

What does this mean to the average person on the street? In short, this is
about ensuring delivery on government’s economic growth objectives by
leveraging our state resources that are unmatched by the private sector.
This also contributes towards the goal of Asgisa by reducing the cost of
business and strengthening the key sectors of our economy. For example,
without the magnitude and efficiency of Eskom, we would not have such a
cheap source of electricity. This is a significant advantage in lowering
the cost of business, especially for industrial sectors and most commercial
sectors.

The programme’s budget increased from last year’s R8,5 million to
R600 million this year. This is because of the R580 million that has to be
transferred to the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor project and the increase for
salaries and goods and services. Excluding the PBMR, the budget for this
programme is expected to rise at an average annual rate of 38,6% and reach
R24,8 million in 2008-09. The allocation to the joint project facility is
expected to increase by R10 million per year for the next three years.

With the objectives of this programme in mind, it is understandable that
there is a noticeable increase in the 2006-07 budget for consultancy
expenditure, owing to the multitude and complexity of the industries
involved. However, while expert services are often necessary, the
department should be cautious of overreliance on  external consultancy.

In addition, in terms of leveraging off the resources of SOEs, the impact
of subprogramme JPF is clearly huge. Consequently guidelines on how experts
are selected seem to be very critical. I would like the budget allocated to
this function to be more transparent and therefore more effectively
monitored.

Having said this, we really welcome the new JPF taking off. It is actually
quite an ambitious programme, but with successful management by the
department’s young and capable team I have no doubt that the budget
allocated will allow the department to achieve its performance targets
effectively and efficiently.

In order not to obscure comparison with the budget, the R580 million
transfer to the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor is obviously considered as an
item on its own. The PBMR is a major and challenging project that
government has decided on. The committee, however, feels that there is a
need for more work to be done. The committee has started the process and
begun to interact with other relevant committees in order to develop our
understanding of and various views on this project.

We hope to have public hearings together with other committees, possibly
next year. Of course, there are many advantages to the PBMR project and we
would certainly explore this project’s potential, especially in the context
of cleaner fuel. We also understand that there is concerted opposition from
civil society, and as Parliament I think it is our responsibility to
respond and address their concerns.

In terms of the strategy and structure of our transport sector, the
fluctuations in the exchange rate and oil prices have always made the SAA a
difficult business to manage. Therefore, the separation of SAA from
Transnet is prudent as it allows the department to monitor the SOE more
closely than before, which, in turn, also allows Parliament to have more
direct oversight to ensure our national carrier fulfils its mandate in a
volatile market.

Another SOE that is subject to international uncertainty and that is of
strategic importance to us is Denel. With its restructured mandate,
assistance from the Department of Public Enterprises and the forming of new
strategic partnerships, we look forward to seeing Denel carry out its new
corporate strategy in support of government’s overall economic objectives,
which include, obviously, job creation and retention, skills development
and exploring export opportunities. Of course Denel will need to work more
closely with our Defence Force.

Regarding another SOE, that is the SA Forestry Company Limited, the need
for state ownership of Safcol has become more evident now, as we can see
that demand is higher than supply, there is the growing superpower in the
East and the requirement for raw materials. This will also encourage small
players in the industry and diversify the market share as we leverage the
state resources to lower the cost of raw materials. That will, in turn,
improve our small and medium enterprises here in South Africa.

Lastly, one of the important aspects of the operation of state-owned
enterprises is actually their capital expenditure and investment plan. The
idea of using various capex programmes to revitalise dormant industries and
encourage local content with job creation is a great idea. We look forward
to the implemented outcome.

One concern is perhaps the slow process of the environmental impact
assessments, for various reasons. As a result, these capex programmes quite
often are delayed or prevented from going ahead. We sympathise with the
frustration over the administrative hurdles, but, again, I think we should
also stress the importance of the validity of these environmental concerns.

Noting the above observations and concerns, I would like to say that the
ANC supports the Vote. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr Z KOTWAL: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers, Deputy Minister, and guests, I
quote: “It may well be that South Africa’s social system is a monument to
racism and race oppression, but its people are living testimony to the
unconquerable spirit of mankind.” These words of the late Chief Albert
Luthuli, I believe, express a true wisdom that it is this very
unconquerable spirit of mankind that has seen our young democracy flourish.

On a daily and yearly basis, every effort is being made by our government
to enhance the lives of our people. One such effort, as recognised by the
Department of Public Enterprises in 2005, was the need for a financial
facility that would enable the development of projects that enhance the
value of an industry or can leverage assets and/or capabilities of state-
owned enterprises to the benefit of those SOEs and the economy as a whole.

The Minister of Public Enterprises and state-owned enterprises established
a joint project facility, which I will be referring to as the JPF, in order
to pursue crosscutting projects with participation by our SOEs. The
objective of the facility is to ensure the rapid development of projects to
the point when an investment case has been accepted in principle by
relevant operational companies and with appropriate financial investors.

In 2005, the JPF was funded through the SOEs, but it is now funded through
the fiscus. The JPF manages projects, identifying them under six different
criteria. The JPF manages SOEs’ continental investment projects,
recognising their importance. Given our obligations in terms of the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development, as a country we remain committed to
the upliftment of South Africa and Africa as a whole, and the strategic use
of state resources to drive continental development to the benefit of all
and to further facilitate future investments.

The energy sector has embarked on a project seeking sufficient liquid fuels
at the best possible price that will make for efficient input costs in our
economy. The pipelines master plan project will objectively scrutinise the
impact of various pipelines in their views for South Africa and ultimately
recommend the best possible solution for suitable strategies in the sector.

The JPF is also involved in projects aimed at halving the actual cost of
telecommunications by at least 50%. This will be done mainly through the
provision of low-cost telecommunications infrastructure and the
implementation of a broadband solution for the country over the next couple
of years.

At this point, it should be borne in mind that when we refer to a 50%
reduction in the cost of telecommunications, we are referring to the end
cost to the consumer, ultimately with the aim that the average South
African consumer will not only have access to telephone services but that
such services will cost at least half as much as current consumer prices.

Apart from the fact that SOEs have the potential to improve the quality and
quantity of skills, in particular in areas of education and training, the
JPF will concentrate on the strategy and plan to prioritise, develop and
deliver a range of critically important technical, technological and high-
level engineering skills that will enhance and extend the capabilities of
SOEs.

This strategy will be linked to the capital expansion programme. In that,
they are currently concentrating on opportunities for further collaboration
with each other and other educational institutions.

The JPF also has responsibilities in terms of the disposal of SOEs’ noncore
properties. They have, together with the Department of Public Works,
developed broad-based black economic empowerment, BEE, criteria for such
disposal.

The criteria are in line with the Department of Trade and Industry’s codes
and property sector charter. However, as a committee, we have become more
and more concerned with ensuring that BEE is really broad-based and that
there are certain guarantees ensuring that small, medium and micro
enterprises also benefit in terms of BEE legislation.

There are also properties that have been identified as properties of
increasing strategic importance, seeing that they are situated adjacent to
the ports of central business districts, with the potential to provide
greater returns for SOEs and to promote mixed use for urban renewal and
integrated development.

These opportunities will be used to provide facilities that make the
country more internationally competitive, that is, to report expansions
that will allow for the handling of greater volumes of freight in our
ports.

Further opportunities also exist to expand enterprises such as the
Johannesburg International Airport in time for 2010. Such an expansion will
also come as a relief to commuters who use Johannesburg International
Airport on a regular basis.

The most important role that the JPF will be playing is managing the
procurement associated with the capital expansion programme. At present, it
is estimated that over 40% of the capital expenditure requirements
associated with Eskom and Transnet will be imported. Obviously, this is a
situation we cannot support if we are really serious about our commitment
to fighting poverty and job creation. Ideally, it is not a situation we
would like to encourage if we are to maximise using our SOEs to benefit all
our people from positive economic growth.

Therefore, there is a need to optimise the local content of procurement so
as to ensure that the local economy reaps the benefits and rewards from the
large amounts that the SOEs intend to spend. Further, we also need to
ensure that, wherever possible, importing of goods and services is avoided
at all costs, and local industry is developed and supported, enabling small
and medium enterprises to benefit from the capital expenditure programme.

Bearing in mind the magnitude of these projects that the JPF has
established and hopes to expand further, one has to question whether the
JPF will be able to facilitate them on a budget of R10 million only. I am
happy that the Minister of Finance is in the House and I hope he takes
note. Indeed, as enshrined in our Freedom Charter, South Africa belongs to
all who live in it, and, therefore, all should reap the economic benefits
of the land.

In closing, I would like to thank Minister Alec Erwin, the chairperson hon
Yunus Carrim, members of the portfolio committee and the Department of
Public Enterprises. As a relatively new member of the portfolio committee,
I look forward to working closely with all. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P A C HENDRICKSE: Mr Chairperson, this is the first opportunity that I
have of addressing the National Assembly since the death of my dad, Rev
Allan Hendrickse. On behalf of our family I would like to express our
sincere appreciation to the presiding officers and to all the political
parties for the condolences expressed, as well as for the words of
appreciation spoken about his contribution to our country.
It was a wonderful privilege having my dad as father, as minister, leader
and mentor. Allow me also to publicly thank my mother for what she has
meant to our family and especially to my dad over all these years.

Last year, as part of an overall programme adopted by the Portfolio
Committee on Public Enterprises to familiarise ourselves with state-owned
enterprises, we visited the Kendal Power Station, Eskom’s head office and
national control centre in Richards Bay harbour, Durban harbour, where we
met the National Port Authority as well as the South African Port Operator.


We travelled overnight on the Shosholoza Meyl, visited the rail workshops,
as well as the South African Airways’ technical services. We also visited
Coega and Port Elizabeth harbours as well as the Koeberg nuclear power
station.

We also visited the various training facilities where on a simulator - and
I repeat, on a simulator - I managed to sink a tanker in Cape Town harbour,
crashed a Boeing on take-off from Johannesburg International Airport, as
well as derailed a 4km long diesel train. All this took place in the course
of one week.

There are two things which made an enormous impression on me. One was the
technical expertise that we command and even more than that was the young
people that work in these facilities. In the year that we are celebrating
the 30th anniversary of the youth uprising of 1976, and may I say that I
too am from the class of 1976, I want to acknowledge the important role
young people are playing in the SOEs.

It was inspiring to see the expertise of these people and the confidence
with which they went about doing very crucial and critical work that I had
never even heard of when I was at school. There was the calmness of people
at the Eskom control centre, the young women steering tankers and cargo
ships into Durban harbour, the port captain at Port Elizabeth harbour and
the manager of the overnight train from Durban to Johannesburg. I wish that
all South Africans could see and experience what we did in that one week.

Even more inspiring was the fact that these people represented the whole
spectrum of South African society - black, brown and white Africans. I use
these terms black, brown and white Africans deliberately. Following on the
President’s ”I am an African” speech on the adoption of our Constitution 10
years ago, I welcome his inclusive definition of African. I also state the
need for us to consciously deracialise the term “African” because for all
of us being South Africans is not a problem but when you take away the
“South”, it becomes problematic and takes on a racial connotation. I
further state that because of our racist past and conditioning as well as
the need to address the injustices of the past, we might still need to
refer to race groups and as such using the terms black, brown and white
Africans would help us accept that we are, first and foremost, all
Africans.

The reason I raise this in this debate is because state-owned enterprises
should lead the market and society in reflecting the ethos that we are all
Africans. Some time ago there was a big story in the media about Eskom and
its employment practices. The story alleged that Eskom used degrees of
oppression as part of its employment criteria. While it is true that we
need to address the skewed racial and gender demographics of the SOEs
inherited from the past, we must do so in a positive way that will
contribute to nation-building, rather than in a mechanical way or in ways
that sometimes appear to be punitive.

People were not given a choice of oppression and as a matter of fact the
National Party government was good at using divide and rule tactics. I
therefore welcome the President’s reply to a question regarding the
incident referred to above. I quote the President’s reply:

   Most certainly the government would not agree to this. Our Constitution
   and legislation that derives from it addresses in part the issue of
   sections of our population that were previously disadvantaged. The
   coloured community belongs among those sections of our population that
   were previously disadvantaged. And therefore it would never be possible
   for the government to say that the coloured people should be excluded
   with regard to those processes. We therefore would indeed argue for the
   equal treatment to which you refer.

He goes on to say that what might be necessary is to pay close attention to
what is actually being done. In the portfolio committee, I was told by a
senior manager at Eskom that, to the best of their knowledge, they don’t
use such a differentiation or use words to that effect.

Chairperson, I raise this because if it is not dealt with unequivocally, it
becomes like the black man Ngoro insult, a festering sore in the minds and
hearts of brown Africans. It adds to the hurt, indignity, humiliation and
dispossession suffered under apartheid.

This sore will be exploited by the unscrupulous for short-term political
gain, irrespective of its long-term consequences rather than out of genuine
concern for their socioeconomic wellbeing. This then contributes to the
ongoing bedevilling of relations between different communities. I want to
call upon the Minister to assure us that none of the SOEs are acting in a
manner contrary to the government’s policy as stated by the President.

Once again I want to reiterate how wonderful it was to see all those young
people performing their work with a confidence that cannot but impress.
This is truly a microcosm of the country that we can become. May I further
add that as we approach the 17th year of the repeal of the hated Race
Classification Act, we must be mindful that soon we will have people
entering the job market who were never classified as being of a particular
race. My children are “born frees” and never suffered the indignity of
being classified and they never must.

With regard to recent articles, Eskom has undertaken the task of
encouraging people to use energy efficient light bulbs and for this purpose
they have been exchanging people’s household light bulbs for energy
friendly ones. I would like to congratulate them on the way they have gone
about this. Some people came to my house the other day to exchange light
bulbs and it was very convenient and effective. It is also a tribute to
Eskom that even in this short-term adversity, they were able to create jobs
for so many people who are going from house to house.

However, I am concerned by questions raised in the Mail & Guardian this
weekend about the price of gas. As we know, Eskom has encouraged people to
replace their two-plate electric stoves with gas stoves, concentrating
particularly on people in the lower income groups. It appears from the
article that the gas suppliers have enormous markups on the price of gas,
and that we are at their mercy. The example given is that of charging about
R130 for a 9 kg cannister of gas, whereas the factory sells that cannister
for R47.
Is it true that Eskom has no agreement with the gas suppliers on the prices
that they will charge? Is it true that it is at least twice as expensive to
cook with gas than to cook with electricity? As an SOE, surely they have a
responsibility not to put our people in a position where they can be
ruthlessly exploited? We know that if it is left to the market, the market
will ruthlessly exploit the most vulnerable.

Could the Minister please enlighten us about these allegations? Will he
interact with his Ministerial colleagues to address this exploitation? Is
there any possibility of regulating the markups on gas? Will Eskom continue
to exchange people’s two-plate electric stoves for gas stoves once we have
passed the critical stage in which we now are?

Minister, I want to acknowledge your forthrightness in acknowledging the
government’s contribution to the delay in increasing Eskom’s capacity, but
we as Parliament must also accept responsibility. Irrespective of whether
we were thinking of selling Eskom wholly or partly or whether we are
keeping it, the long-term planning and capacity enhancement of Eskom should
not have been interrupted. Rather than blame one another, we leave that to
the opposition. We should learn valuable lessons from this experience.

The electricity shortages in the Western Cape are not the result of normal
occurrences and in the big scheme of things are temporary. We should
instead acknowledge the role that Eskom has played in our economy and also
their achievements. They are the cheapest supplier of electricity and have
been able to respond to the government requirement for the electrification
of the whole country and particularly rural areas. Of course there is much
that must be done and even faster.

All this while being a state-owned enterprise, proves two important lessons
that I learnt in Brazil and Chile regarding the privatisation debate. It is
not the ownership of an enterprise but the management that is important.
Secondly, before you even think of privatising, you need a strong
regulatory authority in place with very clear and unambiguous rules.

Chairperson, in conclusion allow me to thank the Minister, the director-
general and her staff for always being accessible and responsive to our
committee. Someone who needs a special mention is Comrade Desmoreen
Carolous, the ANC researcher, who comes all the way from Namaqualand since
Parliament has not been able to provide us with a researcher for 18 months.
She has been acting in this capacity and I am sure that the opposition will
join me in thanking her for all her hard work.

Finally, we owe a warm word of appreciation to our very articulate and
hardworking chairperson, Yunus Carrim, for the energy and enthusiasm that
he puts into making a success of our committee. He has managed to ensure
that we are all on board as far as this demanding and challenging committee
is concerned. The ANC has great pleasure in supporting this budget. Thank
you.

Mnr K J MINNIE: Agb Voorsitter, agb Minister, kollegas, gaste, ek praat
vandag nie namens nie, nie vir nie, maar ter ondersteuning van ’n baie
belangrike groep mense. Die laaste jaar het ek talle briewe en stukke
korrespondensie van ontevrede lede van Transnet se tweede
vastevoordeelfonds ontvang. En ek glo die Minister het ook.

Hierdie pensioenfonds se 100 000 lede en hul afhanklikes, ’n beduidende
groep van ons meer kwesbare bevolking, ondervind tans dat hulle skynbaar
geen seggenskap meer het oor die volhoubaarheid van hul hoof-inkomstebron
en die handhawing van hul lewenstandaarde nie. Terwyl ander openbare
entiteite se lede van hul pensioenfondse in die laaste jare verhogings van
tot 8% geniet het, het lede van die Transnet se tweede vastevoordeelfonds
oor die laaste vyf jaar geen verhogings in hul maandelike pensioene ontvang
nie – buiten nou die statutêre 2%, waartoe hulle geregtig is.

Tussen 2002-04 het die befondsingsvlak van die tweede vastevoordeelfonds
gedaal van 103% tot 72,1% as gevolg van ’n aandeleruiltransaksie wat deur
die fonds se Transnetaangestelde trustees goedgekeur is; oënskynlik met die
doel om die toe wankelende entiteit se finansiële posisie beter te laat
voorkom. Die besluit om die R1,4 miljard van Transnet se MCell-aandele vir
amper R4,9 miljard van die tweede vastevoordelefonds se TO11-effekte
uitgereik deur Transnet aan die fonds in die vroeë negentigerjare, te
verruil, is goedgekeur deur die fonds se trustees, sonder enige
voorafgaande beraadslaging met die pensioenfondslede.

Klaarblyklike botsende belange aan die kant van die tweede
vastevoordeelfonds se trusteeraad het die DA diep bekommerd oor die
toekomstige welsyn van hierdie pensioentrekkers. Een van die hooftrustees
wat die besluit goedgekeur het, is self ’n afgetredene van Transnet en was
by Transnet as finansiële bestuurder werksaam. Ten tye van die besluit oor
die aandeleruiling het hy die maatskappy op verskeie rade dan ook
verteenwoordig.

Die tweede vastevoordeelfonds besit tans 43,6% aandele in die Waterkant in
Kaapstad. Noudat hierdie eersteklasbate moontlik verkoop gaan word, eis ons
die versekering van die Minister dat die lede van die tweede
vastevoordeelfonds se belange onafhanklik van die balansstaat van die groot
konglomeraat beskerm gaan word.

Laat my toe om u te herinner aan die volgende feite: dat hierdie
pensioentrekkers hulself jare afgesloof het vir karige salarisse deurdat
hulle geglo het dat die belofte van goeie aftreepakkette gestand gedoen sou
word en as die trustees van hierdie fonds is beide die regering en Transnet
geheel en al verantwoordelik vir die voortgesette welsyn van die fonds se
lede. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)
[Mr K J MINNIE: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, colleagues, guests, today I
am not talking on behalf of or for, but in support of a very important
group of people. Over the past year I have received lots of letters and
pieces of correspondence from disgruntled members of Transnet’s second
defined benefit fund. And I believe the Minister has as well.

These 100 000 members of the pension fund and their dependants, a
considerable group of the more vulnerable part of our population, are
currently experiencing that they would seem not to have a say any longer
regarding the sustainability of their main source of income and the
maintenance of their standard of living. While members of other public
entities enjoyed increases of up to 8% in their pension funds, in the past
few years, members of Transnet’s second defined benefit fund have received
no increases in their monthly pensions over the past five years – apart
from the statutory 2% to which they are entitled.

Between 2002-04 the funding level of the second defined benefit fund
dropped from 103% to 72,1% as a result of a shares exchange transaction
that was approved by the Transnet-appointed trustees of the fund;
apparently with the aim of allowing the at that stage shaky entity’s
financial position to appear better. The decision to exchange Transnet
MCell shares to the value of R1,4 billion for second defined benefit fund
TO11-shares to the value of almost R4,9 billion, which were issued to the
fund by Transnet in the early nineties, was approved by the trustees of the
fund without any prior consultation with the members of the pension fund.

An apparent conflict of interest on the part of the board of trustees of
the second defined benefit fund is causing the DA to be extremely concerned
about the future welfare of these pensioners. One of the main trustees that
approved this decision is a retired employee of Transnet, and worked for
Transnet as a financial manager. At the time when the decision regarding
the share conversion was taken he was representing the company on various
boards.

The second defined benefit fund currently owns more than 43,6% of the
shares in the Cape Town Waterfront. Now that this first class asset is
possibly going to be sold, we demand an assurance from the Minister that
the interests of the members of the second defined benefit fund will be
protected separately from the big conglomerate’s balance sheet.

Allow me to remind you of the following facts: these pensioners slaved away
for years for meagre salaries because they believed that the promise that
they would receive good retirement packages would be honoured and as the
trustees of this fund both the government and Transnet are totally
responsible for the continued welfare of the members of this fund.]

Many of these pensioners and their representatives, like the SA Association
of Retired Persons, and I from the DA, have written to the Transnet CFO
Chris Wells, the CEO Maria Ramos and the Minister. At most, our efforts had
been met with a promise to look into the matter. Often, not even an
acknowledgement of receipt has been forthcoming.

I appeal to you today, sir, to heed the calls of 100 000 pensioners and
their dependants, struggling to make ends meet, to ensure that the members
of the Transnet second defined benefit fund are retrospectively compensated
for not having received inflation-aligned increases over the last 5 years.
The members of the Transnet second defined benefit should be given the
right to nominate their own trustees to ensure that no movement of assets
of the fund takes place without the prior knowledge and consent of the fund
members. The government and Transnet should publicly commit themselves that
Transnet’s second defined benefit fund members will receive annual
increases, at least aligned with the increases received by other public
entity pension funds.

Ek dink dit is net billik en regverdig. Die DA gaan die verbeterde welsyn
van hierdie Transnet-pensioentrekkers meedoënloos oor die komende maande
bevorder en propageer. Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[I think that is only fair and just. Over the coming months the DA will
relentlessly promote and propagate the improved welfare of these Transnet
pensioners. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Ms N C KONDLO: Chairperson, members of the executive present this
afternoon, hon members and comrades, the decision by the ANC to have state-
owned enterprises remain in state hands was and remains the correct
decision in the context of advancing the national democratic revolution and
the view that the ANC has, that SOEs need to and must play a critical role
in building the developmental state that the ANC has committed itself to.

Kanjaqo, Mhlalingaphambili, izigidi ezingama-40 ekufuneka zenziwe ngu-
Transnet nezingama-80 ekufuneka zenziwe ngu-Eskom zigxininisa kananjalo
ziqinisekisa ukuba uphuhliso anoxanduva lwalo la mashishini aphantsi
kukarhulumente luyenzeka, kwaye lubalulekile. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraph follows.)

[Furthermore, Chairperson, the R40 million and R80 million that Transnet
and Eskom have to accrue respectively, will ensure that the state-owned
enterprises have a responsibility which is important.]

If state-owned enterprises have such a strategic role to play in the
economy, the Department of Public Enterprises has an even greater
challenge, that of monitoring the delivery of SOEs on their mandate without
micro-managing them. This is how the department usually likes to depict
their role in terms of monitoring state-owned enterprises.

The question, therefore, remains as to whether the Department of Public
Enterprises is poised to handle this responsibility, and also whether the
budget allocated to the department is going to be able to match these
responsibilities.

The chairperson of the portfolio committee answered this question, even
though I am of the view that there can be no yes or no. However, owing to
the recognition of the ever-increasing pressures on the department to
provide oversight and strategic direction to SOEs, we see an annual
increase of 15,3% in the department’s budget over the MTEF cycle.

One of the key programmes of the department that is central to the
performance of SOEs is analysis and risk management. Last year it was
reported that there were instances of significant differences between the
level of technical know-how and expertise in the DPE and the management of
SOEs. This had an inhibiting effect on the department’s ability to exercise
oversight over the state-owned enterprises, and it thus makes sense that
the department increases its spending in areas that will facilitate
oversight.

This programme’s budget increased from R7,9 million in 2005-06 to R16,72
million in 2006-07. This is partly to fill vacancies in the financial risk
analysis section.

Isinika ithemba ke loo nto, kuba ithetha ukuba isebe liyaqiniswa kwaye
liyomelezwa ukuze lenze umsebenzi walo wokujonga la mashishini karhulumente
ngeliso elibanzi. Liyinene kananjalo elokuba ntlandlolo kweli sebe kwakukho
ukusilela ngokuphathelene nomsebenzi wokuqinisekisa ukuba la mashishini
karhulumente anendlela ephucukileyo yokuba nezicwangciso ezizizo, isakhono
sokuphengulula nendlela yokubona iingxaki ezinokuthi zenze ukuba la
mashishini angaziphumezi iinjongo zawo.

Sinemizekelo yeemeko apho la mashishini karhulumente akhe asengxakini
ngenxa yokuba, okokuqala, isebe lingenazazo ezi zakhono zokubona iingxaki,
khon’ ukuze akwazi ukuzilungiselela ziseza, zingade zifike.

Phofu namashishini la karhulumente ebeqhuba ebheka phambili ngaphandle
kwezi zakhono. Ndibhekisela kulwazi esinalo sonke ngobekuthe kwenzeka
kwiminyaka egqithileyo kwi-SAA, ku-Denel, ku-Eskom, mhlawumbi no-Alexcor.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[This gives us hope that as the department we are given support in order to
perform the task of monitoring these state-owned enterprises. It is true
that this department has previously lacked monitoring progress in respect
of state-owned enterprises with regard to strategic planning, evaluation
and obstacles that hold back the processes.

The state-owned enterprises once had a problem with regard to, firstly, the
department functioning without the analysis and management risk system to
prevent problems that were anticipated from occurring.

The state-owned enterprises functioned without the analysis and risk
management system. I am referring to the knowledge we have about what
happened in previous years when state-owned enterprises such as SAA, Denel,
Eskom and perhaps Alexkor operated without this system.]

In fact, even as we speak, there are state-owned enterprises that still do
not have their analysis and risk management systems. I am referring here to
Denel, Safcol, Alexkor and the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor, PBMR. Be that as
it may, we welcome state-owned enterprises that do have their systems in
place and we congratulate them on this. I am referring here to Eskom,
Transnet and SAA.

By its own admission, the department alluded to the fact that, with an
effective risk management system - the example of Eskom is tabled here – it
would have been possible to anticipate some risks and take measures to
avoid them. Whilst we welcome the development of a framework by the
department - even though it was scheduled for implementation in April, it
will only be finalised in August - we can only hope that the department
will meet this target this time around.

This framework will be an important tool in helping to anticipate financial
and other risks that the SOEs may face. With proper risk management, it
should be possible to take measures to avoid certain risks. Of course,
proper risk management needs to be backed up by, amongst other things, good
governance principles, which Comrade Ngcengwane referred to earlier.

We therefore look forward to hearing more about the department’s practical
plans for implementing the risk management framework later this year. The
department said they need to strengthen the analysis part of this programme
as proper analysis would help them to correctly anticipate certain risks
and be able to take measures to avoid or minimise them.

Indibanisela yesebe kunye namashishini la aphantsi korhulumente, ebizwa
ngokuba yi-risk management forum, yeyokuqinisekisa ukuba kukho ukubetha
ngesingqi esinye phakathi kwesebe nala mashishini karhulumente, ngethemba
lokuba iinzame zesebe, ngokukhokelwa nguMphathiswa Alec Erwin, kunye
noMlawuli-Jikelele uPortia Molefe, ziya kukwazi ukuwubhekisa phambili lo
msebenzi. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)
[The co-operative governance between the department and state-owned
enterprises has brought about the establishment of the risk management
forum to ensure that there is collaboration between the two, with the hope
that the department under the leadership of Minister Alec Erwin and
Director-General Portia Molefe will achieve its objectives.]

The responsibility of government and state-owned enterprises to fight
poverty and create jobs is ever needed at this time.

Mandithathe eli thuba nditsho ukuba ndiwamamele amalungu amaqela aphikisayo
xa ebethetha apha, ngakumbi ohloniphekileyo uMnu Stephens. Ndiye ndazibuza
ukuba ngaba use lilungu le-DA, okanye kukho nto engahambi kakuhle?
Mhlawumbi ubonisa ukubhideka kwengqondo kubo ngokwemigaqo-nkqubo
yezoqoqosho abayilandelayo.

Noxa kunjalo, i-ANC inoxanduva lokusebenza kwimibutho efana nale.
Asingothuki xa simbona uMnu Stephens ewelela kwa-ANC ngoSeptemba, yaye
sakumamkela singulo mbutho. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Let me take this opportunity to say I have listened to the debate from the
members of the opposition, particularly hon Stephens. I asked myself
whether he is still a member of the DA or whether there is some
misunderstanding. Maybe he is showing signs of their confusion concerning
their constitution on economic affairs.
Nevertheless, the ANC has a mandate to work with parties like this. We will
not be surprised to see hon Stephens joining the ANC in September and we
will welcome him.]

The ANC supports the Budget Vote. Thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Thank you, Chairperson. Let me begin
by responding to certain specific issues that hon members raised.

I agree with the hon Stephens on the issue he raised – the debate on state-
owned enterprises. This is a very long debate; it has been going on for a
long time. I think we share your views on the role it could play and, as
you have seen from ANC policy, from the ready-to-govern document through to
the RDP document, we’ve always argued that the precise balance between the
public sector and the private sector should be decided on economic issues,
on the balance of economic evidence and what is useful.

This will mean that the precise role that a state-owned enterprise plays at
any point in time in an economy and in different economies will change.
These are not single, unchanging entities. These are economic instruments
to achieve objectives. What we should do – and this is why I particularly
welcome the hon Stephens’ intervention because I think it is the correct
approach – is to sit down and analyse. This is not a dogma; this is not a
philosophy; this is not a law. This has to be decided in terms of the
correct economic principles at the time.

We would agree with the issue of employees being protected and with the
objective of creating employment. One issue that I have tried to clarify in
my discussions with the portfolio committee and others – and, I believe, it
is well understood - is that the task of state-owned enterprises with
regard to achieving critical objectives, within the infrastructure it is
responsible for, is not just to create jobs no matter what.

So, quite clearly, what we are looking for are enterprises that are
efficient in achieving their objectives; that treat their employees in a
manner that I outlined in my speech - that they become employers of
preference. But we are not employment agencies; the mandates have to be
very clear; and we are not there just to follow the whim of what
Parliament, or the executive, or any other grouping, may wish at any point
in time.

There will be rules that govern how we conduct ourselves as state-owned
enterprises. They have to be efficient, they have to enter the capital
markets and raise funds, but they are not just profit maximisers. Their
task is to achieve key economic objectives and therefore key economic rates
of return. But, I think, this debate is clarifying, and I hope that we will
not spend too much time on unnecessary arguments about it.
Questions have been raised with regard to whether Denel is viable. Well, I
think we’ve explained in some detail how we intend making Denel viable.
We’ve explained in some detail that the initial corporatisation of Denel
done before 1994, quite frankly, was probably not well conceived and was
probably not well capitalised. So, we have to put this right now. It will
be a process that we will have to go through and undertake.

Just as a matter of information: I regret luggage that’s been lost, hon
member Chang, but Acsa, fortunately, doesn’t fall under me. [Laughter.] So,
I will take it up with my colleague. If it was SAA that lost the luggage,
we will talk to them. But, really, the issue of who deals with both
Metrorail and Acsa is now very clear. It is the Ministry of Transport, and
I think that is correct.

Regarding the issue of the strike that has been raised by the hon Carrim
and other speakers, I believe that both sides have learnt from this. We
have, in the agreement that ended the strike, set up channels of
communication, which were there before but were probably not entirely
effective. I congratulate the Transnet management on the way they have
dealt with this matter of setting up communication strategies, and I
believe that we are establishing a better relationship with the union
leadership.

As we change these enterprises - and not only in Transnet - we must expect
that any good union leader will raise the issue: “What’s going to happen to
my members?” So, we accept and we expect that good unions will always want
to be very sure of what is going to happen to their members during these
changes. I would be much more worried if the unions were not asking these
questions. The fact that they are means we will have to build a good
relationship with them.

Many of the hon members have commented and provided more detail on the
programmes and projects, and it is not necessary for me to add more. Let me
just say to the hon Hendrickse that I’m very pleased you mentioned the
young people in enterprises. Some of them are here with the exhibit today.
I think it is very exciting to see young people in very important positions
in interesting and important careers.

Let me repeat, with regard to the issue of Eskom, the statement made by the
President. It’s now clear to me that we probably need to publish much more
fully the exact facts on this, because the exact facts are not what are
being claimed at all. The President was absolutely correct in what he was
saying. The tribunal and others are clear on what they are saying, and I
think that Eskom’s conduct was in no way untoward in this matter. The
arbitrator found in their favour. They were not moving outside of
government policy.

It’s a pity that the matter has been elevated to some kind of cause célèbre
to prove a point. But that point cannot be proved out of the facts of that
incident, and I just want that to be very clear. The assurance you wanted
is very clear. The President gave it; we give it; the Eskom management has
given it to you; and we will continue in that manner.

With regard to the price of gas, this is clearly something that is
problematic. We need a degree of shift to use gas for heating purposes. It
would be useful in the present circumstances. That has led to price
increases. Now, Eskom is not involved in those issues. I think for the
policy Ministry, Minerals and Energy, this is quite a difficult problem
that they consider we will liaise with.

Whether it is achievable, feasible, possible to regulate gas prices ...
Remember what we are talking about here: this is bottled gas There is no
source that we have access to. We don’t import it in bulk in any way that
the state can control. So, it is quite a vexed issue; quite a problematic
issue that, I think, has to be looked at fairly carefully. It’s a pity that
this rise is taking place at this point in time, because we do need a
switch.

To the hon Minnie I’d like to say, with regard to the second defined
benefit fund, the Transnet fund: quite frankly, the pension funds that we
inherited in Transnet are riddled with problems. I think that the initial
process – and you are probably familiar with it – was exceptionally complex
and wrong.

We now have to unwind this process. We have to do it carefully. We cannot
do it in a manner that is completely unaffordable. We cannot bankrupt
Transnet. It’s not going to help anyone if we do that just to solve the
pension fund problem. So, we are involved in a complex negotiation – with
Transnet, with Treasury and everyone – to see how we can unwind what is not
a satisfactory situation.

Mistakes have been made by the trustees and others in the past. It’s a
complex situation. We cannot just give blanket assurances on anything. It
will have to be - as it is - studied very, very carefully. I am
sympathetic, and I think we are all sympathetic, to the plight of
pensioners with low incomes. This is something we need to look at. But if
any lesson can be learned from this, it is: Don’t do things hastily.

When Transnet was corporatised in the early 1990s, structures were put in
place and pension funds were put in place that were not viable. It was
really quite problematic. We then had to try to rescue it. You’ll remember
that very sizeable amounts of Treasury bonds and others were put in. In
fact, for the first 10 years one of the reasons why Transnet didn’t invest
was precisely because far too much money was going into the pension funds.
So, we do have to correct this. We will do it in a considered manner and
carefully. We cannot rush it. We will try to unwind these unsatisfactory
situations and help wherever we can.

I’d like to say very briefly with regard to the budget of the Department of
Public Enterprises, that it has come up. We are very comfortable with the
budget and the process of how we formulated the budget. We’ve had to work
very closely with Treasury, because the department’s budget is now proving
to be less important than some of the payments we have to make for capital
injections, which are very important long-term strategic decisions.

We are very comfortable with this process and the engagement with Treasury.
It is Treasury’s task to make certain that funds are well spent, and it is
our task to represent these new projects and try to get injections of
capital into them. So, we are comfortable with the process.

With regard to risk management, I must say we must be very clear on this.
Risk management is the responsibility of the boards and management. If we
take responsibility for that, we will have a complete problem of
governance. So, all we are trying to do is to ensure that the boards have
these in place, that they meet certain basic standards. We are getting
there very quickly indeed. I think this is going well.

Some projects, like the PBMR, are very new and we are putting in place the
governance requirements, as we indicated in the speech. Some of these are
fairly complex. In the case of Alexkor, we must understand that a lot will
be changed when we make the settlement with the community and revitalise
Alexkor. For the management of Alexkor and the board of Alexkor, this has
been a very difficult time, because hanging over them they have had the
uncertainty and they have been trying to run a company within uncertainty.
It has been difficult, but I think we are improving very much in putting
the risk management in place.

As I say, in my speech you will see that we are very careful about this.
The DPE cannot take responsibility for risk management. That is the board
and management’s decision. What we will look at is to see whether any risks
are emerging across the enterprises. It’s not the Transnet board’s job to
see what is happening in Eskom, or the Eskom board’s job to see what is
happening in Transnet. It’s our job to see what is happening across those
and to see if there is a risk that is emerging above the enterprises that
could be problematic for the economy or our objectives.

Let me conclude very quickly and once again urge you to have a look at the
booklets, and just tell you, members, that the speech that I gave was web-
cast live. This is an experiment we are using with our website to broadcast
the speech live. We did link up with the foreign missions abroad, which I
think is a way of trying to link in with our foreign missions. [Applause.]

Let me conclude too by just offering my very personal condolences to
Comrade Bhamjee. It was a great shock to me to hear what happened on Friday
night. I would also like to extend my condolences in respect of a good
friend and comrade, Eric Molobi, who passed away.

Thank you very much and thanks for the support for the budget. It’s been
very good working with this committee and with Parliament, and I look
forward to an even better year next year. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


Debate on Vote No 8 – National Treasury (South African Revenue Services),
and Vote No 13 – Statistics South Africa:

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, Chairperson. I would like to
start by extending our condolences from the Ministry to Comrade Yusuf
Bhamjee and his daughters. Their loss is our loss, and we received the news
with great shock on Friday night. Also to Martha Molobi and her daughters.
Eric was a great comrade and mentor to many of us.

Chairperson, the past few weeks have seen heightened volatility in
international financial markets and renewed concern about the size and
sustainability of global growth and trade imbalances. In hosting the World
Economic Forum here last week, we have been reminded of shared
international interests and mutual concerns: the global environmental
challenges, management of trade and financial stability, the economics of
debt and aid, the gap between rich and poor, the management of conflict and
the politics of multilateral co-operation. Particularly welcome, I believe,
is the opportunity to work with other governments and global business
leaders in addressing barriers to accelerated investment and creating a
climate for improved growth, employment creation and poverty reduction
across the African continent.

In South Africa, we are similarly challenged by the complexity of bringing
together our first and second economies; formal and informal activities;
urban and rural neighbourhoods; innercities, suburbs and townships; wealthy
and poor. Different aspects of these challenges are the responsibilities of
the various organisations under the oversight of the Ministry of Finance.
This is partly about building stronger institutions; it is about the social
and economic linkages between increasingly integrated and interdependent
communities; it is about measuring performance and progress against agreed
objectives and targets.

These are the challenges we face together, whether the task is bringing
small businesses and taxi operators into the revenue system, or measuring
changes in income and living standards of households, or planning social
and development spending programmes, or reviewing the structure and
evolution of our financial institutions.

The South African economy is experiencing its longest economic expansion to
date. The economy has now been growing for over six years. Years of
concerted macroeconomic reform are yielding the desired benefits. A
combination of high business and consumer confidence, low inflation and
historically low nominal interest rates, has underpinned the current
growth.

Our growth, however, has been unbalanced. Expenditure has grown faster than
domestic production, thus leading to a current account deficit; the demand
for skills has not been matched by supply; disadvantaged communities have
remained marginalised from the mainstream of economic activity.

As I pointed out in my Budget Speech in February this year, the global
environment remains uncertain. Over the medium term we can influence the
international conventions and market regulations, and the multilateral
institutions in ways that benefit South Africa. We can help to build
regional and farther-flung economic ties and relationships that create
deeper and wider markets that are more resilient to contagion. More
importantly, we can develop appropriate policies, regulatory structures and
institutions, and help to build human capital for our domestic economy.

Getting our policies right means that more rapid growth in investment,
productivity and employment creation can lead to higher income and greater
resources to withstand economic shocks. Our policy challenge is partly
about adapting to global imbalances that seem likely to persist for a
considerable period of time.

It is apparent that by virtue of its relative size and role in the
international financial system, the US economy is able to maintain a large
gap between its investments and savings, financed by capital inflows from
the rest of the world. As Joe Stiglitz put it recently: “It’s a strange
world where the poor countries are in fact financing the richest nation on
the globe.”

A range of factors lies behind this structural feature of the world
economy. One is that for many economies, including much of Europe and Asia,
growth is fuelled by exports to the US, which results in current account
surpluses and flows of capital back into dollars, in turn financing
consumption in the United States of America.

A gradual adjustment path out of this situation would require an increase
in demand in the rest of the world and a decrease in US demand, associated
with a significant depreciation of the dollar and a long-term correction of
the large negative US debt position and its current account deficit, which
is about $800 billion at the moment. The alternative to gradual, policy-
induced adjustment is the build-up of the present unsustainable imbalances,
which carries the risk of an eventual “sudden-stop” correction and slower
growth across all economies.

The flow of capital into the US economy over the years has also contributed
to low interest rates throughout the global financial system. Risk premia
on emerging market assets and interest rates in emerging capital markets
are low by historical standards. This means that there is little room for
easing monetary policy in the event of a crisis, and that the build-up of
credit to relatively unprofitable activities and to finance consumption may
prove unsustainable. But thus far global growth has remained strong, and
the pattern of growth – particularly the continued buoyancy of commodity
prices – has been broadly favourable for the South African economy.

We need to be concerned, however, about two aspects of the current
trajectory of South African growth. One is the exceptionally fast pace of
credit expansion in the economy – including both household credit to
finance consumption and rising debt levels of nonfinancial businesses. The
second is that despite higher export prices, our overall mining production
has been sluggish, and investment in new output capacity remains
disappointing.

Chair, let me draw attention briefly to several international aspects of
our work in the Ministry of Finance, before turning to the policy
implications of the current global environment.

The challenges of growth and development continue to be a central focus of
our participation in multilateral initiatives. Forums in which we play an
active part include SADC, Nepad and the Growth Commission initiated by the
World Bank. Strengthening Africa’s representation in the International
Monetary Fund, reinforcing the capacity of the African Development Bank,
and further work on debt reduction and improving the co-ordination of aid
and development finance internationally are key priorities.

Statistician-General Pali Lehohla and Statistics South Africa are working
with other countries through the Economic Commission for Africa to improve
the calibration and measurement of social and economic trends across all of
Africa.

Commissioner Gordhan is still chair of the World Customs Forum, and our SA
Revenue Service is increasingly involved in initiatives to strengthen tax
collection capacity in other countries and to improve co-ordination between
revenue authorities worldwide.

Through the Collaborative African Budget Reform Initiative, amongst other
forums, we play a supportive role in improving budget systems and public
finance management in almost 20 countries on our continent.

The South African presidency of the Financial Action Task Force, which is
the international standards-setting body against money laundering and
terrorist financing, comes to an end next month. The task was of course
assigned to Prof Kader Asmal by Cabinet. Under his exacting stewardship, a
process has been initiated to raise the profile of a perspective from the
“South” – issues related to illicit financial flows that matter to poor and
developing countries.

Next year, South Africa will host the annual conference of the
International Corporate Governance Network. We will also be chair next year
of the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors, providing a
special opportunity to address pressing issues of mutual interest to
developed and developing nations alike.

The current fiscal environment in South Africa is one of exceptional
buoyancy. Real growth in government expenditure after debt costs has
averaged some 9% a year over the past three years, and will rise by a
further 8% in the current fiscal year, averaging some 6% over the MTEF
period. However, we have seen a rise in underspending in some areas of
public service delivery and infrastructure investment, signalling the need
to address capacity constraints alongside continued budget increases.

A greater focus on ensuring that expenditure takes place according to plan
is part of our current response to favourable fiscal circumstances, and
reprioritisation must continue to direct resources to their most effective
uses. The Treasury’s fiscal policy and budget planning work is aimed at
sustaining and enhancing long-term growth and development, and broadening
participation in social and economic opportunities.

But this work relies critically on better measurement and better
information. This is the central mandate and responsibility of Statistics
South Africa. As set out in the Vote 13 summary in the Estimates of
National Expenditure, there are four key objectives: firstly, to provide
relevant statistical information to meet user needs; secondly, to enhance
the quality of products and services; thirdly, to develop and promote
statistical co-ordination and partnerships; and, fourthly, to build human
capacity.

Statistics South Africa has set itself several strategic targets for the
MTEF period ahead. Firstly, starting with the recognition that statistics
are neither perfect nor complete, the objective is to restore trust, and
maintain such trust, in official statistics through improving the
measurement of key indicators of economic performance, trends in prices,
employment and job creation, life circumstances and service delivery, and
demographic and population dynamics.

Secondly, efforts will continue to be focused on building and strengthening
our statistical infrastructure, which forms the architecture on which all
surveys are designed and conducted. Thirdly, it is important to create a
professional organisation capable of meeting the increasingly complex
challenges of statistics collection and analysis.

We have also agreed on three key projects to be delivered during the
current year. The first is a major community survey, to be conducted in
place of the population census that was scheduled to take place in 2006.
[Interjections.] Sorry, Comrade Kora, I can’t hear myself. It will provide
information at lower geographical levels than existing household-based
surveys, and will also contribute to building capacity ahead of the planned
2011 full population census.

The community survey will be conducted in February next year and will
collect information from approximately 280 000 households over a period of
six weeks. The results will be presented in November next year.
Approximately 20 000 fieldworkers will be employed, and the survey will
provide information across several key social and demographic indicators
aimed at measuring our progress towards the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals.

The data processing phase for piloting this survey is complete and the data
quality assurance and editing work was completed at the end of last month.
Internal tabulation and analysis is under way and the two processes are
planned to be completed by the end of this month. The community survey will
cost R370 million in the current fiscal year and R102 million in the new
year.

The second major project this year is re-engineering the labour force
survey. This will provide a more robust measurement of the dynamics of the
South African labour market. The survey will be conducted quarterly instead
of every four months, with results released after four weeks, and the
content will be focused on critical labour market trends, in line with
international practice.  Research, design and development work will proceed
over the year ahead, and the new quarterly survey will be launched in
January 2008.

Thirdly, Stats SA is conducting an income and expenditure survey, with a
particular focus on the spending patterns of South African households.
Officially launched in September 2005, this is a 12-month survey of 24 000
randomly selected households from 3 000 primary sampling units across the
country. Its main purpose is to update the content of the basket of goods
and services for the consumer price index.

Better statistics are a critical resource for government planning and
management of service delivery, are a key service to the wider public and
community users, and most importantly, are central to Parliament’s
understanding and oversight of our economic and social progress as a
nation.

Let me turn to the key initiatives of the SA Revenue Service for the period
ahead. The first is the small business amnesty. Since the announcement of
the amnesty in the Budget Speech in February this year, we have
concentrated on getting the enabling legal framework in place and, most
importantly, engaging with and listening to small business, including the
taxi industry, and consulting them on the envisaged legislation.

The consultative process is wide ranging. Members of the House can join in
one such consultation down the road at the City Hall tomorrow morning. Over
the past few weeks there have been meetings with representatives and
leaders of national, provincial and local organisations of small business
and the taxi industry. Very constructive meetings have taken place with the
SA National Taxi Association and further meetings will take place with the
association.

I am pleased with the valuable guidance and feedback we have received.
These will be taken into account when we finalise the Bill which the
Portfolio Committee on Finance is considering at present.
The SA Revenue Service will ensure that the great need for education,
information and assistance that is being requested by small business will
be addressed. Much work has already been done in this regard, and will in
due course lead to the establishment of localised structures and processes
to ensure sustainability and permanence as we move towards real
partnerships with small business.

Equally important is the role and influence on our tax system of tax and
customs practitioners. The integrity, professionalism and quality of the
intermediaries are essential to our drive to create a sustainable culture
of compliance in South Africa.

The public seeks their help for tax advice and preparation of returns and
many take their guidance from the tax and customs practitioners on what is
legally acceptable or not. These tax and customs professionals have a
direct impact on taxpayer and trader compliance.

We view them as vital partners in strengthening South Africa’s fiscal
citizenship. We also believe that we can assist by continuously improving
the service we offer and by making every effort to reduce red tape and
compliance costs.

I am, therefore, pleased to announce that Sars will be launching a
programme to provide better accessibility and responsiveness to tax and
customs practitioners. In the next few months Sars will engage with
representative organisations to better understand their needs and tailor
our service to best respond to these needs. We invite representative
organisations to join Sars in raising the integrity and standards of
professionals in South Africa.

Last year I alluded to the fact that the time was ripe for an overhaul of
customs policy to ensure custom’s alignment with government’s developmental
aims and important international developments. Developments in the World
Customs Organisation, the World Trade Organisation and South Africa’s
bilateral trade negotiations require a review of customs policy and
capacity. In addition, there are also new dangers facing South Africa in
the form of illegal trafficking of prohibited goods, international crime,
smuggling of cigarettes, drugs, counterfeit goods and other commodities,
and of course money laundering.

South Africa’s customs capability must be both modernised and significantly
increased if we are to optimally facilitate trade, exploit trade
opportunities unleashed by globalisation and ensure better security of the
trade supply chain and protection of the economy.

Today I have pleasure in announcing that we will shortly release a Green
Paper on Customs Modernisation intended to initiate an inclusive and robust
nationwide debate on the future role of customs and a collective commitment
to the successful implementation of customs modernisation. I also see this
as a historic opportunity to forge a strong and sustainable partnership
between all stakeholders and government.

The challenge ahead of us is to ask the question: How best can customs
serve our nation’s importers and exporters, and thereby contribute to
economic growth? Our new customs policy has to help South Africa’s
exporters and importers engage in international trade and help grow our
economy with both greater ease and better security.

Turning to the National Treasury, I spoke this time last year of the
challenge we face in strengthening the quality and effectiveness of Public
Service management and delivery, and the importance of Parliament’s
oversight role in this regard. The Treasury’s work on budget reform,
monitoring and evaluation and improving financial management is focused
precisely on this challenge.

There is still much to be done, but over the past year we have seen
considerable progress. Consolidated expenditure reports show that capital
spending and infrastructure maintenance have improved markedly, and we are
now seeing the fruits of better information flows, both on financial trends
and nonfinancial data on service delivery.

Quarterly financial reports and service delivery information published by
the Treasury have contributed, for example, to the quality and relevance of
public hearings on education, health, social development and other critical
provincial functions. The National Council of Provinces should be commended
for this initiative, and I am confident that this enhancement of public
accountability will play a significant role in encouraging improvements in
service delivery in the years ahead.
The Public Service Commission, in its recently published 2006 State of the
Public Service Report, correctly notes that we have in place “sound
legislation, regulations, systems and procedures”, but “what needs to be
done now is to undergird the Public Service with the appropriate capacity
that is critical to ensuring the alignment of its service delivery and
sharpening its effectiveness”.

This is a theme that challenges all of us – in Parliament, in the executive
and in every part of the national, provincial and local tapestry of
government agencies and programmes. I would like to highlight just a few of
the specific initiatives of the National Treasury focused on this objective
over the period ahead.

In respect of infrastructure delivery improvement, the Treasury Vote
includes R15 billion over the next three years in support of provincial
infrastructure investment. The House may recall that at the time this grant
was introduced, provincial capital expenditure had fallen to just 3% of
total provincial expenditure. It has increased to about 10% of provincial
budgets now, steadily contributing to better maintenance of schools,
clinics, hospitals and provincial roads, in addition to continued
investment in housing and municipal infrastructure.

The Treasury plays an active role in capacity-building through the
Infrastructure Delivery Improvement Programme, which is a targeted
technical support initiative focused on critical engineering and contract
management skills and systems. In co-operation with the Construction
Industry Development Board, a standard toolkit has been developed to assist
in project management, diagnostic support is provided to identify
bottlenecks and system failures, and infrastructure planning and monitoring
systems are implemented.

Over the past year support has been provided to the nine provincial
education departments, contributing to an 18,5% increase in capital
spending in 2005-06. The programme is currently being extended to the
public works and health departments.

Other aspects of infrastructure development will also enjoy sharpened
attention over the year ahead. The Public-Private Partnership Unit has
stepped up its training programme, with particular attention to developing
parallel capacity in provincial treasuries. Systems and procedures for
evaluation and appraisal of large infrastructure projects are the focus of
a new working committee, also including provincial treasury
representatives. This initiative focuses on the quality of information
required for major infrastructure project planning and decision-making,
within the context of our accelerated economic growth objectives, the need
especially to prepare for hosting the 2010 World Cup and the importance of
improving the design and maintenance of transport, communications, energy
and water supply networks.

Now that the Municipal Finance Management Act is in place, local government
financial reforms and capacity-building are under the spotlight. As with
the implementation of the Public Finance Management Act in national and
provincial departments, the emphasis in the initial years is on building
appropriate institutions and capacity, training, guidance and of course
technical support.

The Treasury has already published over 20 circulars which give guidance to
municipalities on budgeting, accounting systems, procurement and other
aspects of financial management – so that municipal councils have suitable
instruments at their disposal to hold their executive and management teams
to account for the resources and services for which they are responsible.

In relation to capacity and training, work is in progress on a framework of
formal qualifications for municipal financial management from entry-level
to postgraduate standards. Currently, over 500 graduates are working in
over 120 municipalities under the internship programme funded by the
Financial Management Grant under the Treasury Vote. Allocations of these
grants will go to all 283 municipalities over the MTEF period ahead,
contributing to meeting specific capacity-building needs in each local
authority while also supporting a coherent national programme of financial
systems development, implementation, training, monitoring and evaluation.

I indicated in February that a new allocation in support of local public-
private partnerships would be phased in this year, financed in part through
the proceeds of the exchange control amnesty levy collected over the past
three years. An initial call for proposals for the Neighbourhood
Development Programme Grant resulted in 162 applications from 41
municipalities, and the first allocations will be made during the course of
the next six weeks. The aim of this programme is to bring private sector
investment in commercial, recreational and community services into
historically underserved township residential areas – creating business and
employment opportunities alongside improved services to local residents.

I need to emphasise that this is not an alternative source of funding for
the bulk infrastructure and basic service delivery responsibilities of
municipalities – these are already supported through the local government
equitable share and the municipal infrastructure grant. The Neighbourhood
Development Programme is for interventions that will be innovative and
qualitatively different.  It is about developing precincts that combine
administrative and social service delivery with retail and commercial
services; it will include support for several new multipurpose community
centres; and it will include co-financing arrangements for infrastructure
investment and improvements that contribute to local economic development
and job creation.

We have received new ideas and detailed plans for such diverse communities
as Tembisa, KwaThema and Kwatsaduza in Ekurhuleni, the Swalala and
Kanyamazana precincts in Mbombela Munipality in Nelspruit, Mthonjaneni in
KwaZulu-Natal – even a proposal for a “tridistrict alliance” between the
Northern and Eastern Cape and Free State provinces for a Gariep Tunnel
Festival. Some of these proposals will need further refinement, but the
prompt response of so many municipalities is a clear sign that the time has
come for a major programme of shared public and private sector investment
in improving the quality of life in low-income neighbourhoods.

Alongside these direct initiatives, there is also the indirect contribution
to local and regional development associated with sound trusteeship of
public funds. The Public Investment Corporation continues to be a
formidable force in the South African investment landscape, with close to
R600 billion worth of assets under management now. Clearly it is the
largest fund management initiative in this country, and compared favourably
with the largest in the world. Its portfolio includes bonds, equities,
properties and the Isibaya Fund, which is a private equity fund, focused on
black economic empowerment.

Two new initiatives deserve special comment. The first is the Pan-African
Infrastructure Development Fund. We have to recognize that Africa’s growth
and development requires a renewed focus on development of the continent’s
infrastructure. The Pan-African Infrastructure Development Fund will focus
on attracting pension funds from across the African continent, to invest in
a 25-year infrastructure equity fund.

The infrastructure backlog on the continent is huge and it is clearly right
that Africans should engage the challenge. Targeting the top 10 African
pension funds suggests that the fund should be able to achieve a first
closure of the fund with at least $1 billion of commitments by the end of
the current fiscal year.

An office has been established and a team put together to raise these
commitments of at least $1 billion. International pension funds will be
targeted for a second closure of the fund that should bring total committed
funds to about $3 billion.

The initial focus of the fund will be transport infrastructure, energy,
water and sanitation and telecommunication infrastructure investments. It
will focus on projects that can contribute to regional integration of the
continent and that will have regional impact.

Secondly, the PIC has created “Project Rural”.  This is the largest direct
property investment fund focusing on township and rural shopping centres in
South Africa. It has been achieved through the merging of the Community
Property Fund, a well-established property fund, whose investors are union
and parastatal pension and provident funds, and the retail properties owned
by the Government Employees Pension Fund.

The fund has a combined asset value of just over R1 billion and is at the
forefront of township and rural developments, with projects in the pipeline
which will double the size of the fund over the next three years. This
initiative clearly complements and supports government’s broader urban
renewal and rural development programmes.

I should also update the House on progress in respect of the Financial
Intelligence Centre, FIC. Its systems and procedures are beginning to yield
positive results: the reports from accountable institutions are flowing in
steadily; institutions are enhancing their “know your customer” obligations
and other compliance requirements; and law enforcement shows steady
improvement in financial investigations and an increase in money laundering
prosecutions.

During the past financial year the FIC received a total of 19 793
suspicious transaction reports, bringing the total to date to 44 021. This
is an indication that the reporting systems are working, largely due to the
seriousness with which the banks and other financial institutions have
taken on their responsibilities.

However, there are several sectors, which need to demonstrate further
compliance. For example, the FIC will be closely scrutinising the casino
and gambling sector and estate agents in the coming period.

The FIC will also be building even closer working relationships with
supervisory bodies, such as the Banking Supervision Department of the
Reserve Bank, the Financial Services Board, the National Gambling Board,
and similar organisations to ensure that an even and co-ordinated approach
is taken to monitoring compliance.

Consideration is also being given to ways in which less costly and more
efficient ways of implementing “know your customer” processes can be
implemented. The legal framework to strengthen oversight mechanisms must be
examined and improvements made where necessary to facilitate measured
responses aimed at remedying instances of noncompliance.

In conclusion, Chair, the activities of the Finance Ministry and the
departments and agencies under our oversight are wide-ranging and
challenging. Deputy Minister Jabu Moleketi will elaborate on several
important financial sector reforms, and the finalisation of the work of the
Amnesty Unit. Let me, in conclusion, highlight several shared themes of all
of this work.

Firstly, institution-building is at the centre of our activities.  This is
not just about the organisations that report to the Ministry of Finance and
their development, but is also about the larger challenge of institution-
building, sound financial management and governance, right across the
public sector and the economy more widely.

Secondly, the social and economic imperative that is the driving force
behind our activities is the construction of an integrated, equitable,
shared economy, broadening participation, and opening up opportunities for
all. This shapes what we measure, how we engage with taxpayers, what we
plan to spend, how we aim to reform and transform the financial sector and
its role in economic development.

Thirdly, the quality and integrity of our work, the professional standards
to which we aspire, remain paramount.

Fourthly, our activities are organised around clear objectives, and
disciplined by targets and deadlines. The budget date, agreed with this
House, is itself a most powerful discipline over all of us.

Finally, our work is increasingly broad in its scope – national and
regional concerns, and international engagements shape our ideas and duties
– but our progress towards accelerated growth, reconstruction, development
and eliminating poverty is the foundation on which all of our activities
rest.

Thank you for listening to me this afternoon, and I would like to express
appreciation to hon Nene, the Portfolio Committee on Finance and of course
the good men and women who work in the department and report to the
Ministry. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr N M NENE: Chairperson, hon members, firstly, on behalf of the committee,
let me also express our condolences to Comrade Yusuf Bhamjee and family on
the sad loss of his wife. To him we say: Akwehlanga lungehlanga. [Let us
accept what has happened.]

This Budget Vote comes at a time when South Africa is celebrating a number
of important political milestones. Among these milestones are the centenary
of the Bhambatha rebellion, the 13th anniversary of the Soweto June 16
student uprising and the 12th anniversary of the attainment of our
democracy. The budget of a developmental state like ours is therefore a
direct response to the socio-political ills that these rebellions were
waged against and an endorsement of the democracy that was born in 1994.

The state of the nation address delivered by the President on 3 February
2006 reflected on the key challenges of this new season of hope, with a
particular focus on growing the economy and bridging the divide between the
first and the second economies. The Budget, subsequently delivered on 15
February 2006, provided a financial plan and resources to address these
challenges.

Economic development is central to the realisation of the objectives of the
accelerated and shared growth initiative, which is defined as a limited set
of interventions that are intended to serve as a catalyst to accelerated
and shared growth and development. Incidentally, National Treasury, as a
department, is also at the centre of the facilitation and co-ordination of
this process. Therefore its capacity to deliver on this mandate is
exceedingly critical.

The ANC has always been of the view that a developmental state can only
deliver later - measured against the aspirations of the people, as
expressed in the Freedom Charter and through our Reconstruction and
Development Programme. Therefore allow me to measure the performance of the
department and its readiness against these two yardsticks.

The Reconstruction and Development Programme was an integrated, coherent
socioeconomic policy framework, which sought to mobilise our people and our
country’s resources toward the final eradication of apartheid and the
building of a nonracial, nonsexist and democratic future. It is within this
framework that the ANC-led government has developed a legislative programme
and policies that have brought about this season of hope.

This innovative and bold philosophy was based on a few powerful ideas and
sought to be precise. These were integrated and sustainable programmes, and
this programme was essentially centred on a people-driven process. This
programme and this people-driven process would be closely bound up with
peace and security for all that would enable us to embark upon nation-
building and that would require us to link reconstruction and development.
Finally, these five principles depended on a thoroughgoing democratisation
of South Africa.

In order to realise these noble objectives, five key programmes were
identified: Firstly, meeting the basic needs; secondly, developing our
human resources; thirdly, building the economy; fourthly, democratising the
state and society; and, lastly, implementing the RDP itself.

The National Treasury is therefore appropriately mandated by the
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa and by the Public Finance
Management Act to be responsible for the national government’s fiscal
policy framework and co-ordination of macroeconomic policy. This department
also exercises control over implementation of the annual national budget,
including any adjustments to the budget.

Regarding meeting the basic needs, in terms of this programme the
department has discharged its responsibility extremely well. The
expansionary fiscal policy in the past year has translated into a social
wage which was last calculated at close to R1 000 a month to the poorest
40% of households. That is in the Budget Speech of 2005, which was made by
the Minister. We see this trend continuing again in this year’s budget
through a significant increase in the allocation to the Infrastructure
Delivery Improvement Programme, IDIP. We trust that this programme will be
closely monitored so that we reap the desired outcomes from it.

The support given to municipalities and provinces through the
infrastructure grant is also applauded. Monitoring and reporting mechanisms
envisaged in the department’s strategic plan over the MTEF is welcome and
we will, as a committee, monitor this quarterly through those reports to
avoid a situation where funds are not spent and our people continue to
suffer whilst resources are available.

Regarding developing human resources, the committee was briefed by the
department on progress made with regard to the support given to departments
concerning capacity-building and the continuing professional development of
all existing staff. But we would like to see this department taking the
lead in terms of taking up interns in order to contribute in the broader
skills development campaign.

The Minister did mention those that have been deployed in the
municipalities, as we speak. The committee also takes note of your
personnel, Mr Minister, and awaits a report on progress made particularly
on the recruitment of the 140 new employees budgeted for during this
financial year.

Concerning building the economy, on this core mandate of the department I
must admit that it takes somebody from another planet to ignore the
tremendous progress that the department has made. The latest GDP figures
released a few weeks ago, ie 4,2% growth accompanied by a well within
target inflation rate of 3,7% put the country in good stead for the targets
set over the MTEF.

However, as has already been noted, the trade deficit, which is currently
financed by the capital account, may prove to be unsustainable in the long
run. External shocks, mainly the oil price and the volatile exchange rate
are also causes for concern as the second-round effects might have
inflationary consequences that might have a negative impact through the
monetary transmission mechanism.

Concerning democratising the state, under the department’s Programme 2,
which is Economic Planning and Budget Management, we note the progress made
in public finance management and the co-ordination of intergovernmental
relations. It is also worth noting that the Public-Private Partnership
Unit, over the next five years, will increasingly provide support to
municipalities in delivering certain services through partnerships with the
private sector. Further, the introduction of the Neighbourhood Development
Partnership Grant, which the Minister spoke about here, is also another
laudable initiative that could only come from an ANC people-centred
government.

The implementation of the Reconstruction and Development Programme is an
ongoing process and we urge the department to continuously evaluate its
performance against it as it is, in my view, the only programme that will
distinguish our government as a truly developmental state that our people
envisaged ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon member, just give me a
minute please. Hon members, you are conversing very loudly and very close
to the podium. Please continue, hon member.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: [Inaudible.]

Mr N M NENE: Thank you, Chairperson, for bringing some discipline. They are
very undisciplined. If there is no liquor, Mr Gibson is bored. He said it’s
boring because we are talking sense. The implementation of the
Reconstruction and Development Programme is boring for him. It’s an ongoing
process and we urge the department to continuously evaluate its performance
against it, as I have indicated that it’s the only programme that will
distinguish us as a truly developmental state that our people envisaged
when the charter was written.

Allow me to take this opportunity to thank the members for their dedication
that was shown during the deliberations, the Minister and the Deputy
Minister, the director-general and the National Treasury staff for their co-
operation during the hearings. I also want to take this opportunity to
thank the Commissioner of the S A Revenue Service and the Statistician-
General and their staff for their hard work under very challenging and
trying conditions.

I thank you, Chairperson. Before I bore Mr Gibson further: The bar is open,
Mr Gibson. [Applause.]

Dr S M VAN DYK: Agb Voorsitter, ons wil ook net van die DA se kant af ons
innige meegevoel betoon met die agb Bhamjee en sy gesin.

Die Minister van Finansies het ’n moeilike portefeulje. Hy bestuur die Suid-
Afrikaanse Statistiekdiens, die Suid-Afrikaanse Inkomstediens en die
Tesourie en op die resultate van hulle produktiwiteit moet hy sy fiskale
beleid baseer om die regering se ekonomiese mikpunte te bereik.

Alhoewel die Minister ’n gesonde fiskale beleid nastreef, word hy tans deur
sy eie geledere ondermyn in die groeidoelwitte wat gestel word. Hierdie
voortslepende konflik van belange, gepaardgaande met ’n gebrek aan
kapasiteit tussen u departement, Minister, en sommige ander departemente is
nie goed vir die land se ekonomiese groei nie. ’n Werker sal gemotiveerd en
produktief wees as hy opgelei is, vervoer het na ’n werkplek, oor
gesondheidsdienste beskik, oor mediese dienste beskik en munisipale dienste
ordelik aan hom voorsien word.

Die Tesourie wys jaarliks fondse toe aan die onderskeie staatsdepartemente,
maar die probleem is egter dat alle departemente nie saamwerk nie en ek wil
graag na ’n paar se statistiek verwys. Die Tesourie sal ook voorsiening
moet maak in sy eie begroting om meer personeel daar te stel vir die
oorweging van ander departemente se begrotingsmotiverings omdat van hierdie
departemente besig is om die belastingbetaler se geld te mors.

Agb Minister Manuel, u sal nie die volle samewerking van die privaatsektor
kry vir die ekonomiese ontwikkeling, solank as wat die Minister van Arbeid
hulle toegooi met arbeidswette en oorregulering nie.

Navorsing toon dat 51% van die vervaardigingsektore, regulasies en
burokrasie beskou as die grootste enkele beperkings op ekonomiese groei.
Gevolglik beweeg verskeie ondernemings weg van die arbeidintensiewe- na die
kapitaalintensiewe produksie, waar arbeid eenvoudig met masjiene vervang
word. En die Minister van Arbeid moet kennis neem hiervan.

Die sterk rand, lae inflasie en lae rentekoerse maak dit moontlik dat
arbeid baie maklik met ingevoerde kapitaaltoerusting vandag vervang kan
word. Navorsing toon dat, indien die staat net sy regulering van die
privaatsektor verslap deur minder periodieke rapportering van die
sakesektor te aanvaar, sonder om regulasies as sodanig af te skaf, kan die
privaatsektor al klaar R40 miljard per jaar spaar. Daarmee kan 2 miljoen
tydelike werksgeleenthede per jaar in die arbeidsintensiewe
konstruksiesektor geskep word.

Wat opleiding betref, beskik net 44% van die werkerkorps oor matriek en
naskoolse opleiding. As gevolg van hierdie gebrekkige produktiwiteit gaan
22% van alle werkstyd verlore, maar jaarliks gee die Tesourie geld vir
onderwys, maar weet u amptenare dat 10% van alle onderwysers op enige
gegewe dag nie by die skole aanwesig is nie en dat tussen 17 000 tot 22 000
onderwysers jaarliks hierdie beroep verlaat?

Volgens navorsing is gebrekkige vaardighede in die vervaardigingsektor vir
48% sake eienaars in Suid-Afrika ’n groot bedreiging. Daar is tans sowat
300 000 vakante poste in die ekonomie, omdat die aantal vakleerlinge vanaf
33 000 in 1975 tot 3 000 in die jaar 2000 afgeneem het. Die gemiddelde
ouderdom van ’n Suid-Afrikaanse ambagsman is dus nou vandag 54 jaar en oor
ses jaar, wanneer hierdie ambagsmanne op die ouderdom van 60 jaar aftree,
sal dit die ekonomie van Suid-Afrika in ’n totale krisis dompel. Die tekort
aan vaardighede gaan dan verseker Asgisa se grootste kopseer word.

Wat plaaslike regering aanbetref, word 56% van die BBP in die ses metrorade
geproduseer. Die res val binne die grense van die kleiner stadsrade. Daar
is dus ’n baie groter verantwoordelikheid by munisipaliteite om voldoende
infrastruktuur aan die privaatsektor te lewer sodat hulle hulle produksie
kan uitbrei. Maar, wat plaaslike regering aanbetref, kan 48%
munisipaliteite nie meer effektiewe dienste lewer nie. Waar laat dit ons?
Net 52% munisipaliteite is gerat om die funksie te verrig. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK: Hon Chairperson, on behalf of the DA we would also just
like to express our sincere condolences to the hon Bhamjee and his family.

The Minister of Finance has a difficult portfolio. He is in charge of the
South African Statistics Service, the South African Revenue Service and the
Treasury and he has to base his fiscal policy on the results of their
productivity in order to reach the government’s economic goals.

Although the Minister is striving for a sound fiscal policy, he is at
present being undermined by his own people in the growth goals that are
set. This ongoing conflict of interests, together with a lack of capacity
between the Minister’s department and some of the other departments is not
good for the country’s economic growth. A worker will be motivated and
productive if he is trained, has transport to a work place, has health
services and medical services and he is provided with municipal services in
an orderly way.

The Treasury annually allocates funds to the various government
departments, but the problem is, however, that all departments do not co-
operate and I would like to refer to the statistics of a few. The Treasury
will also have to make provision in its own budget for the appointment of
more staff for the consideration of other departments’ budgetary
motivations because some of these departments are wasting the taxpayer’s
money.

Hon Minister Manuel, you will not get the full co-operation of the private
sector for economic development as long as the Minister of Labour is
inundating them with labour laws and overregulation.

Research indicates that 51% of the manufacturing sectors regard regulations
and bureaucracy as the single biggest limitation to economic growth.
Consequently various enterprises are moving away from labour-intensive to
capital-intensive production, where labour is simply replaced by machines.
And the Minister of Labour must take note of this.

The strong rand, low inflation and low interest rates make it possible for
labour to be replaced very easily nowadays with imported capital equipment.
Research indicates that, if the government were merely to ease its
regulation of the private sector by accepting less periodic reporting from
the business sector, without abolishing regulations as such, the private
sector would already be able to save R40 billion per annum. With that, 2
million temporary job opportunities per annum could be created in the
labour-intensive construction sector.

As far as training is concerned, only 44% of the workers corps have matric
and post-school training. As a result of this poor productivity some 22% of
all working time is lost. The Treasury gives money for education annually,
yet do your officials know that 10% of all teachers are absent from schools
on any given day and that between 17 000 and 22 000 teachers leave this
occupation annually?

According to research poor skills in the manufacturing sector constitute a
big threat to 48% of business owners in South Africa. There are at present
approximately 300 000 vacant posts in the economy, because the number of
apprentices has decreased from 33 000 in 1975 to 3 000 in the year 2000.
The average age of a South African artisan is therefore 54 years now and in
six years’ time, when these artisans retire at the age of 60 years, it will
plunge the economy in South Africa into a total crisis. The lack of skills
will then certainly become Asgisa’s biggest headache.

As far as local government is concerned, 56% of the GDP is produced in the
six metro councils. The rest fall within the borders of the smaller town
councils. Municipalities therefore have a much greater responsibility to
deliver adequate infrastructure to the private sector so that they can
extend their production. But, as far as local government is concerned, 48%
of municipalities can no longer deliver effective services. Where does that
leave us? Only 52% of municipalities are geared to perform the function.]

Maybe it would be a good idea if all the ANC mayors across the country
visited Cape Town once a month in order for Helen Zille to address them on
effective municipal governance. [Interjections.]

Wat gesondheid aanbetref, mnr die Minister, weet u amptenare by die
Tesourie dat daar ’n gaping is tussen gesondheidsbeleid aan die een kant en
die implementering daarvan aan die ander kant? Ek weet nie eers of die
Minister daarvan bewus is nie.

Die swak gesondheidsdienslewering, gepaardgaande met die HIV-verwante
siektes wat reeds 55% van die mynbou- en vervaardigingsektore se
produktiwiteit beïnvloed, bring mee dat volwassenes se lewensverwagting nou
gedaal het tot 51 jaar. Alhoewel die gemiddeld bereken word uit
kindersterftes tot ouderdomsterftes, is dit steeds uiters kommerwekkend.

Dit gaan vorentoe ernstige gevolge inhou vir toekomstige aftreefondse by
versekeringsmaatskappye wat eers vanaf ouderdom 55 jaar voordele uitbetaal.
Hierdie bronne van besparing wat uiters nodig is vir verdere investering
gaan eenvoudig minder aantreklik word en daar gaan groter druk op die
staatskas geplaas word om na mense se welvaard in die toekoms om te sien.
Wat ons veiligheid aanbetref, hoekom word 18 000 mense per jaar in Suid-
Afrika vermoor? Hoekom gee die agb minister Trevor Manuel vanjaar R32
miljard belastinggeld vir die polisie en dan moet ons 18 000 mense begrawe?
Êrens is daar mos fout!

Verminder ook die staatsadministrasie se rompslomp, die sogenaamde “red
tape”. Hoekom sloer mynuitbreiding so lank? Dit neem tans etlike jare – tot
10 jaar - vandat ertsafsettings ontdek word, voordat die myn sy deure kan
open. Dit strem mos ekonomiese ontwikkeling. Ons moet daarmee wegdoen.

Dan is die ANC, as ’n party, ook nog besig om minister Manuel in die
uitvoering van sy fiskale beleid te ondermyn deurdat die regering sekere
besluite neem waaroor daar nie ’n deurdagte debat gevoer word ten opsigte
van die gevolge daarvan nie, en wat dan later ’n baie groot las op die
Tesourie plaas.

So het die regering van geskoolde onderwysers ontslae geraak en hulle
betaal om te loop, maar dan moet die staat hulle weer begin terugkoop, en
dit plaas ’n las op die Tesourie. Die regering het ook ’n minimum loon vir
landbou ingestel, en minister Manuel, u is deel van daardie regering, want
u neem saam deel aan daardie besluite. Maar hierdie loon is ingestel,
ongeag of die bedryf dit kan beskostig of nie en dit het gelei tot
afdankings. U weet dit.

Ongeveer 138 000 werksgeleenthede het reeds verlede jaar in die landbou
verlore geraak, maar dan praat ons elke dag oor werkskepping, en dit plaas
druk op die Tesourie vir addisionele investering om werkloosheid op alle
terreine aan te spreek. Laat dit liewers oor aan die markmeganisme om deur
die vraag en aanbod lone te bepaal, want dit is juis die landbou wat ’n
groot persentasie van die massa ongeskoolde arbeid kan absorbeer.

’n Verdere voorbeeld waar die regering beleidsbesluite neem, sonder om die
implikasie daarvan te besef, is die hele proses van regstellende optrede
wat op ’n ongrondwetlike wyse plaasvind. Alhoewel regstellende optrede
noodsaaklik is, moet dit nie gebeur sonder die inagneming van
produktiwiteit nie, want dit het hierdie land al finansieël baie duur te
staan gekom. Baie kundiges het kardinale sektore, en onder andere u eie
departemente, Minister, verlaat, en ons praat telkens daarvan in die
portefeuljekomitees wanneer die statistiekdiens en die Suid-Afrikaans
Inkomstediens met ons kom gesprek voer. Hulle het ook die land verlaat,
maat nou moet die Tesourie meer geld beskikbaar stel om weer geskoolde
werkers in te voer. Dit maak mos nie sin nie. Dis ’n sinnelose kringloop.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

So het Suid-Afrika ongeveer 15 000 nuwe ingenieurs jaarliks nodig, maar ons
kry net 3 000 by. In die munisipaliteite alleen is daar ’n tekort aan 4 000
ingenieurs. Nou, wat verwag u? Dit is hoekom 48% nie meer dienste kan lewer
nie, bo en behalwe die finansiële krisis waarin hulle verkeer.

’n Verdere faktor waar die regering besluite neem sonder om die finansiële
gevolge te besef, is die hele kwessie van grondhervorming – en u moet mooi
luister, want ek sien u luister vandag. Alhoewel grondhervorming ’n
belangrike vereiste is, en dit is belangrik, kan die manier waarop dit
uitgevoer word meebring dat die Tesourie baie belastinggeld in ’n bodemlose
put gaan gooi.

Eerstens hou restitusie in terme van grondeise vir hervestiging van mense
wat voorheen van hulle grond verskuif is, min grondverdeling in omdat 80%
van die eise in stedelike gebiede voorkom, waar die eisers geld verkies in
plaas van grond, en die Minister van Finansies moet betaal.

Tweedens, wat die 30% landbougrondhervestiging teen 2014 aanbetref, is die
vraag baie eenvoudig: Wanneer en hoe gaan ’n 30% mikpunt bereik word? Het u
al mooi daaroor gedink, agb Minister? Dit is byne onmeetbaar, want grond
kan weer van swart eienaars vervreem word. Byvoorbeeld, 20% grond kan
oorgedra wees op ’n gegewe tyd, maar as die helfde van daardie swart boere
as gevolg van droogte of finansiële krisis nie hulle finansiële
verpligtinge kan nakom nie, en die grond word teruggeneem deur die
finansierders, dan sak die persentasie van 20% were terug na 10%. En so kan
dit jaar na jaar fluktueer. Die staat beskik ook nie oor die
grondtransaksie inligting van privaatbanke nie. U weet nie hoeveel
privaatbanke van hierdie swart boere finansier om grond aan te koop nie.

Wat die Minister van Finansies en die regering moet oorweeg is dat die
bestuur van die geld vir boerdery ontwikkeling eerder aan die Departement
van Landbou oorgegee moet word om die ou landboukredietstelsel weer in te
stel, waar bekostigbare lenings dan teen ’n lae rentekoers, en selfs
rentevry, aan voornemende swart boere beskikbaar gestel kan word. Dan sal
’n haalbare mikpunt, alhoewel steeds moeilik meetbaar, vinniger bereik
word.

Dan wil ek ook graag verwys na die hele kwessie van sosiale toelaes, wat ’n
geweldige las op die staatskas plaas. Die Tesourie kies ’n kortpad na
armoedeverligting deur vir 12 miljoen mense welsynsinkomste te gee.

Die ANC kan nie vir altyd hierdie politieke oorlewingstryd so uitrek deur
werkloses te paai nie – daai tyd is verby. Die regering het ook nie gedink
aan die gevolge van sy kindertoelae wat deelmaak van hierdie
welsynsinkomste nie, want die betrokke Minister het gesê in antwoord op ’n
vraag dat ongeveer 12 000 kinders van buurlande, wie se ouers oor die grens
kom, ook nou deur die Suid-Afrikaanse belastingbetaler, waarvan u almal
deel is, gefinansier word, omdat hulle lande nie sulke toelaes gee nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[As far as health is concerned, Mr Minister, do your officials in the
Treasury know that there is a gap between the health policy on the one hand
and its implementation on the other? I do not even know whether the
Minister is aware of it this.

The poor health service delivery, together with the HIV-related diseases
which are already influencing 55% of the productivity of the mining and
manufacturing sectors, has resulted in adult life expectancy now having
decreased to 51 years. Although the average is calculated from the deaths
of children through to the deaths of the aged, it is still very alarming.

This will have serious consequences for future retirement funds with
insurance companies which only pay out benefits from the age of 55 years.
These sources of savings, which are very necessary for further investment,
are simply going to become less attractive and greater pressure is going to
be placed on the Treasury to attend to people’s welfare in the future.

As far as our safety is concerned, why are 18 000 people murdered in South
Africa every year? Why is the hon Minister Trevor Manuel giving R32 billion
in taxpayers’ money to the police this year, and then we have to bury 18
000 people? Something is wrong somewhere!

Also lessen the state administration’s red tape. Why does the extension of
mining activities take so long? At present it takes a number of years – up
to 10 years – from the time mineral deposits are discovered until the mine
can open its doors. This hampers our economic development. We should get
rid of this.

Then the ANC, as a party, is also undermining Minister Manuel in the
execution of his fiscal policy in that the government makes certain
decisions on which no proper debate is conducted in respect of their
consequences, which later on places a very heavy burden on the Treasury.

In this way the government got rid of skilled teachers and paid them to
leave, but now the state has had to start buying them back again, which
places a burden on the Treasury. The government also introduced a minimum
wage for agriculture, and Minister Manuel, you are part of that government,
because you take part in those decisions as well. But this wage was
introduced regardless of whether or not the industry could afford it, and
this has resulted in layoffs. You know that.

Approximately 138 000 job opportunities were lost in agriculture last year,
but then we talk about job creation every day, and that places pressure on
the Treasury for additional investment to address unemployment in all
spheres. Rather leave it to the market mechanism to determine wages on the
basis of supply and demand, because agriculture can absorb a large
percentage of the mass of unskilled labour.

A further example of where the government makes policy decisions without
realising their implications is the whole process of affirmative action
which is taking place in an unconstitutional manner. Although affirmative
action is essential, it should not take place without taking productivity
into consideration, because this has already cost the country a lot
financially. Many experts have left vital sectors, including your own
departments, Minister, and we talk about this over and over in the
portfolio committees when the statistics service and the South African
Revenue Service hold discussions with us. They have also left the country,
but now the Treasury has to make more money available to import skilled
workers. That makes no sense at all. It is a meaningless cycle.
[Interjections.]

For example, South Africa needs approximately 15 000 new engineers every
year, but we only get 3 000. In the municipalities alone there is a
shortage of 4 000 engineers. Now, what do you expect?  That is why 48% of
municipalities can no longer deliver services, over and above the financial
crisis they are experiencing.

Another sector where the government makes decisions without realising the
financial consequences is the whole question of land reform – and you must
listen carefully, because I see that you are listening today. Although land
reform is an important requirement - and it is important - the way in which
it is implemented can cause the Treasury to throw a lot of taxpayers’ money
into a bottomless pit.

Firstly, restitution in terms of land claims for the resettlement of people
who were previously removed from their land entails little land
distribution because 80% of the claims occur in urban areas, where the
claimants prefer money instead of land, and the Minister of Finance has to
pay.

Secondly, as far as the 30% agricultural land resettlement by 2014 is
concerned, the question is very simple: When and how is the 30% target
going to be reached? Have you thought carefully about that, Minister? It is
almost immeasurable, because land can once again be appropriated from black
owners. For example, 20% of land can be transferred at a given time, but if
half of those black farmers cannot fulfil their financial obligations owing
to drought or financial crisis, and the land is repossessed by the
financiers, then the percentage will fall again from 20% to 10%. And so it
can fluctuate from year to year. Nor does the state have the land
transaction information of private banks. You do not know how many private
banks finance black farmers to enable them to purchase land.

What the Minister of Finance and the government must consider is that the
management of the money for farming development should rather be handed
over to the Department of Agriculture to reintroduce the old agricultural
credit system, where affordable loans can then be made available at a low
interest rate, and even interest free, to prospective black farmers. Then
it will be possible to reach a reasonable, although still not easily
measurable, goal a lot sooner.

Then I would also like to refer to the whole question of social grants,
which place a tremendous burden on the Treasury. The Treasury is choosing a
short cut to poverty alleviation by giving 12 million people welfare
income.

The ANC cannot extend this political survival struggle forever by placating
the unemployed – that time is past. Nor did the government think of the
consequences of its child grant which forms part of this welfare income,
because the relevant Minister said in reply to a question that
approximately 12 000 children from neighbouring states, whose parents cross
the border, are now also being financed by South African taxpayers, of whom
you are all part, because their countries do not offer such grants.]

Prof A K ASMAL: Given that Mr Van Dyk will never be a Minister of Finance,
and given the fact that his hectoring tone is totally amusing us, will Mr
Van Dyk tell us if he finds anything positive in last year’s Budget and the
arrangement of the financial sector of our economy?
Dr S M VAN DYK: Agb Voorsitter, as dit so goed gegaan het sou ons nie op
die oomblik op ’n 4,9% groei gewees het nie, maar op ’n 6% groei, terwyl
ons eintlik 10% nodig het, agb lid, om uiteindelik ons werkloosheid aan te
spreek. So dit gaan nie so goed in die ekonomie op hierdie stadium nie.

Kom ons kyk na die Departement Statistiek. Die Suid-Afrikaanse
Statistiekdiens het sy werkvermoë die afgelope paar jaar verbeter deur meer
opgeleide personeel te werf, en dit is goed so. Die Finansiële
Portefeuljekomitee het ook nou in sy verslag oor Statistiek Suid-Afrika
hierdie week aanbeveel dat ’n strategiese plan verwag word om geskooldheid
verder in die departement te ontwikkel. Ek dink egter dat dit ’n bietjie
vergesog is vir die departement om nou ’n persverklaring uit te reik en te
sê:

   Stats South Africa is going to Parliament with the confidence that it is
   on the right course to produce accurate, relevant and reliable statistics
   that it knows South Africans and Parliament can trust.

Die agb Minister het ook vandag net goed gepraat van Statistiek SA se
dienslewering. Ek weet nie of u gerieflikheidshalwe al die probleme verswyg
wat ons in die portefeuljekomitee rondom die statistiekdiens bepreek het
nie, want u het net na al die voordele en die mooi dinge verwys.

Eerstens, agb Minister, is daar ’n groot leemte in die statistiek ten
opsigte van werkskepping. Die twee definisies van werkloos, en baie van ons
lede in die Parlement kan dalk geïdentifiseer word as bedekte werkloosheid
omdat hulle net hier sit en aanmerkings maak en nie werklik ’n
konstruktiewe bydrae lewer nie, en ek hoef nie te kyk nie, u sal weet waar
dit vandaan kom. [Tussenwerpsels.] [Gelag.] Maar, as ons verwys na die twee
definisies van werkloosheid, naamlik om werkloos te wees en werk te soek of
om werkloos te wees en nie werk te soek nie omdat hy moedeloos is, daardie
twee definisies maak mense net eenvoudig deurmekaar. Jy het òf ’n werk of
jy het nie ’n werk nie. En ek kan u verseker, die meeste werkloses is al so
moedeloos om werk te soek, dis hoekom daardie persentasie bly styg.

Tweedens, as die R41 miljard meer belastingsinkomste toe te skryf is aan ’n
groter groei in die ekonomie, hoekom het die werkloosheidsyfer dan nie
drasties gedaal nie? Met die R41 miljard belastingoorinvordering is geld
onnodig uit die ekonomie onttrek waarmee werk geskep kon word. Alhoewel die
R41 miljard wat te veel ingevorder is deels wel toegeskryf kan word aan ’n
toename aan kommoditeitspryse van onder andere goud, platina en die
verbruiksbesteding, hang daar ook ’n vraag oor die berekening van die Bruto
Binnelandse Produk. Meer volledige inligting is nodig vir duidelikheid oor
hoekom die groeisyfer dan net altyd opwaarts aangepas word.

Daar is ook ’n groot leemte in die statistiek ten opsigte van inligting oor
die informele sektor. Die departement sal eenvoudig hierdie sektor moet
binnedring, omdat die informele sektor ongeveer 2 miljoen mense in diens
het en ’n belangrike rolspeler is vir werkskepping. Studies toon dat 45%
van die informele sektor dit oorweeg om tot die formele sektor toe te tree,
wat ook vir die land voordele kan inhou as toekomstige belastingpligtiges.

Dan wil ek ook graag verwys na die Tesourie wat deur die agb Minister
bestuur word. Die Tesourie se verantwoordelikheid stop nie by die proses
van toewysing van fondse na die departemente toe nie, maar ook om die
effektiewe bestuur daarvan te monitor en ek en die Minister het al in die
verlede hieroor swaarde gekruis. Die Grondwet en die Openbare Finansiële
Bestuurswet - en ek gaan nie nou na die klousules verwys nie - bepaal dat
die Tesourie moet omsien na die gesonde bestuur van die belastingbetaler se
geld en om ’n toesighoudende rol te speel oor die finansiële bestuur van
departemente.

Die Tesourie moet ook effektiewe bestuur van departemente ten opsigte van
hulle inkomste en uitgawes bevorder, maar u departement faal om hierdie
funksie na behore uit te voer. Want, hoekom moet Binnelandsesake nou, na
die finansiële jaar ’n paar dae gelede, die Tesourie vra om in te gryp,
nadat die Ouditeur-generaal laasgenoemde departement se finansiële
jaarverslag afgekeur het omdat ongeveer R800 miljoen by die departement net
verdwyn het? Hoekom het die Departement van Sport en Rekreasie sy lopende
begroting met 162% oorskry?

Minister, u het ook nie in u toespraak vroeër vandag enigsins verwys na
hierdie verantwoordelikheid in die verband nie. Dié Tesourie kan eenvoudig
net nie meer voortgaan om geld uit te deel met oogklappe aan nie. U en u
departement het ’n verantwoordelikheid teenoor die belastingbetaler. Die
Parlementêre Finansiële Portefeuljekomitee het ook ’n paar dae terug in sy
verslag aanbeveel dat die Tesourie nou ’n verslag moet voorberei oor die
stand van interne ouditeuring en risikobestuur in die staatsdiens.

Om terug te kom na die ekonomiese groei omstandighede, navorsing toon dat
in ontwikkelende lande 55% volwassenes werk het. In Suid-Afrika is die
syfer 39% en om te beweeg na die 55% impliseer dat ons teen 10% per jaar
moet groei, in plaas van 6%, terwyl ons tans teen 4,9% groei. Investering
is net 17% van die Bruto Binnelandse Produk en dit behoort - en die
Minister weet dit - tot 25% uit te brei.

Staatsinvestering kan net 3% van die werkloses absorbeer, vanweë ons
geweldige kapasiteitsprobleem. Tans word staatsinvestering aan bande gelê
deur swak bestuurs- en beleidsbesluite, ook deur lae geskooldheid van
sekere amptenare en die onvermoë om hulle kapitaalbegrotings suksesvol te
besteë. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK: Hon Chairperson, if we were doing that well we would not
have had a growth rate of 4,9% at present, but a 6% growth rate, whereas we
really need 10%, hon member, to address our unemployment at long last. So
the economy is not really doing well at this stage.

Let us look at the Department of Statistics. The Statistics South Africa
improved its operating capacity over the past few years by recruiting more
trained staff, and that is a good thing. The Portfolio Committee on Finance
has now also recommended in its report on Statistics South Africa this week
that a strategic plan is expected to improve skills further in the
department. However, I think it is a bit far-fetched for the department now
to issue a press statement saying:

   Stats South Africa is going to Parliament with the confidence that it is
   on the right course to produce accurate, relevant and reliable statistics
   that it knows South Africans and Parliament can trust.

The hon Minister also had only praise for the service delivery of the
Statistics SA. I do not know whether you conveniently refrained from
mentioning the problems that we have discussed in the portfolio committee
regarding statistics services, because you referred only to all the
advantages and the positive aspects.

Firstly, hon Minister, there is a great deficiency in the statistics in
respect of job creation. There are two definitions of unemployment - and
many of our members of Parliament can perhaps be identified as being
covertly unemployed because they just sit here and make remarks and do not
actually make a constructive contribution, and I do not have to look, you
will know where they come from. [Interjections.] [Laughter.] But, if we
refer to the two definitions of unemployment, namely being unemployed and
looking for work or being unemployed and not looking for work because you
are despondent, those two definitions simply confuse people. One either has
a job or one does not. And I can assure you, most unemployed people are
despondent about looking for work; that is why that percentage keeps on
increasing.

Secondly, if the R41 billion additional tax revenue can be ascribed to an
increased growth in the economy, why has the unemployment figure not
dropped drastically? With the R41 billion tax over-recovery, money with
which jobs could have been created was unnecessarily withdrawn from the
economy. Although the R41 billion which was over-recovered can indeed be
partly ascribed to an increase in commodity prices of, inter alia, gold,
platinum and consumer spending, there is also a question mark hanging over
the calculation of the Gross Domestic Product. More comprehensive
information is necessary for clarity as to why the growth figure is always
only adjusted upwards.

There is also a great deficiency in the statistics in respect of
information on the informal sector. The department will simply have to
penetrate this sector, because the informal sector employs approximately 2
million people and is an important role-player for job creation. Studies
indicate that 45% of participants in the informal sector are considering
entering the formal sector, and they may also hold benefits for the country
as future taxpayers.

Then I would also like to refer to the Treasury that is managed by the hon
Minister. The Treasury’s responsibility does not end with the process of
the allocation of funds to the departments, but it also monitors the
effective management of these funds and the Minister and I have already
crossed swords about this in the past. The Constitution and the Public
Finance Management Act - and I am not going to refer to the clauses now -
provide that the Treasury must attend to the sound management of the
taxpayers’ money and play an oversight role over the financial management
of departments.

The Treasury must also promote effective management of departments in
respect of their revenue and expenditure, but your department is failing to
perform this function properly. Why must Home Affairs now, after the
financial year ended a few days ago, ask the Treasury to intervene after
the Auditor-General rejected the financial annual report of the
aforementioned department because approximately R800 million simply
disappeared in the department? Why did the Department of Sport and
Recreation exceed its current budget by 162%?
Minister, in your speech earlier today you also made no reference at all to
the Treasury’s responsibility in this regard. The Treasury simply cannot
continue to pay out money with blinkers on.  You and your department have a
responsibility to taxpayers. The Parliamentary Portfolio Committee on
Finance also recommended in its report a few days ago that the Treasury
must now prepare a report on the state of internal auditing and risk
management in the Public Service.

To return to the economic growth conditions, research indicates that in
developing countries 55% of adults are employed. In South Africa the figure
is 39% and to move to 55% implies that we must grow at 10% per year,
instead of 6%, whereas at present we are growing at 4,9%. Investment is
only 17% of the Gross Domestic Product and it should - and the Minister
knows this - grow to 25%.

State investment can only absorb 3% of the unemployed, on account of our
enormous capacity problem. At present state investment is being hampered by
poor managerial and policy decisions, as well as by the poor skills of
certain officials and the inability to spend their capital budgets
successfully.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Let’s see. Is it a question or a
point of order? A question? Do you want to take a question, hon member? He
has to respond first. Hon Bloem, let’s first hear if he wants to take your
question. Do you want to take the question? You will take it?

Mnr D V BLOEM: Ek wil net vra ... Dis ’n kort vraag. Rook jy, of rook jy
nie?

Dr S M VAN DYK: Wel, ek dink ek praat sin. Ek lyk nie gerook nie. So, ek
dink ek praat die waarheid, maar as iemand dit nie verstaan nie kan hy dalk
gerook wees in die Parlement. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr D V BLOEM: I just want to ask ... It is a short question. Do you smoke,
or don’t you?

Dr S M VAN DYK: Well, I think I am talking sense. I am not stoned. So, I
think I am telling the truth, but if someone does not understand it, he may
be stoned in Parliament.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member, you cannot be following
up on the question. You raised your question. There is a response, just
listen to the response.

Dr S M VAN DYK: Agb Voorsitter, so het die nasionale departemente – om
terug te kom na hoekom die kapasiteitsprobleem daar is en departemente nie
hulle kapitaalbegrotings spandeer nie – R2,5 miljard van hulle lopende
begrotings wat geëindig het in Maart vanjaar, nie spandeer nie. Weet u
amptenare dit, Minister?

Kuns en Kultuur het byvoorbeeld net 1,8% van sy kapitaalbegroting spandeer,
terwyl die Suid-Afrikaanse Nasionale Weermag nie een sent van sy
kapitaalbegroting spandeer het nie. Nou wat sê dit vir u? Dan is daar mos
’n geweldige kapasiteitsprobleem. En dan mors u die belastingbetaler se
geld, want hoekom moet ons geld uit die ekonomie onttrek vir investering as
dit nie gebruik word nie?

Minister Manuel, die staat het genoeg geld vir openbare investering, en ons
weet dit almal, maar dan moet die staat eers sy bestuurders identifiseer,
hy moet die projekte identifiseer en dan moet hy die geld beskikbaar stel
vir die investering daarvan. Dit het ook tyd geword dat die Parlement ...
[Tyd verstreke.] Die DA ondersteun die begroting. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK: Hon Chairperson, the national departments - to come back
to why the capacity problem exists and departments do not spend their
capital budgets – failed to spend R2,5 billion of their current budgets,
which ended in March of this year. Do your officials know this, Minister?

Arts and Culture, for example, spent only 1,8% of its capital budget, while
the South African Defence Force did not spend one cent of its capital
budget. Now what does that tell you? There is obviously an enormous
capacity problem. And then you are wasting the taxpayers’ money, because
why must we withdraw money from the economy for investment if it is not
used?

Minister Manuel, the state has enough money for public investment, and we
all know it, but then the state must first identify its managers, it must
identify the projects and then it must make the money available for
investment. It is also time that Parliament … [Time expired.] The DA
supports the budget.]

Mr T E VEZI: Thank you, Chair, let me also, on behalf of my party and
myself, convey our condolences to colleague Yusuf Bhamjee on his sad loss.
If you’ll bear with me, I think this is the first time that I have stood on
this podium with nine minutes at my disposal. I always used to have only
three minutes.

The National Treasury aims to promote economic development, good
governance, social progress and a rise in living standards through
accountable, economic, efficient, equitable and sustainable management of
South Africa’s public finances. The Treasury is responsible for preparing a
sound and sustainable national budget, an equitable division of resources
between the three spheres of government.

Real total GDP grew from R770 billion in 1994 to R1,5 trillion in 2005. In
2005 the economy grew by 5%. The National Treasury is expected to advance
economic growth, broad-based empowerment, progressive realisation of human
rights and the elimination of poverty. The total allocation of R218 billion
includes transfers to provinces; R17 billion or 8% more than in 2005 for
increases to Sars and provincial and local government.

What remains of concern to the IFP is whether the existence of vacancies
within the Treasury has any impact on its ability to deliver on its
mandate. The IFP hopes that the accrual system is now almost complete. The
Treasury should now insist on performance, otherwise officials will always
use a lack of capacity as an excuse for failing to perform. The IFP
encourages the Treasury to ensure that the PFMA is applied rigorously; that
the public sector managers manage more efficiently and are held more
accountable.

The launch of Asgisa requires the National Treasury to play a pivotal role
in providing the necessary economic analysis that should underscore this
process. The IFP wishes to congratulate the National Treasury on its stable
economic management.

The aim of Sars is to collect tax revenue and provide customs services. The
IFP commends the commissioner, his senior management team and all of his
staff for the outstanding revenue collection performance in 2005-06. Sars
collected R354,9 billion last year – that is R21 billion more than targeted
for. It brings the budget deficit down to 1,6% of GDP.
Sars’ allocation is R4,8 billion more than last year for capacity-building
and project management. The free movement of goods means that South Africa
is exposed to greater levels of transnational criminal activity. These
activities sometimes threaten national economic security. Sars should
optimise compliance and risk management. It should also enhance trade
facilitation and border control.

The aim of Stats SA is to produce accurate and reliable data in the
following areas: economic growth, the measurement of the gross domestic
product, improving the measurement of price changes, employment and job
creation, re-engineering of the labour force survey. Stats SA’s allocation
is 4,5% more than in 2005 for savings on income and expenditure, community
and labour force.

The challenge to produce high quality data to meet the information needs of
the state, is massive. Stats SA faces high organisational risks. Stats SA,
as a scientific institution, operates in a society that, for many years,
was deliberately and systematically denied proper development in the
mathematical sciences. The provision of official statistics is an
indispensable element in the information system of democratic society,
serving the government, the economy and the public with data about the
economic, demographic, social and environmental situation.

In congratulating the Commissioner of Revenue and realising the problems
that he sometimes faces, let me quote from a famous case in America:

  Over and over again, the courts have said: there is nothing sinister in so
  arranging one’s affairs so as to keep taxes as low as possible. Everybody
  does so: rich or poor and all do right. Nobody owes any public duty to pay
  more than the law demands. Taxes are enforced extractions, not voluntary
  or contributions. To demand more in the name of morals is mere cant.

Thank you, sir.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): You didn’t even use the entire nine
minutes. I thought you would use all of it.

Mr K A MOLOTO: Hon members, the monumental achievements of Sars are a
living testimony to the dedication of men and women in Sars. These
achievements have inspired me to deliver a very short speech indeed. It is
a real South African success story and envied by many tax administrations
in developing countries. The mandate of the SA Revenue Service is to meet
the state revenue requirements to fund the government’s development agenda.

With this budget allocation, Sars is expected to intensify the campaign to
broaden the tax base by including the unregulated economy or informal
business in the tax system. Sars is expected to administer the tax amnesty
offered to small businesses that was announced by the Minister of Finance.
Most of these small businesses have been marginalised from the economic
mainstream and are now prepared to regularise their tax affairs. They
require amnesty to deal with their fears about their past noncompliance and
the possibility of heavy penalties for previous nondisclosures.

The other challenge that Sars has to continuously deal with is tax evasion.
Tax evasion poses a risk to the South African revenue base and Sars
requires the support of this House to contain this risk. The ANC is really
pleased to note that the number of convictions secured in courts for tax-
related offences has increased. In the 2005-06 financial year 148
convictions were secured in courts for tax-related offences.

The other area of great concern is tax evasion by very rich individuals who
do not fully disclose their incomes. This House should be pleased to note
that Sars is going to launch operations to deal with noncompliance by high-
net-worth individuals. They will be prosecuted without fear or favour. Sars
has done sterling work in this area.

Aggressive tax structuring, which is being advocated by the hon Vezi,
should be a matter that should not be tolerated by this House. It erodes
the tax base and should be seen as a crime against the poor in this
country, and it is an obstacle towards the realisation of our development
agenda.

We do consider that the compliance cost of taxpayers has to be lowered.
There has to be reduction of the red tape and simplification of forms and
procedures. I am impressed to learn that Sars is launching e-filing to
enable taxpayers to submit their tax returns over the Internet. This will
go along way towards lowering compliance and administration burdens.

Allow me to address this House on a matter that is equally important but
rarely receives the publicity it deserves. This is a matter that relates to
the trade facilitation and border control role of Sars. International trade
requires that Sars has to be efficient in the ways it handles this matter.
This becomes even more important, given our SADC responsibilities and the
trade protocols that we have entered into.

Traders and transporters in the Southern African Customs Union and SADC are
faced with major challenges in transporting goods through borders of
various countries. Different customs clearance documentation in various
countries, which fall within Sacu, poses a set of challenges. It reduces
processing time and causes unnecessary delays at the borders. This leads to
reduced service levels, raises costs and ultimately the competitiveness of
products. It is quite encouraging to realise that Sars has been
instrumental in the development of a single multipurpose document that can
be used in all countries within the Southern African Customs Union.

The other critical area that Sars is engaged with is the development of one-
stop borders. Currently, the customs process requires a trader to make at
least four stops. A South African trader exporting goods to Botswana will
make the first stop, for example, at Ramatlabama border post on the South
African side to have documentation and the load verified. The second stop
will take place when the trader enters Botswana where he undergoes the same
process of documentation and load verification. The third stop will take
place when the trader leaves Botswana. The fourth stop will take place when
the trader re-enters South Africa.

Clearly, this is a time-consuming and inefficient process. The
establishment of joint customs facilities and border inspection services
will reduce the costs to both governments and traders. Sars is currently
negotiating one-stop borders with Botswana, Namibia, Swaziland, Lesotho and
Mozambique.

It is important that South Africa should intensify the fight against
smuggling of goods and the movement of contraband. The deployment of
scanners at South African ports this year will assist in detecting the
movement of contraband and smuggled goods without hampering the movement of
legitimate goods.

The study on the feasibility of establishing customs laboratories has to be
finalised as a matter of urgency. These laboratories will assist in the
detection of drugs and dangerous substances as well as identifying other
goods subject to import and export prohibitions. It is important that Sars
should develop and increase the capacity of its dog units. These units are
crucial in reinforcing the fight against narcotics and dangerous
substances.

This government has committed itself to making a contribution to the
success of Nepad and the strengthening of microeconomic policy convergence
in SADC. In the past, Sars has been involved in the strengthening of tax
administration capacity and systems in Lesotho and Swaziland. This type of
assistance to fellow African countries should be encouraged.

Finally, Sars has continuously performed beyond our expectations. It is
part of many of our success stories. The ANC supports this Budget Vote.

Mr J BICI: Chair, Minister and hon members, at the outset, let me
congratulate the Minister and the department on performing their duties
with excellence and consistency year in and year out. We may not
necessarily always agree with the policies that direct your activities but
your work performance is unquestionably good.

Indeed, a special word of praise should be directed towards the SA Revenue
Service. As a citizen, it is a revelation to enter the average Sars office
where friendly and competent staff are the norm, not the exception. We can
only plead with the government to use Public Service delivery at Sars as a
blueprint and replicate it in other departments like Home affairs, Health,
etc.

Regarding the broad policy direction of the National Treasury, we are
satisfied with the more expansionary fiscal stance that replaces the
earlier austerity. Whilst fiscal budgetary management has been good at
National Treasury level, the same cannot be said for some other
departments. Problematic budgetary overspending and underspending occur in
provincial and local governments. It is relevant to mention this here,
since the National Treasury has been spearheading the increasing devolution
of national budget and service delivery responsibilities to lower tiers of
government.

Statistics SA remains the ugly duckling in the National Treasury family. We
appreciate, however, that the embarrassments of a few years ago have not
been repeated in that much work is going into further improving the agency.
Nonetheless we must, once again, emphasise the pivotal role that timely and
accurate economic and social indicators and statistics may play in shaping
both government policy and the markets. The UDM supports the budget.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Hon Chairperson, hon members, allow me to
preface my speech this afternoon by dealing with some of the issues that
have been raised by hon Van Dyk. Quite obviously, in the mind of hon Van
Dyk, the role of the National Treasury is that of a police person. Or
rather to put it more clearly, it is that of an enforcer or terminator
rolled into one.

I must submit that even Schwarzenegger in his heyday couldn’t really
achieve the type of feat that hon Van Dyk thinks the National Treasury
ought to. [Applause.] He expects the National Treasury to take over the
role, amongst others, of the oversight duties of Parliament by ensuring
that all departments account for their deficiencies to the National
Treasury. I suppose as we all sit here we know that is the responsibility,
amongst others, not just of the management of the different departments but
of the oversight committees of Parliament.

He also expects us in the National Treasury to undertake some of the tasks
of the Auditor-General. We can’t do that. And I want to remind the hon
member that our mandate is captured in the Estimates of National
Expenditure and all our programmes are quite clearly articulated. It is
also obvious that there is evidence to indicate that in the past years –
and we are committing ourselves even in this current financial year that we
will live up to that mandate and to a large extent we will pledge to do
exactly that – to advance the mandate as captured in the Estimates of
National Expenditure.
It is also important to understand that his confusion around the narrow and
broad definitions of unemployment has nothing to do with the institution of
Statistics SA. It has everything to do with his lack of understanding of
some of these matters. And I am sure the Statistician-General is also a
good teacher. In your free time, hon member, find time to engage with the
Statistician-General so that you can be broadly educated around some of
these very, very complex but necessary issues for Members of Parliament to
basically understand. And I think it’s important for all of us to do that.
As we come here as members of the legislature we must not just be informed
by our own understanding of issues, but we must seek to broaden it by
engaging with the institutions that advance some of these very, very
important tasks.

I don’t understand, and I never perceive, Statistics SA as an ugly duckling
of the National Treasury. Statistics SA is undertaking a very, very
important task - the task, to a large extent, over the past few years,
though most of us did not understand it, of basically updating our data –
because, by and large, they have inherited a legacy that statistics in
South Africa really did not exist for the majority of the constituencies
and the people of South Africa. And to update that is a mammoth task in
itself.

Whilst we do that, and because this is a human endeavour, quite clearly
there will be a few occasions when errors are committed, but you cannot
judge this mammoth effort by the numbers and the sparse population in terms
of the errors that have been made. But what has been achieved at this point
is that South Africa can stand up within the international fora and boast
about the existence of this institution that in itself has undertaken to
update our statistics. [Applause.]

Over and above that, they have advanced this technical expertise to our
neighbours. On the African continent, and even internationally, our
Statistics SA has taken its place internationally in terms of ensuring that
in the African continent, notwithstanding the capacity challenges that we
confront, we are also able to advance the ability of the world to base
policy on credible data. It’s a journey that we have embarked on and we are
confident that the management of Statistics SA will rise to this challenge.

Quite obviously, strong economic growth and investment and the efficient
allocation of investment funds depend on the quality and depth of our
financial markets. Over the past year, we have seen an extraordinary
performance in our capital markets, partly driven by robust global goals
but also indicative of rising confidence in South Africa’s growth outlook.
For business in general, and certainly for the financial sector, conditions
have never been so good. But the sustainability of growth depends also on
the quality and equity of economic performance. This is perhaps especially
true of the financial sector.

At the heart of our broadening economic development strategy are the key
concepts of good governance, sustainability and equity. We have strived to
do what is transparent, what will result in long-term success and what is
fair and right. For business, this has resulted in a far more favourable
environment than many envisaged.

Whilst many in industry may originally have been sceptical about issues of
empowerment, transformation and redistribution, increasingly we are seeing
the wisdom of such policies in that not only were they the right thing to
do, but they also contributed to stronger, shared and sustainable economic
performance.

It is perhaps no surprise that questions of fairness have dominated the
financial sector reform agenda during this past year of extraordinary
growth and improved performance. The spotlight has fallen increasingly and
sharply on the standard of good governance and equity and the character of
enlightened trusteeship at the helm of our financial ship.

Shortly after taking office, which is basically just about ten years ago,
Minister Manuel stated that government needed to have a big say in the
structure and regulation of the financial services industry and that the
industry could not place itself above the law by defining its own
regulation. Ten years later, we can see that those words were indeed
prophetic.

The situation inherited in 1996 was one of a financial sector that had
developed within the context of an inward-looking policy environment,
skewed investment opportunities and ownership by a few. Years of political
and economic isolation meant that our regulatory structures had become
progressively out of line with international standards. A highly
concentrated financial sector meant that there was limited competition to
bring down the costs to consumers and to spur innovation. It was a
political dispensation that did not care about the majority of its people
and it found its reflection in a financial sector that had scant regard for
the interests of ordinary consumers.

Over the past ten years, the pace of transformation in the financial sector
has indeed been remarkable. Legislation in most segments of the financial
sector has been overhauled. Where traditionally regulation was focused on
issues of prudential risk management, we have seen a range of new laws
aimed at balancing this with improved consumer protection. But legislation
can only go so far. Bringing about true change is also about the
enforcement of such legislation and the spirit and the integrity with which
financial sector participants take the message of this legislation to
heart. I am happy to say that though many challenges still exist in this
regard, the past year has witnessed some heartening progress in giving
effect to the principle of good governance, transparency, and fairness and
consumer protection.

In December 2005, the Minister of Finance and representatives of the life
insurance industry signed a statement of intent in which the industry
committed itself to finding an effective solution to concerns highlighted
by the Pension Fund Adjudicator relating to the lack of transparency in the
fee structures of contractual savings products, in particular the cost of
early termination. While there were extensive debates about the obligations
of insurers in terms of the relevant legislation and regulations, the life
insurance industry recognised that the reasonable expectation of consumers
with respect to net returns from retirement annuity funds, members’
policies and other savings policies have not been met, particularly in the
context of early premium cancellations. As a result of this, the life
insurance industry agreed to a restitution package of close to R3 billion
to reimburse effected and affected policyholders.

The spirit that informed this agreement was that while certain practices
may not have been formally illegal, they were plainly unfair and
indefensible. The task of putting flesh on the bones of this agreement is
currently under way, guided by a discussion paper on contractual savings in
the life insurance industry released by the National Treasury by the end of
March 2006.

This includes proposals on regulatory changes to provide more adequate
consumer protection measures to lower the cost through improved
transparency and competition, measures to better align the incentives
structure of intermediaries with the interests of the client, including the
reform of the structures of commissions and, lastly, financial safety nets
to provide a more equitable sharing of risks between the client
intermediary and insurance companies. It is anticipated that these reforms
will result in a significant improvement in consumer confidence in the
value offered by the savings products of the insurance industry and provide
a strong foundation for improving the culture of savings to go forward.

A second example of the financial sector being held to the highest
standards of transparency and accountability relates to recent
investigations into a practice that was termed as “bulking” by retirement
fund administrators. It has emerged that administrators were making
undisclosed profits from bulking the funds under their administration and
then negotiating a higher rate of interest to be paid on the funds by
taking some of these benefits for themselves, without approval from the
pension fund under administration.

This is tantamount to taking away benefits from pension fund members
without their knowledge or approval. An agreement has been reached between
the Financial Services Board and Alexander Forbes, whereby Alexander Forbes
will repay the retirement funds the total benefits received from bulking,
as well as making a contribution of R12 million to the Financial Services
Consumer Education Foundation – and this money will be used for training of
retirement fund trustees.

This sends a clear message to all retirement fund administrators and other
financial services providers, acting as agents of retirement funds, that we
will tolerate no less than the highest standards of accountability.
Financial sector service providers are placed in a position of trust
towards retirement funds and as such are under a legal duty to act in the
best interests of their client at all times.

Receiving secret profits or undisclosed compensation from other parties is
not an acceptable practice. Retirement fund administrators operate in terms
of a licence, as we all know, from the Registrar of Pension Funds and, as
such, must observe all the conditions and obligations that come with such a
right to operate. It is imperative that all other administrators provide a
full and frank disclosure of all practices that amounted to undisclosed
profits as required by the Registrar of Pension Funds and that similar
steps are put in place to fully compensate retirement fund members and
pensioners.

In terms of the Pension Funds Second Amendment Act of 2001, all pension
funds were required to submit fund surplus apportionment schemes to the
Financial Services Board within two and a half years of their surplus
apportionment date. This ought to be done by 7 June 2006 at the very
latest. It is estimated that about 2 000 pension funds will have surplus
apportionments but to date only about 10% of these have, to a large extent,
submitted the surplus apportionment schemes.

In plain language, this means that there are hundreds of thousands of
individuals who are not receiving their due surplus benefits. If this
situation persists, we will see an increased number of people, especially
pensioners, lose out on these benefits because they will not survive long
enough for the process to be completed. This, as we all know, is entirely
unsatisfactory.

Retirement fund members have a right to demand that the trustees of their
funds take urgent action in case of non-compliance. Ultimately, it is the
retirement fund members and pensioners who are penalised by this
inactivity. If no action is forthcoming, the trustees will have compromised
their fiduciary duties and the fund will be required to appoint a tribunal
to take over the duties of trustees, in respect of complying with the
surplus legislation.

Ultimately, this is indeed an expensive and complex step that we do not
want to take unless necessary. Rather, we call upon all trustees and
administrators to deal with this issue with the seriousness that it
deserves and submit surplus schemes in terms of the agreed timetable with
the Chief Actuary of the Financial Services Board by no later than 31
December 2006.

It is not our intention that changes in the financial sector should begin
and end with what is prescribed in legislation. The financial sector
charter is instructive in this regard. Firstly, it is a model of
constructive industry corporation on a national scale, not in the form of
collusion but rather in the sense of sharing of intellectual capital to
find solutions to present day challenges. Secondly, it breaks new ground in
terms of an industry coming forward voluntarily to commit itself to doing
things that go above and beyond what is required in terms of legislation.

Certainly, legislation and regulations are important cornerstones in
setting the framework within which firms must operate, within which we must
protect overall financial stability. However, the charter has demonstrated
the power of a shared vision, one that commits transformation, not only for
moral reasons but also because it will build the foundations on which we
will benefit in the future.

Last year, I was able to report that Mzansi has led to the creation of 1
million new bank account holders, within its first seven months. This
figure has now grown to over 3,3 million new accounts. [Applause.] Mzansi
will continue to evolve as new product features are added. It has already
taken significant strides in the challenge of improving access to banking
services for all.

We are also seeing the development of similar initiatives in the insurance
and collective investment industries. Transformation and access to finance
are objectives of the proposed tier banking legislation in the form of the
Dedicated Banks Bill and Co-operative Banks Bill. The Co-operative Banks
Bill seeks to provide community-based banks with legal standing and
strengthen regulations, so as to afford its depositors the same safety and
stability as that enjoyed by formal commercial banks.

The first draft of the Co-operative Banks Bill has now been revised to
reflect the numerous comments received and will be tabled at Nedlac within
the next few days for further consultation, prior to submitting to Cabinet
later this year.

The Dedicated Banks Bill seeks to create a new institution that will
provide core banking services without having to conform to the traditional
model of full-scale banks. Institutions which it is envisaged will apply
for these types of banking licences would include telecommunication
companies, large retail companies and micro lenders. It is my view that the
promulgation of these two Bills will introduce significant opportunities
for new entrants into the banking system, with the aim of increasing
competition and access to finance.

Turning to other organisations reporting to the Minister of Finance, I am
pleased to announce that the amnesty unit housed in the National Treasury
and tasked with adjudicating the applications by South Africans who wish to
voluntarily declare their foreign assets and regularise their tax affairs,
has completed its core work. After undertaking a final audit of files
received, I can report that the amnesty unit has adjudicated all of the 42
679 applications it received since the announcement of the amnesty nearly
three years ago. Of this number, 42 178 applications were approved, 937
applications were withdrawn, deleted or voided and 20 applications were
declined. The amnesty process has raised R2,9 billion in levies and will
soon transfer this amount to the National Revenue Fund. [Applause.]

It is worth noting that when the amnesty process was announced in 2003, it
had four objectives: to broaden the tax base; to enable South Africans to
regularise their affairs without prosecution; to provide SA Revenue
Services and the Reserve Bank with details of foreign assets; and, finally,
to facilitate the repatriation of foreign assets to South Africa. I am
pleased to announce that the amnesty process has successfully achieved all
these objectives and a total of R68,6 billion of foreign assets have been
disclosed. Approximately 70% of these disclosed assets were illegal, whilst
30% were legal or legalised through the Reserve Bank.

It is estimated that the income tax base has increased by R1,4 billion,
which is likely to increase the collection of personal income tax by an
estimated R400 million. The sum of R2,9 billion of revenue raised through
the levies is a further indication of the success of the amnesty process
and will be used for social development, as indicated by the Minister, and
community infrastructure.

I wish to specifically thank the chairperson, Adv Madlana, who has led the
amnesty unit impeccably and with great enthusiasm. I would also like to
thank the Reserve Bank and Sars for their assistance in finalising the
amnesty process.

Finally, my appreciation also goes to Parliament and the public for the
confidence they have shown in this amnesty process, which, as stated above,
has indeed been a remarkable success. The Minister of Finance earlier made
reference to progress in implementing the Financial Intelligence Sector
Act. I just want to relate a personal experience in this regard. I think it
is also important that we begin to look at some of the regulatory burdens
that are basically imposed on clients.

I have also had personal experience of being ``FICA’d’’. I don’t think it
was ever the intention of the legislation, when the Federal Insurance
Contributions Act was passed, to allow a situation to develop where the
customer of a financial institution, for example a bank, would be
``FICA’d’’ and would have to identify themselves more than once.

However, what we have at the moment is a situation where every time a
person who is already a client and who has already been ``FICA’d’’ wants a
new product, another home loan or motor vehicle financing, he or she has to
go through the motions of being ``FICA’d’’ again and again. This is time-
consuming and expensive. This is not hearsay, it has happened to me.

I believe it is the responsibility of a bank or any other similar
institution to ensure that their internal systems enable them to have a
single view of their customers. If they only have separate views with each
and only link a client to a particular product, then how can they honestly
state that they have good customer relationships in place? How can they
honestly say that they have developed good risk management processes?
Moreover, it then becomes an excuse to pass the cost of complying on to the
client. This is not acceptable.

Our banks and other financial institutions have world-leading IT systems.
It seems to me that here is something that shouldn’t be difficult to
achieve. It also seems to me that in doing so, they will not need to pass
the costs to their clients, because the institutions will soon recoup these
costs through the better relationships that they develop with their clients
and many others will choose to come and bank with them.

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Minister
of Finance for his leadership and the management of the National Treasury
and all the institutions that are residing within the area of his
responsibility, for maintaining high standards of efficiency and
competency. Thank you very much.

Mr M JOHNSON: Chairperson, I want to start off my speech with a quotation
from a certain Ralph Waldo Emerson. He said:

   Shallow men believe in luck.
It is those days.
   Strong men believe in cause and effect.

That is what happens when you suddenly have 18 minutes. You end up
waffling, not knowing what to do with it. [Interjections.] It’s new.

On the occasion of the 30th anniversary of the 16 June Soweto revolt, it is
fitting that we dedicate this speech to those who took up stones, petrol
bombs, fought against an armed enemy, were maimed and died in the process,
were detained, imprisoned, and got exiled, all in the name of liberating
you and me.

This cluster of 1976 efforts opened our eyes and minds about a need, not
only of fighting against the usage of Afrikaans as a medium of instruction,
but also against the entire system of Bantu education that denied an
African child being taught maths and science. Heita Class of 1976, heita!

Chairperson, Minister of Finance, Deputy Minister of Finance, the team from
Statistics South Africa, led by Messrs Howard Gabriels and Pali Lehohla,
Ministers and Deputy Ministers present, colleagues, comrades and fellow
South Africans here and elsewhere, we gather at a sad moment when one of
us, comrade Yusuf Bhamjee, has just lost his loved one, through the
senseless murder of his wife at her surgery.

Also, South Africa mourns the passing on of one of us, a seasoned cadre of
our movement, Comrade Eric Molobi. We salute these cadres for the sterling
work they have contributed towards liberating our country from the fascists
who only knew of the existence of one race in this world, that is, the
white race. Even if we don’t say it in so many words, your work did not go
unnoticed.

Today is better than yesterday, and tomorrow shall be better than today.
This is firmly illustrated by the growth of our gross domestic product to
4,2% in the first three months of the year on a seasonally adjusted and
annualised basis.

It is the 30th consecutive quarter of economic growth, the longest
continuous upswing in South Africa’s history. In this regard, therefore, we
have every reason to celebrate these achievements under an ANC-led
government and administration. I demand that applause from you. [Applause.]

Class of 1976, indeed your struggles have not been in vain. You continue to
swell the ranks of leadership in society. However, a challenge still
remains – that of ensuring the wider spread of this generation in other
areas, like we are dealing with today.

I am speaking here as a non-statistician during this debate on Vote No 13 -
Statistics South Africa, to pass a message that talks to the importance of
data collection with regard to planning and a need for all of us here and
out there to allow these statisticians to enter our homes and businesses,
and be given correct information as they collect this data.

We collect this reliable data in order to do proper planning towards
building a better life for all in our country. The credibility and
reliability becomes very important for statistics in South Africa, because
these inform policy formulation, development, effective implementation of
targeted delivery and allocative efficiencies.

For the reasons above, growth in our economy is better measured with the
introduction of the new systems, and the rate at which prices of
commodities are measured in our inflation targets leaves us with much scope
for future achievement.

Underlying the objectives of collection of reliable data is the honesty and
willingness on the part of South Africans, and those who have since
migrated to our country.
The Statistics South Africa Act of 1996 has as its purpose the advancing of
the planning, production, analysis, documentation, storage, dissemination
and use of official and other statistics. Among the other purposes of this
Act is to seek co-operation between producers of official statistics and
the users thereof, and other statistics in government, other sectors of
society and the public at large, and the respondents supplying the
information that results in official and other statistics liaising also
with international and regional organisations.

The vision is very clear: To be a preferred supplier of quality statistics.
The mission is equally clear: Provide a relevant and accurate body of
statistics to inform users on the dynamics in the economy and society
through the application of internationally acclaimed practices.

There are three fundamental principles of official statistics –
confidentiality, professional independence and co-ordination and co-
operation amongst institutions, both in the country and abroad. What we get
here as and when the statisticians present all of these statistics is the
confidentiality that goes with it.

In achieving these sound principles, we are pleased with the work done by
Stats SA by providing us with the work programme that maps out five
programmes that Stats SA is following in implementing the above.
On the administration side, over the past year, we have seen a significant
improvement in the office, especially with the appointment of the new
Deputy Director-General on economic statistics. That makes our lives easier
as we go along in doing especially the community surveys that precede the
work of Statistics South Africa for Census 2011.

On economic statistics, the statistics are produced to meet user
requirements. For example, in the industry and trade statistics, they refer
to the turnover and volumes in various economic sectors. Statistics on
employment and prices provide us with information on employment in the
formal non-agricultural sectors with the price indices like the CPIX and
PPI. There are also financial statistics on public sector spending and the
performance of private sector organisations.

Critical to our emerging economy is the unrecordability of our second
economy. This refers to the resistance that we find among our informal
businesses. The challenge here is to measure these success stories, and the
challenges that accompany these in order to identify the gaps for proper
intervention.

As the Minister has said, the community survey is upon us. Of critical
importance for this is an effort that will take us towards the 2011 Census
that will be done nationwide. The Question we must ask ourselves is whether
we are ready to accept these statisticians with correct information at our
fingertips as they come to us, seeking such data.

The last programme seeks to optimise the use of technology in the
production and use of official statistics. Of here importance here is the
development of the provincial capacity of provinces towards ensuring that
we have this data collected.

On the education front, part of this exercise entails the understanding of
the reasoning behind the collection of such data. The importance of honesty
amongst the people, big business, and the small and medium-sized businesses
towards the provision of correct information to data collectors cannot be
overemphasised. At the heart of this initiative is the need to increase the
accessibility of Stats SA’s statistics to all users.

On the labour force survey, accurate reporting on employment and
unemployment levels leaves a lot to be desired. In keeping with
international best practices, we welcome the re-engineering of the
quarterly labour force survey, and look forward to its first publishing in
2008. This initiative provides our country with better-informed statistics
on employment and unemployment.

Statistics South Africa operates within an ambit where you have other
departments of government that are doing a similar exercise. Amongst these
are Home Affairs, the Department of Trade and Industry and the SA Revenue
Service. They collect valuable information and reliable data about
registration of the newly born. They also collect information on the
population, business registers and taxpayers in our country.

Of importance is the data located within the SA Police Service, especially
about those who die, and the causes of this, amongst others. This is one
area that the country has to work hard on. The time to stigmatise the HI-
virus and these causes of such is “verby” [passed].

With few facts for policy formulation and planning, it becomes difficult to
target accordingly. Once again, we are called upon to stop stigmatising HIV
and Aids-related deaths. This call helps us arrest the virus with more
required help, and subject these carriers to more years of economic
activity.

Regarding the shortage of skills, South Africa continues to suffer from
imbalances of the past apartheid colonial order. Our skills are skewed to a
point of nonalignment to the requirements of our economy and its growth
accordingly. A close liaison with the institutions of learning by the Stats
SA office is critical as we move forward with our work of finding these
important skills required for such planning.

I challenge Stats SA to engage with those skilled but without official
qualifications in recognising the prior knowledge, especially among the
class of 1976 and the 1980s. These are the sons and daughters who were able
to engage with the enemy head-on, understanding precisely where and how to
get certain information in pursuit of the struggle for liberation.

One of our major weaknesses is the extent to which we have not been able to
integrate our human resource development strategy, including recognition of
prior learning experiences accumulated in the course of practical work,
towards change in society.

In this regard, therefore, we welcome the efforts led by the Deputy
President in the form of the Joint Initiative for Priority Skills
Acquisition. However, the point remains that of integrating our human
resource development strategy towards filling critical areas of delivery
for a better life for all.

We therefore do not amass skills for the sake of it. Our revolution
requires revolutionary policy implementers that implement revolutionary
policies intended to transform our society from the past colonial apartheid
order to one which is nonracial, nonsexist and democratic.

As part of this programme, support for maths teachers should be programmes
that reach out to where the need is felt most, that is, in the rural
communities. I challenge Stats SA to reach out to these communities by
supporting these maths teachers in rural communities to achieve the desired
goals of excellent results.

As you have pointed out in your work programme, we look forward with keen
interest to a programme that engages young learners with maths at pre-
primary and primary levels of education. The main objective here is to root
out poverty.

The last point is that as we engage in this national address project, we
must open our houses and businesses and supply the correct information.
Yes, under apartheid, we had to delete the numbers on our homes and houses
with a view to ducking the enemy forces and its might. Now, in the course
of the reconstruction and development of our nation, we need all of us to
get into the partnership in the renumbering of our homes.

With the intergovernmental structure led by Stats SA, business, and NGOs,
it is time that we make ourselves available as we go through the process of
community surveys, ahead of the 2011 national Census. It is projects like
these that the unemployed youth of yesterday make use of.

As South Africa is part of a global movement that seeks to achieve set
targets spelt out in the Millennium Development Goals, we are confronted
with a challenge of co-ordinating and guiding, especially our
municipalities and quasi government agents, as they continue with our
fragmented visions that do not talk to the MDG’s targets of halving
unemployment ... [Time expired.] The ANC supports this Budget Vote.
[Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, hon Minister, the ACDP would also like to extend
its sincere condolences to Yusuf Bhamjee and his family on his tragic loss.

Minister, the thorny issue of whether Parliament should be given power to
amend the national Budget was raised today in the media. The ACDP is fully
aware of the conundrum you, hon Minister, would face if Parliament had the
power to amend the Budget, and then held you accountable for the result.
Clearly, however, section 77 of the Constitution envisages a procedure to
amend money Bills, but after 10 years, such a Bill has not seen the light
of day.

Parliament’s oversight committee already does have a degree of power over
how money is spent. The question is whether we as parliamentarians are even
at present engaged in the executive sufficiently during the process of
drawing up the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework. Perhaps, until we are
doing that, and using the monthly financial information effectively, the
debate about amending the Budget is premature.

Additionally, besides the important role played by the Standing Committee
on Public Accounts, we, in exercising our oversight functions in our
portfolio committees, should be monitoring every department and internal
audit process throughout the year, and not only now during the budget
process.

We need to ensure that we are fully conversant with departmental
expenditure, and are not surprised by an adverse Attorney-General’s report,
such as the Attorney-General’s shock disclaimer recently issued to Home
Affairs. [Interjections.] Sorry, it’s the Auditor-General.

In this case, there were glaring inadequacies relating to financial
controls and internal auditing that should have been picked up earlier in
the financial year. That, however, does not exclude the National Treasury’s
role in this regard.

The ACDP thus welcomes the National Treasury’s financial management reforms
whereby the department will continue to build and upgrade internal audit
capacity in government. We welcome the Treasury’s intervention in Home
Affairs, which may be slightly overdue.

In conclusion, the ACDP would like to commend the National Treasury, the SA
Revenue Service and Statistics South Africa for the exceptional work
performed, notwithstanding major challenges with filling vacancies and
attracting appropriate skills. The ACDP will support this Budget Vote.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B A MNGUNI: Thank you, Chair. Hon Minister, Deputy Minister, colleagues
and the House at large, in anticipation of the level of concentration at
this time of the day due to mental gymnastics this House has been subjected
to, I have decided to limit my speech to the bare necessities.

Looking at the strategic plan of the National Treasury and comparing it to
the department’s progress during the briefing session, one has realised
that most of the department’s goals were achieved. This is against the
backdrop that the National Treasury has one of the smallest budgets as
compared to most of the departments. This, however, is not a justification
for more resources to be allocated.

Also, we should be mindful that most deliverables in this department are
not physically visible, such as houses or roads, but they tend to be more
abstract and intangible although the outcomes have a greater impact in
society, such as economic growth. However, a detailed report of
achievements is still to be tabled in the annual report of the department.

Programme 1 has to do with the administration of the Ministry’s office, the
Director-General’s office and corporate services. We believe that
allocations to this programme are sufficient, seeing that the core activity
in these three subprogrammes is co-ordination. A high vacancy rate that was
a concern in the previous strategic plan has been addressed. The total
vacancies were decreased from 299 to 152 between March 2005 and March 2006.

The department is planning to recruit another 140 during the current
financial year. On this issue of unemployment and underemployment the 51st
conference of the ANC resolved that government at all levels implements a
comprehensive and integrated employment strategy combining short-term
measures aimed at providing a degree of immediate relief with longer term
interventions aimed at sustainable job creation and alternative income
earning opportunities. In line with this resolution the department has more
than 50, or 56 to be exact, interns, some of whom have been appointed to
permanent posts. Their qualification ranges from a National Diploma to
Masters in Economics.

In the ANC policy document “Ready to Govern” we envisaged that, “the
central goal of economic policy is to create a strong, dynamic and balanced
economy that will be directed towards, amongst others, initiating growth
and development to improve the quality of life for all South Africans, but
especially for the poor”. The Economic Planning and Budget Management
programme is one of the cores of the Department’s activities. In the quest
to fulfil the ANC’s aspirations as outlined above, this programme is key in
the coordination of Asgisa. Therefore, the allocation of resources in this
programme is not only important but it needs proper and careful management.
Not that the officials of the Department are not doing it - it is just that
it needs to be looked at carefully.

As was noted during the briefing session, accelerated economic growth will
require the department to play an important role in providing the necessary
economic analysis that would underscore the process. In turn, for the
National Treasury to be able to do this, it will need to embark on
institutional reorganisation in order to provide the necessary support.
Consequently, expenditure on research and other projects will increase in
the 2007-08 financial year and taper towards the other two years.

The committee was concerned about R970 million that would be spend on
Integrated Financial Management Systems over the MTEF period. The National
Treasury explained that it was addressing the shortcomings within the
financial systems of government, as they were based on outdated technology
and architecture. Revision of the financial landscape necessitated a
comprehensive analysis of existing financial systems that required the
replacing of outdated systems and called for the introduction of new
integrated financial management out-solutions to address the new challenges
in the public sector.

In supporting this Vote I would like to refer back to the ANC’s 51st
National Conference resolution on the restructuring of state-owned assets
and enterprises which resolved “to re-affirm the ANC’s policy on
restructuring particularly the role of State-Owned Enterprises in economic
transformation, democratisation and deracialisation of our economy, which
ensures that the transfer of assets to the private sector strengthens our
department’s developmental agenda”. The National Treasury is the key driver
of our economic policy. State-owned enterprises are outside the scope of
its day-to-day operations. However, the department has the responsibility,
through the Assets and Liability Management programme, of co-ordinating
resources in all departments to fulfil government goals.

The question that the committee is unable to answer is whether the measures
and indicators as tabulated in the strategic plan will go far enough in
addressing the outputs as envisaged by the departments. But, most
important, is whether government will achieve the strengthening of the
developmental agenda as envisaged by the 51st conference of the ANC.
Therefore, the question calls for close monitoring and robust oversight
work by the committee over the strategic plan and expenditure programmes of
the department.

This equally applies to financial development institutions, whose broader
mandate is to facilitate socioeconomic development in our communities. It
is a matter of grave concern that the Apex fund has failed to execute this
task. It was reported during the budget hearing that the funds allocated
for Apex could not be spent because the business plan was not submitted.
The question arises then: Do we have a politically conscious civil service
in these development institutions that shares the vision and mission as
envisaged by the executive authority in the country? What recourse do we
have if these institutions are not fulfilling their mandate? Are we as
committees playing our role in ensuring that plans put in place by
departments are adhered to and objectives achieved? It is, therefore, up to
us as committees that through Parliament we receive monthly and quarterly
expenditure reports for perusal and analysis against the strategic plans.

Finally, we have to complete this exercise when annual reports are tabled
in September or October. In reintegrating South Africa into the global
economy the department intends to spend R13 million in the MTEF period to
host the G20 secretariat in 2007. Though Joseph Stiglitz notes that
globalisation has its own discontents, we cannot linger on the periphery of
the global economy and wait to be assisted by outside countries. We need to
take the stage and show that globalisation is to the benefit of all South
Africans irrespective of colour or creed. Thanks, Chair.

Ms J L FUBBS: Chairperson, hon members of this House, colleagues, comrades,
my fellow countrymen, I wish to congratulate the Statistician-General, Pali
Lehohla, on the corrective measures taken to put Statistics South Africa
back on course. However, I also wish to advise the Statistician-General to
ensure that he continues to underpin these management measures to take
Stats SA to fresh heights.

Indeed, statistics is more than just a set of numbers, ratios and
aggregates. It is a symphony of synthesised requirements and realities,
expressed in numbers. Statistics expose misconceptions and gather data
informed by reality. Statistics deal with facts and not fiction, but, more
importantly, statistics configure the information gathered and analysed in
ways that lead to delivery solutions, by allowing us to shake ourselves
free from the prison of blinkered reality. It would be a good idea if this
happened to a few members in this House!

There is a continuing sense of wonder and delight about statistics, when
users find a robust instrument that calibrates the information that informs
their policies and information that ensures efficient, effective and
equitable delivery. [Interjections.] If that isn’t English, I suggest you
get a dictionary.

Credible data orchestrates this symphony when the needs of the targeted
group of people are identified with laser-like precision by statistical
data, both quantitatively and qualitatively.

Statistics, as I have been trying to put across, is not a dry discipline,
devoid of passion and social meaning. Certainly, the previous regime tried
to do that, but today we know that statistics are a rich tapestry of a
community’s profile and definitive data in detail. Statistics give that
analytical architecture of trends on prioritised challenges such as
poverty, employment, economic growth, educational development and
attainment, but also health and housing.

Over the past 12 years, we have developed and implemented several
strategies aimed at removing the disparities in the quality of life of
fellow South Africans, disparities, incidentally, which were inherited from
decades and centuries of racial and colonial discriminatory practices and
policies. Statistics South Africa was a key instrument of these historical
distortions.

When one considers this, it is imperative that Stats SA takes great
strides, as it can no longer simply implement change, but must embrace the
call to arms to achieve the following six challenges. These challenges, I
can tell you, I defined myself after analysing this, but then I read that
the Statistician-General himself had recognised them anyway! Nevertheless,
I am going to tell you what I thought. [Interjections.]

These challenges are: the restoration of trust; the development of a
passion to study mathematics while pursuing a social conscience; promoting
professionalism ... [Interjections.] Turn yours down if it’s too loud ...
an acknowledgement that capacity must be steadily pursued rather than
parachuted in; ensuring that what we need to know gets measured; and, most
importantly, a participatory approach that involves all stakeholders.

Statistics has a new challenge, and that is to ensure that its work enables
all departments and entities to achieve the qualitative and quantitative
targets set by the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South
Africa.

We are dealing with racially divided towns and cities, with fragmented
educational fronts and a fractured infrastructure, and all of this makes
service delivery difficult to do and achieve economically. Yet do it we
must, and we will, with the help of credible and robust statistics.

Clearly, it is evident that statistics is an essential tool in the delivery
of quality services. Service delivery must be available but it must also be
accessible, and, most importantly, affordable.

Relevant and reliable statistics that reveal the profile of your family,
your neighbourhood, your community, your region, your province, and our
country are increasingly utilised effectively by our elected
representatives and leaders, by the Public Service, and, let me tell you,
by the private sector. I want to believe that they are relying on official
statistics and not those turned out by Van Dyk and Fubbs.

Anyway, they have been complaining for a long time about statistics in
previous years, but they are unusually silent at the moment. They are
silent, because what is there to criticise? In fact, a novelist once said
to me: “I wish that critic would stop criticising my work. Tell him to sit
down and write a book.” Now I am saying this to Mr van Dyk.
[Interjections.] I am saying to Mr van Dyk: “Please, Mr van Dyk, you and I
are colleagues. I enjoy your jokes. I enjoy your cigar jokes, yes, but what
I want to tell you is this: Stop trying to do the work of official
statisticians, because you can’t.” [Interjections.] You can’t!
[Interjections.] Yes, you propose! I suggest you propose a little less.

The ANC-led government is continuing its quest to accelerate growth and
economic and social development, but it faces multiple and complex
challenges. Do you know, the policy-maker’s and implementer’s nightmare in
both developed and developing countries is this word “uncertainty”, because
it breeds in any environment where there are problems with numbers and
resources.

However, the only difference between policy-makers in developed and
developing countries is the fact that in developed countries they have a
macro quantity of resources and an armoury of finance. We don’t have that
luxury. What we do have is a commitment and a conviction that the credible
statistics we have been producing recently will remain and be retained and
improved.

The increasing relevance, robustness and reliability of official statistics
have been boosted by regular household surveys that are acting as a litmus
test for change. The community survey will provide a much-needed update of
information that can be used immediately but also serve as a platform from
which to launch the massive census due in 2011. The labour statistics that
are now being compiled and published more frequently also generate greater
certainty, not just for the Public Service in an ANC-led government, but
for commercial, industrial and other institutional planners.

But do you know what is interesting? We talk of the volatility of markets.
They blow this way, they blow that way, they go up and they go down. But
the mobility of people is equally volatile, especially in countries that
are experiencing rapid urbanisation, as South Africa is doing. In South
Africa, people have been drawn by the magnet of local economies that are
generating more jobs, and the consequence is annual radical changes to
local demographics.

As fast as new houses are being built, as fast as educational and health
institutions are expanded and government offices opened, instead of the
originally targeted needs being met, they shift along, not a silk route, as
in previous years - you see, that is why I am wearing my Little China
outfit – but along an employment route. That is one of the biggest
challenges facing us in respect of poverty. [Interjections.] The frequency
of robust statistics is an imperative to local, provincial and national
departments, because they align allocated resources with realistic
requirements and accurately identified target groups of people.

So, comrades, colleagues, my fellow countrymen, what is the summum bonum?
[Interjections.] That is the supreme good. What is the supreme good of
official statistics? The supreme good, the summum bonum, is the relevance,
the robustness, the reliability, the transparency and the accountability of
statistics. [Applause.]

Yes, it is the integrity of statistics that imbues technical data with
social purpose and economic objectives, and embraces social and economic
justice in South Africa. More recently, the ANC-led government has
expressed this in a strategy called accelerated growth.

The community survey will focus on data at local level, upon which high-
level planning depends. Why? It is because national departments don’t
service national departments, generally speaking. They service people on
the ground.

Statistics South Africa put this very well in its work plan. I must
congratulate them on a very innovative piece of publishing material,
something that has enabled us to do our oversight more effectively, but
will also enable them to do their job more effectively. I want to quote
from that book:

  ``When a person talks about number 240 in Botsaleni, be it Telkom, Eskom
  or any government department, it refers to my house,” says a community
  resident. Another put it this way: “The numbers made our community
  beautiful, but we also hope for more improvement.”

In Sebokeng, you are no longer a number. In Qwaqwa, you are no longer a
statistic. You will be one of the many receiving services you need. So just
as we have participatory democracy, so too we need participatory
development in order to deepen democracy. Good governance depends not only
on competence and conscientiousness, but also on accountability, and my
appeal to the National Treasury, which has done such a fine job as everyone
says, is this: Let’s now try to line up the strategic plan with the
allocated resources and let’s be less creative there.

I do want to say this: It is always a pleasure to speak on this Vote,
because I have nothing but superlatives to add, particularly when I see a
change in the way things have been done. Certainly, as far as statistics
are concerned, today is better than yesterday, and tomorrow will be even
better. The ANC supports this Vote. Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member, you indeed spoke English
throughout!

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, Chairperson. After the
animated speech by the hon Fubbs, everything will be nothing. [Laughter.]

Let me just state again the purpose of the exercise. It is a process of
accounting to Parliament, and that’s what we have tried to do. I think that
because we’ve considered this discussion to be what we’d like it to be,
there is no party and perhaps that is why the House is as empty as it is.
Perhaps everybody’s wandered off to the Department of Public Enterprises’
great party today. I suppose the only tragedy is that there was only one
woman who participated in this debate. That is probably unprecedented in
the history of this Parliament and we should note it.

In respect of the comments by the hon Van Dyk: thank you for your support.
If that is how you support, I would hate to see when you don’t support.
[Laughter.] I am not quite sure what we have done, and I shall certainly
call the hon Leon this evening. You know, we had Ken Andrew. He was okay;
he left. Then we had Raenette Taljaard - she was very good and she left.
Then we had Pierre Rabie, and I don’t know why he doesn’t talk to us
anymore. And then Ian Davidson abandoned us, and now we have Van Dyk. What
have we done? [Laughter.]

Part of the problem is that he is ideological, and we understand that. I
mean, he worked for the Goebbels department called the CEAS – the Central
Economic Advisory Service – there to tell lies about apartheid. That was
the economic advice that they gave successive apartheid heads of state.
That’s where he comes from, so you need to understand the context. He has
not been able to unshackle himself from what he has really been through in
the bulk of his adult life. [Interjections.] That is his problem. So when
he stands here before you, as he did this afternoon with what he calls
statistics, they still come from the Goebbels mind. [Laughter.]

You see, when he says that there is no employment creation, he’s telling an
untruth. And it’s not a good thing. It’s not parliamentary to say that a
member isn’t telling the truth. But if you look at the statistics between
September 2004 and September 2005 and you see that 600 000 new jobs were
created and that for the first time in many years you have exceeded the
number of entrants to the labour market, then unemployment must fall. And
if the member doesn’t accept that, he doesn’t know the first thing about
statistics.

The second issue I want to raise is that he fails to understand the origins
of economic history. In the 1970s you had the big infrastructure programmes
that continued marginally into the 1980s. Then they built the war economy,
and all of the project managers who were around in the 1970s were then
called in to the war effort. That is part of the legacy we have to deal
with. It’s the reality of South Africa, and that is why there is a dearth
of the necessary skills. This is not a money problem. It’s a wider skills
problem: white, black, green - you can’t find them in South Africa.

When this happens in an era of globalisation, when the United States is
reporting a shortage of engineers and project managers, you understand the
scale of the difficulty we are dealing with. It’s shaped by the history of
this country; shaped by the resistance to democracy. And that is part of, I
think, the legacy we have to unpack.

In respect of the PFMA, again, I must respectfully submit that the hon Van
Dyk is wrong. Section 6(1) of the PFMA – I have it right here in my hand -
asks of the National Treasury to define uniform norms and standards, and
then asks of us to report to Parliament. It empowers Parliament like no
other piece of legislation has before. But as the hon Swart said, it is
sadly not something that Parliament has used. We would like to see
Parliament use this. I have said this from this podium a number of times.
The Act empowers you. We provide you with the information. Please use it,
because that is the oversight role of Parliament that will strengthen
democracy in this country. Please use it.

In respect of the hon Vezi, again, I say: Ask us to do what we must do and
leave the management of departments to the managers in departments. You are
so preoccupied with vacancies. The vacancy rate has dropped from 30% to
15%.
The hon Bici speaks about the ugly duckling. Well, come to the pond
sometime. We have never seen you in the committee. You don’t know if it’s a
coot, a duck, a goose or a swan, because you are never there. [Laughter.]
So don’t criticise that which you have not taken the time to see.

The hon Moloto spoke about e-filing. Well, in terms of the update as at 4
o’clock this afternoon – three working days since 1 June – there have been
4 462 new registrations for e-filing, 500 returns have already been
submitted in three days, and 578 practitioners have registered to
facilitate e-filing. I think that is certainly very encouraging as regards
the compliance climate. [Applause.]

The hon Swart, I think, raised the issues well pertaining to section 77.
Could you imagine, hon Swart, that you give powers to make a budget to the
hon Van Dyk? Could you think about this in a quieter time and think what
the outcome may be? [Laughter.] So, we have to find each other on this
issue. Let’s get the oversight role of Parliament right. Let’s strengthen
that. [Applause.] Let’s use the information and then, I think, we will have
a better platform to deal with the other issues. I think that the hon Fubbs
said everything that needs to be said about Statistics SA, so I would be
doing a grave injustice if I tried to add to or summarise that.

Let me just conclude by saying thank you to all the parties in the House,
all the members who have spoken, all the members who diligently attend the
Portfolio Committee on Finance meetings, who have gone through the
documents, who keep us on our toes.

More importantly, let me also express appreciation to the team of whom I am
greatly honoured to be a part: the Deputy Minister, the director-general,
the commissioner, the statistician-general, the Director of the Financial
Intelligence Centre, the CEO of the Public Investment Commissioners, the
CEO of the Financial Services Board and their entire teams. I think that
they do democracy proud in this country, and I think that we owe them a
great debt of gratitude. [Applause.] Thank you very much for your support
here. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 18:48.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

      (1)   Strategic Plan of the 3rd Parliament of the Republic of South
         Africa for 2004-2009 [RP 50-2006].

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

CREDA INSERT REPORT - Insert T060605a-insert1 – PAGES 1099-1122

2.    The Speaker

CREDA INSERT REPORT - Insert T060605a-insert2 – PAGES 1123-1149

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

CREDA INSERT REPORTS - Insert T060605a-insert3 PAGES 1150-1152

National Assembly

CREDA INSERT REPORTS - Insert T060605a-insert3 PAGES 1153-1175



