---
title: 'National Assembly - 25 May 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-05-25
---

THURSDAY, 25 MAY 2006
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:05.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                                 AFRICA DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –


   (1)      notes that today, May 25, is Africa Day and that it is the day
        when Africa celebrates the founding of the Organisation of African
        Unity on 25 May 1963 in Addis Ababa in Ethiopia;


   (2)      recalls that for almost four decades the OAU waged a struggle
        against colonialism and ethnic strife and promoted unity,
        multiculturalism and a sense of common purpose among the people of
        Africa;


   (3)      believes that the new challenges confronting us today, demand of
        the people of Africa to unite in action, to work for the further
        strengthening of the African Union and NEPAD as we pursue the goal
        of creating a peaceful, democratic, prosperous, healthy and stable
        continent, fully living up to its promise and potential; and


   (4)      calls upon all  humanity  to  unite  in  the  struggle  for  the
        entrenchment of the culture of human rights and the  eradication  of
        poverty in Africa and the world.

Agreed to.


                                ASCENSION DAY




                             (Draft Resolution)
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –


   (1)      notes that today is Ascension Day and that it is a date of great
        religious significance for millions of Christians in South Africa
        and around the world; and


   (2)      resolves to convey good wishes to all Christian people.


Agreed to.

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON MINERALS AND ENERGY

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, may we request
that this matter stand over until after the debate. We just want to consult
amongst the parties on one or two aspects. Is that in order?

The SPEAKER: Is there any objection to the matter standing over for a
while? No objection, so the matter will stand over in favour of
consultation.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


Debate on Vote No 30 - Minerals and Energy:

The SPEAKER: The hon Minister of Minerals and Energy - this is the hon
outgoing Minister of Minerals and Energy.
The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon Deputy
President, Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, colleagues, hon members, ladies and
gentlemen, I think today history is being made. I don’t think this bit will
be so easily emulated. I am making both my first and my last budget speech.
So, eat your heart out.

Madam Speaker, I stand before you today to present this budget speech. It
has been an exciting though challenging ten months in this portfolio.

The past year has witnessed a global commodity boom that has seen
the prices of oil, platinum group metals, gold, copper and other
minerals move to levels not seen before. Except for the high oil prices,
the commodity boom has had a favourable impact on our economy, which has
seen our commodity sales grow by 14,1% from 2004 to 2005 and with R12,4
billion of commodities being exported from South Africa. This growth in
commodity sales has gone a long way in helping to mitigate the effects of
the high oil prices.

In past boom times the industry failed to invest wisely in the sector,
hence we had a number of retrenchments immediately the commodity prices
fell. This time around we have been a bit wiser, as my department, together
with the unions, the Chamber of Mines, AngloGold Ashanti, Harmony,
Goldfields, and South Deep have put aside R4,15 million for a comprehensive
study that is to look into issues that we have to focus on in order to
ensure that we ameliorate retrenchments that have been the norm in this
sector.

The department, for the 2006-07 financial year, has been allocated R2,548
billion, a large portion of which was allocated to transfers to public
entities, other organisations and municipalities, while  22,5% of the
budget, which amounts to R572 million, has been allocated to the running of
the department and regulating these diverse industries.

The impact of the high crude oil prices and consequently the high petrol
price is felt by all, but more so by developing countries and poor
countries and the poor in those developing countries. Furthermore, if these
increases continue they could result in the slowing down of global economic
growth, which would then have a major negative impact on our economy.

This situation has necessitated that we in South Africa look at
alternatives in order to secure our energy supply. It is clear that for the
government’s Accelerated Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa, Asgisa,
energy is going to play a very crucial role. The projected economic growth,
as well as the targets as expressed in Asgisa, necessitate a review of some
of the assumptions that were made in planning for new energy capacity and
infrastructure. The results of our review will be factored into the
integrated energy planning process.

Our task, as a state, is to ensure that there are measures in place to
secure energy sources that will power the economy of this country into a
future where we all share in the benefits. For the hydrocarbons and energy
planning this means that a robust integrated energy planning that will look
at both the short and long-term needs, must be established. This plan will
indicate to us available energy sources and those that we will need to
develop in future. This will include, of course, looking at our strategic
stocks policy, for both crude oil and petroleum products.

Coming to oil and gas, our Energy White Paper of 1998 envisaged a fully
liberalised petroleum sector. However, recent events, both at home and
globally, have necessitated a review of some of those assumptions that
underpin our strategy also in this area.

When the country experienced fuel shortages in December of last year, there
were indications that the shortages were largely linked to bottlenecks in
the supply, transportation and distribution of finished products to the
markets. At that time, I initiated an investigation that is being led by
Adv Marumo Moerane. This investigation covers all matters that would offer
us insight into the reasons that led to the fuel shortages. Adv Moerane and
his team have been hard at work and they are expected to conclude their
investigations by July 2006.

I have also appointed a task team that is looking at the short, medium and
long-term constraints in the fuel supply industry. This task team includes
members of the industry and the department, and will incorporate the
findings of the Moerane investigation.

The primary output of this task team will be an analysis of the current
downstream liquid fuels supply to the South African market. This analysis
will show how and when bottlenecks will occur in the supply chain and what
range of remedial measures should be put in place to overcome such
bottlenecks. The medium to long-term analysis to be done by this task team
will provide us with insight into the critical planning and management
aspects of the downstream liquid fuels.

It will, therefore, become necessary for us to consider changes to the
entire petroleum and gas value chain, which includes refineries, pipelines,
wholesaling, distribution and retailing. This value chain cuts across both
public and private sector organisations, with PetroSA, the state-owned
national petrochemical company, expected to play a critical role here. Our
policy review will contribute towards a realignment of our strategy, and
preventing the recurrence of shortages whilst improving security of supply.


Coming to electricity provision, one of the foremost thoughts of many
members in the House today would be the recent electricity outages in the
Western Cape. I would like to use this occasion of my budget speech to
address some of the issues, and really to assure Members of Parliament,
investors as well as the public at large that the Department of Minerals
and Energy, as the department responsible for energy policy and ensuring
there is a framework for adequate provision of energy supply in the
country, is taking these outages very seriously, and is taking steps to
ensure there is sufficient energy capacity in our country.

Security of energy supply is the mandate of the Department of Minerals and
Energy and we require a robust plan to ensure that there is adequate power
supply in the country, both in the medium and the long-term. We have
reinforced our capacity to deliver on this mandate; firstly with the
introduction of the Electricity Regulation Bill, which provides regulatory
clarity regarding the responsibilities of the Minister, vis a vis the
regulator and Eskom. The Bill also introduces stiff penalties in the event
of breaches of the licence conditions, and a centralised plan for
electricity capacity expansion. It is also our intention to strengthen the
regulatory framework to ensure effective regulation of the distribution
channels of energy sources.

Hon members, earlier this month we held a workshop with the CEOs of energy
companies, most of whom are here, with the chairpersons of those companies,
with the regulator, with the energy research institutions, with other
government departments and associated institutions. Together, we remain
convinced that at present there is sufficient capacity in the country and
there is no need for panic.

However, we are fully aware that the reserve margins are tight, and going
forward new infrastructure and plants will have to be built. The Department
of Public Enterprises and Eskom have already announced the extensive
programme for refurbishing and building new power plants, which will
generate a significant investment in our country. These plans will have to
be informed by projections of the electricity demand, as well as
projections of how fast the economy is going to grow.
The Department of Minerals and Energy is also co-ordinating the
introduction of private investors into the electricity sector. These IPPs,
as they are called, will supply 30% of the electricity needs of our country
over the next 10 years. The bids for the first two privately-operated
peaking plants will be submitted by September 2006, and these power plants
should be operational by the winter of 2009.

In addition to the new plants being built by Eskom and the private sector
independent power producers, there is a need for public-private
partnerships for the establishment of additional energy capacity.

Concerning nuclear alternative energy sources and energy efficiency, the
problems at Koeberg have created very specific challenges for the Western
Cape. The assistance of the French government in supplying the rotor has
helped to ensure a speedy return to service of Koeberg unit 1, which is now
fully operational. Koeberg unit 2 is now able to be refuelled - which has
started, and by August this refuelling should be complete. We expect that
by then the situation in the Western Cape will return to normal.

The problems at Koeberg have had positive consequences, though in an ironic
way, because we have now taken the opportunity to embark on concerted
energy efficiency and demand-side management programmes, both here and
nationally. We have asked consumers in the Western Cape to conserve and to
use alternative forms of energy for cooking, heating etc, so that we can
reduce the amount of electricity required, particularly during peak times.
When we all come back from work, we want to bath, cook and heat our homes.

Energy efficiency offers a short-term solution to some of our challenges
and members of this House will be aware that, over the past few years, this
department has been running energy efficiency campaigns. This year, we have
declared May an energy efficiency month in South Africa.

We have, for several years, been looking to all businesses and citizens to
take greater levels of responsibility for reducing their consumption of
electricity. What is saddening is that, no matter how much we preach this
energy efficiency ...

... abantu bakuthi bayaqhubeka besebenzisa umbane ngendlela yokuwuxhaphaza.
Siyazama koonomathotholo, koomabonakude, nasemaphepheni inyanga yonke le
iphelayo, sisithi bethuna kukho ingxaki ingakumbi apha eNtshona Koloni
ngoko ncedisanani nathi kule ngxaki. Ndithetha nabantu balapha eNtshona
Koloni. Ndiyayazi ndihleli apha nje, -kodwa andizi kubiza magama abantu,-
ukuba kukho abantu abalala bengazicimanga iimbawula zombane (heaters) zabo
ebusuku, kanti xa ungena ebhedini kusuke sele kufudumele ekameleni ngoko ke
yicime ihita.
Kwakhona cima isibane xa uphuma kwelo gumbi. San’ukuwagcwalisa amanzi
ashushu ebhafini bethu na. Cutha izinga lobushushu begiza yakho
ingawatshisi kakhulu amanzi, ngoba aza kukutshisa ufele, atshise
nabantwana. Andazi ukuba kufuneka sithini ngoku ukuze le vesi yokonga
umbane, nale yokuncedisana nathi ivakale. Niyabona phaya kumabonakude ngoku
uEskom ufake iirobothi ezithi xa zikhanyisa bomvu kufuneka ucime isitovu,
ucime ihita, ucime igiza ngaloo mzuzu. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[... people continue to abuse electricity. We publicised this on TV and in
the newspapers for the whole of last month, stating that there was a lack
of electricity, especially in the Western Cape Province. I have been
informed of people who go to sleep with their electric heaters on, but I
will not mention names. If you leave your heater on, by the time you go to
sleep the room is warm enough.

Other suggestions I can make are to switch off the lights when you walk out
of the room. Do not fill up the bath with hot water when you bath. Lower
the heating level of your geyser so as not to make the water too hot, as
this will harm you and your children. I do not want to recite this verse
again about the high electricity consumption. Eskom advertises indications
of the levels of electricity consumption on TV. When the robot turns red,
it means consumers must switch off stoves, heaters and geysers
immediately.]

There is a huge demand ...
... yombane apha eNtshona Koloni, ngako oko ke siyanicela ke bantu ukuba
nincedisane nathi, ukwenzela into yokuba singaphinde siwelwe bobu bumnyama
bebumane busiwela. Igama lamakhosikazi malibongwe! [Kwaqhwatywa.]
Ndizityela itheko lam. [Kwahlekwa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[... for electricity in the Western Cape, therefore, we plead with the
community to help in this regard, to minimise the chances of experiencing
further blackouts. Let the name of women be praised! [Applause.] I am
running my own show here. [Laughter.]]

Energy efficiency is not just a South African issue. At the recently held
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development that I attended, it
was agreed that energy efficiency is the best possible way to decrease
emissions. It pays for itself and, in most cases, it even generates
savings.

Ngako oko sivile ke ukuba lo mkhankaso uyaqhubeka. Ukuba abantu abasimameli
singurhulumente siza kude sithathe amanyathelo aqatha. [We have heard that
this campaign is rolling. If the community does not adhere to this appeal,
further action will be taken.]

One of those measures that we will be taking as the Department of Minerals
and Energy will be to phase out the use of certain classes of incandescent
light bulbs in our country, and replace them with compact fluorescent lamps
- CFLs. The implication is that, in the near future, the normal high
voltage light bulbs that we buy in the supermarket will no longer be
stocked; rather, we shall see these energy-efficient CFLs, that use a fifth
of the energy and last up to six times longer, being made available.

As part of our diversification strategy of primary energy sources, we
intend to promote renewable energy, not only because it is the right thing
to do but also to ensure that we have other options for our energy mix.
Nuclear energy offers a cleaner alternative to coal-fired power stations.
For the Western Cape in particular, which does not have coal in abundance,
we must consider nuclear energy as a viable option.

That said, there is a great deal of work that needs to be done before a new
conventional nuclear power station can be built. A decision on whether we
want to consider this option will need to be made in the next few months,
in order to go through the proper consultative processes and have a new
nuclear power plant operational by 2015.

Alternative and renewable energy sources such as hydropower, wind power,
solar energy, and generating electricity from waves, are also being
explored. Currently, the most significant potential for energy generation
lies in hydropower; and this requires extensive regional co-operation in
the construction of hydroelectric plants and bringing electricity across
several neighbouring countries.
My department is working very well with the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry in the development of hydropower potential for the country through
the Central Energy Fund. Another impact of the high oil prices is that
renewable and more environmentally friendly forms of fuel become more
viable to produce, because the complaints from all involved have been that
the cost is just too high to establish this industry.

Here, we refer to biofuels, which are fuels that can be manufactured from a
number of different agricultural products such as sugar cane, maize or
soya. The production of biofuels has been recognised as having significant
potential for our country, not only because of the environmental benefits
but also to create significant numbers of jobs in the agricultural sector
and the second economy, and to reduce our dependency on the import of crude
oil.

As we all know, biofuel is one of the priority projects for Asgisa. In
December 2005 Cabinet approved the setting up of a task team, co-ordinated
by my department, to look at this. We are at present working with several
other departments as well as the Central Energy Fund and the Industrial
Development Corporation. We have commissioned an extensive study of this
sector. It is nice to say that the private sector has responded very
positively to our shift in policy towards biofuels. We are looking at
significant investment by the agricultural sector and in the manufacture of
these fuels.

One of the largest allocations of our department’s budget is on
electrification. A total of R1,3 billion has been allocated over the coming
financial year. In 2004 the President announced, in his state of the nation
address, the intention to achieve universal access to energy by 2012.
According to our plans, in order to make this goal a reality, we are going
to need no less than a R2,5 billion injection per annum. We are currently
receiving an average of R1,4 billion per annum and we continue to engage
with role-players to ensure that we receive this extra funding that is in
shortfall. We believe we have enough capacity in the department to
effectively implement this electrification programme.

We all know the benefits of electrification to poor households. It helps
us; it reduces poverty; it can help people move from the second economy
into the formal sector because if you bring electricity, I can buy a fridge
and start making business wherever I am etc. Indeed, electricity creates a
better life for poor people. So, we hope that we are going to get this
extra allocation, hon Deputy President, in order for us to reach universal
access on energy by 2012.

Of course, I have mentioned the benefits of small business opportunities.
Electricity also has health benefits, where people stop using coal and are
not exposed to the fumes. It has educational benefits where, suddenly,
schools are lit and students can study for longer hours. All those benefits
are well documented. With the support of provincial and local government we
are, indeed, committed to attaining our goal of universal access.

Part of our strategy to improve the provision of electricity and to
increase the social safety net to consumers has been to establish the
regional electricity distributors, the so-called REDs that you are going to
hear so much about this afternoon. [Interjections.] Mr Schmidt says yes.
Last year we established RED 1 in Cape Town and we have learnt many lessons
from this experience. We welcome the inputs from the City of Cape Town and
the ones we received from the portfolio committee on this issue.

It is important to give clarity to this House that, in the process of
establishing the REDs, we needed to have flexibility. One of the issues
identified is the need to have six REDs based in the metropolitan areas,
and a national RED that encompasses the regions outside of the metropolitan
areas. This approach is based on the realities that we have identified, and
we have been asked by Cabinet to model the viability of this national RED.
A company by the name of EDI Holdings has done this modeling, which will be
taken to Cabinet and later on to Parliament for finalisation.

We have acknowledged that there are indeed challenges that face us in the
establishment of these metro REDs but we have made significant progress,
and we look forward to meeting the timeframes that were indicated by the
President in his state of the nation address. We look forward to all Metro
REDs being in place by this time next year. With co-operation from all the
players, local government, the unions, Eskom and other government
departments, we have no doubt that we are going to achieve this vision.

Concerning the area of minerals, in the 2004-05 financial year the Mineral
Development Branch was split into two, namely the Mineral Regulation
Branch, which is responsible for the implementation of the Mineral and
Petroleum Resources Development Act and other mineral policies; and the
Mineral Policy and Promotion Branch, which is solely responsible for policy
formulation and the promotion of our country as a good investment in
mineral resources.
One of the benefits of this split is the improvement on the
turnaround time for processing of prospecting and mining licence
applications in this sector. The capacity of the Mineral Regulation Branch
has been increased to cope with the workload as well as to give the branch
resources to assist first-time entrants in the industry. This branch
received the biggest share of the department’s budget this year, at 28% of
the total budget of the department.

We have started to see the results, because out of 6 785 applications
received last year, 957 were rejected mainly for being incomplete, 191 were
withdrawn, 861 were refused for non-compliance with the Act and 912 were
issued. The balance of applications are still in the system. It should be
noted that the majority of the 912 licences have a minimum of 15% black
participation. Later this year we will be effecting amendments to the
Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act, in Parliament, to further
streamline the processing of applications.

As far as beneficiation is concerned, minerals continue to play a critical
role in our economy and we need to see what we can do together with
beneficiators beyond the boom time. We have seen continued growth in the
processing of minerals and in 2004, for the first time, processed minerals
overtook the gold and the platinum group metals in total sales although,
with the significant increase in the commodity prices, the situation was
reversed in 2005.

The growth in domestic sales of processed minerals indicates that there is
a significant increase in local beneficiation and growth in the
manufacturing sector. Our efforts in promoting beneficiation are starting
to bear fruit, although we still have a long way to go.

It is gratifying that producers and companies in the ‘platinum group
metals’ sector are looking at beneficiation. The CEOs of Lonmin, Angloplats
and Amplats approached me with a proposal on how we can further extend the
levels of beneficiation of the platinum group metals in South Africa.
Subsequent to that, we have held a workshop with industry players and
established a task team to achieve this process. It is fitting that we grow
this industry and increase our levels of research into the uses of the
platinum group metals, as we are the number one producer of this commodity
in the world, with 87% of the reserves being in South Africa.

The passing of the Diamond Amendment Act and the Precious Metals Act last
year will usher in the establishment of the State Diamond Trader and the
Diamond and Precious Metals Regulator, both of which will go a long way in
making a dynamic minerals beneficiation sector a reality. Indeed, it is a
bold vision that we are looking for in the growth of our beneficiation
sector.

My department has initiated legislation over the past year to encourage
greater levels of value addition. We are now looking to the industry
players to take forward that vision and ensure that ...
... ngokwenene igolide yethu yenziwa apha ekhaya, amacici nayo yonke lento
eyenziwa ngegolide, iplatinamu, idayimane, ndibala ntoni na? UMthetho
ukhona wona, silinde nje ukuba nisebenzisane nathi ukwenzela ukuba abantu
bakuthi bafunde ukusebenzisa ezi zimbiwa. [... mineral beneficiation is
actually done in this country, and the same applies to platinum, diamond
and gold products such as earrings. There is legislation in place that is
awaiting your commitment to established players in beneficiation.]

With regard to black economic empowerment, the department has seen several
significant big deals over the past year and we have begun to see new faces
in these deals with broad-based empowerment and women empowerment becoming
more prevalent. With the implementation of our transformation legislation,
the department will be in a good position to continue promoting effective
black economic empowerment.

I think we still need to give more attention to seeing to it that all these
deals are as broad based as they can be. And, indeed, we need to make sure
that women are involved from the very beginning, because in most of these
deals we really had to ask about the women and only thereafter were women
brought in. SA Women in Mining Association, Sawima, and Women in Oil and
Energy SA, Woesa, you have to be assertive to make sure that you are there
right at the beginning when the deals are being discussed and before they
are concluded. These are some of the challenges that come from this area
that the incoming Minister will have to seriously address, particularly the
participation of women but also the dilution of the deals.

In order to accurately assess the level of compliance with our targets as
set out in the Liquid Fuels Charter, my department commissioned Empowerdex
to do a study and conduct a five-year review. As you know, last year the
charter had been in existence for five years and of course the results of
the review were disappointing. Those results have been communicated to all
the oil industries that are covered by this charter. The study showed that
very little was being done on procurement and in some cases it was  dismal
as far as participation and equity are concerned. We have established Sasda
to ensure that this area of procurement in the liquid fuels industry is
taken care of.

In conclusion, the strong economic growth that our country is currently
experiencing, which in part arises from the increased investment in mines
and in beneficiation of minerals, both of which are energy hungry sectors,
will place increasing pressure on our energy capacity. During the course of
this year, we will be taking measures to ensure that there is alignment
between our planning for energy and the 6% growth that is projected by
Asgisa.

The role of women is very important. It is very important for Woesa and
Sawima to participate and get support in these sectors. Today we’ve got in
the gallery Namhla Mdoda, a learner from Brackenfell High School, who has
been with me since this morning as part of the “bring a girl-child to work”
day and she is my shadow minister for the day and hopefully a future mining
magnate. [Applause.]

I request this House to approve my department’s budget of         R2,548
billion. I would like to thank my Director-General, Adv Nogxina, for the
support that she gave me throughout this period, DGs sitting here and the
senior management of this department who have supported me from day one,
sitting with me every Monday in the Executive Committee, trying to help me
understand the intricacies of mining and energy. [Applause.]

I would also like to thank my Deputy Minister, Comrade Lulu Xingwana, who
made sure that the department was made warm with heaters each time I
arrived. [Applause.] We have worked so well with Lulu as a team and I am so
happy about her promotion, it is well deserved. Congratulations!
[Applause.]

In conclusion, I would like to thank the most important part of my life, my
family, my husband Andrew, my sisters Busi and Yaya, my daughter Olwethu,
they are all seated there. They are the backbone. [Applause.] And Vuyelwa,
of course, is part of the family and Kagiso, who is not here. Those are the
people who make sure that we do the job that we have to do in the best
possible way. Thank you very much to the CEOs and the chairs of boards. I
think I have worked very well with all of you because we were doing this
for the common cause of South Africa. Thank you and farewell. [Applause.]

Mr E N MTHETHWA: Somlomo, Phini likaMongameli, boNgqongqoshe ... [Madam
Speaker, Deputy President, Ministers ...]

... I want to start by saluting the heroic youth of 1976, and this year is
the 30th anniversary of those events. We need to build permanent and
everlasting monuments for those young gallant fighters. We’ll have to
deepen youth development in all facets of our society. That is our duty.

The ANC supports the Budget Vote. The continued development of policies and
legislation that advocate social justice is a clear portrayal of a
government with conscience and social consciousness. It is in this context
that the 51st national conference of the ANC held in Stellenbosch in 2002
resolved, and I quote:


   That the process of rationalising electricity distribution should
   continue, ensuring viable and affordable electricity supply for all
   regions as well as progressive achievement of universal and affordable
   access, on the foundation of a minimum free basic electricity service to
   all households.

With regard to universal access to electricity by 2012, we are concerned
because the programme is behind schedule due to inadequate financial
allocation.

Ngakho-ke siyayicela leyo mali, Phini likaMongameli. [Therefore we request
that that money be given to us, Deputy President.]

These are the targets we have set for ourselves and therefore we must
embark on an aggressive rollout drive. Similarly, the Integrated National
Electricity Programme, Inep, which is premised on the rollout to 500 000
households per annum for electrification, is compromised by the inadequate
allocation of financial resources. The current budget for 2006-07 caters
for 89 525 households per annum.
The other area which is of concern to us, relates to the rolling out of
regional electricity distributors. Given current challenges regarding RED
1, the likelihood of meeting the target for 2007 seems slim, in our own
assessment, especially after the advent of the national RED, that is RED 7.
This might affect the distribution of electricity. It also creates an
uncertain situation and, as a result, we, as the portfolio committee, have
resolved to call for public hearings on the matter.

In connection with renewable energy, our policy, as the ANC, embraces
research into renewable energy technologies to increase the energy source
basket and to increase the benefit of locals in the development of those
sources. This is consistent with the position of the energy mix. It is
imperative to acknowledge the fact that we have not exploited these energy
sources optimally.

Primary to renewable energy development are partnerships that were
established during the World Summit on Sustainable Development in 2002.
They are premised on promoting the widespread use of sustainable energy
sources. As the ANC, our stance on sustainable energy sources is clear: we
are committed to take concrete steps to combat pollution arising out of
greenhouse gases by setting clean targets in the context of sustainable
development and also in the context of the Kyoto Protocol. The White Paper
on Renewable Energy targets 10 000 gigawatts of renewable energy to final
energy consumption by 2013. This will add about 1 667 megawatts of new
renewable energy capacity.

The mineral sector is strategically positioned to bridge the gap between
the first and the second economies. Regarding the mineral policy and
promotion, groundbreaking legislation was introduced. Two of those pieces
of legislation are the Diamonds Amendment Act and the Precious Metals Act.
These seek to revolutionise the South African minerals industry, create a
beneficiation industry and deracialise the ownership of the mineral
resources of our country.

Quite critical to these legislative developments, is the transformation of
the way the mineral industry is operating. These legislative tools seek to
apply ideals contained in the Freedom Charter and the RDP. They embrace the
principles of accountability, transparency, economic growth, and
redistribution and job creation.

The revolutionary consciousness of the ANC is captured correctly by the RDP
when it states, and I quote:

   Mining and mineral products contribute three-quarters of our exports and
   the industry employs three-quarters of a million workers, but this could
   be much higher if our raw materials were processed into intermediate and
   finished products before export. Our RDP must attempt to increase the
   level of mineral beneficiation through appropriate incentives and
   disincentives in order to increase employment and add more value to our
   natural resources before export.


With regard to the development of small-scale mining, the SA Small-Scale
Mining Chamber was launched in July 2005 in Kimberley, Northern Cape.
According to estimations, about 1 000 jobs can be created out of every
seven to 10 sustainable small-scale mining projects, if nurtured. It can
assist in job creation and skills development.

About R120 million has been allocated for the rehabilitation of ownerless
and derelict mines. Believe it or not, but there are ownerless mines here
in South Africa. The priority is the cleaning up of abandoned and ownerless
asbestos mines. Sixty-five percent of 578 identified sites, which are
mainly in the Northern Cape and Limpopo, have been cleaned up. Further
cleaning up of ownerless and derelict mines is taking place in various
provinces. This creates jobs and builds capacity for the people of our
land, particularly the youth and women.

Concerning the mine health and safety front, the ANC-led government has
changed the thinking and approach. Whereas in the past the emphasis has
been more on safety at the expense of health, we see no difference between
the two. We see both of them as important.

The Minister has alluded to the review on the Liquid Fuels Charter but what
is of major concern to us is the whole issue of fronting. That phenomenon
is actually eroding what we have been trying to do because, in the process
of fronting, the people who are intended to benefit from the process of
broad-based black economic empowerment are co-opted into that scheme. As a
result, it undermines the very essence of what we are trying to do.

In connection with nuclear energy, it is imperative to understand this
energy source from the perspective of diversification of our energy
sources. The future energy lies in this sector. It makes good economic
sense for South Africa to invest in this energy source, as part of the
energy mix.

On 12 May 2006, the portfolio committee hosted a delegation from the Czech
Republic. It was indicated that 40% of the Czech Republic’s electricity is
drawn from nuclear energy, and that they have challenges with regard to
radioactive waste management storage, just like any other country in the
world. It is a reliable and efficient energy source. The radioactive waste
management policy has just been developed here in South Africa by the
Department of Minerals and Energy, and it will be able to answer the
questions that have been raised by various interest groups.

Lastly, we would like to acknowledge the commendable work done by the
outgoing Minister of Minerals and Energy, Comrade Lindiwe Hendricks, and
the Deputy Minister, Lulu Xingwana. We wish them well in their new
appointments. We also want to extend a hand of friendship and welcome the
new Minister of Minerals and Energy, Comrade Buyelwa Sonjica.

We just want to say, in conclusion, that so many Acts have been passed.
Groundbreaking Acts were passed last year under the stewardship of Lindiwe
Hendricks and Comrade Lulu Xingwana. We are not really worried about all
these things that have been said in the media because we know that they
have actually worked for this department. They have assisted this
department to go forward within a very short space of time. They, too,
shouldn’t be worried about all these things. You know that there are many
so-called analysts and all these people who are talking. They are just
talking because these papers must sell. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

  Adv H C SCHMIDT: Madam Speaker, a report by US based consultancy Frontier
  Strategy Group, recently examined the issues facing mining companies in
  African countries. This consultancy group expected, and I quote, “a
  continued deterioration of South Africa’s above-ground
environment for 2006”.

It was furthermore predicted that a significant flight of capital away from
South Africa and into other parts of the continent would be prevalent,
whilst South Africa was becoming a no-go area for those international
mining companies that are not already active in the country.

It is exactly this perception that this Ministry should turn around and
improve on. This situation is compounded by the looming energy crisis
facing South Africa, as Eskom has basically run out of base load generation
capacity. Currently, the reserve capacity of electricity generation is
approximately between 5% and 10% with the forthcoming winter ensuring that
load shedding will be a certainty.

A briefing by Eskom to the committees on Minerals and Energy, Trade and
Industry and Science and Technology, as well as the President’s remarks
that South Africa is not facing a national energy crisis, indicate that the
responsible individuals in government are refusing to accept the fact that
we are in serious trouble and that we are facing a crisis.

Eskom has indicated that it has a planning process that gives it a 20-year
view at any one time, which is updated every eight months. In addition, it
has a 5-year capital expenditure plan, which is approved annually, and
which has been based on a growth rate of 4%.

Considering the fact that South Africa has had excess capacity to the
extent that three coal power stations were shut down in the late 80’s and
early 90’s, and the fact that we are currently faced with a national power
crisis, it is abundantly clear that executive mismanagement at Cabinet
level and the board of Eskom has taken place. This situation is detrimental
to the South African public whose best interest has been squandered.

It is disconcerting to note that the chief executive officer of Eskom,
together with Eskom’s executive directors, were the highest paid in the
country. They earned approximately R73 million last year with the CEO
earning R13 million for 2005. This is a shocking disgrace. This amount is
five times more than Transnet’s chief executive officer is earning, and in
that regard, it appears, if you compare it, a meagre, and I say it
sarcastically, R2,6 million.

Continued blackouts seem to be the future for South Africans especially in
areas such as Johannesburg and the Western Cape, in particular, this coming
winter when a nuclear reactor at Koeberg is due for shutdown.

You will recall that the Minister of Trade and Industry - unfortunately he
is not here - Minister Alec Erwin, on the day before the local government
elections on 1 March 2006, stated that the failure of the Koeberg nuclear
reactor was due to sabotage and undertook to ensure that the matter was
investigated properly.

Despite undertakings by the government and various Ministers that the
report of the investigation would be completed by the end of March 2006,
two months ago, Parliament and its various committees still await such a
report. No report has been made available at all and the question could
well be asked as to when such a report will be available, if ever at all.
The Minister should have avoided such heavily loaded political statements
on the eve of the local government elections.

Whilst the committee has been informed on the progress regarding the
implementation of Regional Electricity Distributors, REDs, and EDI
Holdings, the entity responsible for the restructuring of the electricity
distribution industry, it became clear yesterday that serious problems
exist regarding the feasibility of this policy initiative. At present RED 1
can merely be described as an outsourced function or process of the Cape
Town Metro Council without any assets and still in the process of
restructuring itself nearly a year since it was formed.

In addition, the number of REDs has arbitrarily been increased by Cabinet
from six to seven whilst the boundaries have been changed to reflect the
six metros only, from Messina right down to Cape Town, with a national
metro comprising all the other municipal councils.

The state of affairs in respect to the implementation and constitutionality
of issues relating hereto is at best disgraceful. Bad planning and a lack
of foresight are evident, with the resultant collapse thereof not
impossible in the near future.

It needs to be noted that the Oilgate saga is a clear example of the
manipulation of state entities to the benefit of the ANC at the cost of the
public. It is an undisputable fact that R11 million was paid to the ANC a
few days before Christmas in 2003, before the 2004 elections, by Imvume,
which secured lucrative oil contracts from the Iraqi government due to the
assistance of senior ANC members leading to this enormous payback as thanks
for their efforts.

The double payment by PetroSA to the supplier of the oil before the money
was due indicates how the ANC is prepared to muscle public entities and
unscrupulously use private companies and institutions to its own benefit.
The ANC should be forced to pay back this money, which it has exhorted from
PetroSA and Imvume at the cost of the South African public. The terms of
reference of the Donen Commission established to investigate this matter
should be widened to enable it to investigate all issues relating to
Oilgate, including the ANC, PetroSA and Imvume.

It would be appropriate to state the negative consequences of irresponsible
mining activities in areas such as the West Rand in Gauteng. In towns such
as Randfontein, vast tracts of land have been destroyed with sand dumps and
slime dams littered in close proximity to residential areas.

To worsen matters, vegetation planted by previous mining companies has been
left untreated and barren by - guess who - Harmony Gold Mine, causing mine
dust to blow from these slime dams and sand dumps to the utter nuisance,
irritation and possible negative impact on the health of local residents.

Due, in particular, to the neglect of this mining company to address the
situation, the Randfontein Environmental Action Group, REAG, was formed and
has interacted with Harmony, the Council of Geosciences and the Department
of Minerals and Energy, to reduce the mine dust. Despite support from the
local media, the Randfontein Westonaria Herald and undertakings by Harmony
to address the issue, very little has been done by Harmony to resolve the
matter. In fact, it can be argued that they reneged on their undertakings
and that the situation regarding mine dust will be just as serious, if not
worse, than during last year.

It is the task of the department to ensure that mine dust emanating from
sand dumps and slime dams on a national level is addressed to the
satisfaction of the community and the department.

It is also important to note that mine water decanting at certain points,
in particular in relation to mine water decanting into, arguably, the
Sterkfontein World Heritage Site, is another concern. [Interjections.]
Sorry sir, I can’t hear you.

The department and the Minister are ultimately responsible for ensuring a
dependable supply of fuel to the economy and must ensure that new
regulations do not result in a disruption of supply. The breakdown in the
supply of fuel during December 2005 and January 2006 can only be regarded
as abysmal.

The Minister should have been involved with the contingency planning
process and should have demanded full and frequent reports on the state of
readiness regarding the clean fuels conversion deadline. In brief, she
should have seen this crisis coming. Blaming the failure on the fuel
companies not honouring a “moral agreement” is disingenuous. The regulatory
and research capacity of the department needs to be strengthened and South
Africa needs to invest in a fuel supply infrastructure that can accommodate
the higher rate of growth that economists expect over the next few years.

Nkskz B TINTO: Igama lamakhosikazi!

AMALUNGU: Malibongwe!

Nkskz B TINTO: Mhlalingaphambili, amalungu abekekileyo, amaqabane, naye
wonke umntu okhoyo apha. Mandibulele eli thuba ndilinikwe liSebe leZimbiwa
naMandla, ukuba ndize kuthetha apha malunga nomsebenzi owenziwa phaya
kwisebe. UMr Schmidt lo usuka apha, uthathe zonke ezi zinto zichasene
nenkqubela kaKhongolozi azifunda emaphepheni waza kuthetha zona apha,
wayeka ukuthetha le nto ibisenzeka phaya ekomitini, ngoba ebesiya
ezintlanganisweni zekomiti, kodwa kucacile ukuba ebehamba nje. Ngako oko ke
akandidanisanga bendiyazi ukuba uza kwenza loo nto.

Ndifuna ukubulela umama uLindiwe Hendricks esithe sanaye ixeshana
elifutshane apha kwiSebe leZimbiwa naMandla. Ndifuna nokuthatha elithuba
ndibulele nosekela wakhe uLulama Xingwana, naye othe wanyuselwa waya kuba
nguMphathiswa kwezolimo. Ndamkele ngokunjalo umama uBuyelwa Sonjica
esizakuthi sisebenze naye apha kweli sebe. Siyathemba ukuba siza
kusebenzisana kakuhle nanjengokuba besisenza naba baPhathiswa bahambayo.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs B TINTO: The name of women!

HON MEMBERS: Praise!

Mrs B TINTO: Chairperson, hon members, comrades and all the people present
here, let me thank the Department of Minerals and Energy for this
opportunity and put across what is taking place in the department. Mr
Schmidt, who was standing here, spoke about all the negative aspects from
the newspapers which are against the progress of the ANC and said nothing
about what was being discussed in the committee meeting. His presence in
the committee meeting was not helpful. I am not disappointed by his
reaction, as I expected that.

I want to thank hon Lindiwe Hendricks, who was part of our team in the
Department of Minerals and Energy for a short time. I also want to thank
her Deputy Minister, hon Lulama Xingwana, who has been appointed as
Minister of Agriculture. We welcome hon Buyelwa Sonjica to the ranks of
this department. We hope we are going to work as well with her as with her
predecessors.]

It’s imperative to state that the ANC supports this Budget Vote. My focus
is on the administration programme ... [Interjections.] Keep quiet please,
and listen like adults. [Laughter.]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O BAPELA): Hon members, can I really appeal
that the speaker should not be interrupted? Thank you.

Mrs B TINTO: Thank you, Chairperson. Fundamental to our support of the
budget, are good administrative practices accompanied by principles of
Batho Pele. At the core of our governance is the proclamation contained in
the Freedom Charter – the people shall govern. This is a basic pillar of
our hard won democracy ...

... eningazange nayilwela nina. [Kwaqhwatywa.] [... that you never fought.
[Applause.]]

It is for this reason that President Thabo Mbeki highlighted and
acknowledged the challenges that face our government, including the skills
shortage, unemployment and poverty. Mechanisms such as Asgisa and Jipsa
have been put in place to address the challenges faced by our fledging
democracy.

The department is strategically positioned to ensure that the objectives of
Asgisa, which is aimed at halving poverty, job creation and skills
development are attained. Primary to these will be the nurturing of the
SMMEs through training and development.

Urhulumente wabantu uyazi into yokuba ikhona imiceli-mngeni ekuphuhliseni
imfuno zabantu. Loo miceli-mngeni unakho ukuthi ayiphumeze. Simazi
kananjalo ukuba urhulumente kaKhongolozi mininzi imceli-mngeni athe
wayiphumeza. Andizi kugxininisa kuyo ke namhlanje. Enye into endifuna
ukuthetha ngayo kukuxhotyiswa kwamakhosikazi nolutsha. Umongameli,
kwintetho yakhe yonyaka, yokuvula iPalamente wayibeka ngokucacileyo le
mingeni ikhoyo, nalapha kweli Sebe leZimbiwa naMandla. (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[The government of the people understands that there are challenges in
providing services to the people. These challenges can be overcome. The ANC-
led government is trying its best to overcome  these challenges. I am not
going to talk much about the challenges today. Another aspect I want to
highlight is the empowerment of women and youth. The President in his state
of the nation address clearly stated the present challenges and the
challenges facing the Department of Minerals and Energy.]
In order to succeed in delivering services to the masses, the department
has re-aligned and increased the number of programmes from six to seven.
This is in line with the goals set in the previous Budget Vote. The
administration programme supports the work of the six other programmes,
namely, mine health and safety; hydrocarbons; energy planning; mineral
regulation; mineral policy and promotion; and electricity and nuclear
energy.

Key issues of the administration have been the employment of women and
youth, and training. In this regard, the department has made considerable
strides, and this will be improved in the current financial year. Also,
there are internship programmes aimed at absorbing unemployed graduates.
This will go a long way in addressing the skills mismatch in the minerals
and energy sector.

The minerals and energy sector will also play an important role in the
achievement of the objectives of Asgisa, particularly through the metals
and metallurgy sector. This is linked to the progress that government has
made last year in areas of beneficiation and the passage of various pieces
of enabling legislation. For the 2006-07 financial year, the department has
also outlined seven programmes in which it will deliver on the targets set
out in the state of the nation address and its strategic plan.

The department’s guiding fundamentals are premised in the following
strategic objectives, namely: Active contribution to sustainable
development; bridging the gap between the first and second economy;
implementing relevant regulatory and promotional policies; and review of
structures and capacity, so as to efficiently deliver on the mandate.

Key to the responsibility of the administration programme is to manage the
department and provide administrative support, including policy
formulation. The administration programme is centrally located and very
critical to the success of other programmes of the department. In carrying
out its mandate, the department and the Ministry require proper management
of all programmes, and the development and implementation of policies.

The department has increased its budget for the administration programme to
enable it to deliver on the mining and energy development areas. For the
2005-06 financial year, R111 million was allocated for the administration
programme and for 2006-07, R151 million has been allocated – an increase of
R39 million.

This increase is attributable to the increased number of personnel and the
improvement of the information technology system in the department. The
share of the administration programme in the overall budget of the
department is 26%. It is second to the mineral regulation programme. This
shows the significance placed on this programme and its centrality to the
success of service delivery and the proper management of other departmental
programmes.
This year we will see the delivery of services in all areas of minerals and
energy. Opportunities are forthcoming for the masses of our people,
particularly women and youth. The committee has been engaged in, and will
continue, its effective oversight role over the department, especially in
making sure that the department fulfils its mandate.

Ndiyabulela, maqobokazana. [Kwaqhwatywa.] [I thank you, young women.
[Applause.]]

Mr E J LUCAS: Chairperson, Ministers and colleagues, the overall allocation
to the Department of Minerals and Energy has increased from almost R2,3
billion last year to R2,5 billion for 2006-07.  With the exception of
Programme 6: Electricity and Nuclear, the rest of the department’s seven
programmes all receive increases to their allocation in the current budget.
The allocation to the Electricity and Nuclear Programme decreased from just
under R82 million last year to just over R55 million in the current budget.

The Department of Minerals and Energy should be proud of the work it has
done in improving the lives of many over the past few years but some of the
events that have transpired over the last few months have not been so good.
The most notable is the electricity problem that was experienced in certain
parts of the country.

Electricity is an essential service that not only impacts greatly on
everyday lives of people, it also affects a wide range of activities.
Besides the inconveniences caused by the power shortages there were also
great financial losses incurred by many businesses and individuals. We, in
the IFP hope that those power shortages serve as a wake-up call to all
relevant stakeholders and emphasise the need for forward planning. We
cannot afford to have another   bout of power shortages, especially with
the winter fast approaching.

We are, however, pleased to note that the repairs to the generator at
Koeberg power station are nearing completion. The Portfolio Committee on
Minerals and Energy needs to undertake study tours in order to get better
acquainted with the working of this important facet of the department that
has such a great impact on our lives. It is also imperative that
alternative forms of energy are investigated and focused on.

Chairperson, the fuel shortages experienced a few months ago were very
unfortunate and again caused unnecessary hassles and economic losses. We
believe that with proper planning these shortages could have been avoided.
Once again the need for forward planning is highlighted.

The ever-increasing price of crude oil is a cause of great concern and
directly affects the price that consumers pay for fuel at the pump. It also
has an impact on other sectors of the economy. If the current trend
continues, fuel is going to become unaffordable for the majority of South
Africans. We have to investigate ways of making fuel more affordable for
the majority.

Sasol should be commended for the innovativeness that they have shown in
developing technology that converts gas to liquid. It appears that this
technology could play a part in providing cleaner fuel for diesel engines.
Fuel is becoming a scarce commodity and we can only hope that this new
technology will help South Africa meet its fuel demands.

The Department of Minerals and Energy has accomplished a great deal in
attempting to normalise the mining industry. The role of the historically
disadvantaged as well that of women have gained prominence within the
industry. Although great strides have been made in acquiring prospecting
rights, the mammoth task of raising funds in order to obtain a bankable
document is a daunting prospect and without a bankable document it is
almost impossible to get financial assistance from a bank or any financial
institution.

Those companies that are willing to assist do so at ridiculously high
prices. This has a negative effect and undermines the good work and
achievements made by the department with regard to the mining industry. The
Deputy Minister, who is now the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs,
should therefore be commended as she came out strongly on this issue on
television recently.

The passing of the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act was a
defining moment for the mining industry and this transforming piece of
legislation has far-reaching, effects but the finalisation of the royalty
Bill has been dragging on for far too long. We do understand that this Bill
is the responsibility of the Finance Committee and that they have been
attending to it but we urge them to finalise it as soon as possible.

The final point that I would like to raise pertains to cheaper solar panels
that have been developed in South Africa but for some reason are being
exported to Germany. I find this very puzzling, as I would have thought
that this technology could have resulted in savings here in South Africa.

I don’t mean to be pessimistic and focus only on the negative aspects as
these are also numerous positives but I do believe that issues I have
raised in my speech are important and do warrant special mention. I
therefore urge the department to look into the issues above and hopefully
provide solutions.

Overall, the department has performed admirably over the past year and we
therefore commend them for their hard work and great contribution to the
economic and social upliftment of many South Africans. I must thank the
Minister and the Deputy Minister for the good working relationship we had
and welcome our new Minister. The IFP supports the Budget Vote. I thank
you.

Mr B G MOSALA: Chairperson, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon
members, comrades, ladies and gentlemen, the ANC supports this Vote. As we
debate this Vote, I wish to begin by quoting the Freedom Charter:

  The national wealth of our country, the heritage of South Africans, shall
  be restored to the people. The mineral wealth beneath the soil, the banks
  and monopoly industry shall be transferred to the ownership of the people
  as a whole.

It is these fundamental tenets that inform the legislative and policy
formulation of the Department of Minerals and Energy. Primary to the agenda
to transform the mineral and energy sector is our belief in the equality of
mankind. The revolutionaries who met in Kliptown in 1955 were not in
government. We are governing this country, and now we dare not let them
down.

Indeed, the mineral wealth of this country must be shared by all its
people. The “people shall share”, must not just be a slogan, but a reality.
Consistent with the government’s vision to transform and open the petroleum
sector to all sections of our population, especially those who were denied
access in the past, various legislative and policy tools are in place.

The Liquid Fuels Charter is one of these tools. It provides a mechanism for
the realisation of a deracialised and gender-compliant petroleum sector. It
also seeks to empower historically disadvantaged South Africans, and
creates space for them in the petroleum and liquid fuels industry.

Critical to the development and growth of the petroleum sector is the
creation of employment opportunities and the development of small
businesses in the spirit of BEE. In this instance, the Petroleum Products
Amendment Act is another tool that pertinently promotes the advancement of
historically disadvantaged South Africans. It also promotes the creation of
employment opportunities and the development of small business in the
petroleum sector.

It is also important to mention that this Act also ensures countrywide
availability of petroleum products. Recently, all South Africans know that
fuel was reported to be in short supply in some parts of the country. There
was a huge outcry. All sorts of problems can occur in any industry anywhere
in the world. But in this instance, the prophets of doom had a field day
making all kinds of allegations and predicting gloom and disaster for the
country.

I wish to take this opportunity to commend the Minister and her department
for the commendable and responsible manner in which they handled this
matter. They did what had to be done for the sake of all of us. We
therefore thank them. We are confident that the Minister will confront all
challenges in the water and forestry sector as well as she did in the
minerals and energy sector. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

We firmly believe that BEE is a critical catalyst to bridge the gap between
the first and second economy. To this end, we wish to move from policy
formulation to policy implementation. BEE must begin to work for our
people. We must be smart, and ensure that those who have been in the
driving seat do not use this concept to further entrench themselves at the
top.

Token appointments have been made in the name of BEE, merely to lend
credibility to some institutions. Whereas BEE may serve as an option to
counteract this trend, it will succeed only if departments are vigilant and
capable of closing all the loopholes, failing which the majority - that is
in the second economy - will continue to slide to the bottom. The vision of
Asgisa will not be realised.

We must also find mechanisms to stop the scourge of fronting. This practice
undermines the noble essence of BEE.

Another tool that assists with empowerment is the Petroleum Pipelines Act
of 2003, which promotes healthy competition in the industry. It inhibits
the monopolistic abuse of pipelines and storage facilities. The Act
generally establishes a regulatory framework to promote stability. For the
first time this year, the petroleum industry will be regulated by way of
licensing and fuel quality regulation, underpinned by the Petroleum
Products Amendment Act and the Petroleum Pipelines Act.

The department is also set to conclude the paraffin safety strategy this
year, which will ensure the phasing out of paraffin as a household fuel,
while looking at other more environmental friendly fuels. The provision of
liquefied petroleum gas, which is colourless and odourless, will also be
intensified.

We have also witnessed the banning of leaded petrol and the introduction of
cleaner vehicular fuels, with the reduction of sulphur content in diesel.
This is as a result of our ANC-led government’s commitment to the Kyoto
Protocol, as well as our commitment to the utilisation of cleaner,
healthier and safer energy sources.

We wish to commend the Department of Environmental Affairs, without quoting
specifics, for their sterling work towards the creation of a South Africa
free of pollution. They can always count on the Department of Minerals and
Energy as a partner.
With regard to biofuel, our approach as the ANC-led government is premised
on three pillars, which are affordability, reliability and sustainability.
The masses of our people must be in a position to afford this energy
source, and it must be reliable for usage. Furthermore, the utilisation of
biofuels is going to contribute to job creation in the second economy.

In connection with regional co-operation, we have bilateral gas exploration
projects with Mozambique. Sasol supplies Mozambiquean natural gas to users
in our country.
What we have alluded to above in terms of legislation and other activities
of the Department of Minerals and Energy in the hydrocarbon sector is
indicative of the passion with which essential service is being rendered to
South Africans. In due course, as our economy continues to prosper, our
environments are also rendered pollution free.

I wish, at this point, to say to our counterparts in the opposition
benches, the members of the DA, that one day we shall discover those
skeletons that you are hiding in those cupboards. Today you are free to
criticise the remuneration of certain officials in this country. We never
knew what you earned, but one day we shall know. We shall know about all
the perks that you had in your government that was not transparent.

As a transparent government today ... [Interjections.]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Mosala, order please! I am not
sure whether you are standing on a point of order.

Mr M J ELLIS: It’s a point of order, Mr Chairman. The hon member is
deliberately misleading the House. The DA has never been in power. And I
want to make that very clear to him, because he has his facts absolutely
wrong. For him to say that we have skeletons in our cupboards and we are
hiding things that one day will appear, is absolute rubbish.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order, please! Thank you. Hon
Mosala, just a minute. I am not sure whether he did refer to a specific
party. He didn’t do so. He was just pointing in that direction.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, there is no doubt, sir, that he was referring to
the Democratic Alliance. In fact, I think he actually made reference to us.
He is really misleading the House.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): If indeed he did, obviously you were
not in power. He is incorrect. Hon Mosala, can you proceed. [Laughter.]

Mr B G MOSALA: Chairperson, we know the history of South Africa. We know
where you come from, and you cannot deny your past. You know where you come
from. You know that you are compromised, leader of the DA. We know about
all that. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Mosala, order please!

Mr M J ELLIS: I rise on a point of order. I do not believe that it is
parliamentary to refer to a member of another party as being compromised.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Ellis, earlier you stood on a
point of order saying that the member was unparliamentary, or deliberately
misleading the House. In terms of that deliberate misleading, I don’t think
it is unparliamentary. However, on the point that you are raising now, I
don’t think it is a point either. So, let the member continue on that
particular point.

Mr B G MOSALA: Thank you very much, Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): I am not saying I agree with him,
but I am just saying for him to refer to the past is not a point of order.

Mr M J ELLIS: I am going to ask you, sir, if you wouldn’t mind taking that
issue back, and have a look at it. Perhaps you can make a ruling at a later
stage.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Can you repeat the issue first?
Whether I agree with it, just repeat it again.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, he referred to our past – pointing to Mr
Seremane – and said, “your past is compromised”.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon members, can I really appeal to
you. I just want to hear what the point of order is. Can the Table really
listen to that?

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I will repeat it again. The hon member at the
podium referred to hon Mr Seremane and said, “your past is compromised”. I
am asking you to please look at this because I believe that it is
unparliamentary. I am not asking you just to make a ruling now, but perhaps
you would come back to the House at a later stage.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): We will come back to the issue at
some point. Let the hon member continue his the speech. [Interjections.]

Mr B G MOSALA: Let me just conclude. Chairperson, you might have missed the
fact that he said that I was corrupt. That is what he said. But, you know,
sometimes when the truth ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Mr Mosala, hon member, there is
another point of order from a member to the right of where you are
standing.

Mr S K LOUW: Chairperson, I want your ruling on the fact that the hon
member said that the hon member was corrupt. That is unparliamentary, and
he must withdraw it.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Was there any reference to the
member at the podium being corrupt? Could the person who really said it
just stand up and apologise? There is no evidence presented to the House to
that effect. Could somebody please, whoever said it, stand up and just
apologise. Who was it? [Interjections.]
All right, Mr Ellis, is it you?

Mr M J ELLIS: I think the hon member is hearing things, sir. He might have
been referring to himself, but I am not sure. [Laughter.]
Mr S K LOUW: Hon Chairperson, again, whether he referred to anybody, the
hon member has to withdraw that.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Louw, there is no name mentioned
as yet. Although there is no one denying that such a remark was made. So,
we will review the matter and report back on it. Thank you.

Mr B G MOSALA: Chairperson, this is a typical response when the truth hits
home. Thank you very much.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): I am quite aware that the person
coming to speak now is a Minister, as appointed, and I would like to
congratulate her on behalf of the Presiding Officers. On the speakers’ list
you are still referred to as the Deputy Minister of Minerals and Energy.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Chairperson, I will only be
sworn in tomorrow morning. I am still the Deputy Minister of Minerals and
Energy.

Madam Speaker, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, today I present my third
and last Budget Vote as the Deputy Minister of Minerals and Energy. This
year, I want to advise the industry bosses to loosen their seatbelts and
relax. Today we are not fighting.

I am here to bid farewell and express my appreciation for their support,
and the support of my colleagues, and hon members in the House, as well as
for the support that I have received from all stakeholders. However, this
does not mean that I will not raise concerns and issues close to my heart,
and those of the department.

Today, I would also like to take this opportunity to introduce the new
Deputy Minister of Minerals and Energy, Lerato Nqamano, from Hershel High
School. [Applause.] Stand up. Lerato is going to be a future economist of
the Reserve Bank of South Africa. I also have with me Sihle Ntsaloba, a
future doctor at the Pretoria Academic. She is here today as the Minister
of Agriculture of the Republic of South Africa. I also have Candy Jonas,
the future Auditor-General, after she had becomes a CA. She is here as the
new Minister of Land Affairs. [Applause.]

Chairperson, I would like to thank all the members of the industry, and
members from both the opposition and from my party, who have congratulated
me on my new appointment as Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs.
[Applause.] I hope, with your support, that I will be able to carry forward
my new responsibilities, which, I believe, are a huge challenge.

I will not dwell on the electricity challenges faced by South Africans
today, especially here in the Western Cape. The Minister has already
presented the future plans on the matter. At this point, I would like to
reiterate the Minister’s concerns and commitment, and how seriously the
department takes these challenges.

For us, the critical issue is to ensure that both our short and long-term
solutions are implemented as soon as possible. We have to acknowledge that
while we are attending to short-term challenges, we do not overlook the
fact that, what could be long-term plans today, might one day be short-term
challenges.
I want to remind the hon Adv Schmidt not to always look at the pessimistic
side. That is why the voters of South Africa will not vote for the DA,
because the economy of this country has never been so good. The rand has
never been so strong. Because of the leadership of the ANC and President
Thabo Mbeki, we have been able to achieve the levels that we are achieving,
where we are now beginning to create jobs for our people. [Interjections.]

Significant progress has been made in the number of connections within the
integrated national electrification programme. To date, we have managed to
connect 126 000 households at a cost of R1,09 billion, and a total of 526
schools and clinics at a cost of R43 million, while 12 000 homes have been
connected to the solar heating systems at a cost of R43 million.

These figures have contributed to an achievement of 72% towards universal
access. We have continued to address the challenges of this programme with
the aim of reaching universal access by 2012.
Since the launch of free basic electricity, significant progress has been
made throughout the country.

This has not been without challenges. In certain areas, progress has been
stifled by the municipalities not signing the funding agreements with Eskom
on time. The criteria used to identify recipients of free basic electricity
have been relaxed to allow municipalities to apply their own tailor-made
indigent policies to identify recipients.

Coming to integrated energy centres, a total of four integrated energy
centres are operational in the Northern Cape, the Eastern Cape and Limpopo.
We will be launching an additional three IECs in Limpopo, North West and
KwaZulu-Natal.

I am pleased to announce that the Xabamdeni IEC continues to sustain its
operation, liability free. In its first six months, the Xabamdeni IEC
managed to pay off its creditors.

We want to thank Total and Sasol who have contributed in a private-public
partnership programme with the Department of Minerals and Energy in setting
up these important energy centres.

Coming to paraffin safety, the continuing health and safety hazards
associated with the use of paraffin in households is of great concern to
the department. By the end of June this year, we will conclude the paraffin
safety information strategy to increase awareness on health and safety
hazards related to paraffin. Through this strategy, we will initiate a
campaign that is expected to promote behavioural changes with respect to
the handling, storage and use of paraffin.

In the long term, we intend to phase out the use of paraffin as a household
energy source. We have no illusions that this will not be easy. However, we
believe that the wide availability of paraffin will have to be addressed
because of the dangers to property, to our people and to young children in
particular. However, it is our view that we need to act in order to stop
the annual misery that comes with the burning down of homes, particularly
here in the Western Cape, and property, due to the wrong usage of paraffin.


It is our intention therefore to look at alternative modern energy sources
to ensure that they are made available and are affordable. Coming to gas,
my department is exploring the future use of cleaner, safer and affordable
energy as possible sources of energy at household level. In a collaborative
effort with industry, we will soon launch a pilot project throughout the
country, which will inform our people on the consumption of LPG for
households.

To date, industry, in a related pilot project, has already connected a
minimum of thirty thousand households around the country. The DME will in
addition connect a total of 20 000 household before the end of this year.
We further intend to have a total of 80 000 households connected by the end
of 2007.

In mitigating the cost of energy and making it more affordable to the poor
and all, my department is investigating the current pricing methodology of
LPG with the intention of minimising the cost of delivery to consumers.

Coming to the radioactive waste management policy, hon members would recall
that last year we reported on the extensive workshops we were conducting on
the radioactive waste management policy. I’m glad to report that the
radioactive waste management policy has now been approved by Cabinet and
has subsequently been published. The policy has created certainty and
confidence for the South African public in that there is a plan and
strategy on nuclear waste management.

The implementation of this policy has started, and the main activity of
this financial year will be the establishment of the national committee on
radioactive waste management. As part of our public awareness programme,
the department has published a booklet entitled “Understanding
radioactivity and radiation in everyday life” and also participated in
various public awareness and educational activities on the benefits of
nuclear technology.

With regard to nuclear liabilities management, Cabinet approved a nuclear
liabilities management plan and the funding for the discharge of
liabilities arising from historical strategic activities on the Pelindaba
site of the SA Nuclear Energy Corporation. The cost of this plan has been
quantified at         R1,8 billion over a period of 28 years, based on the
2004-05 rand value. An amount of R21 million has been budgeted for this
financial year.

We have also welcomed Dr Rob Adam, the previous Director-General of the
Department of Science and Technology, as the new CEO of the National Energy
Corporation of SA, Necsa. We wish him well in his new role and we are
confident that he will meet our expectations. [Applause.] I’m happy to
report that owing to interventions the department made, we have been able
to bolster the management capacity and through additional funding – thanks
to the National Treasury – Necsa ended the financial year on a more sound
financial footing.

A turnaround plan for Necsa was approved for implementation from the 2006-
07 financial year onwards. This turnaround aims to position Necsa, once
again, at the cutting edge of South African nuclear technology research.
The conversion of the Safari-1 research reactor at Necsa from using highly
enriched uranium fuel to low enriched uranium fuel was approved and funding
allocated. The public announcement in this regard was well received by the
international community at large and continues to give expression to South
Africa’s commitment to the peaceful use of nuclear energy.

As far as PetroSA is concerned, I’m very sorry to be leaving some of my
friends and colleagues. PetroSA, as the national oil and gas company, is
actively pursuing oil and gas blocs, mainly in Africa, in the development
of the new generation gas-to-liquid technology. As we all know, PetroSA is
spearheading this technology. We encourage PetroSA to prioritise the
sourcing of natural gas for the South African market as feedstock for its
own and for gas-fired power stations.

To give effect to that mandate, PetroSA has been actively participating in
the procurement of oil and gas blocs, mainly in Africa, and in the
development of the new generation gas-to-liquid technology. I want to leave
this programme with the new Minister of Minerals and Energy. We have made
inroads in Africa and we are beginning to get positive responses in terms
of oil and gas blocs.

I then want to remind PetroSA that owing to the recent high crude oil
prices and greater appetite by the Asian countries, amongst others, to
secure oil and gas blocs in Africa, we have had to strengthen our efforts
in this regard. China, in particular, has virtually outpriced most players,
resulting in higher than normal signature bonuses. I hope the Minister of
Finance is listening wherever he is. We need his support.

Significant progress has been made in the development of the new low-
temperature Fischer-Tropsch, with the result that PetroSA, with its
strategic partners Statoil of Norway and BHP Billiton – and, I’m informed,
Sasol – has been short-listed for the Algerian gas-to-liquid project.
Beneficiation is also an important programme that has been developed and
initiated by this department. In striving to achieve the objectives of the
Accelerated Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa, the department will
forge ahead with its plans to ensure that the mineral resources produced in
this country are beneficiated locally. Local and international players in
the diamond cutting and polishing industry, as well as the players in the
gold and platinum metals processing industry, have shown serious interest
in investing in South Africa, following the changes that we have put in
place through passing relevant legislation in this Parliament.

I also want to commend my Minister, Minister Lindiwe Hendricks, for the
sterling work she has done. Her legal mind has helped us a great deal in
passing the last few pieces of very complicated legislation in this
Parliament. [Applause.] The department, in conjunction with local and
provincial government, is continuing with the jewellery manufacturing
projects in Kimberley and at Johannesburg International Airport, which have
already been introduced to Parliament.

These will create a platform for the influx of investment, which will bring
with it new skills, technologies, jobs and new funding mechanisms. All
investors that have held discussions with the department have indicated a
commitment to the transfer of knowledge and skills, based on their
extensive expertise in this field.

With regard to training, in November 2005 five students were taken to
Belgium for an extensive two-week training course in a more theoretical
area, that is diamond jewellery management. These candidates reported that
they gained enormous knowledge and that they would be able to build their
own businesses and ensure that they get access to investors in Antwerp.
English is my eighth language. As a result, two of these students are in a
better position to start their own businesses. More of these initiatives
will be undertaken by the department during 2006.

The department continues to work with skills development organisations. We
have the Kgabane project that is continuing to train rural women in
beneficiation and jewellery making. We have also been working closely with
our Seta – the Mining Qualifications Authority - to enhance jewellery-
manufacturing skills throughout the country. We have also facilitated the
participation of a minimum of 90 young South Africans, mainly women, from
previously disadvantaged communities in a training initiative in China in
all aspects of jewellery making.

So, those gems that are not cuttable will be cuttable very soon in South
Africa, because the Chinese are coming, the Indians are coming, with their
special skills. Eight more groups of 15 young girls are expected to undergo
training in Beijing. Fifteen are already there, undergoing training in
jewellery making. For the next five years, we will be sending two batches
of young girls for six months each to Beijing to do jewellery
manufacturing. [Applause.]

Last week - I think it was my last major assignment - I had the honour of
attending the 2006 Platinum Week conference in London at the invitation of
Anglo Platinum. I thank you, sirs. [Applause.] This exposed me to all the
opportunities and challenges facing the platinum group metals. It emerged
from the conference that the world demand for platinum is increasing, which
is very nice because 80% of the world reserves of platinum are in this
country.

Most of this growth occurs in Europe and in the USA, and it stems mainly
from the tighter emissions rules, which, I believe, have been passed by the
EU and the USA government. I would like to advise my colleague, the
Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, to look at these new rules
and strict measures on emissions. I believe this will create more
opportunities for beneficiation. We will be able to produce more catalytic
converters in this country, ensuring that our platinum group metals have a
bigger market and a bigger industry, which will be able to assist us to
create jobs and to transfer skills to our people and use our platinum and
PGMs here in South Africa for the benefit of the nation.

There is a huge potential therefore for growth in the beneficiation of
PGMs, which is driven by the following: industrial use, including the
application of electronics, refining, glass manufacture, and medicines,
including a cure for cancer and heart disease. Their use as autocatalysts
has grown significantly, taking up 54% of the mined total production. Up to
30% of autocatalysts are now being produced in Germiston, South Africa, and
the industry employs approximately 24 000 people, and is now planning to
expand. Minister, I hope you will attend the launch in July of the
expansion of this factory, and we believe that more jobs will be created.

I also had the opportunity to visit the De Beers Diamond Trading Company in
London, where I was able to see some of our beautiful gems – Botswana gems
and those of other African countries. I’m glad to report that with the
signing of an agreement between the Botswana government and De Beers, those
gems are coming back to South Africa. The dream of President Thabo Mbeki to
make diamonds Africa’s best friend is becoming a reality.

I also want to share with you that I had a lunch meeting with Gareth Penny,
the CEO of De Beers, and we agreed that they would give all their
marginalised mines to the Minister so that the Minister could give them to
small businesses and to women, and I would like the Minister to continue
that conversation. [Applause.] We also discussed ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Minister, your time has expired,
and thank you very much.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Can I thank my director-general
and the staff for the support they have given me? I know he was the dean of
all directors-general. That is why the President decided to take both the
Minister and the Deputy Minister, and left him there to be the pillar and
to continue to assist the new Minister.

I also welcome the new Minister to the warm minerals and energy sector of
South Africa. You will enjoy yourself. [Applause.] I also want to say that
I look forward to working with the farmers. I’m told I shoot from the hip.
We are going to go on hunting trips, and I’m a very good shot and I know
you love a woman who can shoot. [Applause.] [Laughter.]

Mnr J J COMBRINCK: Voorsitter ... [Tussenwerpsels.] Amakhosikazi! [Ladies!]
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Voorsitter, agb lede van die Parlement, uitgenooide gaste, dames en here,
die ANC steun hierdie begrotingspos. In die Vryheidsmanifes van die ANC
word daar duidelik melding gemaak dat die rykdom aan alle burgers in Suid-
Afrika sal behoort. Verder word dit in die HOP-dokument verwoord dat daar
elektrisiteit aan alle inwoners van Suid-Afrika verskaf moet word. Suid-
Afrika se elektrisiteitsnetwerk is in ses RED’s, oftewel
streekelektrisiteitverspreiders, verdeel, waarvan die eerste een reeds van
1 Julie 2005 in werking is ... [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)
[Mr J J COMBRINCK: Chairperson ... [Interjections.] Amakhosikazi! [Ladies!]
[Interjections.]

Chairperson, hon members of Parliament, invited guests, ladies and
gentlemen, the ANC supports this Vote. In the Freedom Charter of the ANC it
is clearly stated that the wealth shall belong to all citizens in South
Africa. Furthermore, it is stated in the RDP document that all inhabitants
of South Africa must be provided with electricity. South Africa’s
electricity network is divided into six REDs, that is to say regional
electricity distributors, the first of which has been in operation since 1
July 2005 ... [Interjections.]]

I know I am very long-winded.



... soos ooreengekom op die sperdatum gestel deur president Mbeki.

Die byvoeging van ’n sewende RED is egter oppad. Die vraag moet gevra word
of dit nodig is, en wanneer die navorsing gedoen is om te bevind of daar
nog ’n ekstra RED nodig is.

Ons ekonomie is hoofsaaklik afhanklik van steenkool, hoofsaaklik vanweë die
feit dat ongeveer 75% van die primêre energie in die land van steenkool
afkomstig is. Steenkool is ook verantwoordelik vir die produksie van 92%
van alle elektrisiteit in Suid-Afrika. Alle aanduidings is egter dat
hierdie tendens nog ’n paar jaar lank sal voortduur.
Die elektrisiteitstekort in die land is grotendeels te wyte aan ’n ekonomie
wat baie vinnig groei en sodoende die vraag na elektrisiteit laat toeneem.
Dié van u wat vanoggend u posstukke in die posvakkies gaan haal het, sou
gesien het daar is ’n dokument wat ek vir u daar gelos het. Lees asseblief
die dokument en help Suid-Afrika elektrisiteit bespaar.

Weens die feit dat hierdie ingrypings met beperkte, bekostigbare tegnologie
en beperkte water- en windhulpbronne aangepak word, en die uitbreiding van
woestynvorming, veral wes van Suid-Afrika, is die meeste van die
geïdentifiseerde moontlike tegnologie om die veerkrag, doeltreffendheid en
omgewingsprestasie van die energiestelsel te verhoog nie geskik nie of
bloot onbekostigbaar.

Nietemin moet ons werk aan beide die plaaslike en internasionale vlakke om
verminderings- en aanpassingskwessies te hanteer. In baie opsigte kan ons
toekoms van ons sukses afhang. Gedurende die afgelope twee dekades is
hernieubare energie grootliks aangewend as die primêre energiebron vir
alleenstaande kragoplossings wat lae-kapasiteitsaanwendings verskaf in
gebiede wat ver van die elektrisiteitnetwerk verwyder is.

Netwerkaanwendings is beperk tot ’n paar hidrostasies en sekere
biomassaopwekkings, hoofsaaklik vir eie gebruik, terwyl Eskom sedert 1998
besig is om grootskaalse aanwendings aktief na te vors in sy Suid-
Afrikaanse grootmaat-hernieubare energie-opwekkingsprogram, oftewel SABRE-
Gen. Tot op hede het hierdie program aanleiding gegee tot twee hernieubare
energiedemonstrasie-inisiatiewe, te wete die Klipheuwel-
windenergiedemonstrasieprojek in die Wes-Kaap en die sonskottelinstallering-
inisiatief in Midrand, Johannesburg. Die vraag kan weer eens gevra word
hoekom daar nog nie met sulke sonskottels in die Noord-Kaap
geëksperimenteer is nie. Die provinsie is welbekend vir sy mooi sonskyndae.

Die ANC-regering het ’n verbintenis tot die VN se raamwerkkonvensie oor
klimaatsverandering wat verlede jaar vorm aangeneem het deur ’n teiken vas
te stel. Die regering se doelwit is om teen 2012 ’n waarde van 10 000 GWh
hernieubare energie op te wek. Dit het die belangstelling aangewakker in
verskeie hernieubare energiesektore, veral met betrekking tot die
verwarming van water deur middel van die son. Alhoewel die doelwit tot
betekenisvolle belangstelling deur projekontwikkelings gelei het, het die
afwesigheid van geleentheidskeppende meganismes die aantal werklike
projekte beperk.

Die Departement van Minerale en Energie is tans besig om ’n subsidiekantoor
op die been te bring wat die geleentheid behoort te skep vir ’n aantal
klein kragopwekkingsprojekte, maar dit is onwaarskynlik dat groot
verskaffingsprojekte tot stand sal kom sonder enige ander meganismes wat
geleenthede vir kragopwekkingsooreenkomste op die lang termyn sal bied. Die
Suid-Afrikaanse kragstelsel werk op die tyd-van-die-dag-beginsel,
waarvolgens krag wat gedurende die piekvraagperiodes opgewek word hoër
gewaardeer word as dié wat gedurende middel- en nie-piekperiodes opgewek
word. Die vermoë van heelwat hernieubare oplossings om die vraagkurwe te
volg en op te wek wanneer krag vereis word, bly onseker, asook die
kwaliteit van die verskaffing.

Windenergie sal moontlik net uitgebrei kan word tot ’n klein hoeveelheid
eenhede. Suid-Afrika is ’n relatief groot land, maar die meeste wind kom in
die kusstreke voor. Hierdie kusstreke is gewoonlik ekologies bewaarde
gebiede en dit is daarom baie moeilik om enige ontwikkeling te doen met
betrekking tot windlaaiers. Baie skaars voëls en plantspesies kan hierdeur
beïnvloed word.

Die vernietigende krag van kernwapens en die vrees vir die onbekende wat
betref kernfisika het groot agterdog gewek jeens die gebruik van kernkrag.
Die tema is deeglik deur Hollywood uitgebuit, wat die siening van die
publiek net meer versterk het. Wat min mense besef, is dat Three Mile
Island een van die rampe was waar niemand beseer of gedood is nie.
Tsjernobil het 31 lewens geëis en nog 10 mense later deur middel van
bestraling. Elke onnatuurlike dood is een te veel, maar as ons die gevolge
van dié gebeure vergelyk met dié van vlieg- en motorongelukke moet ons
toegee dat ons nie konsekwent is nie. Kernkrag voorsien in omtrent 17% van
die hele wêreld se elektrisiteit deur middel van 438 reaktors in 31 lande.

Omdat hierdie bron so belangrik vir ons geraak het, is die belangrikheid
van ’n beleidsdokument oor kernafval van kardinale belang, want dit is juis
die kernafval wat vir almal ’n groot probleem is. Die basiese beginsels van
hierdie dokument moet die volgende insluit: die beskerming van menslike
gesondheid, die beskerming van die omgewing, die beskerming van wat oor die
grense van die land kom, met ander woorde om seker te maak dat ander lande
nie hul kernafval in Suid-Afrika stort nie, en die beskerming van ons
nageslagte.

Hierdie beskerming moet plaasvind binne ’n wetgewende raamwerk, beheer van
radioaktiwiteitsopwekking en die beveiliging van hierdie fasiliteite. As
ons aan ’n dokument kan werk wat bogenoemde punte sal beskerm, glo ek dat
kernkrag ’n veilige oplossing vir Suid-Afrika se kragprobleme kan wees.
Deur meer as R82 miljard tot en met 2012 te bestee, sal die
elektrisiteitstekort beslis tot ’n einde kom.

Graag sluit ek af deur agb lede weer eens te vra om hul samewerking te gee
om krag in Suid-Afrika te bespaar. Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[... as agreed to on the deadline set by President Mbeki.

However, the addition of a seventh RED is in the pipeline. The question
must now be asked whether it is necessary, and when the research was done
to establish whether an extra RED was necessary.

Our economy depends principally on coal, in the main owing to the fact that
approximately 75% of the primary energy in the country comes from coal.
Coal is also responsible for the production of 92% of all electricity in
South Africa. All indications are that this tendency will continue for
several more years.

The shortage of electricity in the country can be attributed largely to an
economy which is growing very fast and is thus causing the demand for
electricity to increase. Those of you who collected your mail from your
pigeonholes this morning would have seen a document that I left there for
you. Please read the document and help South Africa to conserve
electricity.

Owing to the fact that these interventions are being tackled with limited,
affordable technology and limited water and wind resources, and owing to
the extension of desertification, especially to the west of South Africa,
most of the identified possible technology to increase the resilience,
efficiency and environmental performance of the energy system is not
suitable or is simply unaffordable,

Nevertheless, we must work at both the local and the international levels
to cope with decrease and adjustment issues. In many respects our future
could depend on our success. During the past two decades renewable energy
was largely utilised as the primary source of energy for individual energy
solutions providing low-capacity utilisations in areas that are far removed
from the electricity network.

Network utilisations are limited to a few hydrostations and certain biomass
generations, mainly for own use, whereas Eskom has been actively
researching large-scale utilisations since 1998 in its South African bulk
renewable energy generation programme, that is to say, SABRE-Gen. To date
this programme has resulted in two renewable energy demonstration
initiatives, namely the Klipheuwel wind energy demonstration project in the
Western Cape and the solar-disk installation initiative in Midrand,
Johannesburg. We can once again ask the question why no experiments have
been done with such solar-disks in the Northern Cape. This province is well
known for its beautiful sunny days.

The ANC government is committed to the UN’s framework convention on climate
change which took shape last year when certain goals were set. The
government’s goal is to generate renewable energy to the value of 10 000
GWh by 2012. This has sparked interest in various renewable energy sectors,
especially regarding the heating of water by means of the sun. Although the
goal has resulted in significant interest by project developers, the
absence of opportunity-creating mechanisms has limited the number of actual
projects.

The Department of Minerals and Energy is at present establishing a subsidy
office that should create the opportunity for a number of small power
generation projects, but it is unlikely that large provision projects will
be established without any other mechanisms that will provide opportunities
for power generation agreements in the long run. The South African power
system works on the time-of-the-day principle, according to which power
generated during the peak demand periods is valued more highly than that
generated during the medium and non-peak periods. The ability of a number
of renewable solutions to follow the demand curve and generate when power
is required remains uncertain, as well as the quality of the provision.

Wind energy will possibly only be able to be extended to a small number of
units. South Africa is a relatively large country, but most wind occurs in
the coastal regions. These coastal regions are usually ecologically
conserved areas and it is therefore very difficult to do any development
with regard to wind chargers. Many rare birds and plant species can be
influenced by this.
The destructive power of nuclear weapons and the fear of the unknown with
regard to nuclear physics have caused a lot of suspicion regarding the use
of nuclear power. The theme has been thoroughly exploited by Hollywood,
which has only intensified the view of the public. What few people realise
is that Three Mile Island was one of the disasters where no one was injured
or killed. Chernobyl claimed 31 lives and another 10 people died later as a
result of radiation. Every unnatural death is one too many, but if we
compare the consequences of these occurrences with those of aircraft and
vehicle accidents, we have to concede that we are not being consistent.
Nuclear energy provides about 17% of the entire world’s electricity by
means of 438 reactors in 31 countries.

Because this source has become so important to us, the creation of a policy
document on nuclear waste is of the utmost importance, because it is
precisely the nuclear waste that is a big problem for everybody. The basic
principles of this document must include the following: the protection of
human health, the protection of the environment, the protection of what
comes over the borders of our country, in other words to ensure that other
countries do not dump their nuclear waste in South Africa, and the
protection of future generations.

This protection must take place within a legislative framework, control the
generation of radioactivity and the safeguarding of these facilities. If we
can work on a document that will protect the above-mentioned points, I
believe that nuclear power could be a safe solution to South Africa’s power
problems. By spending more than R82 billion up to and including 2012, the
shortage of electricity will definitely come to an end.

I would like to conclude by asking hon members once again to give their co-
operation to conserve electricity in South Africa. I thank you.
[Applause.]]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, firstly I would like to take this opportunity
to thank hon Minister Lindiwe Hendricks for all her efforts and endeavours
to lead the Department of Minerals and Energy – DME - to delivery. We
believe that the hon President does have a strategy in his decision to
reshuffle Cabinet and that Minister Hendricks’ valuable skills will benefit
Water Affairs and Forestry. Our sentiments are equally expressed towards
hon Minister Buyelwa Sonjica, as we welcome her into the Department of
Minerals and
Energy. The MF express its full faith in the President’s strategic
decision.

Turning our attention to the Department of Minerals and Energy, the MF
knows the challenges we are faced with. And we can certainly also
acknowledge the dissatisfaction and inconvenience shared by the larger
public as a result of the recent and unexpected power cuts and steeply
rising petrol price. The explanation for the recent 39 cent hike in the
petrol price is an increase in the international price of crude oil. This
was certainly not welcome as the only solution given for motorists in light
of this is to budget for petrol use and plan journeys properly.

Further, in response to the recent power cuts, the MF feels it is crucial
to encourage our people. Having been told that, if there are powercuts, our
domestic supply will not take priority over our supply to neighbouring
states is discouraging. Our priority and commitment starts with our
domestic need and supply.
These blackouts not only left people in darkness, businesses unable to
operate and hospitals frantic, but stopped the entire mechanics of our day-
to-day living. Now in winter people are being promised blackouts again. The
MF, in the light of this, calls for an entire reassessment of our power
situation and if another power plant has to be erected to sustain need and
supply then so be it. The MF supports the Budget Vote. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Ms N F MATHIBELA: Madam Chair, hon Ministers, hon Deputy Ministers, hon
members, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, let me begin by
congratulating the incoming Minister Sonjica on her appointment to the
Minerals and Energy portfolio as well as Minister Hendricks on her
appointment to the Water Affairs and Forestry portfolio and also our Deputy
Minister who is going to Agriculture. I wish them well in their new
portfolios.

The ANC supports the Budget Vote. The mission of the Department of Minerals
and Energy, as set out in the strategic plan for the period 2007-2011, is
the regulation and promotion of the minerals and energy sectors for the
benefit of all, and I do emphasise the words ``for the benefit of all’’.
Through the Promotion of Mine Health and Safety Programme, the department
executes its statutory mandate of protecting the health and safety of mine
employees.

It is a known fact that mining is a difficult and dangerous occupation.
Mineworkers labour under taxing and unsafe conditions, often under the
earth. It has always been the view of the ANC that mineworkers are the
heartbeat of the mining industry and therefore ought to be afforded
protection against the dire effects of their working conditions on their
health and safety.

The minimum standards aimed at ensuring the health and safety of
mineworkers as set out in the Reconstruction and Development Programme were
thus in keeping with the view of the ANC that mineworkers play a
fundamental role in the development of the industry. Consequently,
legislation regulating mine health and safety is guided by the standards
set out in the Reconstruction and Development Programme.

In addition to passing laws aimed at ensuring the safety and health of
workers within mines, the department has committed itself to monitoring the
proper implementation and effectiveness of such laws.

Re a tseba gore kgale meepong go be go sa lebelelwe malwetši a mangwe. Go
be go lebelelwa fela ge batho ba gobetše goba ba hlokagetše. Tše dingwe ba
be ba sa di lebelele. Efela mmušo wo wa rena wa lehono wa ANC o lebelela
batho ka moka le malwetši ka moka ao a swanago le bo HIV/Aids. [We are
aware that back then mines used to overlook some of the illnesses. They
only insured cases of injuries and deaths. The other illnesses were
overlooked. The ANC-led government looks at all the people and illnesses,
including HIV/Aids.]
The department’s 2006-07 to 2010-11 strategic plan sets out the measures
the department intends taking in ensuring compliance with and monitoring
the effectiveness of health and safety laws and regulations. The strategic
objectives of the department are, among others, firstly, to contribute to
sustainable development by reducing the impact of mining on public health
and the environment, addressing specific occupational health and safety
problems, and dealing with public health and environmental hazards and the
source of such hazards; secondly, to redress the past imbalances in the
sector by ensuring sufficient and appropriate skills and human resource
development strategies for the sector; and thirdly, to govern the minerals
and energy sector to be healthier, safer and cleaner by eliminating
occupational diseases and injuries over the next five to six years.

In each year over the period 2006-07 to 2010-11, the department has set as
a target the reduction of workplace injuries and fatalities by 20% in
respect of occupational diseases resulting from exposure to hazards. The
target for the third year of the five-year period is a reduction of 15%
occupational diseases from exposure to hazards and thereafter a reduction
of 10% over the last two years of the five-year period.

Furthermore, the Safety in Mines Research Advisory Committee has a
programme in place aimed at overcoming barriers to improved occupational
health and safety performance. The barriers identified in the committee
programme include rockfalls, rockbursts, explosions and fires, machinery
and transport systems, airborne pollutants, physical hazards such as noise,
temperature and radiation, occupational diseases with a specific focus on
the effects of HIV/Aids, TB and silicosis.

The scourge of HIV/Aids has also had an impact on the health and safety of
mineworkers. Critical to addressing the HIV/Aids challenge in mines, will
be the introduction of the new family units and doing away with the old
system of hostels.

There are also five key projects aimed at raising awareness on the
prevention, treatment and care of HIV/Aids in the mining industry. These
are the Powerbelt Project, for the coal mining areas, the Lesedi Project in
Virginia in the Free State Province, the Lechabile Project in Welkom, also
in the Free State Province, the Bambisanani Project in Lusikisiki in the
Eastern Cape Province, the Carltonville Home-Based Care Project, in the
Gauteng Province.

The issue of mine health and safety requires continuous review and
development. Such review and development have been provided for in the
strategic plan for the period 2006-07 to 2010-11 through measures such as
policing compliance with the relevant laws and where necessary providing
the necessary education and for the implementation of such laws in order to
improve mine health and safety.
Furthermore, the department’s ongoing self-assessment has led to the
restructuring of the Mine Health and Safety Inspectorate, with the result
that all policy-related issues are to be dealt with by the policy unit
while all specialist-related issues on occupational health are to be dealt
with by the special unit. This will ensure improved service delivery by the
inspectorate.

The department remains committed to the betterment of the lives of all our
people employed within the mining industry as well as those affected by
mining activities and will appropriate the funds allocated to it in a
manner that is in keeping with such a commitment.

I thank you, Madam Chair. [Applause.]

Mr C M MORKEL: Madam Deputy Chair, Ministers, past, present and future,
departmental officials, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, the President in
his state of the nation address this year called upon us to herald for our
beloved nation an age of hope.

For anyone to have hope of anything, they would need a fair amount of
certainty and trust before they can envision the future and each milestone
to reach the destination of that journey.

It is not different with democracy and development and, so too, it is not
different in minerals and energy. The Progressive Independent Movement will
therefore propose practical solutions for consideration in response to the
challenges faced by the new Minister and department, as we did with the
previous Ministers during this financial year.

In saying farewell to the previous Ministers, I want to commend personally
your openness to simply listen. We wish you well in your new portfolios. To
the new Ministers, we hope that our working relationship could be as open,
frank and constructive as it has been with the previous Ministers.

Ministers, colleagues, with the budget at our disposal for this financial
year, we would like to highlight a few of the following: The Minerals and
Petroleum Resources Development Act would need to be reviewed or amended to
provide greater certainty and specificity to its two components parts, both
minerals and petroleum.

Whilst the minerals component has seen the forging of a Charter, it does
not in our opinion cater sufficiently for the specificity each mineral
subsector may require. For example, although we recently enacted the
Diamonds Amendment Act, we cannot achieve accelerated and shared growth if
we do not give more detailed attention to the specific factors that
differentiate the economies of scale for example, in fluvial, alluvial, and
kimberlite mining, especially at a small-scale mining level.

Ultimately, we would not want to see the same unintended consequences
before this sector’s newly empowered PDIs, as was the case in the fishing
industry with its flawed permit system. Many permit holders in that sector
were forced to sell out with no access to finance, equipment, technical
expertise, and allegedly this is also happening in the small mining sector.

Our second proposal is on the petroleum sector. Seismic data gleaned from
our National Petroleum Agency suggests there are unexplored offshore
geology beyond waters 250m deep. This is not that different from that in
the oil and gas producing west coast on the West Coast of South Africa.
What is different is the level of investment in our deeper waters, and the
risks can be mitigated by a greater certainty on a fiscal regime,
especially with regard to royalties.

Lastly, for now, we propose that the electricity sector, especially the
rollout of new capacity, be streamlined by reviewing some of the EIA
processes, and we would like to work with you on that. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr G R MORGAN: Good afternoon, Madam Minister and members. In the last few
months, the people of the Western Cape have learnt the meaning of a number
of new words and terms: ``load-shedding’’, ``brown-outs’’, ``rolling
blackouts’’ and ``demand management’’.

But, of course, this new vocabulary is no consolation for the irritation,
anger and massive economic loss, in the region of
R3 billion, that the people of this region had to endure. And while all
this outages were happening, no one was claiming responsibility. Eskom’s
CEO, who earns more than R1 million a month, did little to calm nerves.

How did we get to this situation? The answer is simple and we knew the
answer before this energy crisis even began: Bad planning, underinvestment
in infrastructure, a skills shortages and a dash of arrogance.

I frequently heard that what happened at Koeberg, in conjunction with the
transmission problems, was a worst-case scenario, as if that explanation
somehow made it all better. But we should be planning for worst-case
scenarios. What other worst-case scenario at Koeberg is Eskom not planning
for?

South Africa has the capacity to produce approximately 37 000 MW of
electricity. A safe reserve would be 15% over the peak usage. But, consider
this: The expected peaked amount in winter is approximately 35 000 MW,
leaving a reserve of about 6%. That is too close and means that if further
power stations go down, further blackouts will occur, and there will be
associated economic loss.

What amazes me is that this government set itself a goal of achieving rapid
economic growth way back in 1996. With economic growth there is an ever-
increasing demand for energy. And thankfully our economy today is growing
steadily, but it seems as if the Department of Minerals and Energy never
actually believed that we would achieve this growth when it was doing its
scenario planning a decade ago.

Having said that, the DA supports moves by government to re-commission
several old coal power stations and to construct new gas power stations in
KwaZulu-Natal and the Eastern Cape in conjunction with the private sector.
These moves will help to improve capacity and drive growth.

Furthermore, Eskom must invest in improving and maintaining transmission
lines. Even if we could produce more electricity, it is not certain that we
would be able to transmit it.

Like so many industrial sectors in this economy, the energy sector faces a
skills crisis. In a recent survey conducted by the Solidarity trade union,
77% of respondents regarded the lack of trained staff with the necessary
skills as one of the main reasons for the electricity crisis in the Western
Cape.

According to Stan Bridgens, president of the SA Institute of Electrical
Engineers, a consequence of the transformation drive has been that people
who aren’t engineers have filled key
decision-making positions, the result being that “the strategic decisions
that need to be made are not made timeously”. If we are going to succeed in
this highly technical sector, we need to get the right people to do the
job, irrespective of race.

Investing in our energy security must be a priority. I agree that coal and
nuclear-generated electricity is necessary to secure our base-load
requirements, but diversification of sources helps to improve security.
While this government plans to pump billions of rands into the pebble bed
modular reactor project over the coming years, renewable energy sources
receive insignificant funding for research and development.

This budget allocates a paltry R46 million for capital start-up grants for
projects in the renewable and bio-fuels industry. Yet officials in your own
department tell me, Madam Minister, that there are over half a billion
rands worth of renewable projects crying out for support.

I accept that renewable energy needs to be economically viable, but the
technology learning curves for these technologies are steep and deserve
more government support, especially if we are to be genuine about achieving
our renewable targets.
The DA looks forward to the completion of the bio-fuel strategy. It is
correct that the bio-fuels industry has been identified as a key project
under the Accelerated Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa, for it has
the potential to revitalise many rural communities by providing new
livelihoods and reduce our reliance on imported oil.

Finally, in the wake of the recent electricity crisis in the Western Cape,
demand-management has been thrust into the spotlight. While energy saving
and efficiency strategies are crucial to this economy, many consumers feel
like they are expected to take the hit for Eskom’s ineptitude.
Nevertheless, this is a good opportunity to promote efficiency, as has been
said already today.

And here is a challenge. I realise that your department has already
undertaken certain efficiency initiatives, but how about this one?
Why does your department not take the lead? Approximately 5% of electricity
is used by appliances in stand-by mode, so, as an act of good faith, I
suggest you recommend a directive where your department, and then perhaps
others, commit to procuring electronic goods with a stand-by mode of 1 Watt
for goods for which that is possible. For other goods, it won’t be
possible, but you can find the best stand-by mode.

It is not anticompetitive, according to the World Trade Organisation
Regulations. And, in this way, you would be able to indicate to the broader
public that government itself is also committed to energy efficiency, not
just the consumers of the Western Cape and beyond. We can call it ``a taste
of government’s own medicine’’. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S K LOUW: Chairperson, we have been listening to some very good speeches
in this House this afternoon, but I must say that despite the fact that we
had those good speeches, some of the members from this side spoilt them.
They keep on crying about Koeberg, which is a clear indication that they
don’t have the answers on how to solve the problems. The cry from this side
is because they are in charge of the Western Cape and they don’t know how
to solve the problem, they must pass the buck. It is clear that they rule
over an unstable city that doesn’t have answers to the problems of these
people. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order! Please take your seat, hon
member. Yes, hon member.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, it would appear that there has been a very
important piece of news coming through that we haven’t heard about in this
House. The hon speaker at the podium has said that the DA is in charge of
the Western Cape. We are not aware of that.

Mr S K LOUW: Chairperson, coming back to the Public Protector’s report,
again, in this Chamber, the very same committee adopted the report. We had
a joint meeting with Scopa and all of them agreed to the terms that they
had to follow and we agreed that those that owed the department or anybody
any money, should pay it back. Why should we open it? Why should we open
it? It is not political bankruptcy. It is total bankruptcy. Allow me to
focus on my speech.

The following analysis was made at a national consultative conference of
the ANC in Mogorogoro in 1969:

   Today, most of the wealth of South Africa is flowing into the coffers of
   a few in the country and others in foreign lands. The white minority as a
   group have over the years enjoyed a complete monopoly of economic rights,
   privileges and opportunities. An ANC government shall restore the wealth
   of our country, the heritage of South Africa, to the people as a whole.

At its 51st national conference in Stellenbosch it was resolved that:

   The establishment of a vehicle to support mineral exploration by
   previously disadvantaged groups should be explored, especially rural
   communities, given the importance of sustaining the industry and bringing
   in new entrants through new legislation.

Looking at the stable position of our country’s economy, we can proudly say
our country is in momentous processes of change, blazing a trail towards a
secured future. This achievement enjoys a respect and admiration of the
world at large. We must give effect to the government’s programme of action
and contribute positively to the age of hope, as mentioned in the
President’s state of the nation address. We must not lose sight of the many
young leaders who fought the battle in the streets for economic inclusion
30 years ago.

Today, our debate on Minerals and Energy contributes enormously to the
economy of our country. I remember the jubilation, the joy, the shouting of
Mayibuye i’Afrika and the singing of liberation songs when the Minerals and
Petroleum Resources Development Act was passed four years ago. That Act
charts the way forward to ensure that previously disadvantaged people have
meaningful participation in the industry. The implementation of the MPRDA
brought with it a few challenges that the department has to grapple with to
improve on service delivery in terms of the time taken to process the
applications.

I must applaud the Minister, the Deputy Minister, the director-general,
DDGs and the nine regional managers for the way they have handled this
paradigm shift with a serious shortage of staff, especially in the
Klerksdorp office. I must put a feather in the cap of Mr Levy Rapoo and Mr
Vincent Twala. They spent lots of hours in the office to ensure a smooth
process to meet the target. I am saying this despite the media tags that
they are not delivering. They have stood their ground and ensured a smooth
running of a process that is totally inclusive as applicants comply with
the necessary criteria to get their licences.

Therefore, it was further necessary for the department to come up with the
mineral policy and promotion as a structure to set in place. This branch is
key in formulating mineral-related policies and promotes the mining
industry to encourage investment. It is indeed a product of a split from
the mineral development branch, thus it is linked to the Asgisa programme
of creating jobs, especial the scarce skills in the mining industry like
rock-breaking, metallurgical operators and many more.

The opportunities that we have in this industry cannot be over-emphasized.
Institutions like Mintek, Geoscience and M2A play a pivotal role in
empowering our disadvantaged groups. The potential and impact of
beneficiation to employment creation will be sustainable if harnessed
correctly.

We further believe that the development of them gem cutting and polishing
industry in South Africa will play an immense role in job creation, bearing
in mind that thousands of workers were retrenched previously because
diamond cutting and polishing houses have had to close due to the scarcity
of rough diamonds. Access to rough diamonds can be acquired through the
state diamond trader for the local diamond beneficiators.

The SDT will purchase a portion of rough diamonds based on a requirement
for local beneficiators and sell to beneficiators at a fair price. This is
intended to stimulate growth and development for small role players and it
will empower those who did not have access to rough diamonds. It will
definitely stimulate competition and economic growth in the country for the
benefit of all of us.

We also have to face a series of problems in the department. We must find a
way to deal with the challenges that we face in regard to BEE and fronting
in this industry. Fronting is fraud. Fronting is theft. It is unacceptable.
We must reject it. This has become a matter of serious concern for
government as well as stakeholders. We must look at structural issues to
expand our economy and consolidate black involvement in our country in
order to build a stable industry that satisfies the unemployment market.
More and more people are needed to participate in the main and maintain or
fill the scarce skills needed.

BEE should not be seen as a vehicle to make a quick profit or be an
overnight millionaire. Neither do we need to dilute the shares or sign an
agreement in which the shares will be locked up for 20 years or more and
don’t get any dividend but let us rather see it as a vehicle to sustain the
economy of this country. It must be more than the sale of equity to
historically disadvantaged South Africans. It must further make an
important contribution through recruitment, education, training and
development of existing employment and benefit the wider community.

Allow me to focus sharply on small scale mining projects that were
developed and implemented with technical support provided for them. This is
one of the areas that we need to focus on more, with special emphasis on
health and safety. The department needs to have a special structure to
monitor and inspect this area. Primary to this is the environmental
rehabilitation of small mines, especially in the Northern Cape and North
West that we need to focus on in order to ensure a better environment to
live in.

Mevrou die Voorsitter, die mynboubedryf is nie maklik toegangbaar as jy nie
beskik oor die nodige kapitaal om ’n suksesvolle begin te maak nie. Daarom
is dit noodsaaklik vir die departement om ernstige oorweging te skenk
daaraan om ’n bevondsingstruktuur te implementeer wat uitsluitlik in
hierdie bedryf gaan spesialisieer. Ons sal daardeur die misleidende
frontering kan uitskakel en die groot probleem oor bevondsing vir die nuwe
mynkapteine oorkom.

Met groot opgewondenheid word hierdie vereistes vanaf die departement
begroet. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Madam Chairperson, the mining industry is not easily accessible if you do
not have the necessary capital to make a successful start. Hence it is
imperative that the department give serious consideration to implementing a
funding structure that would specialise exclusively in this industry. We
would then be in a position to eliminate misleading fronting and overcome
the great problem of funding for new mining captains.

These requirements from the department are greeted with great
exitement.[Time expired.]]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Op ’n punt van orde, asseblief Mevrou.
[On a point of order, please Madam.]

Is it parliamentary for the member to say that the DA is the front of
confusion? I would like to ask him to withdraw that, Madam Chair.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, it is my right to ask hon
members to withdraw things, not yours. [Laughter.] Please continue, hon
member.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Chairperson, let me deal with a few
issues that have been raised and in doing so thank the hon members. I would
first like to thank the chair of the portfolio committee, Comrade Nathi,
and all the members of the portfolio committee for their kind words, but
also for a very good working relationship, which the Deputy Minister and I
had with this committee.
We have taken note of what has been raised by the portfolio committee on
the formation of the national RED, and also note that they are planning to
hold public hearings in that regard. My hope is that these hearings, which
would be following right after the electricity workshop that was held
recently in Gauteng, will assist all of us to enhance the quality of our
final product.

I have noted the issue of fronting that the chairperson has raised. It has
now been raised by Comrade Sam Louw. I agree indeed that it is a serious
problem; it amounts to fraud; it reverses all the achievements and gains
that we have had since this government came into power and, indeed, if you
look at the Department of Trade and Industry’s codes of practice, fronting
is dealt with there.

I am hoping that in the minerals and energy and liquid petroleum sector, we
are going to establish similar regulations that would ensure that we take
out these people and then put their names into a register, which would
indicate that they would never get work from government again.

Coming to Adv Schmidt, who likes to talk and then disappear. He likes
saying all kind of things and then disappearing. That is just the level of
arrogance that he has. [Interjections.] There is no need to say sorry,
because he can’t raise issues and then run away. But you will tell him what
I am going to say. Thank you.

With regard to Koeberg, which is the first issue he raised, it is a fact
that a foreign object was found in the generator. It is a fact it was not
by accident. That is why an investigation was started. We are not going to
make pronouncements on the outcome of that investigation until the correct
authority that is investigating gives us a report and makes the
announcements about those outcomes.

So, you must just be patient. [Interjections.] The issue of the replacement
... Sheila, please! The issue of the replacement of the generator I dealt
with in my speech, so I don’t know why he is raising that again. He says
there is an energy crisis, I don’t know. I told you I was sitting with the
CEOs, the chairpersons, the energy research institutions, everyone who
deals with energy, and we remain convinced that there is no crisis.

There is an explanation for what is happening in the Western Cape. The
Koeberg issue is a case that has never been foreseen. It is a situation
never foreseen, and I will tell you just now, hon Morgan, I hope you are
still here to listen to what you were raising. [Interjections.] I would
explain to you right now what plans we had because you want to communicate
a situation of a government that didn’t plan for its energy economic
growth. We actually did plan.

The issue of the energy crisis I have dealt with it and there is no energy
crisis in the country, and I did say we are conceding that, in fact,
possibly the reserve margin that Morgan was talking about has declined to
the extent that it needs to be increased.

What this means is that the capital investment signal has been triggered.
You are all aware of the R84 billion investment for new power stations. So,
I don’t know what this panic is all about.

On the Oilgate saga, this matter has died and I don’t know why it is coming
back here. It is dead and buried. [Interjections.] The competent
authorities in our country have investigated it, including the Public
Protector. A report was presented in this House and was adopted by all
members of it.

So, I do not understand how this matter arises, unless you didn’t agree
with the recommendations in the report, which are being implemented, by the
way. [Interjections.] So, don’t just be populists here and bring things
that have been dealt with. [Interjections.] Maybe you are conflicted and
not the report.
With regard to slime dumps and mine water, what I want to say is that the
rehabilitation and management of these dumps that have been raised here is
being dealt with by our regional office in Gauteng as per agreement between
the DME and the company involved.

On the issue of water, there is an interdepartmental task team that was set
up and the whole issue has been assessed in both the western and central
basins. It has been established that a canal will have to be erected to
ensure that the water issue is addressed. So, there is progress on that
front.

With regard to the problem of fuel shortages, I thought I addressed that in
my speech and the investigation is going on. All I can say is that the DA
wants to blame us for this, but, watch this space, when the Moerana
investigation tables a report and, please, don’t stand in our way when we
start implementing those recommendations, because you are the ones who are
going to say that this government is interfering with business and how it
is run, when, in fact, we are trying to correct the very problem of,
possibly, a totally unregulated industry.

I agree with hon member Tinto on the issues that she raised. With regard to
Mr Combrinck, he raised many issues, but I would like to respond to the
issue of whether research was done before Cabinet decided that we should
look at a seventh national regional electricity distributor.

What was done is that Cabinet confirmed the establishment of the metro Reds
and requested the Department of Minerals and Energy to go and investigate
and model the viability and sustainability of the seventh RED. That
modelling, which I assume is the study that you were looking at, is
complete and we are going back to Cabinet to say: This is what the
modelling says, which is that a seventh RED is viable.
I think I dealt with all the issues of equity and people paying different
tariffs in different places, and the cost of energy, when I answered
questions here the day before yesterday. So, yes, modelling has been done
and the modelling results will be presented to Cabinet.

I would like to agree with Mme Mathibela, on the issues that she raised,
which really are the very important, namely mine health and safety. I
should apologise that both the Deputy Minister and I didn’t have time in
our speeches to deal with this, but there is a lot that is being done in
that area.

The rate of mine accidents has decreased, but we remain concerned that, in
fact, there are still accidents, some of which result in death. We still
believe that one death is a death too many, and we are continuously
reviewing our mine health and safety regulations.

With regard to Aids, we are very involved with the industry, the companies
that are mining in this country, on various programmes around HIV and Aids.
Mr Morkel, those are very practical steps and I hope my colleague, Minister
Sonjica, took note of all those steps. It is funny that when people talk
they look at the negatives and don’t highlight the positives.

Mr Morkel was very worried about the outages in the Western Cape and he was
phoning me frantically wanting to give me some information and, by mistake,
I phoned Mr Morkel senior, because that is the number I was given. But, I
must say, he was very pleased and surprised to be phoned by a Minister.

So, although people don’t say those things, there are concerned South
Africans that want to give information and assistance in that regard. These
are very important issues you raised, and we have taken note.

With regard to Mr Morgan, I can agree with you on planning in what you said
and what we have done about it. You spoke of people with a touch of
arrogance - I though you were very arrogant in the things that you were
saying here.

Let me tell you, you say we didn’t plan for the situation in which we are.
We predicted peaking capacity and we do have plans for those in the form of
the two new power stations. As you all know, peaking power, I think I
explained it, is needed for short periods when we all suddenly get home and
use all kinds of appliances and put a huge demand on the electricity
network. So, we predicted that.

These new two power stations, which are driven by gas turbines, are
specifically designed for that, peaking capacity. With regard to the power
station that is needed for the whole day, which is known as Base Load, we
only expect to need that by 2009, at the current levels of growth. That is
what our planning has produced.
We believe that the current situation at Koeberg could not have been
foreseen. It was never foreseen, it could not have been, and I have dealt
with Koeberg. I will deal with the last issues. I have got only four
minutes.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): No, hon Minister, you have no more
minutes left. But, considering that this is your last speech in this
portfolio, I will allow you to continue.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Thank you. I have noted the concerns
from Mr Lucas around that. I think the lesson that can be learnt from that
experience is that South Africans, particularly our own research
institutions, have to make sure that our intellectual property is
protected, particularly when government has invested a lot of money in the
research and development of that technology. But, we do have a stake in
that company. Anglo American also has a stake in it, but there are lessons
to be learnt and together with the Minister of Science and Technology, the
Minister of Environmental Affairs and myself, we are working on that issue.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Please conclude.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: I am concluding. The decrease in the
allocation of electricity, I will leave that. Finally, welcoming the
Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry into the department, I just want to
say that I hope that all of you are going to give her the support that I
got in my short stint as Minister.

The people I didn’t thank were the very people who make my office run. I
don’t know where they are sitting. But, wherever you are, all the people in
the Ministry are here. They are too many to mention. Those are the foot
soldiers who make our work easy and, of course, women in mining up in the
gallery, thanks for your support. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 26 – Communications:

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Hon Chairperson, hon Cabinet colleagues,
hon members, captains of industry, distinguished guests and ladies and
gentlemen, today we celebrate Africa Day, a day that the Organisation of
African Unity declared would symbolise the collective desire and commitment
to rid our continent of all forms of exploitation and colonisation.

That spirit, inspired by great African leaders like President Kwame Nkrumah
of Ghana, was to influence future generations of Africans. One of these was
President Samora Machel of Mozambique whose mysterious death on South
African soil 20 years ago we remember this year. Another is our own
President Mbeki.

There are other significant events that mark important moments in our
history, which give me inspiration as I deliver this year’s Budget Vote
speech. There are: the 100th anniversary of the Bhambatha rebellion and the
satyagraha in commemoration of the life of Mahatma Gandhi; the historic
march of the women to the Union Buildings 50 years ago, and the Soweto
Uprising 30 years ago.

All these events are of immense significance. They provide us with an
important framework within which to evaluate the work that we have done,
and continue to do to sustain the benefits of our freedom, deepen our
democracy and create a better future for the generations to come.

Today is also Cell-C’s ``Take a Girl Child to Work’’ day. This programme
continues to be one of the country’s most creative and innovative community
social investment programmes. It exposes girls to the workplace and its
career possibilities. Our department is honoured to have been allocated a
high school in Mamelodi, which is named in memory of one of the finest
young men of our country, Stanza Bopape. I wish to acknowledge Tidimalo
Phethle and Portia Digangoane, learners from that school who are shadowing
my Director-General and myself today. [Applause.] Unfortunately, they are
not here. [Interjections.] Oh, they are! Thank you, very very much.
[Applause.] They haven’t spent much time with me, because I don’t have an
office. I have squatted; I have moved around and had dust allergies. So,
they have not been able to spend the time that they could have had with us.


Also, from KwaZulu-Natal, we have Sithabiso Khuluse from the Queensburgh
Girls High School in Durban. [Applause.] We hope that they will have been
able to learn something about the work and the challenges that Ministers
also face. No one ever thought one could be kicked out of one’s office,
even if you are a Minister! [Laughter.]

The vision of our department is to make South Africa a global leader in
harnessing information and communication technologies for socioeconomic
development. The social appropriation of the information and communication
technologies by the majority of the marginalized in our society remains a
critical challenge.

To meet these challenges, we have drawn lessons from two African proverbs:
‘`To propel a canoe forward fast, you need to paddle on both sides.’’ There
is another proverb that says: ``A fruit cannot appear on a branch unless
the branch is part of the tree.’’ This taught us to work with others, and
to balance the needs of the poor and the marginalized with those of the
industry as a whole. Our theme last year was: ``A river has to be filled by
streams.’’ Today we have to paddle our canoe on this full river.
In the spirit of Africa Day, our African Union heads of state provided us
with a vision. We have the passion, and our officials have the drive. We
are all able, willing and ready to succeed. What do we have to show for it?
I hope this speech will show that!

Government set five key focus areas to meet certain socioeconomic
development objectives by 2014. We are therefore anchoring our work within
this government agenda. The ICT sector has a critical role to play in
achieving the goal of at least 6% growth as stated in the Accelerated
Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa that the President announced
earlier this year. Investment in the ICT sector is central to the Asgisa
initiative, which is aimed at removing impediments to economic growth.

With regard to achieving higher rates of investment in our economy, in my
speech last year, I indicated that I would be establishing a digital
migration working group. I’m happy to report that the working group was
indeed formed and has been doing its work. We will receive its report soon.
The digital migration strategy is one of our priority areas of work that
will be concluded later this year.

Work related to the frequency spectrum, including consultations within the
SADC region, has advanced. Input thereon to the International
Telecommunications Union was on time. Our delegation is currently in Geneva
at the Regional Radiocommunications Conference deciding on these important
matters.
Following the allocation of funds to Sentech for the digitisation of its
signal distribution network, work has started to get us ready for the roll-
out of digital-ready infrastructure.

Last year, we also said that we would address the question of increasing
affordable access to, and thus use of, broadband. As clearly shown by
international experience, where adequate infrastructure exists, access to
it is more affordable. Experience has also shown us that where adequate
infrastructure is in abundance, this has been as a result of direct and
deliberate government intervention, particularly so in developing
countries.

We have prioritised the roll-out of broadband infrastructure in the
country. In this regard, there are three focus areas, namely, the
information superhighway, wireless broadband and international
communication network access.

As a country, we have to ensure that the broadband backbone is robust
enough to meet our socioeconomic development, business as well as the
science and research needs of our country. Our work in this regard is
continuing at a good pace in collaboration with the Department of Public
Enterprises.

Consistent with Cabinet’s declaration that ours is a developmental state,
we have decided to examine the contribution that the assets of state-owned
enterprises can make to achieve affordable broadband access in our country.
A policy decision on this matter will be announced soon.

In addition to the broadband backbone cable that links large business
centres, there is a need for wireless broadband access, especially to rural
and remote areas. Wireless broadband networks are less costly to roll out
as they do not require the digging of long trenches. It is for this reason
that we have decided to invest in it. We will be strengthening the policy
framework that encourages more players to consider investing in wireless
broadband.

The July Cabinet lekgotla last year decided that Sentech is a strategic
national asset, which has important infrastructure and expertise. I
therefore hereby announce two policy decisions with respect to Sentech:
Firstly, Sentech will form the core of our wireless broadband
infrastructure network that our country will use to advance its
socioeconomic development goals, and secondly, Sentech’s wireless broadband
infrastructure network will be expanded beyond the current footprint and
enabled to carry voice to the end-user in the provision of this service,
thus giving full effect to its multimedia licence.

Accordingly, we will be expediting the finalisation of discussions to find
an appropriate funding model that takes into account the fact that Sentech
provides and should continue to provide both public and commercial
services.
Access to international communication networks accounts for a considerable
amount of the cost to communicate. There are two policy decisions I wish to
announce. The first relates to the speed with which we will implement the
Electronics Communications Act in this regard. The second concerns the
guiding principles of our participation in the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development-led broadband network project.

In accordance with the spirit of section 3(2) of the ECA, we will ensure
affordable access to international broadband infrastructure. I will be
consulting shortly with the Independent Communications Authority of South
Africa on my intention to issue a policy directive to the Authority
regarding this matter.
This relates to the timeframes within which Icasa will ensure that, amongst
others, all arrangements regarding access to, or use of, international
cables and/or facilities do not unfairly exclude others; access to such
cables and/or facilities is provided on a cost basis; and, lastly, access
is duly regulated as access to essential facilities as provided for in
section 43 of the new Act.

I hereby declare that as a matter of policy, all holders of licences that
will qualify to be converted into individual electronic licences will have
the ability to self-provide with respect to their international traffic
within six months of the promulgation of the ECA.

In reaffirming our commitment to support the development of the African
continent and her people, we decided to be part, and the co-initiators, of
the Nepad-led initiative to build an affordable broadband network. We are
working with 22 countries in Southern and Eastern Africa to build a
terrestrial and submarine broadband network for our region. This project is
led by the Nepad e-Africa Commission, and involves in excess of 30 African
companies. The Ministers of the participating countries will be meeting in
Johannesburg in two weeks’ time, on 6 and 7 June, to consider the
recommendations of our Directors-General and Permanent Secretaries.

In this regard, I have taken a policy decision to support the decisions of
the latter’s meeting regarding the application of open, nondiscriminatory
and affordable access to these networks, and that cross-border terrestrial
and submarine cable segments of these networks can be developed, owned and
maintained, as appropriate, by special purpose vehicles.

The objective of this important project, which encompasses both coastal and
landlocked countries, is to support regional integration and our
socioeconomic objectives through providing affordable connectivity. We took
the decision to participate in this project in spite of being told
repeatedly that this was not commercially viable and it would not find
investors. I must say that we found that quite a number of investors were
interested.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Industrial Development
Corporation for responding to the request to support the Nepad e-Africa
Commission with the development of the special purpose vehicle model when
no one heeded e-Africa’s request. This is indeed what our leaders envisaged
when they adopted the Nepad principle that we ``should rely on Africa’s
resources and the resourcefulness of its people’’.

I can only say: What an Africa Day spirit! Ningadinwa nangomso. [Do
likewise even tomorrow. Thank you.]

I have instructed the director-general to invite all our mobile operators
to participate in the aforementioned project should they so wish.

As a country, we need to consider innovative and bold ways of increasing
the rate of broadband penetration. This would include examining principles
of open and nondiscriminatory access to essential ICT infrastructure at
national level. In order to assist us, I have decided to establish a
Broadband Advisory Council made up of African experts of international
calibre.

This Council will be chaired by Dr Victor Lawrence from Ghana. It includes
Dr Henry Chasia from Kenya, Ms Aissatou Dieng from Senegal and Mr
Motlhatlhedi Motlhatlhedi from Botswana. The Council will be supported by a
representative task team of South African experts, to be announced soon.
The advisory council will report to me with recommendations before the end
of the year.

The creation of an enabling policy and regulatory framework is important
for increasing competition in the ICT sector, thus reducing the cost to
communicate. This is essential to increasing the competitiveness of South
Africa’s economy.

In this regard, we took a decision that we would issue special policy
directives aimed at accelerating the reduction of these costs. Accordingly,
the department hosted two successful consultative colloquia with excellent
participation by the different stakeholders in our sector. Their report
contributed significantly to meeting our objective. I wish to take this
opportunity to thank them. I thank my Deputy for ably championing this.

In accordance with the spirit of section 3(2) of the ECA, and to ensure
affordable open access, lower prices and wider choice of access to
international ICT infrastructure, I will be consulting shortly with Icasa
on my intention to issue a policy directive to the Authority regarding the
timeframe within which it will enable all licensees of electronic
communications networks to interconnect with Telkom’s last mile network.
The Department will also be consulting with Telkom on this matter.

In order to give effect to this decision without delay, I hereby appoint Dr
Marwala to chair the Local Loop Unbundling Committee, whose task will be to
oversee the development and implementation of our local loop unbundling
process, and to make appropriate recommendations. Dr Marwala was awarded
with the Order of Mapungubwe for exceptional achievement in engineering
science by the President.

Open standards are important to foster a climate of convergence and
technological diversity and to enable a diverse range of platforms and
services that are affordable. It is government policy that open standards
in the electronic communication sector be encouraged. In addition and
consistent with the spirit reflected in the object of the Act, to ensure
the provision of a variety of quality electronic services at reasonable
prices, it is also government’s policy to support the use of diverse
technologies, particularly those that promote affordable access to ICTs.

I hereby announce my intention to issue a policy directive to Icasa to
facilitate the deployment of WCDMA and other cost-effective technologies,
taking into account, but not being limited by, the frequency spectrum
requirements for broadcasting. In this regard, priority should be accorded
to the needs of underserviced area licensees or users. In this way we will
indeed be paddling the canoe on both sides.

The four areas of activity that we are focusing on as a contribution to
broadening participation in the economy are job creation, SMME support,
skills development and universal access to ICT infrastructure and services.
In advancing universal services, our focus is on increasing the ICT
footprint. In addition to underserviced area licences issued by Icasa,
Digital Harps will be rolled out by the universal service agency in all
provinces to complement these licences.

SMMEs have proved to be the biggest contributors to economic participation
globally. Taking this into account, the department decided to prioritise
the development of SMME ICT support to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of business operations of SMMEs.

MTN has embarked on an ICT and rural entrepreneurship programme, which is
already being implemented in five provinces. It focuses on the use of ICTs
by rural women. To date 18 centres have been set up and 500 rural women
have been trained. They plan to establish 50 centres and train 1 500 women.
[Applause.]

There are several BEE and job creation initiatives that companies in our
sector are planning. Notably, Naspers will soon launch their most ambitious
empowerment deal to date through Multichoice’s biggest empowerment in the
sector. I trust that this deal will significantly increase broad-based
participation of black people in the media.
Vodacom, on the other hand, will, in support of Asgisa, and the
Johannesburg CBD renewal programme, establish a call centre in the
Johannesburg city centre and this initiative will provide 1 000 jobs. The
department, in partnership with other stakeholders from public and private
institutions, has initiated an ICT skills development programme through
further education and training colleges, aimed at increasing the number of
South Africans with ICT skills.

The programme is operational in Ekhurhuleni in Gauteng, Umfolozi in KwaZulu-
Natal, Orbit in North West and Capricorn in Limpopo. In collaboration with
the Departments of Labour and Education, we plan to upscale it to two FETs
per province by the end of 2007.

In addition, the SA Post Office is implementing just over 1 000
learnerships that will contribute to the national effort of enhancing
people’s skills. And I thank them for that.

Telkom and Vodacom have continued and improved their programmes to assist
in developing students in engineering and information technology, including
design and maintenance, in order to expand the skills at all levels. Nemisa
has also redefined its training strategy to prepare students for the new
converged environment, which embraces the whole ICT sector. We thank all of
these people for this commitment.

Access to information plays an important role in creating conditions for
meaningful participation of people in society. I wish to take this
opportunity to acknowledge the 10th anniversary of Highway Africa and the
critical role it has played in this regard under the guidance of Prof Guy
Berger.

A priority of government is improving the capacity of the state to deliver
on its mandate. In this regard we are strengthening Icasa through the
allocation of additional financial as well as human resources with the
imminent increase in the number of councillors.

The ECA will open the door by creating a vista of innovative opportunities
for entrepreneurs to enter into the market place. The competition landscape
will be such that there will no longer be any distinction between the
different types of operators. There will also be no distinction between
voice, video and data. Multiple services will be delivered on common
platforms.

This age of digitisation will be leveraged to provide competitive services
economically, effectively and efficiently. This will result in value for
money to consumers, customers, including government. To this end, the
authority is already rolling up its sleeves to embark on programmes to
issue new licences for electronic communication networks and electronic
communication services.

We now have a better alignment of state-owned enterprise strategies with
government objectives. In addition we have also developed a strategy for
improving our collaboration with stakeholders in the sector.

Our challenge is to ensure that ICTs are embraced at all levels of
government as a critical tool for socioeconomic development. In this regard
the department will soon be launching the Intergovernmental Relations Forum
on ICTs with provincial governments. This structure will facilitate a co-
ordinated development of an inclusive information society in our country.

The youth have a role to play in improving the capacity of the state to
deliver. I am happy to announce the e-cadre pilot programme launched by the
SA Post Office this past week. This pilot programme will utilise IT
graduates who have faced challenges in gaining employment to play a
facilitative role as volunteers in educating the public, and where
necessary, even SA Post Office staff on the use of these technologies,
using the outlets of the SA Post Office.

The capacity of our department has also improved. We have three new deputy
directors-general. They are sitting here. They are Mr Harry Mathabathe in
finance, Dr Keith Shongwe and Dr Harold Wesso. I wish to welcome them as
well as the new staff in the Ministry and my department. [Applause.] I have
no doubt that the director-general and the COO are already feeling the
impact of their presence.
I’d like to take this opportunity to thank our former DDGs, Mr Pakamile
Pongwana, Mr Joe Mjwara and Ms Phumele Ntombela-Nzimande, and those members
of the South African communications forum for assisting us to lay the sound
foundation, which we say we are on in order to launch into the future.

At the centre of contributing to building a better world is our commitment
to supporting the African agenda, strengthening South-South co-operation,
reform of institutions of global governance, strengthening bilateral
relations and following up on major summits and conferences.

This year, in honour of the 30th anniversary of June 16, National Youth
Day, we will be launching the Nepad e-Africa youth programme. This
initiative is aimed at engaging young people from different African
countries in the development of the information society on our continent.

Amongst other programmes developed by the e-Africa commission is the Nepad
e-schools project in which my department and the Department of Education
are participating. This African project won the accolade of “Visionary of
the Year” at the intelligent community forum awards ceremony in New York in
July 2005. [Applause.]

Our industry has also received a lot of recognition. The Canadian South
African animated and SABC-commissioned series called Magic Cellar – I hope
your children have seen it – won the highest award, the Platinum Remi award
at the world’s largest video competition in Houston, Texas.

The SA Post Office has also made South Africa proud by winning the World
Mail Award in the customer service category in Paris for its electronic
bulk mail delivery. [Applause.] Sentech has won the African ICT Achievers
Award for the most innovative ICT company in Africa. [Applause.] The branch
is beginning to bear fruit, but this is so because it is part of the tree.

Next year promises to be a very busy one. Amongst other things, South
Africa will host the 5th World Summit on Children in Broadcasting in 2007.
I am pleased to announce that in relation to the 2010 World Cup we are on
track. My Deputy will speak further on this matter. Our ICT sector people
are all pulling in the same direction and carrying the flag for South
Africa in the technology sphere. Possibly the most exciting technical
development recently is the current Multichoice Digital Video Broadcasting-
Handheld test worked at in collaboration with the SABC, Sentech and our
cellular companies.

South Africa will be one of the few countries in the world where every game
of the 2006 World Cup will be shown, using DVB-H technology. South Africa,
together with Finland, Germany, Italy and France, are all in the trial
stage and this cutting edge technology has yet to be commercially launched
anywhere in the world. South Africa is therefore showcasing the
technologies of tomorrow – today.

I hope developments like these have put paid to the doubts of those Afro-
pessimists who were suggesting that South Africa might not be ready for
2010. I am not only confident that we will meet the requirements for 2010;
I suspect we might even exceed them. [Applause.]

The Presidential International Advisory Council on the Information Society
and Development has been instrumental in keeping us abreast of
international trends and advising us on best practice. I would like to
thank them and hope that they will recognise their own contribution in our
actions.

Some of their recommendations will be reflected in the national ISAD plan
being prepared by the Presidential National Commission on the Information
Society and Development for presentation to the Cabinet.

I wish to reiterate that the Department of Communications recognises its
responsibilities in this emerging era and is committed to positioning South
Africa and its people in a proactive way to meet the challenges of a
globalising world. I therefore ask you to pass this Vote and allow us to
take our country to even higher heights.

I would like to thank the portfolio and select committees of Parliament for
the role that they have played in the development of the sector and their
continued support, as we put forth our documents within the parliamentary
processes. The past year has been particularly challenging with regards to
the two Bills, the ECA and Icasa Amendment Bill.

I’d like to pay special tribute to the MEC of Social Development in
Gauteng, our former and very able chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on
Communications, Mr Kgaogelo Lekgoro. I hope he is in the House. We thank
him and wish him well in his new job. To many others who have left us, we
also say: Siyabonga. [Thank you.]

I’d also like to thank my Deputy Minister most sincerely for the manner in
which we have co-operated to improve our department’s responsiveness to the
ICT needs of our society, in particular for driving the processes to reduce
the cost to communicate and for championing legislation through Parliament.

To Ms Lyndall Shope-Mafole, the director-general, I thank her most
sincerely. She has been a beacon of strength and courage. She has
demonstrated strategic leadership, not only to the department but to the
sector as a whole and to the continent. I say: Kea leboha. [Thank you.] An
organisation is only as strong and as powerful as its people: Re leboha
[Thank you] to Team DoC. Thank you. [Applause.]
Mr G G OLIPHANT: Chairpersons, hon members, friends, colleagues, comrades
and members of the industry who are here, later on today or this evening we
will bid farewell to the former Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on
Communications, Comrade Kgaogelo Lekgoro who is now the MEC for social
development in Gauteng. [Applause.] Thank you. We wish him well in his new
deployment, which is nearer home, and his family.

Comrade Lekgoro leaves behind a legacy of hard work, dedication, commitment
and absolute tolerance for divergent views in the vibrant portfolio
committee process. Our loss here in Parliament is a huge gain for the
Gauteng provincial executive council.

Let me also take this opportunity to thank those committee members and
staff who heeded the call to bring a girl-child to work today; and to
welcome all the girls who have come to Parliament and elsewhere; and also
for their company throughout the day, their valuable time and keen interest
they have shown in what we do. We hope that our activities today will
influence your future career decisions. We also thank Cell-C for their
initiative in this regard.

Today, comrades, the 25th of May, is Africa Day, the significance of which
we debated in this Chamber this morning. Most countries in the continent
have accorded this day the respect it deserves by declaring it a public
holiday. Although we in South Africa may not have declared this a public
holiday, we join our brothers and sisters across the continent in
celebrating this day. We need to find more creative ways of participating
in the celebration of this very important day in the diary to enhance
African solidarity. The debate in the House today was one example of such
creativity and we are grateful.

Today, as we debate the Budget Vote on Communications, the National Union
of Mineworkers, which is the biggest trade union within Cosatu, the biggest
miners union in Africa, is also having its national congress to map out
their strategies in this sector. We wish them well in their deliberations.

Coming back to this sector, the information and communication technology
sector is a multibillion rand dynamic and vibrant sector, which continues
to grow in leaps and bounds, under the favourable policy conditions created
by the ANC government. Over the past decade, our country has experienced
remarkable policies, policy directives and a regulatory framework which
sought to enhance socioeconomic development by promoting a high quality of
multimedia services which are fully competitive, affordable and lead to
consumer satisfaction.

Some of the challenges in this sector include, amongst others, lowering the
cost of communication; providing universal service and access to those in
rural areas, especially the poor; providing adequate funding for
infrastructure roll-out and closing the digital divide that still engulfs
our country, more specifically in government; and skills development,
skills development and skills development. Attracting new skills and
retaining those skills inside the country is presently a more challenging
and critical issue.

I am pleased to state that our country has recorded remarkable progress in
ensuring sustainable development of this sector over the past 10 years. We
have moved away from the old “poskantoor, draadloos en koerant mentaliteit”
[post office, wireless and newspaper mentality] to New Age postal services,
advanced telephony, multichannel television and computers with Internet
services.

Presently, the SA Post Office is in a position to provide services such as
the one-stop shop for government information, transactions and services; a
financial services centre enabling citizens in rural and urban areas to
transact safely and efficiently; a preferred authentication services
provider facilitating electronic communications and transactions for
government.

Now that we are at the crossroads of a convergent environment, the SA Post
Office has enhanced its basic services such as postage stamps, letter and
courier services and continues to expand its services. They are indeed
moving with the times. Our communities today can go to the post office to
access services such as banking facilities, public internet, collection of
ID documents, motor licence renewals, registration services and social
grants services through the biometric system.

Telkom has played and continues to play a pivotal role in the development
of fixed-line telephone services in the country. [Interjections.] Somebody
is complaining about the price. Now, with the recent licensing of the
second national operator, we can only envisage that there will be economic
growth and competition, affordable and better services, more jobs and
skills development, infrastructure roll-out, and an advance in universal
service and access.

The roll-out of computers to schools, the multipurpose community centres,
post offices, workplaces and some homes, has made it possible for our
people to communicate effectively, conveniently and expeditiously. At some
point last year we were informed that several companies planned to roll out
computers and laptops, an initiative that we welcome. We intend to have
further discussions with the companies concerned in order to ensure that we
are kept abreast of developments in this area and to encourage them to
continue with the good work.

We wish to congratulate the SABC on the excellent manner in which they kept
the country informed during the past local government elections. They are
indeed the storyteller of the nation and deserve a round of applause.
[Applause.]
The SA Yearbook, the recent edition, gives an impressive historical
overview of the evolution of broadcasting services in South Africa. For
example, the first radio broadcast in South Africa took place under the
auspices of the SA Railways in the 1920s. The SABC is now a fully-fledged
public broadcaster. In 2005, Madam Sheila, the SABC national radio network
comprised 15 public broadcast radio stations and three commercial radio
stations, broadcasting in 11 official languages with an average daily reach
of about 20 million adult listeners. Is that not impressive? [Applause.]
[Interjections.]

Regarding TV, the SABC comprises three free-to-air channels and one
satellite pay-TV channel that has audiences in Africa. There are more that
4 million licensed TV households in South Africa. We have the largest
television audience on the continent and my colleagues will elaborate more
on this subject and other important achievements.

Resources have been committed in this budget to ensure that SABC 4 and SABC
5 become operational as soon as possible. We are further encouraged by the
progress made with Sentech, Nemisa, Siemens and other stakeholders to
develop a multichannel strategy that should result in the delivery of more
services to the citizenry.

The 2010 World Cup broadcasting capacity remains a major challenge for the
SABC and other television channels. Soccer-loving people in our country, in
the continent and the world expect the best from you and we will have no
room for disappointment. We can only wish you well.

Regarding mobile telephones, the mobile operators are contributing
handsomely to the socioeconomic development of this country through their
community service telephones. The coverage for the mobiles operating in the
country is very remarkable, for instance Vodacom has 20 million
subscribers, Cell-C has 3,2 million subscribers and MTN has 10,3 million
subscribers.

South Africa presently has 4 million Internet subscribers, which is an
improvement compared to the price of broadband in the country. We have
average usage of the service in the country. Industry, government and other
stakeholders need to encourage utilisation of this efficient tool.

The committee will be conducting hearings on issues of convergence in the
Internet industry, such as Internet protocol telephony and Internet
protocol telephony networks. We will also be engaging government in these
discussions. South Africa must have Internet protocol telephony by 2010.
Government IT officers should look at the best electronic communications
legislation in the region, if not the best in the world, to advance
government services for our people.

Icasa has recorded many successes in this dynamic environment. There are
still many challenges ahead, which call for more capital and human
resources from government. The Minister has already referred to some of the
allocations that have been committed to this body. The Electronic
Communications Act and the Independent Communications Authority of South
Africa Amendment Bill are important instruments to take us into this new
environment we have been speaking about. For example, Newsbreak 082152, a
news-by-telephone service, is one such excellent example. Many more
exciting multiple-platform services are in the offing; watch this space.

More resources are needed, Minister, to ensure that Icasa is able to retain
capable staff in order to regulate effectively in the convergence
environment. More resources are also needed for streamlining our state-
owned enterprises like Telkom, the SA Post Office, Sentech, the SABC,
Nemisa and our Icasa. We are satisfied that the MTEF provides for adequate
funding and scope for service delivery, job-creation and poverty reduction.
More co-ordination is needed though to ensure that we communicate our South
African message of hope and a better life for all in a country with
encouraging possibilities.

Regarding the international front, the Department of Communications’ vision
is to become a global leader in harnessing ICTs for socioeconomic
development. Their track record in the country and elsewhere in the world
proves that they are indeed equal to the task and need to be congratulated.

According to the third Press Freedom Index by Reporters Without Borders,
released on World Press Freedom Day on 3 May 2005, South Africa ranked 26th
in the world, coming ahead of countries such as the UK, Greece, Italy,
Spain, Australia and Japan. South Africa, as a member of the International
Telecommunications Union, has been active in its reform through, for
instance, chairing its restructuring committee, and the list is endless.
The Minister has already alluded to some of the achievements that we have
made as a country, internationally.

Let me conclude by saying that on Tuesday we finalised, concluded,
completed and finished the Independent Communications Authority of South
Africa Amendment Bill deliberations. The report to that effect will soon be
tabled.

I want to thank all members of the portfolio committee, the department, the
press and everybody who participated in those vibrant deliberations. In
particular, we are very thankful to our Presidency for applying its mind on
this matter and proving to all and sundry that our young democracy rests on
solid foundations.

The executive, the judiciary and legislature are becoming stronger and
stronger than ever before. This young democracy, our democracy, is intact.
With the wheel, the shield and the spear on the one hand, and the black,
green and gold colours on the other, the ANC supports this Budget Vote. Ke
a leboga. [I thank you.] [Applause.]

Ms M SMUTS: Sir, this should have been the Minister’s moment: the
Electronic Communications Act would have been seen as her monument. The
reason why it is not so, although she has made dramatic strides here today
– dramatic towards ascending the pedestal - is that she has proved unable
to let go of the idea of executive control of telecommunications.

She takes this position, despite, or perhaps because of, the fact that the
two new communications laws have once and for all, as a result of
convergence, done away with the differing levels of ministerial involvement
that existed under the old Telecommunications Act, on the one side, and the
old broadcasting laws, on the other.

For these 10 years, first Satra and then Icasa needed her concurrence
before their proposed regulations could be gazetted. By contrast, the old
IBA was an autonomous regulator and did a far finer job governing the
broadcast sector and freeing up the airwaves than Satra or Icasa were ever
allowed to do to date.

I wonder sometimes, when there is such pressure on pricing from a
government concerned about the cost of doing business and rightly so,
whether the hon Minister reflects on how much - not all of it - of the
current trouble she could have avoided if she had not blocked Mandla
Langa’s Icasa from reducing Telkom’s tariffs under the price-cap regime
after the tariff-setting power passed from her to the regulator. I think we
could have avoided a lot of the trouble.

But, of course, she inherited a previous Minister’s undertakings. She has
my sympathy; we have discussed this matter before. The clear lesson that
emerges is that independent regulators are there for a good reason and they
must be allowed to regulate in the public interest. Those tariffs should
have dropped in 2001, as Icasa wanted. This is because monopoly pricing
power results in inefficient markets and, in the case of industries like
this one that serve to create inputs to other industries, this will
inevitably result in increased costs of doing business.

Now Icasa, under the new laws, will regulate the full, converged field of
electronic communications, free of executive concurrence and control, and
only the objects of the Act bind its regulation. This is as it should be.

There is a demonstrable conflict of interests when Ministries, which drive
and conclude the licensing deals that bring in the strategic equity
partners, then remain shareholding managers as in the case of Telkom,
and/or remain concurrent regulation makers as with the SNO
Telecommunications until the ECA is in force, or which, in any other way
such as controlling the appointment and performance of regulators, exert
direct or indirect influence on the market. There is a demonstrable
conflict of interest.

Now Thintana was former Minister Jay Naidoo’s baby. The Second National
Operator Telecommunications is the present Minister’s very own baby. She
took over the licensing under a section that was written very badly – not
by me – to allow spectrum and cell licences to be either auctioned or
issued under the traditional beauty contest model.

She was, frankly, ultra vires when she gave shareholdings to two beauties
whom Icasa had twice declared too ugly to participate. I said so at the
time, but South Africa was so desperate for a competitor for Telkom by then
that any protest petered out and everyone was plainly relieved to have Tata
and the SNO.

But let’s be clear: the need for independent regulation therefore increases
because of the role the Minister has played with the SNO. And it just beats
me - I place it on record - that the department tried before the
Constitutional Review Committee to take the “I” out of Icasa again, in so
many words. We flatly refused any such thing in this committee last year
when we started on the Icasa Bill and when it was also proposed. Now the
executive - the Minister - appears to be trying another avenue, and setting
her face against the President’s letter to Parliament on top of it. Let me
just say this one thing: If the hon Minister does not appreciate the
gravity of this matter then we have a problem, and it is a constitutional
problem.

There is plenty of scope for the Minister in her policy-making powers and
even in the now reduced policy-direction-giving powers under the ECA, our
new law. She now has the role that she should have been playing to date.
Indeed, the string of announcements made today demonstrates that scope. It
demonstrates the scope available to her without intruding or trying to take
control.

We will want to digest and study her announcements. What a speech,
Minister! But let me say that the whole sector, all consumers, will cheer
her on in creating cost-based access to essential services like the
existing undersea cables under the new ECA, likewise for her intention,
through Icasa, to trigger a timeframe for creating shared access to the
local loop.

I am pleased also to have fuller information on the thinking behind
Sentech’s wireless broadband roll-out, although the impact of that roll-out
on the new market structure created under the ECA still needs to be thought
through. I am very pleased to have the fuller information and
argumentation.

When we concluded the Electronic Communications Act here last year, I said
that it was presented to the House as much by the DA as the ANC. With the
exception of those sections and chapters - they are few - to which we
objected, as well as areas which require a rethink, I am happy to help
defend the ECA against those voices now rising with assorted warnings, dire
and otherwise. The voices come, not surprisingly, from big operators. They
come, more surprisingly, from competition authority people, whom we after
all invited into our legislative process.

I would like to say that we still believe that telecoms must eventually be
regulated on competition issues by the Competition Commission, but we are
persuaded that it will be a long time before our dominant telco can be kept
in check just by ex post penalties. They come too late, when damage has
been done.

It is typical of telecoms anywhere that there is a dominant original
natural monopoly operator that has more information than the regulator. It
is typical of duopoly models, the one we have been pursuing until now, that
they do not compete on pricing. And that is why we need an independent
regulator to oversee pricing where appropriate, to police and enforce
access to existing networks, especially now that we have opened up the
market.

Icasa has been given a set of tools, economic and legal, to restrain
dominance, on the one side, and to open up the markets, on the other. It is
my view that communications in South Africa will stand or fall on the
success or failure of Icasa’s implementation of these powers. If this
flops, then we might as well declare communications an open commercial
contest and let the Competition Commission catch them, if and when it can,
after the fact. And very good luck to them, because there will be
collusion, cartels, price-fixing, and so forth that will follow.

Icasa would then be reduced to making frequency plans, policing for
frequency interference and licensing out spectrum. The message I am trying
to convey is that if we don’t look after Icasa now, we might as well start
reducing its role. The thing to reflect upon is that there would then
really be no role, whatsoever, left for the hon Minister. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms M R MORUTOA: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members of Parliament,
members of the public, I greet you all. Sometimes I really wish I was
thirty years younger. [Interjections.] I’ll tell you why.

Ms M SMUTS: [Inaudible.]

Ms M R MORUTOA: Yes, exactly to deal with you, Dene. This Budget Vote has
confirmed to me that the wise words from the President’s state of the
nation address, namely “that today is better than yesterday, and we are
confident that tomorrow will be better than today”, are definitely true and
they do relate to the state of the nation at present.
This reminds me of my background as a child who grew up in a rural area, at
a place called Kubusi, in a small town called Stutterheim in the Eastern
Cape. Men in this area migrated to the cities, to places such as
Johannesburg and other towns in the Free State where there were mines. If
anything happened within the family their wives were left with no other
option but to travel for more than 10 kilometres to send a telegraphic
message, which they were not even sure would reach the particular person it
was intended for. The message could even reach that person a month or more
later.

This is how poor communication was during those years for people who were
disadvantaged. I hope you take note of that, Dene.

This makes me wonder, every time I speak about communication, how the ANC
managed to be established as early as 1912 and was able to communicate its
messages successfully to become such a huge organisation.

This year we are celebrating the 50th anniversary of the women’s march to
Pretoria. Just recently we celebrated the Freedom Charter in Kliptown. I’m
mentioning these celebrations precisely because the success of these
historical events was an indication of how the people of South Africa
managed to communicate in the face of the oppression they experienced under
the apartheid regime. [Applause.]

We all know that during those days there was no freedom of speech and no
open lines of communication. This is the reason why when the ANC came to
power the Cabinet committed itself to promoting the communication sector.

In February 1996 the South African Cabinet committed itself to the
implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action, which since then has
become an instrument of note in the advancement of women in the
communication sector.

The Department of Communication accepted a gender equity policy for the
broadcasting, telecommunications and postal sectors in order to give effect
to issues of gender perspective in all policies and programmes of the South
African government.

This was driven by the notion that women should be able to participate in
the telecommunications-driven information society on an equitable basis. It
was also resolved that the gender focus be placed on recruitment, training
and operational policies and practices in the ICT sector.

Dene, ungandibophi ulwimi ndingakwazi ukuthetha. [Kwahlekwa.] [Dene, please
do not cut my tongue so that I may not be able to speak again. [Laughter.]]

The department then took a conscious decision to improve the standard of
living and status of women in its employment in order to create a
representative sector reflective of South Africa’s demographics, and to
reduce gender inequalities with regard to access to and control over the
resources and benefits of deployment.

While I’m appreciative of what the department has done, a question arises
when I go through the savings indicated on Budget Vote 26: Communications.
I need someone to explain to me the reason for delays in most of the
programmes initiated to improve the quality of life of disadvantaged
people, especially those in the rural areas and some in urban areas, result
in savings.

This becomes questionable because the utilisation of those savings does not
focus on continuation of the programmes that the money was initially meant
for.

One of the gender implications of the Accelerated Shared Growth Initiative
for SA, popularly known as Asgisa, is that unemployment is coupled with the
fact that amongst the ranks of those who are unemployed there is a great
disparity and inequity in how people are remunerated. This problem has
gender dimensions to it in that it is often women who are allocated low-
paying jobs.

The following tells us how the ANC-led government has always been
passionate about improving the lives of the poor, mainly women in the rural
areas. The Department of Communications conducted a gender audit in support
of previously mentioned endeavours. The findings of the audit were used as
a guideline for the sector’s gender equity policy.

On the occasion of the National Women’s Day celebrations in South Africa
House in London on 7 August 2002 ... Niyangxola. [You are making noise.]
... the Minister of Communications observed that: At present parastatals in
South Africa have a large number of women serving on boards. I can mention
here several parastatals that are led by women. For instance, chairpersons
of Telkom and the SA Post Office, Sapo, the CEO of Sentech are women. Forty-
three percent of staff serving in the Independent Communications Authority
of SA, Icasa, are women.

HON MEMBERS: Malibongwe! [Praise!] [Applause.]

Ms M R MORUTOA: The aforementioned appointment of women to senior positions
in the communications sector does give rise to the question of women in
training in this important sector. Therefore, there is a dire need for more
money to be allocated in the area of training of our young women.

This necessitates that one thanks Cell-C for their campaign of taking a
girl-child to work. I know that the Department of Communications has taken
a significant step by involving young women in the ICT sector through
training programmes offered at Nemisa and the Institute for Software &
Satellite Applications.

This information needs to be disseminated down to the people on the ground
by us, members of Parliament, when doing our constituency work.

Siyavuya kakhulu ngomsebenzi owenziwa liSebe loNxibelelwano, wokuphucula
impilo yoomama emakhaya. Enye into indlela yonxibelelwano izisa inxaxheba
ebantwini, ngakumbi koomama abanamashishini amancinci anjengeevenkile
ezaziwa njengezpaza, apho kuthengiswa amakhadi eeselfoni, nakwabanye
abathengisi, ngokuvula ushishino lweemfonomfono ezikoneni zezitalato
ezidolophini nasezilokishini. Kodwa yonke le nto iyacotha ezilalini.

Simvile ke noMphathiswa uEssop Pahad kule veki igqithileyo esixelela
ngokwanda kwaMaziko oLuntu aSetyenziselwa iZinto ezaHlukileyo, ii-
Multipurpose Community Centres. Abaluleke kakhulu ke la maziko eluntwini
ngenxa yokuba abonelela ngolwazi ngezinto ezenziwa ngurhulumente ukuphucula
impilo yabantu. Mandenze umzekelo. Xa ufuna ipasi, uyakwazi ukulufumana
uncedo kula maziko. Nabantu abafuna ukuchazelwa ngezinto ezinxulumene
nezentlalontle bayavuna apha kula maziko.

La maziko anazo neekhompyuta ezinganceda abantwana nabantu abafuna
ukuchwetheza amaxwebhu aqulathe imbali ngezifundo zabo namava
ngokwengqesho. Iyaziwa into yokuba abantwana bethu abanazo iikhompyuta
emakhaya. Ayanceda ke la maziko ukuze bakwazi ukuthumela amaxwebhu abo
aqulathe imbali ngezifundo zabo namva ngokwengqesho kwiindawo abafuna
imisebenzi kuyo.

Ndifuna ukuyala abantu abanamashishini athengisa amakhadi omoya weeselfoni
ukuba bangahendwa ngabantu abafana naba bebebhale kwiphephandaba i-City
Press kule Cawe igqithileyo, besithi urhulumente ufuna ukubenza amahlwempu
xa eza nomthetho onxulumene neeselfoni oza kuphucula uphuhliso
lwamashishini abo. Lo Mthetho, obizwa ngokuba yi-Regulation of Interception
of Communication and Provision of Communication-related Information Act,
wenzelwe ukuba kubekho ulawulo kwimalike yamakhadi omoya weeselfoni
noweefowuni. Kuthiwa abantu abathenga la makhadi mabazichaze ukuba
bangoobani na. Kufuneka iinombolo zabo zezazisi qha, hayi enye into. Enkosi
kakhulu. [Laphela ixesha.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[We appreciate the work done by the Department of Communications, which
seeks to better the lives of women in rural areas. This way, people,
particularly women who have small businesses like spaza shops that also
sell cell phone cards and others involved in the telecommunications
business who run their businesses from the side of the street in the city,
will have easy access to information that is vital for their businesses.
But all this takes time to reach rural areas.
We heard Minister Essop Pahad when he talked about multi-purpose community
centres last week. These centres are very important because they provide
information to people about government’s development programmes, which are
aimed at improving people’s lives. For instance, if someone needs an
identity document, these centres can assist in that regard. People can also
receive certain information that they require about welfare and social
services from them.

There are also computer laboratories that children and older people can use
to type information about the history of their education as well as their
CVs. It is a known fact that most of our children do not have access to
computers, especially at home. This kind of access will enable them then to
send their CVs to places of employment when they seek employment.

I would like to caution people who are in the commercial business of cell
phone cards not to be influenced by an article that appeared in last
Sunday’s City Press, which reported that the government seeks to drive them
to poverty with its introduction of the Regulation of Interception of
Communication and Provision of Communication-related Information Act. The
aim of the Act is to regulate the cell phone cards market. It only requires
people to identify themselves. It is only their identity numbers that are
needed, and nothing else. Thank you. [Time expired.]]

Ms S C VOS: Chairperson, it is obvious that given the minutes that the IFP
has at its disposal we cannot interrogate this Budget Vote exhaustively,
but merely highlight the areas of which we believe mention needs to be
made.

In response to the announcement you’ve made today, Minister, well done and
wow! It really is your best ever budget, an action woman. And who would’ve
thought that you have a member of the IFP here acting as your personal
imbongi. [Applause.]

Of course, there is much that needs to be said about the department, about
the Independent Communications Authority – Icasa; Sentech; the SABC; the
Post Office; the second national operator - SNO; the Universal Service
Agency; Nemisa and, crucially, policy formulation. And it is excellent work
that is clearly being done and this is why the IFP will support this
budget, and especially after today’s dramatic developments.

The urgent need for aggressive consumer protection throughout the
communications sector, accelerated competition and upgrading and roll-out
of national infrastructure are, once more, at the top of the list of
concerns for the IFP. Luckily, they are concerns shared by the department.

So, Minister, we’re sorry to have to now move from positive to negative,
and highlight the events of this week when, once again, you – we assume –
through your director-general and the compliant ANC majority in the
portfolio committee signalled government’s intention to, in effect, control
the selection, removal and performance appraisal of Icasa councillors.

Many have hopes, and some have very high hopes, that the Electronic
Communications Act will rapidly liberalise South Africa’s communications
landscape for the better. Much, we have always known, will depend on the
capacity of Icasa and the ability of Icasa councillors to apply their minds
in terms of this Act and, indeed, the Constitution of the Republic expertly
and, crucially, independently.

Unfortunately, we must now dispel ourselves of any illusion that the
regulator will be able to act entirely independently of government, and the
Minister of Communications and by extension the party-political control of
the ANC majority.

The die has long been cast, when it appears that government’s intention has
always been to exert an iron grip on the regulator and its councillors who
operate in an environment in which the Minister has an open conflict of
interests and a shareholding in some of the dominant players in both the
telecommunications and broadcasting sectors. The IFP will obviously have
more to say on this matter when the redrafted Icasa Amendment Bill, once
again, returns to this House next week. And, of course, it will be approved
by the ANC majority, like its predecessor, which was mercifully rejected by
the President.

However, the IFP wishes to record in this debate that the means by which
the department recently manoeuvred to overturn decisions of this House, and
instead effect changes to its liking in the NCOP relating to the Icasa
Amendment Bill, and specifically the powers of the Minister over Icasa
councillors, were nothing short of disgraceful and, as it turned out for
the department, embarrassing.

It is a memorable day when a member of this House has to thank the
President, and by extension the executive arm of government, for exercising
oversight over Parliament, memorable too when one hears Mr Oliphant also
thanking the President for doing so. The fact that the Icasa Amendment Bill
was sent back to this House for redrafting is a ringing tribute to our
fledgling democracy and something about which we can all be very proud,
notwithstanding the outcome this week, in which the Minister has gotten
what she wanted, again, but this time skirting by a hair’s breadth the
tricky issue of constitutionality.

One wonders how Icasa will ever manage to exercise its authority in the
rates regime arena with the Minister a Telkom shareholder. However, to be
fair, Minister, your announcement with regard to the local loop today
cannot have champagne corks popping in the corridors of Telkom this
afternoon. This is really, simply, a fabulous development.

The success of cellular uptake throughout South Africa has a mirror side.
We all know the tragedy of the majority of citizens not being able to
afford fixed line telephony and in particular access to the Internet. This
comes at a time when government has put the acquisition and utilisation of
knowledge at the forefront of nation-building. As Telkom continues to
record massive profits, for the time being at least, we wish the SNO
Godspeed in its uptake and outreach.

The negative impact on our learners of being cut off from the Internet and
all that it offers, and their hampered ability to compete in a global
knowledge-based world has to be devastating. The IFP therefore fully
supports Sentech receiving in this tranche some of the funding it requires
to help it start upgrading its tired and outdated infrastructure, and the
announcement, Minister, that you’ve made today regarding Sentech is another
major development, which we fully support. This investment will enable, as
you have so clearly pointed out, enhanced wireless connectivity and could
finally enable cheap and reliable universal access for citizens in both
urban and rural areas, and especially to our learners. Your wireless
broadband announcements are also applauded and welcomed.

Now, once again, the praise singing continues, but it is a pity that the
issue of Icasa and its independence has yet again, from our perspective,
somewhat overshadowed much of the outstanding work of this department and
all of its multifaceted components.

With the little time left we have to salute the Post Office for its
remarkable turnaround and, in particular, Post Bank for what appears to be
the huge success of its low-cost banking product.

Once again, Minister, the IFP supports this budget and especially the
important announcements you’ve made today, which we look forward to being
able to interrogate more thoroughly. Thank you. [Applause.]

uMnu S E KHOLWANE: Somlomo, tiNdvuna nemaSekela ato, malunga
eSishayamtsetfo, baholi beTelitiko leTekutsintsana, baholi betimboni
kulomkhakha wetekutsintsana kanye nabo bonkhe labasivakashele lamuhla,
ngingakayicali inkhulumo-mphikiswano yami ngiyatsandza kuhalalisela lona
wekunene labenguSihlalo weLikomiti leTekutsintsana longangaMnu Kgaogelo
Lekgoro emsebentini wakhe lomusha. Sitsi ndlela-nhle, babe. Chubeka
usebentele sive. [Tandla.] (Translation of Siswati paragraph follows.)

[Mr S E KHOLWANE: Chairperson, Ministers and Deputy Ministers, members of
the National Assembly, all leaders in the Department of Communications,
leaders of industries in the sector and distinguished guests, before I
enter into this debate, I would like to congratulate the hon member Mr
Kgaogelo Lekgoro, who was the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on
Communications. We wish you well in your new position and hope that you
will go on to serve this nation with continued fervour. [Applause.]]

Chairperson, at our 51st national congress in Stellenbosch in 2002 it was
noted without any doubt that communication plays a major role in deepening
our democracy. It promotes a culture of human rights as advocated in the
Freedom Charter that was adopted at the Congress of the People at Kliptown
on 26 June 1955. I so wish, hon Morutoa, that I was born at that time
because you said that you wished to be 30 years old and I also wish to be
that old.

As a key pillar in the transformation of our country as a developing state,
it is also understood that central to Parliament’s processes is engagement
with the public and this budget debate forms part of those processes.
Therefore, the resolution of dedicating parliamentary radio and TV
channels, that we took some years ago in Stellenbosch, should be
established to increase access to information by the people in general,
particularly the poor, was an informed decision.

In my view, there is no doubt that it is shared by the majority of our
people. This resolution remains more relevant today than it was then. This
is because, presently, the only TV channel dedicated to parliamentary
proceedings is through subscription.
As much as we understand that the SABC command a lot of support or viewers
in terms of TV, in the same vein we should remember that there are still
millions of our fellow South Africans who cannot access both TV and radio
channels which are provided by the SABC. Unfortunately those people happen
to be poor and cannot afford even to subscribe.

However, we believe that the research that will be conducted by the
universal service agent on the definition of universal services and service
and access in terms of the broadcasting environment as detected by the
Electronic Communication Bill will be instrumental in ensuring that in the
future all our people do participate in these public debates in particular.

We should also note the development that SABC’s terrestrial TV channels
have devoted about 17% of their time during prime time to news and news
related programmes. I think that has been a major achievement. [Applause.]

Ngalesikhatsi Mengameli Welive etfula inkhulumo yakhe esiveni, mhla
titintsatfu kuNdlovana kulomnyaka losetulu watsi: Sive sonkhana sesingene
esigabeni selitsemba, njengaloku sisho kutsi lamuhla sekuncono kunayitolo.

Kugcizelela kuloku, ase ngente umzekeliso ngendzawo letfolakala lapha
ngasemphumalanga neNaspoti, lekutsiwa yiMatsulu. Kuleminyaka leyendlulile
yakhelwa liposi, kodvwa intfo lebuhlungu kutsi alizange selichunyaniswe
nebuchakachaka betekutsintsana. (The post office was not online.)Loko
kwabengela kutsi leliposi libe lekuposa nekutfola tincwadzi nje kuphela.
Loko kwawugongonya kakhulu umphakatsi waseMatsulu.

Kodvwa lamuhla ngenca yebuholi kanye nekutimisela kwakho Ndvuna, kanye
nebuholi betemaposi nikwente kwaciniseka kwekutsi imiphakatsi
lebeyisesimeni lesifanana nalena yaseMatsulu ikwati kwekutsi igcine
seyitfola inzuzo ebuchakachakeni betekutsintsana ngendlela lefanelekile.

Loku kuniketa imiphakatsi lefanana nalena yaseBhushbuckridge, eXimungwe
kanye naleminye imiphakatsi kwekutsi ngalelinye lilanga nabo
bayawuchunyaniswa nalobuchakachaka. Njengobe sisho setfu tsine maSwati
sitsi; akuvelwa kanyekanye kungesiwo emadlebe embongolo.

Ngenca yekutsi emagatja emaposi atsite citsi saka nalo lonkhe lelive
njengaloku alinganiselwa eti 2 000, loko kwenta kutsi kube lula kakhulu
kubantfu, ikakhulu labatfolakala esigabeni sesibili kutemnotfo, batfole
lusito dvutane kusukela ebuchakachakeni kuye kutetimali njengaloku sati
kutsi bantfu labanyenti sebavule boMzansi Akhawunti emaposini. (Translation
of Siswati paragraphs follows.)

[When the President delivered his state of the nation address on 3 February
2006, he said: “…our country has entered its Age of Hope… today is better
than yesterday ..."

To emphasise this, I would like to make an example of a place that lies in
the eastern part of Nelspruit, called Matsulu. In the past few years a new
post office was built but it did not receive an Internet connection. This
resulted in the post office being used to send and to receive mail only.
This proved to be a problem for the people of Matsulu.

Today, because of your leadership and dedication, Minister, working with
the heads of the post office you have made it possible, for other areas
that were in a similar position as that in Matsulu, to receive Internet
connections.

This has given communities such as the one in Bushbuckridge, in Ximungwe
and other communities hope that they too will one day be connected to the
Internet. As the saying goes, Rome was not built in a day.

The fact that post office branches that have been built around the country
today are estimated at 2 000, makes it easier, especially for those in the
second economy, to have access to the Internet for all, including financial
purposes. As we all know many people have opened the Mzansi account that is
now available at the post office.]
Last week, when the President was responding to questions in the House, he
made mention that sometimes the mere fact that we have  these technologies
or infrastructure does not address our problems which we are facing as a
country. Indeed, I agree with that assertion made by the President, because
as long as people are unable to utilise those technologies, those
facilities become useless to that particular community.

We appreciate the fact that in most of our post offices, public Internet
terminals have been installed. However, we should register a concern that
most of the personnel in the post offices are not in a position to operate
these technologies.

The question that we should be asking ourselves is what more should be done
about the communities. Are these technologies utilised optimum? If the
answer is no, then what should be done? I am glad because the Minister, in
her address, indicated that Sapo has engaged in the ICADA programme. That
programme precisely will ensure that those graduates go and educate the
public on how to use these technologies and facilities.

Ngalesikhatsi sisaye ekhefini njengeSishayamtsetfo, ngike ngavakashela
emaposini ngacondzanisa ngco nangesikhatsi bantfu labadzala labahola ngaso
imali yabo yempenisheli kanye nalabanye labatfola imali yetondlo nalokunye.
Nangibutabuta batsi, impela lamuhla sekuncono kunayitolo. Abasafoli
emalayinini kuze batfole impenisheli yabo. [Tandla.] Baya nome ngunini
eposini bayewutfola timali tabo. Nangabe loko kungesiyo inchubekela embili
kusho kutsi angiyati-ke inchubekela embili kutsi iyini. (Translation of
Siswati paragraph follows.)

[Just as we were on break, as the National Assembly, I visited the post
office. It was exactly at the time when senior citizens were receiving
their pension payouts, and others, the child grants. When I asked around,
people said today is indeed better than yesterday - when they had to wait
in long queues to get their payouts. [Applause.] They said, they could now
go to the post office at any time and still receive the money. If this is
not progress than I don’t know what is!]

Furthermore, I appreciate the fact that the department has allocated more
money in terms of programme 6, which addresses finance and  shareholder
management. Indeed we should strengthen that programme so that the
department is able to ensure that we monitor the shares that we have in
these public entities. We would particularly be able to influence their
decision to ensure that those decisions benefit our people in general.

On 5 September 1998, His Excellency Dr Fidel Castro, better known as the
President of Cuba, in his address at the Hector Peterson memorial service
in Soweto said, that victory is not only achieved with arms, it is also
achieved many times without arms. I don’t practise the philosophy of
Mahatma Gandhi, but history has shown that many and great battles have been
won fundamentally with ideas. That is why I always say the first thing is
the idea, the second is the struggle for ideas and the third is to triumph
with sweat and blood if necessary for those ideas to be achieved.
[Applause.]

It is precisely for that reason that on 16 June this year, we will be
celebrating the 30th anniversary of the 1976 student uprising. Who were
these students? Why did the then regime kill them? What crime did they
commit to be murdered? Which ideas were they defending?

I don’t doubt in my mind that these students were defending a feeling with
which we were all born - everyone without exception - and that is a sense
of human dignity. Indeed those students were sacrificed for that dignity.

Before I close, there is a problem here. Maybe we must embark on an
education process. Someone here was saying that the letter was referred by
the President to the Minister. That is not correct. The letter was
referred, in particular, to the Speaker of Parliament, so that we in the
Portfolio Committee on Communications could deal with the matter so raised.


We must set that record straight. I am not sure what the Minister has done
to the hon Smuts. She hates the Minister. I don’t know why. Maybe you
should slaughter for your ancestors, Minister. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Please take your seat, hon
member.

Ms M SMUTS: Would you allow me to object please? It can’t possibly be
parliamentary - it is flatly incorrect in any case - but it can’t possibly
be parliamentary to suggest that one member hates a Minister, when that
member has granted her objections on the Constitution itself.
[Interjections.]

Mr S E KHOLWANE: I will withdraw. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Thank you. [Interjections.]

Mr S E KHOLWANE: But there is bad blood between the hon member and the
Minister. [Applause.] [Laughter.] You see, Chairperson, the problem is that
they say the ANC has bulldozed the amendments in terms of this Bill.
Unfortunately, we did not. It’s because the majority rule – the majority of
our people have voted the ANC into power. We would be failing our people if
we did not pursue our objectives. So, I suggest that you go for a campaign
too so that you can get majority votes and then you can also bulldoze your
ideas through.
The ANC supports the Budget Vote. [Interjections.] The department has
nothing to do with the portfolio committee work. [Interjections.]

Mr W P DOMAN: The President overruled the majority here.

Mr S E KHOLWANE: The President did not overrule the majority. Thank you, Mr
Doman. [Time expired.] [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Mr Chairman, yes, I think that it
certainly would not be unparliamentary to declare our love for members of
the House here. [Laughter.] I was hoping that Mr Gibson would have remained
here because when Godfrey Oliphant, the chairman of the portfolio
committee, was thanking members for their participation, I heard him also
thank Dene Smuts.

I wanted to really say that, yes, I think it’s quite in order: we want to
thank Dene Smuts for her participation. In the committee she indeed brings
quite a vibrant tone to its discussions and work. The discussions on the
Icasa amending Bill this time were so hot that she repeatedly said to me
that she was feeling hot and would I take my clothes off. [Laughter.] I
promptly said to Susan Vos, Susan, you had better listen to what she is
saying, because she wants to start something here that just could never
end, you know. [Laughter.]

Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, members of the portfolio committee and hon
Members of Parliament, distinguished guests, representatives of the
organisations and businesses that are here, ladies and gentlemen, in our
budget speech delivered to the House last year we reminded ourselves that
the future is a matter of choice and not one of chance. We also reaffirmed
that the Department of Communications is imbued with the vision that ICTs –
information communication technologies - have a strategic and important
role to play both as an enabler of growth in the economy and as a
development trampoline to leverage our people out of poverty.

In pursuance of this mission, the department’s strategic thrust, we remind
ourselves, is best summarised by its commitment to becoming a global leader
in harnessing ICTs for socioeconomic development. In keeping with this
commitment, you would have heard from the hon Minister’s speech to the
House that the strategy of the department was to liberalise the telecoms
sector, to stimulate growth in the economy, to attract foreign direct
investment, to reduce the cost of telecommunications and to increase
competitiveness in the economy, to facilitate SMMEs and to promote BEE, and
also to facilitate universal access in order to bridge the digital divide
between the first and second economies in our country.

Fundamental to our approach on these matters is our understanding that the
information sector has become an ever more central part of, and will
continue to play an increasingly important role in South Africa’s national
economic development.

Communication networks provide the infrastructure of the national economy
and will constitute the basis and a major driving force for the higher
growth rate of the economy, as envisaged in our Asgisa programme under the
leadership of the Deputy President.

ICTs therefore must occupy a position of strategic importance in the growth
and economic life of this nation, and in our strategy to reduce poverty and
halve unemployment by the year 2014. The focus of our work in the past two
years has been to prepare the legislative framework for this thrust. No
doubt, one of the most outstanding achievements accomplished in the last
year of our work has been the promulgation of the Electronic Communications
Act. As members would know, this Act has been signed and all that remains
is for a date to be announced on which this Act will come into force.

As we celebrate Africa Day today, we take pride in recording that we are
the first country in Africa to promulgate the convergence law of ICTs and
to make this a law, demonstrating by our practice that we indeed lead on
matters of ICT on the continent.

The statement that development in technology always runs ahead of
development in legislation must remain true for today. South Africa is
starting to get a peep into the exciting, digitally networked future of a
convergence era. It sounded like science fiction last year when we reminded
ourselves that through a cell phone, you could answer your doorbell
remotely.

Today the Minister told us about the launch of DVB-H - digital video
broadcasting on cell phones. It is now possible that with this device, we
will be able to receive television broadcastings on our cell phones. Also
making its first appearance in South Africa is the idea that you may be
able to send video mail via your television to a friend. Indeed, such are
the emerging innovations in technology that will drive further growth and
development in the ICT sector.

The real truth of the matter is that there is a revolution taking place
right here in the world and before our very eyes, and it is arriving
without very much fanfare. The combination of open global markets and
innovative technologies lies at the base of this revolution.

In preparing ourselves, our country and our people to remain at the
forefront of these developments and to catch the next wave of advancement
in the technology of ICTs, four projects are very central to our work this
year. These are the establishment of a task team to undertake a strategic
analysis of the South Afican ICT industry, as you heard the Minister
explain; the development of a broadband policy and infrastructure plan; the
implementation of digital migration; and the ICT preparations for the 2010
Soccer World Cup.

Let me deal with two of these projects. With regard to the task team to
undertake a strategic analysis of the South African ICT industry, this is a
joint initiative of the ICT Ministry of India and our Ministry here in
South Africa. A joint task team of experts from both countries will
undertake a strategic analysis of the ICT industry in South Africa and
propose a development plan for this sector.

A crucial element of this plan will focus on human resource development and
training and on the growth of indigenous technologies that will also
stimulate manufacturing, software development, and research and development
in ICTs.

Arising from this synergistic partnership between India and South Africa,
the analysis will outline a possible niche for the South African ICT
industry in the global market and its responsibility in relation to
supporting ICT developments on the African continent. This task team will
draw participants from government, industry and academia. This proposal was
accepted by both our governments during a visit to India in November.

As far as broadband is concerned, you have heard the Minister emphasise our
thrust in the development of broadband policy and infrastructure. Most
advanced economies in the 21st century are information and knowledge
driven.

Value creation depends on the ability to efficiently and effectively manage
new data in order to transform it into valuable knowledge and profitably
exploit this knowledge. It is not fanciful to suggest that the
macroeconomic importance of broadband in the 21st century is comparable to
electricity in the 20th century and rail in the 19th century.

It is for this reason that we, through our work in the department, are
fairly determined to ensure that we bring into being an effective policy in
broadband and also establish the appropriate infrastructure to take us
forward on these matters. The generation of available bandwidth at
affordable prices is absolutely critical to the industry’s future growth.

Let me come to the second project that, I think, is important, and that is
our ICT preparations for the 2010 Soccer World Cup. That day when we won
the bid to host the 2010 Soccer World Cup will remain one of the greatest
moments in our young and free nation’s history, a day when we were all one
for the future of our country.

In this same way, the actual moment of hosting the 2010 World Cup will,
likewise, constitute a great opportunity to build a high point of social
cohesion in our emerging nation. Our ability to be technologically and ICT-
ready to host the 2010 World Cup is absolutely crucial to our successful
hosting of the 2010 Soccer World Cup. Central to this is our ability to
deliver the ministerial guarantees on ICTs made to Fifa.

Working through the technical co-ordinating committee under the leadership
of the interministerial committee for the games, the department and
representatives of the ICT industry will participate in a joint working
team to ensure that we make the necessary ICT preparations for the hosting
of the World Cup.

In this regard, I’m pleased to announce the establishment of a sector-wide
co-ordinating committee for the ICT industry for the 2010 World Cup. I’m
also pleased to announce that the chairperson of this committee will be Mr
Victor Moche.

The Department of Communications, as part of a broader government-wide
initiative, is advancing plans to ensure that the country will certainly be
ready for the 2010 World Cup. At the same time, strategies and plans are
under way to ensure that associated economic opportunities will also emerge
from the 2010 event and that the games will be truly an African event.

The infrastructure, comprised of an international broadcasting centre and
the host city broadcasting centres, will provide a 2010 World Cup legacy
that will certainly be put to good use by the industry following the
closure of the games.

Yesterday the Minister of Sport and Recreation announced that even today,
at the World Cup in Germany, the SA Broadcasting Corporation has already
been invited to participate in the broadcasting of three of the current
games at this year’s World Cup. This is so that they could get the
necessary experience to make sure that South Africa is ready for the 2010
World Cup. As a country, we are determined to be 2010-ready and to meet the
ICT conditions of guarantee given to Fifa to host the most amazing moment
of Africa’s history in the 21st century.

In conclusion, let me say that we indeed appreciate the commitment and
support given to our work by members of the portfolio committee and for the
contribution made by its previous chairman, Mr Lekgoro, who is now an MEC
in the Gauteng legislature. Allow me also to express my appreciation to the
deputy directors-general, Mr Pakamile Pongwana, Mr Joe Mjwara and Ms
Phumele Ntombela-Nzimande, for their valuable contribution while they were
in the department and for their continuing contribution to the ICT sector
in our country.

I also wish to express my support to the Minister for her continuing
encouragement and support. I also express appreciation to the director-
general and the staff for their commitment and dedication to ICTs in the
country and, certainly, I express appreciation for and place value on my
own staff in the office under the capable leadership of Mr Raymond Reddy.
Your support is, indeed, very much valued.

Let me also give my words of welcome to the learners who are here today,
namely Sithabiso, Portia and Tidimalo for being with us today and giving us
some excitement in our lives. We value the fact that you were able to take
time off from school and to discover some bits of the working life of
Parliament and the working life of all of us in the service of our nation.

We express our appreciation to the private sector for their contribution to
the portfolio organisations, and for all that they have done in ensuring
that South Africa certainly makes an outstanding contribution in bridging
the digital divide.

Lastly, let me say that as we marshal our resources, both financial and
human, to execute the projects identified, we are certain that we will not
let our people down. We will reinforce the confidence that the masses of
our people have in our government’s ability to ensure that our people truly
enter an age of hope, thereby confirming our President’s enunciation
earlier in Parliament that today is better than yesterday and that, indeed,
tomorrow will certainly be better than today. I thank you very much.
[Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, hon Deputy Minister. Hon
L E Yengeni. [Interjections.] Sorry, I didn’t realise that he was sitting
there. Sorry about that. You can proceed, hon member.

Mr V C GORE: Hon Minister, Deputy Minister and members, there can be no
debate and argument that in order for South Africa to achieve its intended
target of 6%, as outlined in the Accelerated Shared Growth Initiative for
South Africa programme, the information communication technology of our
economy has to play an integral if not essential role.

However, if the world competitiveness report is anything to go by, South
Africa is going backwards in this regard. The report released just over two
weeks ago ranked South Africa 59th overall in terms of technology
infrastructure out of 61 participating countries.

So, the question needs to be asked: Why are we doing so badly? It is the
view of the ID that the reasons include a hurry-up-and-wait approach to
legislation, policy and regulation, and an attempt by the Ministry to take
over control of the regulator.

Unfortunately, the past number of years have been characterised by a hurry-
up-and-wait approach to legislation, regulation and policy, and,
thereafter, it sits in a state of hiatus.

One only has to think of the Telecommunications Amendment Act and
Electronic Communications and Transactions Act of 2002 where significant
sections of these Acts still need to be implemented. We are still waiting
with bated breath for the final implementation of the second national
operator and for it to start operating.

At this stage, I would like to congratulate the Minister and repeat some of
the sentiments expressed in this House about the sweeping announcements
made today, and I hope that these will be implemented without delay.

The impact of this approach is that, with particular reference to this
sector, the incumbent Telkom has been able to maintain its exclusivity
period way past its intended date of 7 May 2002, just over 4 years ago.

It is no longer a theoretical possibility that competition results in more
affordable and quality services, but it is a practical certainty. The
blurring of roles between the regulator and the Ministry, and the latest
attempt by the Ministry to wrestle control from the regulator does not bode
well part for creating a stable, protectable and efficient environment for
bridging the digital divide and being an economic driver in this economy.

Unfortunately, South Africa faces the real possibility of no longer being a
leader of ICT in this continent. We are being rapidly overtaken by
countries such as Mozambique, who have rolled-out commercial broadband Y-
max networks. Countries such as Egypt have connected more villages to
broadband than South Africa has connected to fixed line services in the
past three years.

Hon Minister, the challenge now lies before us. I thank you.

Nkz L E YENGENI: Sihlalo, ohloniphekileyo, malungu eNdlu yoWiso-mthetho
amahle, Maqabane nezihlobo, ndiyanibulisa. Zindwendwe, namkelekile. Ndiziva
ndinochulumanco ukuthatha inxaxheba kwiingxoxo zohlahlo-lwabiwo-mali zeSebe
lezoQhagamshelwano. Olu suku lubaluleke kakhulu kwiAfrika jikelele kuba
kaloku sithi “Huntshu!” kumhla wokubhiyozela ukusekwa komanyano lweAfrika
ngomhla wama-25 kwinyanga kaCanzibe ngomnyaka ka-1963. Kufanelekile ke
ngoko ukuba silukhuthaze ngamandla uqhagamshelwano lweAfrika. (Translation
of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Mrs L E YENGENI: Chairperson, hon members of the House, comrades and
friends, I greet you all. I would like to welcome all our guests too. I am
very glad that I am able to participate in the Budget Vote for the
Department of Communications today. This is a memorable day in Africa since
it commemorates the establishment of the Organisation of African Unity on
25 May 1963. It is important for us to encourage relations with the rest of
Africa.]

This budget addresses a set of fundamental principles upon which media
transformation is premised. It deals with the issue of universal service
obligations, bridging the digital divide, universal access and service to
marginalised and historically disadvantaged communities.

Since 1994, one of the main challenges facing South Africa’s first
democratic government was to transform the media and broadcasting sectors
and to bring this in line with international trends and standards.

Legislation and other initiatives were introduced by the ANC-led government
with the intention to regulate and transform the powers and functions of
particularly public broadcasting and other media sectors. One such piece of
legislation was the Independent Broadcasting Authority Act. This Act is in
accordance with provisions of the Constitution that require the regulation
of the media independently and in the public interest.

This was an important foundation to build on and to realise the ultimate
goal of an unbiased mass media in South Africa. It is crucial to critically
look into the role of the print and electronic media in a transforming
society. Broadcasting in South Africa has an extremely diverse media sector
catering for the unique demands of the local and international market.

The core mandate of the national broadcaster is to contribute to social
cohesion by broadcasting programmes that promote the development of a South
African national identity, indigenous languages, traditions and cultures.
Finally, its mandate is the strict adherence to accurate, factual, credible
news and current affairs programmes.

As a result of the strategic position that the South African government
occupies in the continent, SABC Channel Africa became a necessity aimed at
advancing the agenda of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development.
Secondly, it had to bridge the digital divide across the continent.
Thirdly, it aims to communicate our foreign policy objectives and the
objectives of Nepad to the rest of the African continent.

News and current affairs in the SABC and other media should not be defined
by political and commercial elitist sections of society. The dominance of
English and Afrikaans in programming of news, soapies, drama and
commercials is not a reflection of the rich South African diversity.

While there is very little coverage of the situation and programmes of
people in the rural areas and people with disabilities, there is excessive
violence shown in both print and electronic media, against women and
children.

The changes that have occurred in the media environments since 1994 have
not been as far-reaching as to transform media in South Africa. Despite
these changes, the function of media is still rooted in its history that
characterised South Africa since the advent of apartheid. There is still no
significant media which represents and articulates the aspirations, views
and interests of the majority in the country. As an example, the
information and knowledge gap between urban and rural areas is widening.

Media restructuring and transformation must take place as part of the
broader political movement to democratise, deracialise and create a
nonsexist South Africa. There is therefore the need to continually engage
with the media around the attitude towards the democratic movement and
government, and that the struggle for a media that reflects the diversity
inherent in our society should not be confused with an anti-media stance.

There is a strong perception, though in varying degrees, that our media,
both electronic and print, adopts the posture of being the opposition to
the ANC-led government. This is witnessed by their continuous attack on
government policies in accurate reporting of issues related to government
departments and their viciousness when dealing with ANC members of
Parliament and ANC leadership issues in general and blatantly breaking all
the rules on commenting on issues that are patently sub judice.

And, to make matters worse, the media seems not to see anything wrong in
this. They go on daily to defend their rights to break the rules. And, most
recently, they have gone on the rampage, attacking a judge simply because
they do not agree with his judgment. [Applause.]

This behaviour by the media is unbecoming and it must simply come to an
end. Indications are that this kind of media behaviour has led to a decline
in the esteem with which the media is held in almost all democracies in the
world.

Freedom of the press is a right enshrined in our Bill of Rights and our
Constitution. We must defend these rights with everything we can muster.
But, equally, the abuse of this noble right should be fearlessly resisted.
As long as the transformation of the media is off-limits as the subject of
political debate, it would be difficult to imagine any qualitative change
for the better in the relationship between media, government and the
democratic movement.

The struggle for the transformation of the media should be rooted with a
campaign to extend these media freedoms to be enjoyed by all South
Africans. The ANC supports this budget. [Applause.]

Ndifun’ ukuthi ndlelantle kowabengusihlalo wekomiti yethu
yezoqhagamshelwano. Ndimnqwenelela okuhle namathamsanqa. [I would like to
bid farewell to the former chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on
Communications. I wish him well and the best of luck.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Ngiyabonga bese ngithi ugqibile.
[Thank you, I thought that you were done.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, the Minority Front welcomes the Department of
Communication’s budget allocation for this year. Be it electronic
communication, postal telecommunication or via broadcast, communication
plays a vital role in our daily lives, our development, growth and
progress. We therefore require a sustainable, effective and efficient
department of communications, which our department is.

Proudly, South Africa ranks 34th amongst 104 countries surveyed in the
World Economic Forum’s global information technology report of 2004-05, and
is progressing. Telkom, heading telecommunication in South Africa, and
owning half of Vodacom’s cellular company, has proudly achived a 40% higher
headline profit for 2006 than it did last year. Listed on both the
Johannesburg Stock Exchange – the JSE - and the New York Stock Exchange,
Telkom contributes to the economy greatly in revenue and brings to the
various corners of South Africa, a means to communicate.

The adjusted tariff has served to make telecommunications more accessible
and the coming introduction of competition will serve to increase
accessibility and lower costing. Even though cellular use has largely
replaced landline use, our concerns are extended towards the dangers of
radiation and health risks from signal towers in residential areas.

Further, we ask why, when Vodacom is off-line, MTN and Cell-C networks
cannot carry Vodacom connections, as is the practice abroad. As for the
postal regulator, the MF is pleased with the progress made in this sector,
but, however, seeks an increase in postal service depots in areas to
increase accessibility.

As for broadcasting, the MF is encouraged by the dividends brought in this
sector. The TV licensing should be administered more strictly, as many
continue to have access to broadcasting without meeting the legal dues in
this regard.

As for electronic communication, Telkom reports a growth in the number of
Internet subscribers to 225 280, representing a 49% increase. In light of
this, the MF seeks an initiative to make electronic communication and the
Internet more accessible to disadvantaged learning institutions. The MF
supports the Budget Vote. [Time expired.]

Adv P S SWART: Chairperson, given our history, nothing can be crueller than
opening up a window of opportunity for previously disadvantaged
entrepreneurs to participate in the development and upliftment of the
underserviced, and then unceremoniously slamming it shut in their faces.
Apart, of course, from doing it through bungling delays or bureaucratic
impediments that first eat up all their venture capital and then spit them
out, failed and broke. Even worse, if this is done by a government that
prides itself on ots commitment to development, the poor and redress
through black economic empowerment.

I am referring to our seven user licence holders, all of whom are
underperforming, while two of them are already in default of their subsidy
criteria – and of whom you said very little today. Yet, you are inviting
applications for another 14 licences. The question is: Do you intend to
continue with new user licences or will you put the process on hold to
rethink its viability in its current form?

This may be your last opportunity to salvage a scheme already referred to
by the broader telecommunications community as Ivy’s well-intended
disaster. Even your remarks today on digital HARPS to complement universal
service agencies may well come to nothing if no viable universal service
agencies are left after rollout.

The background to this is the good intentions of the Telecommunications
Amendment Act of 2001, permitting small businesses to apply, on invitation
of the Minister, for licences to provide telecommunication services and
facilities in underserviced areas. These are defined as having
teledensities of less than 5%. Maybe this definition and the restriction to
only operate in such defined areas by itself posed a viability problem.

The fixed line operator had, by 2001, already failed in its attempt to
penetrate these areas and subscriptions fell. In economic terms, this type
of venture can only be classified as high risk, precluding successful
bidders from securing finance through traditional sources. The R15 million
subsidies over three years, paid through universal service agencies, are
ring fenced for setting up the network and not for operating costs. The
Business Day remarked on this financing problem with the Industrial
Development Corporation stating:

   Profitability and sustainability are non-negotiable.

White financiers cannot inject cash for equity as it is illegal, causing a
senior manager from the universal service agencies to say, and I quote:

   The universal service agencies are not allowed strategic financial
   partners because they need to empower previously disadvantaged people.
   These are the people who don’t have money.

In the meantime, the Development Bank of South Africa blamed ill-conceived
licence conditions for the failures. In weighing bids for licences, only
45% goes to business aspects. The rest goes to factors like ownership,
control and empowerment, which we agree are important factors for BEE but
no indication of viable business operations.

Dominic Mokhethi, formally from Bokamoso, one such a universal service
agency operator, regarded them as:


  A golden opportunity to empower previously disadvantaged communities.


He now says that he has lost R600 000 of his own money, and he is broke and
unemployed. With years of delays before the first licences were granted,
and the fact that these operators must compete with two fixed line and
three mobile operators, it is little wonder that they, from the first to
the last holder, are disillusioned and call this a serious problem.

It goes without saying that the further liberalisation of the sector
allowing companies to offer payphones or voice over Internet protocols,
already impacts negatively on the universal service agencies’ viability,
while those of the state-funded Sentech broadband network, which you
referred to again, hon Minister, have yet to be determined. That most of
them are ending up as just extensions of national mobile operators, is
nothing but a struggle for survival caused by a lack of state support and
licence delays.
The DA is cognisant of the need to expand teledensity and the freeing up of
telecommunications, but in a well-planned, sustainable way, keeping pace,
in particular, with this ever-changing technological environment.

The universal service agency just lost their head. Please don’t lose yours.
Do not send more black entrepreneurs to the poorhouse. Rethink this well-
conceived disaster. [Applause.]

Mr M R MOHLALOGA: Igama lamadoda! [The name of men!]

Hon Chairperson and the House, the World Development Bank’s Report
entitled: ``Knowledge for Development’’ of 1999 in the opening statement,
says:

   Knowledge is like light, weightless and intangible. It can travel the
   world enlightening the lives of people everywhere, yet billions of people
   still live in the darkness of poverty unnecessarily.

Central to the claim that we live in a global information society is a
social construction of people, known as the information poor, which is an
additional factor for people living under conditions of poverty. These
people who do not participate in the new information economy will find it
more difficult to climb out of poverty. It is in this context that the ANC
government has been at the forefront of initiatives to bridge the digital
divide and to provide universal service and access to information
communication technology, and this has been possible through your visionary
leadership, hon Minister, and the collective in the department.

By sharing information and communication amongst themselves and with
others, these communities can certainly remove certain barriers to
development and speed up their progress. Information communication
technologies serve as a transmission belt to generate access, disseminate
and share knowledge, data, information and communications best practices.

The ultimate objective should be to build a knowledge and information
society, a society with the ability and capacity to generate and capture
new knowledge and to access, absorb and use effectively information and
ICTs.

However, the biggest impediment is the cost of telecommunications. Paying
your monthly telephone or cell phone bill is like paying for a bond. Our
telephone and cell phone tariffs must really come down and this is the
point that the hon President continuously makes. However, as the ANC, we
are determined to have a competitive information communications technology
industry, an industry that provides accessible and affordable services.

It is our view that universal service and access should also imply that the
cost of ICT services such as the basic telephone remain affordable,
especially to those from low income families and people living in rural and
suburban areas.

Icasa has released its international cellular pricing document last year
and is currently conducting public hearings on the cost of mobile
telephony.

Predictably, the operators are not in agreement. They do not agree with the
Presidential National Advisory Council on ICT. They do not agree with the
Presidential National Commission on the Information Society and
Development. They do not agree that the cost of communication in South
Africa is exceedingly high. We insist that we are correct and they are
wrong.

Let me refer you to the article by Hodge Truen of Genesis Analytics, which
appeared in the Business Day. They say that MTN subscribers in Uganda,
Cameroon and Rwanda pay less for their cellular phone usage than MTN
subscribers in South Africa. MTN subscribers in Uganda are paying 40% less
for bundle services and in Cameroon they pay 35% less, and sending an sms
on your MTN network would cost you 75c in South Africa but in Uganda it
costs you only 37c.

Similarly, across the border in Mozambique Vodacom is offering customers a
bundle of prices that are around 30% cheaper than in South Africa. A
prepaid Vodacom customer in Mozambique will pay R1,31 per minute while a
South African prepaid customer must fork out R2,99 per minute. The short
message service will cost the Vodacom subscriber in Mozambique 39c while
South Africans pay 80c. The net effect of that is that South African
subscribers face cellular phone prices that are higher on average than what
subscribers pay in other countries served by our own companies.

Our own cellular companies have shown us that they are capable of charging
us as much as 35% to 40% less than we are paying. Consumers should not be
content therefore with just a few ``happy hours’’ a day or being charged
different prices everywhere they go, so they conclude:

Millions of our people still live in the darkness of poverty and remain
information poor because of the high costs of communicating and yet this is
a constitutionally guaranteed right which all of us should enjoy.

But what do the industry players say? They say that we should leave prices
to market forces. Karl Polanyi in his book, The Great Transformations
argues that self-adjusting markets could not exist for any length of time
without annihilating the human and natural substance of societies, and I
agree with that particular assertion.

Therefore, it is the role of Icasa to protect the interest of the consumer
against this classical example of market failure. This failure cannot be
spectated upon, we need regulatory intervention and we need it now.

This also applies to the cost of ADSL and fixed line telephony by Telkom.
In May 2004 Icasa granted licences to users to expand services by
government such as health, education, safety and security, welfare and so
on. This was because it is not attractive for major operators to go into
those areas because of their financial nonviability.

The issue that hon Swart is raising is an opportunistic vulgarisation of
the issue we as the ANC raised during our budget hearings with the
Universal Service Agency. Minister, we had an engagement with the Universal
Service Agency during the Budget Vote hearings and it was clear that we
needed further engagement on this particular model than the vulgarisation
that hon Swart has just articulated.

The issue is that we need to look at the lessons learnt, the impact of
telecommunications conditions that convergence would have on users and
review what our measuring instruments for access should be, viz either you
use teledensity or mobidensity or a combination of both. This is so due to
the imminent equation emerging in the context of convergence and therefore
is not an ideological rejection of a concept Universal Service licensee per
se.

We did agree with the USA that we needed to probe this matter further
moving forward. One other issue that could not emerge clearly was our
universal service and access targets. We think that we need clear targets
and time lines with regard to practical measures and time lines with regard
to practical measures to cascade us towards universality.  It is our view
that the Universal Service Agency should start doing some work in that
particular direction.

Developing a stable and predictable regulatory regime on e-commerce is
central to the ANC government to move South Africa into the knowledge
economy. After six year of existence, Icasa is at the crossroads. Changes
in the legislative environment, with new roles and responsibilities and
imperatives for more affordable communication services, put Icasa under
pressure to transform in order to improve its capacity, efficiency and
effectiveness.

Icasa has therefore launched a comprehensive transformation strategy, which
centres on in-depth understanding and effective regulation of the
communication sector, satisfying customer needs by putting into effect
appropriate regulations and providing transparent and responsive processes
that address the needs of the sector itself. Given the nature of the sector
we are dealing with, there is always a challenge for Icasa to retain the
skills and experience that we need for effective regulation. Ways have to
be found to sufficiently resource Icasa given the imminent implementation
of the Electronic Communications Act.I move for the adoption of the Budget
Vote. Thank you, sir.

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Mr Chairperson, I would like to thank all
the members in the House that stayed on and really wanted to listen to this
important debate. [Applause.]

In some of the responses, I would like to start by saying to the hon
Morutoa setori that when we made a commitment as a country we said we were
making a commitment to ensure that this will not be a sexist and racist
society. And there are certain things we had to do.

I am now looking at the team that is sitting behind me here, both at the
top level and the boards. It is because someone did not go in and look
through spectacles that just looked for certain things. You said one should
be true to the things for which one’s party stands and if one wears glasses
that can pick out women, young people or whoever one is looking for, one
will find them. Do not wear glasses that won’t see what you are looking
for. That is a representative sample of South Africa. [Applause.] It is
that commitment because you are the ones who walked to the Union Buildings
in Pretoria and said to us ``we struggled to get there. Implement what we
fought for.’’ And, we tried as hard as we could. [Applause.]

The second thing I would like to take up with you is that you talk about
multipurpose centres. I would like to link that with, for example, the
competitive report that hon Gore raised, which is that South Africa is
moving backwards. I think when we develop these multipurpose centres we
should look at what definitions were used in their development. The unit of
analysis in most of the countries where these multipurpose centres are
developed is the household in rural areas where there is so much poverty
and where our people live.

It is impossible to say that the criteria used in the development will
actually be the right ones. So, when we have a multipurpose centre, it must
service many people but on the criteria that they have used, that kind of
looking at how this thing is arrived at is not seen. So, we cannot be
discouraged by our performance. The other point about it is that when we do
that it is precisely because we say we want to make sure we can, en masse,
be able to empower our people - men and women, young and old.

Finally, tomorrow must be a better day because through those multipurpose
centres, I will go to my grandmother and strap her up in that clinic or in
that multipurpose centre and let a doctor listen to her heartbeat – whether
it is in Umtata or Cape Town - read her blood pressure through the
computers that we are using today and it will make my grandmother’s life
easier because technology is now available. [Applause.]
I would like to say to the hon Dene Smuts: it is nice to have a selective
memory because the hon member was here even before I came. She knew what
the problems were with the first IBA - of not being able to be monitored,
not to be sanctioned and to be cajoled - in fact about all kinds of things
about the perfection or efficiency of their work. And, that was because if
the IBA had fights in between - and she knows about the fights - nobody
could intervene. Even when I arrived during SATRA days, I just stood there
unable to move to deal with the fights that everybody was causing within
SATRA, including some members of her party.

We must therefore remember that when we said we needed performance
agreements and a Chairperson to look at it is because we had actually tied
the hands of the chairperson to be able to take any action against some of
the members. So, we should not have selective memories.

We want to reduce, and not increase, poverty and therefore when we say
these things must happen they must happen. I think the last speaker spoke
about it. At a time when we want to move forward, you cannot have markets
that just deal because the opposition looks at the free market. Whether the
free market leaves others behind, those that get left behind are your
problem.

We have to check where there will have to be interference in that market
that is not always perfect. And we all know that markets are not always
perfect. Therefore, when there are failures of markets, what kind of
mechanisms must be brought in to make sure that things are put back
together. So, it is not as easy as what it is made out to be.

With regard to the issues around the points that were made by hon Vos, I am
glad that you are able to see that it is important that we should not leave
the majority behind. Today, we have a Postbank and a Post Office that is
very creative. Everybody had said to us that government must get out of the
business of the Post Office. And we insisted that we had to bring business
into the Post Office and today we see that working. It is working for your
grandmother; it is working in rural areas and in the townships. [Applause.]
That is what caused the turn around and it does not get these awards for
nothing, is because everybody is recognising it.

Today, I can get hold of my grandmother in a rural area as long as there is
a Multipurpose Community Centre, MPCC, or a Post Office. The Post Office
types letters for people and sends them by e-mail to another Post Office
and that Post Office actually goes and delivers the e-mail at the time.
Those are the creativities and innovations that the Post Office has come up
with. [Applause]

My Deputy said that the future is not a matter of chance but a matter of
choice. It is the choices that we make that are not always easy but
painful. But, it’s the choice we make in order to talk about how we bring
the most marginalised people to the fore and make things better for them.
That is quite important. So, we really need to look at these issues that we
are talking about.

With regard to the points that have been raised by hon Yengeni, I am really
glad that she raised that because it is time that we really have a debate
that looks at our broadcasting across the spectrum, especially now that we
are going to go into digital broadcasting as well as the rest of the media
to deal with this question of how we create social cohesion when in fact
there are such differences of power. Ten years have not changed those power
relationships. We know who the owners are and who the ones are who do not
own anything, whether it is ideas or other kinds of mechanisms. We need to
start that debate. I think the time is right for us to be able to do so.

I am glad that the hon Mahlaloga has dealt with the performance of the
USLs. So I won’t deal with it. But, I would like to say that the reason why
we have actually decided to also open up the discussion and ask Icasa to
look at the issue of CDMA was precisely the kinds of technologies that
those users had chosen - precisely to bring our people in but where there
was a clash with the broadcasting spectrum. And they could not move.

So, we must look at this. We are doing an evaluation on what it is that we
did right and we must not be selective in saying what works and what does
not work. Let us have an objective assessment of these things.

I think the hon Kholwane was right in saying the struggle for ideas is a
very important thing because we have had to struggle very hard and battle
with our ideas in this industry because this is a sector that has been, for
a long time, predominantly white and predominantly male. Even white women
did not participate in that. And today we do see differences in this
sector. [Applause.] It is because we simply said, if I cannot win this, I
am going to work slowly but I am going to arrive there.

Ha o tshwanetse o nyonyobe, o tla nyonyoba. Ba tla o fumana o se o le mane!
Bona ba ntse ba o batla mona. Ka jeno re ne re ntse re nyonyoba re fihlile
mane. [Ditlatse.] [If there is a need for you to sneak through, you will
definitely do that. While they will be looking for you here, you will
already be on the other side. We sneaked through and today we have reached
our destination [Applause.]]

I would like to say thank you for all the ideas that have come up. I am
sure as we stand here as South Africans; we have the feeling that something
is going to happen. We are getting better and better. There are times where
we would have to step back, but indeed we are going to shape that future
for the betterment of all of us and all of you will be enjoying and
celebrating a future that is the kind of future that we want, especially on
this Africa Day.

Debate concluded.

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON MINERALS AND ENERGY

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Report be referred back to the Committee for reconsideration of
   the Committee’s recommendations.

Agreed to.

Report accordingly referred back to the Committee.

The House adjourned at 19:26.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1.   Membership of Committees


     1. Ms B A Hogan has been elected as Chairperson of the Standing
        Committee on Auditor-General with effect from 24 May 2006.


     2. Mr V G Smith has been elected as Chairperson of the Ad Hoc
        Committee on Appointment of Auditor-General with effect from 24 May
        2006.

National Assembly
1.    Referral to Committee of papers tabled

    (1)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Foreign Affairs for consideration:

          a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Foreign Affairs for 2006 to
             2009.

    (2)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Transport for consideration and report:

        a) Convention on International Interests in Mobile Equipment,
           tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


        b) Protocol to the Convention on International Interests in Mobile
           Equipment on Matters Specific to Aircraft Equipment, tabled in
           terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


        c) Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention on International
           Interests in Mobile Equipment and the Protocol to the Convention
           on International Interests in Mobile Equipment on Matters
           Specific to Aircraft Equipment.

    (3)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Safety and Security:


        a) Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD) for
           January 2003 to December 2003, in terms of section 18(5)(c) of
           the Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act No 116 of 1998).


    (4)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report:

        a) Draft Practical Guidelines for Employees in terms of section 10
           of the Protected Disclosures Act, 2000.


    (5)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration:

        a) Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
           Presidents’ Fund for 2003-2004 [RP 229-2005].

    (6)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Judicial Service
             Commission for 2005.


        b) Proclamation No R.3 published in Government Gazette No 28528
           dated 17 February 2006: Commission of inquiry to conduct an
           investigation into alleged illicit activities of certain South
           African Companies or Individuals relating to the United Nations
           Oil-For-Food Programme in Iraq, in terms of the Commissions Act,
           1947 (Act No 8 of 1947).
        c) Government Notice No R.159 published in Government Gazette No
           28528 dated 17 February 2006: Terms of Reference of the
           President of the Republic of South Africa for the establishment
           of a Commission of inquiry to conduct an investigation into
           alleged illicit activities of certain South African Companies or
           individuals relating to the Oil-For-Food Programme in Iraq, in
           terms of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996.



    (7)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Education for consideration:


   a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Education for 2006 to 2010.

    (8)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Sport and Recreation for consideration:

   a) Strategic Plan of Sport and Recreation South Africa for 2006 to 2010.


    (9)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Water Affairs and Forestry and the Standing Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

   a) Letter from the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry dated 7 April
      2006 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
      65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
      1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of
      Bloem Water for 2004-2005.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


     a) A report in terms of section 9(5)(b) of the Magistrates’ Courts
        Act, 1944 (Act No 32 of 1944), a list containing information with
        regard to vacancies in the offices of magistrates which have
        remained unfilled for a continuous period exceeding three months as
        on 31 March 2006.


     b) Proclamation No R67 published in Government Gazette No 28282 dated
        29 November 2006: Commencement of sections 40 and 62(6) of the
        Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision of
        Communication-Related Information Act, 2002 (Act No 70 of 2002):
        Amendment of Proclamation.

2.    The Minister of Science and Technology


    (a)     The Corporate Strategy of the Department of Science and
        Technology for (2006/7) 2005/6 to 2008/9.

3.    The Minister of Home Affairs


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 4 – Department of Home
        Affairs for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 53-2006].


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


       a)
       b) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the State of the
          Public Service for 2006 [RP 39-2006].


COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Assembly


1.     Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on   Communications   on   the
     Independent Communications Authority of South Africa Amendment Bill  [B
     32D-2005] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 23 May 2006:

        The Portfolio Committee on Communications, having considered the
        Independent Communications Authority of South Africa Amendment Bill
        [B32D-2005] and the reservations of the President on the
        constitutionality of clauses 7, 9 and 11 of the Bill
        (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, dated 26 April
        2006, p 562), referred to the Committee, reports the Bill with
        amendments [B 32E-2005].


