---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 25 October 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2006-10-25
---

WEDNESDAY, 25 OCTOBER 2006
                                    ____


              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 15:03.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                              AWARD TO CENTLEC


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:

   That the Council –


   (1)      notes that –


        (a) Centlec, the electricity distributor for the Mangaung
            Municipality has for the second consecutive year won the
            coveted World Quality Commitment International Star Award;
        (b) this award, in the Platinum Category, was awarded to Centlec by
            Business Initiative Directions for its corporate achievements;


        (c) Mangaung Municipality is the only municipality in South Africa,
            as well as in the world, that has received this award; and


        (d) this award is in recognition of the status of Centlec as a world-
            class electricity utility; and


   (2)       congratulates  Mangaung  Municipality  and  Centlec   on   this
        achievement.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                     VIOLENCE AND DRUG ABUSE IN SCHOOLS


                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:

   That the Council –

     1) is deeply concerned about the violence and drug abuse gripping some
        of our schools nowadays;
     2) condemns in no uncertain terms this unlawful and appalling
        situation that occurs in some schools;


     3) believes that schools are supposed to be places of learning and
        safety for our children; and


     4) calls upon all stakeholders, including the Department of Education,
        parents and teachers, to do everything in their power to eradicate
        the anomaly before it gets out of control.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.




                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE


                           (The late Lebo Mathosa)

Mr B J TOLO: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:

   That the Council –


   (1)      passes its heartfelt condolences to the family of Lebo  Mathosa,
        a young musician, who died on Monday morning in a car accident;


   (2)      recognises  that  at  the  tender  age  of  29,  she  was  still
        blossoming and that death has therefore robbed us of a golden voice,
        a talented musician par excellence, who was an inspiration  to  many
        young people; and


   (3)      because she died so young, is reminded of the  words  of  Thomas
        Gray in his poem “Elegy written in a country churchyard”,  in  which
        he wrote:


          Full many a gem of purest ray serene,
          The dark unfathom’d caves of ocean bear:
          Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
          And waste its sweetness on the desert air.


May she live forever through her music, while her soul rests in peace.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                  WISHING THE HON QIKANE A SPEEDY RECOVERY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms J M MASILO: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:

   That the Council –

   (1)      notes that the hon Qikane was  hospitalised  in  Benoni  Private
        Clinic while attending a workshop on the Children’s Bill from 12  to
        13 October 2006, and that she is now recuperating in her hometown in
        the Eastern Cape; and


   (2)      wishes her a speedy recovery so that she can resume  her  duties
        in the Select Committee on Social Services.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE


                 (The late Mr James Zamiwonga “Castro” Kati)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Deputy Chairperson, I hereby move without
notice:

   That the Council –


   (1)      notes with profound sadness that on Friday, 29 September 2006,
        the hon utata James Zamiwonga “Castro” Kati passed away;


   (2)      recognises that the hon Kati was a South African patriot who
        spent all his life in the struggle for peace, democracy and social
        progress in this country and for the broader humanity;


     3) recalls that Dlomo –


his clan name –

   as he was affectionately called in his community, throughout his
   life embodied the courage and vision that characterise the majority of
   the people of our country and the continent;


   (4)      remembers that “Castro”, as he was known amongst his comrades,
        was amongst the first recruits of Umkhonto weSizwe, serving with
        comrades like Vuyisile Mini, Wilson Khayinga and many others;


   (5)      further remembers that he was tortured and jailed several times
        by the security police of the former apartheid and Transkei homeland
        governments;


   (6)      acknowledges the great contribution that the hon Kati made as a
        Member of Parliament and notes that he served on various portfolio
        committees, including Water Affairs and Forestry, where he was an
        advocate for rural development, always pleading for the provision of
        basic services such as water and sanitation for rural communities;


   (7)      believes that he discharged his responsibilities with
        dedication, discipline, diligence and humility and that the life of
        this great leader epitomises heroism and a commitment to the cause
        of the poor; and


     8) conveys its condolences to the Kati family, the African National
        Congress and the South African Communist Party.


The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): As there is no
speakers’ list, I shall now put the question. The question is that the
motion be agreed to. As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65
of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all the delegation
heads are present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declarations of vote if they so wish. We shall now proceed to
voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per province.
Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in
favour or against or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: Eastern Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal elethu. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Delegation head not present.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Kapa Bokone e a dumela. [Northern Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West Ke ya rona. [North West supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Eight provinces
voted in favour. I therefore declare the motion adopted in terms of section
65 of the Constitution.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

 TWENTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF THE TRAGIC DEATH OF MOZAMBIQUE PRESIDENT, COMRADE
                             SAMORA MOSES MACHEL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Deputy Chairperson, I hereby move without
notice:

   That the Council -


   (1)      notes that 19 October 2006 marked the twentieth anniversary of
        the tragic death of the first President of independent Mozambique,
        Comrade Samora Moses Machel and 34 fellow countrymen;


   (2)      recalls that President Samora Machel was a towering giant in
        African efforts for peace and democracy, that he dedicated his life
        to our own liberation and that his ideas and his deeds are a
        material force in the struggle for total emancipation of humanity;


   (3)      recognises that the blood he shed on our soil is and will
        forever be a fountain of freedom for all our people;


   (4)      further recognises that on the historic day of the commemoration
        of his death, on 19 October 2006, President Thabo Mbeki and
        President Armondo Guebuza of Mozambique, the Machel family and other
        guests gatherered at Mbuzini where their fellow combatant, Samora
        Machel, lost his life and that they unveiled a monument that will
        symbolise the common suffering of the people of Southern Africa, be
        a tribute to their heroism and a solemn affirmation that we share a
        common destiny of liberty, peace and social progress;


   (5)      acknowledges that the life of this great leader, organiser and
        fighter for freedom and social justice bequeaths to humanity a
        legacy that epitomises heroism and commitment to the cause of the
        poor;


   (6)      believes that he was one of the most outstanding leaders of our
        continent, one of its finest brains and an unsurpassed fighter who
        fought for the whole of Southern Africa to be free; and


   (7)      remains steadfast in its call that the mystery surrounding his
        death be resolved soon.


The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): As there is no
speakers’ list, I shall now put the question. The question is that the
motion be agreed to. As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65
of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all the delegation
heads are present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declarations of vote if they so wish. We shall now proceed to
voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per province.
Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in
favour or against or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: Eastern Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyavuma. [We support.]
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal in favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Delegation head not present.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga siyavuma. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Noord-Kaap steun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West ke ya rona. [North West supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Eight provinces
voted in favour.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

           FOODSTUFFS, COSMETICS AND DISINFECTANTS AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Ms J M MASILO: Chairperson, colleagues, the department briefed the
committee on the concerns raised by the provinces during the process of
negotiating mandates. With regard to final mandates, all nine provinces
agreed to support the Bill.

The report states that the Bill was agreed to, with proposed amendments.
Since 1972, when the principal Act was passed, the Act has been amended
only once, in 1981. There have been some developments with regard to the
regulation of foodstuffs that have necessitated the review of the principal
Act, Act 54 of 1972, by providing for the following:


  The authorisation of medical practitioners, environmental health
  practitioners and veterinarians to administer certain provisions of the
  Act; an increase in the sum to be deposited by persons requesting an
  analysis or examination of samples; further regulation of food premises,
  the handling of foodstuffs, the exportation and importation of
  foodstuffs; the inspection and removal, detention and destruction of food-
  producing animals or foodstuffs and the water used for food processing;
  the regulation of mollusc farming and fish farming; and, the delegation
  of functions to provincial departments.

The purpose of the Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Act is to
control the sale, manufacture and importation of foodstuffs, cosmetics and
disinfectants, and to provide for incidental matters.

The aim of the amending Bill is to bring the Act in line with the new
constitutional and organisational dispensation; to include a provision in
the Health Act of 1977 that relates to food safety; and to update certain
outdated provisions of the Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Act.

An amendment in section 10 provides for the director-general to authorise
any employee of the national department, provincial administration or local
authority to act as an inspector as per the powers, duties and functions
conferred by the Act.

Section 13 stipulates that the prescribed amount be increased from R25 to
R500 and for the accused to deposit that amount if he or she requires a
further analysis or examination of a sample. The increase aims to
counteract the effect of inflation.

Section 15 deals with the regulations relating to processing, handling and
storage of foodstuffs. It also provides regulation regarding ensuring a
hygienic environment in places of storage.

Section 16 of the principal Act deals with the preservation of secrecy. The
amending Bill omits this provision because it seriously affects the ability
of the authorities, in all three spheres of government, to use food safety
warnings.

Section 25 provides for the director-general to delegate powers to the
national and provincial officers.

In conclusion, the short title of this Bill is the Foodstuffs, Cosmetics
and Disinfectants Amendment Bill of 2006. The committee supports the Bill.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be agreed to.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I shall now put the
question, and the question is that the Bill be agreed to. As the decision
is dealt with in terms section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first
ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast
their provinces’ votes. Are all delegation heads present? [Interjections.]
In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make declarations of vote, if they so wish. We shall now proceed to voting
on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order, per province.
Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in
favour or against, or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: Eastern supports the Bill.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Steun. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyavuma. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal is in favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Delegation head not present.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Re a e thekga. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Siyavuma. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke ya rona. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Steun. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Eight provinces have
voted in favour of the report.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

              NATIONAL LAND TRANSPORT TRANSITION AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Order disposed of without debate.

Question put: That the Bill be agreed to.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order! I shall now
put the question in respect of the second order. The question is that the
Bill be agreed to. As this decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of
the Constitution, I need to ascertain very clearly whether delegation heads
are present. Are all delegation heads present?

I shall now also allow provinces the opportunity to make their declaration
in terms of Rule 71, if they so wish. Is there any province wishing to make
any declaration of vote? There is obviously none.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: Eastern Cape is in favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: In favour.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Delegation head not present.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Re a dumela. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke ya rona. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Eight provinces
voted in favour. I therefore declare the Bill agreed to in terms of section
65 of the Constitution.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIOAL
  AFFAIRS - INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION FOR THE SUPPRESSION OF ACTS OF NUCLEAR
                                  TERRORISM

Mr N J MACK: Deputy Chair, hon members, believing that South Africa will
never be secure while dark clouds of international terrorism engulf the
African continent and the world, the masses of our people expect their
elected representatives in this democratic Parliament to reaffirm their
condemnation of all forms of terrorist activities without any equivocation.


Because mere condemnation of terrorism cannot be sufficient, the masses of
our people also expect us to ratify all the continental and international
instruments, which contribute to the fight against the phenomenon of
terrorism on the African continent and in the world. The masses of our
people are well aware of the fact that our ratification of any continental
and international instruments is always subject to both the Constitution of
the Republic and international law.

Ratification of these important instruments is necessary for our democratic
institutions to communicate a clear and unequivocal message to the world
that South Africa condemns all forms of terrorism. Without fear of any
contradiction, we must affirm our firm belief that the fight against all
forms of terrorism, including nuclear terrorism, should be waged and
conducted under the aegis of multilateral bodies. Therefore with the
ratification of these instruments, the protocol and international
convention, the people of South Africa undertake to join hands with the
people of the continent and the world in the fight against all forms of
terrorism and nuclear terrorism.

Furthermore, South Africa fully supports the Global Campaign Against
Terrorism within the framework of the UN and contributes to the efforts of
regional and other multilateral organisations; in this regard, SADC, the
Non-Aligned Movement, the Commonwealth and AU.

In the International Campaign Against Terrorism, South Africa regards it as
important to focus on the root causes of terrorism and to develop
appropriate strategies to address them. In this regard concerted efforts
must be made to end perennial conflicts such as the Middle East conflict.
Very important is the view that South Africa has that the International
Campaign Against Terrorism should include a worldwide joint commitment to
eradicate poverty and underdevelopment.

The issue of terrorism should not push development off the international
agenda. Similarly, the combating of terrorism cannot take place at the
expense of civil liberties and human rights. Thank you.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order! I shall now put the
question in respect of the third order. The question is that the Report be
adopted. As this decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution, I need to ascertain very clearly whether delegation heads are
present. Are all delegation heads present?

I shall now also allow provinces the opportunity to make their declarations
in terms of Rule 71 if they so wish. Is there any province wishing to make
a declaration of vote? There is obviously none.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: Eastern Cape supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI (Gauteng): Siyaxhasa. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal in favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Limpopo?

Delegation head not present.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Northern Cape?
Mr M A SULLIMAN: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke ya rona. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Eight provinces voted in favour.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
      AFFAIRS ON THE PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION FROM OFFICE OF MR MATEREKE,
 ADDITIONAL MAGISTRATE AT THE MAGISTRATE’S COURT, JOHANNESBURG, IN TERMS OF
                  SECTION 13(3)(b) OF THE MAGISTRATE’S ACT,
                          1993 (ACT NO 90 OF 1993)

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
    AFFAIRS ON THE PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION FROM OFFICE OF MR I X MASIMINI,
  ADDDITIONAL MAGISTRATE AT THE MAGISTRATE’S COURT, QUEENSTOWN, IN TERMS OF
       SECTION 13(3) OF THE MAGISTRATE’S ACT, 1993 (ACT NO 90 OF 1993)

Mr S SHICEKA: Thank you, House Chairperson, this is the first time that I
have been allocated 15 minutes. I therefore feel honoured and privileged to
be speaking for such a long time. I will talk about the issue of the
magistrates.

The masses of our people expect us as their public representatives to
ensure that we transform and protect the integrity of the judicial system,
so as to ensure that we promote the confidence of our people in the courts.
We are building a society, which the masses of our people had been
alienated from; a system where it was the face of the apartheid enforcement
agency that had to ensure that the laws of apartheid were enforced. It is
in this context that the committee supports the removal of those in our
midst who are involved in corrupt activities and also involved in criminal
activities, as well as serious misconduct. I am talking about those who sit
on our benches and who have to judge others.

As the Republic of South Africa, we are trying to build a society that is
morally grounded and we must ensure that the judicial system is at the
forefront of upholding the rule of law. The Freedom Charter says that all
shall be equal before the law and no one is above the law. The committee
has engaged on this issue and it believes that the magistracy must show
good behaviour in its conduct.

We are supporting the provisional suspension of Mr Matereke. The courts
found him guilty on 16 August. He was found guilty of murder and assault.
This man is still being paid, while he is in prison. We are therefore
saying that he must be suspended provisionally. We are saying to the
Magistrates Commission that they should consider the fact that he be
removed immediately, because he has been found guilty by the courts of law.
He cannot continue to get a salary, thus exploiting the taxpayer.

At the same time, we are moving on to the issue of Mr Masimini. He was
involved in assault and he was charged and it was recommended that he
undergo counselling. Three days after that judgment was given, he was
involved in another assault attempt, where he assaulted a woman in a
tavern. She had an open wound on her chin. We are therefore saying that the
recommendation of the Magistrates Commission, namely that he must remain in
office, cannot be supported.

This man is a danger to himself and to society in general. He must be
suspended from the Bench and be given the responsibility of working within
the administration, maybe as a clerk. He should not act in a position where
he judges others. That man does not deserve to be in that position. We are
also saying to the Magistrates Commission that they must take seriously
their responsibility of ensuring that people are dealt with and are
disciplined, whilst the due process of the law continues in the court. That
is, internal processes of discipline must be conducted when dealing with
individuals who are charged and they should not wait for the courts first
to find guilty those who committed those misdemeanours, as was the case
with Mr Matekere. Mr Matekere was only found guilty by the Magistrates
Commission three years, five months and five days after the misdemeanour
was committed.

That is why we are saying that our people need to have confidence in our
magistrates and in those that sit on the Bench and they must be beyond
reproach. We are saying the law must take its course immediately. We must
make sure that it is not postponed or delayed. If it is delayed, it creates
the wrong impression and it taints the Bench.

In that respect, as the committee, we support the fact that these gentlemen
should be dealt with as was recommended and be removed from the Bench.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): I shall now put the question. The
question is that the report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all delegation heads are present in the Chamber.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province that
wants to make a declaration? We shall now proceed to voting in alphabetical
order. Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: Eastern Cape is in favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Ondersteun. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Elethu. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Limpopo?
Delegation head not present.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: iMpumalanga iyasekela. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Ke ya rona. [Northern Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): North West?

Mr Z C KOLWENI: Ke ya rona. [North West supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Western Cape supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Eight provinces have voted in
favour.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): I shall now put the question in
respect of the fifth order. The question is that the report be adopted. As
the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the
Chamber.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province that
wants to make a declaration? We shall now proceed to voting in alphabetical
order. Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: Eastern Cape supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Egoli iyaxhasa. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal elethu. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Limpopo?

Delegation head not present.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: iMpumalanga iyaxhasa. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Ondersteun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): North West?

Mr Z C KOLWENI: Ke ya rona. [North West supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Western Cape supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Eight provinces have voted in
favour.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 15:43.

                                 __________





                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                         WEDNESDAY, 18 OCTOBER 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    Translation of Bills submitted


     (1)    The Minister of Safety and Security


          a) Wysigingswetsontwerp op Beheer van Vuurwapens [W 12 – 2006]
             (National Assembly – sec 75)


             This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the
             Firearms Control Amendment Bill [B 12 – 2006] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     a) Report of the Auditor-General on the findings identified during an
        investigation into procurement at the Companies and Intellectual
        Property Registration Office (CIPRO) – September 2006 [RP 245-
        2006].


COMMITTEE REPORTS





National Council of Provinces


1. Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs on the
  International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism,
  dated 18 October 2006:

     The Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs, having considered
     the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
     Terrorism, reports that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.

2. Report of the Select Committee on Social Services on the Oversight visit
  to the Western Cape Province, 31 July – 04 August 2006:




  Introduction


  The Select Committee on Social Services undertook  a  study  tour  to  the
  Western Cape Province from 31 July – 04 August 2006. The  purpose  of  the
  study tour was for the Committee to exercise its  oversight  function,  as
  mandated by the Constitution. The primary  objectives  of  the  provincial
  visit included:

    • To conduct oversight over  the  management  and  quality  of  services
      rendered in respect to social development, health and home affairs.
    • To  inspect  various  health,  social  development  and  Home  Affairs
      facilities, in order to determine the state of physical infrastructure
      and equipment.
    • Identify progress made and challenges that are being experienced by
      all the stakeholders.


  The Committee has prioritized the provinces, which they wanted to visit
  during the 2006/07 financial year and the Committee identified the Western
  Cape Province as a priority.


  The  regions  identified  by  the  Committee  were:  the  Cape  Metropole,
  Worcester, Oudtshoorn and George.


  The information was gained by interacting with the MECs, HODs and Regional
  Managers of the Provincial Departments of Social  Development  and  Health
  and the Department  of  Home  Affairs.  Before  the  oversight  visit  was
  undertaken the Committee identified the regions which they wanted to visit
  and the aim is to visit the rural areas, where service delivery is not  up
  to standard (Batho Pele).


  Limitations of the report:
    • The fact that the whole of the Western  Cape  Province  could  not  be
      visited, but only parts of it.
    • The Committee was unable to visit Oudtshoorn, as was scheduled, due to
      roads beings closed due to floods.


   1. Social Development

   1. Meeting with the MEC: Ms Mqulwana


The MEC stated that it is a challenge for the department to separate the  SA
Social  Security  (SASSA)  from  the   provincial   Department   of   Social
Development, but in saying this at the same time both SASSA  and  provincial
Department of Social Development (PDSD) must ensure that  beneficiaries  get
good quality service delivery.

The MEC noted that in the department there is a lack of  transformation  and
this relates to a lack of redistribution of  resources,  equity  etc.  where
example in Khayelitsha 1 social worker is serving 17  000  people.  The  MEC
noted that a task team has been established to  look  at  transformation  in
the department.

The MEC said that 25%  of  the  budget  has  been  set  aside  to  establish
organisations where there were none previously. She further noted  that  the
bureaucracy is hampering service delivery. The MEC  informed  the  Committee
that the Department has  changed  its  name  to  the  Department  of  Social
Development  (previously  Department  of   Social   Services   and   Poverty
Alleviation).

The MEC stated that 80% of the projects funded by the department are led  by
women.

1.2. Briefing by the Department of Social Development

The HOD briefed  the  Committee  on  the  strategic  goals  and  the  budget
structure of the Department.

On the issue of children in correctional facilities  in  the  Western  Cape,
the HOD stated that on average there  are  2  200  arrests  per  month.  She
further noted that a benchmark of 150 children  in  correctional  facilities
in the province was set  by  the  department  as  part  of  an  intervention
strategy. It was stated that there are  142  children  in  prisons  awaiting
trial and that 86 of these children are in Pollsmoor Prison. The  Department
informed the Committee that additional probation officers were  employed  to
assist  and  that  an  interdepartmental  task  team  has  been  set  up  to
streamline procedures.

With regard to the management of children the Department stated  that  every
child is assessed by a probation officer within 12 hours of arrest and  that
follow-ups are done on children in correctional  centres  for  placement  at
suitable alternatives and  that  there  are  monthly  reviews  on  cases  of
children awaiting trial.

Challenges  which  are  faced  by  the  department  concerning  child-headed
households are that census information is not  helpful  in  identifying  the
extent  of  the  problem.  The  department  further  noted  that  the  Draft
Children’s Amendment Bill 2006 addresses child-headed households and sees  a
child over the age of 15 as a head of a  household,  and  that  this  is  in
conflict with other legislation that specifies that to qualify as  a  foster
parent  you  must  be  18  years  and  older.  Another  challenge  is   that
organisations do not provide details of child-headed households  but  rather
orphaned and vulnerable  children,  and  that  internal  statistics  reflect
children in foster or alternative care  and  not  as  a  household  head.  A
challenge for the department is that children who are living  on  their  own
might not know  how  to  access  support  services  and  in  some  instances
children fear being removed from the environment they know.  The  department
stated that preliminary costing of  the  implementation  of  the  Children’s
Bill indicate that at least 52% of funds  to  implement  will  be  spent  on
orphaned children as a result of HIV/AIDS.

The department stated that in the absence of reliable data the  departmental
focus has been orphaned and vulnerable children that includes  child  headed
households. The department further noted that foster care placement  is  one
of the options exercised to address  the  needs  of  orphans  and  that  the
department  currently  funds  18  shelters  for  children  that  accommodate
approximately 387 children in the province and that 181 NGOs, CBOs and  FBOs
are funded that  work  exclusively  with  families  and  children  including
HIV/AIDS and partners and include the Departments of Health,  Education  and
Local Government. Much emphasis  will  be  placed  on  family  strengthening
programmes in the province  that  will  focus  on  the  care  of  vulnerable
children through building the capacity of communities and families.

3. Clarity seeking, comments and questions


With regard to substance abuse in the province,  with  reference  to  “tik”,
the MEC stated that 1 000 young people have been  recruited  to  assist  the
department in this regard.

The MEC stated that w.r.t. ECD the department is taking the lead in Grade  R
and the department of Education is assisting with the  curricula,  but  that
there is a close working relationship with the departments of Education  and
Health.

The department worked with the Unicity regarding street  children  and  last
year the department gave R2 million for this project.

On the issue of soup kitchens the HOD stated that the cut-off time for  soup
kitchens is 6 months, the reason being that the department does  not  foster
“dependency”.

1.4. Visit to Sarepta Home for Older Persons

1.4.1. Introduction and background

The manager of the facility, Ms La Poorta briefed the delegation and  stated
the following: The facility is registered to accommodate 150 frail and  aged
persons and  falls  under  the  auspices  of  the  Apostolic  Faith  Mission
Church’s Welfare Commission. The board and management have  transformed  and
is representative of the demographics of the Western Cape. The  facility  is
situated in  a  predominantly  coloured  residential  area  and  enjoys  the
support of the  local  community.  The  current  manager  has  been  in  the
position for several years.

The facility has a staff component of 52 consisting of 33 nursing staff,  16
general workers, 1 administrative officer, 1 secretary and 1 manager.

The residents come from all areas (metro and peri-urban) and not  only  from
the Kuilsriver community, and currently there are 146  residents  consisting
of 81 women and 64 men with 81% of the residents being frail.

The facility manager stated that all the grant  payments  of  residents  are
paid to the facility, this translates to  R840,00  X  146  residents.  Other
sources of financial income is obtained from donations, bequests  and  fund-
raising events. The state subsidy is the largest financial  support  to  the
facility. The total subsidy transferred  to  the  facility  for  the  period
April ’05 – March ’06 totalled R1 923 525.00.

The manager informed the delegation that the regional office  (Eerste  River
District Office) the facility complied with requirements and  the  residents
seemed contented and happy.
The following challenges exist at the facility:

 • Except for administrative  staff  members,  the  provision  of  both  the
   nursing staff and the kitchen are outsourced.
 • In the past the department received numerous complaints about the care of
   the residents, and according to the manager, outsourcing  these  services
   improved the service at the facility.

The delegation enquired whether the facility has a  well-functioning  board.
The manager stated that the Board consists of 7 people (2  residents  and  5
from the community) and that it is functioning.

The manager informed the delegation that many of the residents do  not  have
family members and that even those that do have, are not visited  regularly.
She further noted  that  the  institution  buys  the  residents  clothes  on
special occasions, and that they look after the residents everyday needs.

The delegation enquired what happens to those “residents” who are unable  to
pay for their burial, and the manager replied that family  and  friends  are
asked to assist in  this  regard  and  if  they  are  unable  to,  then  the
institution will  pay  the  undertaker  for  the  service  who  charges  the
institution a special rate.

With regard to residents  visiting  their  family  members,  the  delegation
enquired what is being done by the institution to  assist  in  this  regard.
The manager stated that some of the resident’s family members come  to  pick
them up, but in the event that family  members  do  not  have  transport  to
fetch them (the  institution  does  have  a  combi  for  home  visits),  the
institution takes them to their family members and collects them again.

The delegation asked whether or not a  well-functioning  committee  for  the
residents exists at the institution? The manager stated  that  many  of  the
residents are mentally incapacitated  and  because  of  this  the  committee
lapsed.
In  conclusion  the  delegation  raised  concern  regarding   the   terrible
conditions under which the residents are living  in  the  facility.  As  the
delegation for example toured the facility  they  found  that  the  blankets
which the  residents  are  sleeping  under  are  tattered  and  ragged.  The
delegation visited the facility during the afternoon and it  was  cold,  but
in the “entertainment area” there were no heaters,  the  result  being  that
residents there were getting cold.

1.4.2. Recommendations
      • That the institution  needs  to  explore  best  practices  in  e.g.
        Northern Cape where old age homes pay  fees  to  AVBOB  for  burial
        services
      • That the institution can play a greater role w.r.t. home visits.
      • That follow-up visits be made to the old age home.


 2. HEALTH

 1. Meeting with the MEC of Health: Mr P Uys


The MEC stated that 70% of the 4,2 million people in  the  Western  Cape  do
not have medical insurance and that many  people  come  for  primary  health
care (PHC).  He  further  noted  that  tuberculosis  is  very  high  in  the
province, but in saying this the  Western Cape has one of the  highest  cure
rates of all the provinces in  the  country;  and  he  further  stated  that
chronic diseases are also on the increase in  the  province  e.g.  diabetes,
asthma etc.

The MEC informed the Committee that there is a major demand  for  facilities
especially PHC, due to the influx of people, from various provinces, to  the
Western Cape.

2.2. Briefing by the Department of Health

The department stated that  the  Comprehensive  Plan  for  HIV/AIDS  in  the
province is to ensure that those  citizens  who  are  not  infected,  remain
uninfected;  and  to  enhance  efforts  in  prophylaxis  and  treatment   of
opportunistic infections and to improve nutrient and lifestyle  choices;  as
well as the effective management of HIV-infected people who  have  developed
AIDS.

With regard to  Voluntary  Counselling  and  Testing  (VCT)  the  department
stated that pre- and post-counselling is being done  and  if  found  that  a
person is positive, he/she will be referred to appropriate medical care  and
if negative to re-inforce safe sexual behaviour. VCT  is  available  at  all
446 health facility sites and 373 lay counsellors are employed via 23  NGOs.
Results of VCT in province include: 283 834  persons  older  than  15  years
counselled and 262 792 persons older than 15 years tested for HIV/AIDS.

The department stated that the there are 43 operational  sites  and  16  343
clients on treatment for Antiretroviral (ARV) Treatment Programme  (2005/06)
and the target for 2006/07 is 50 operational sites and  22  489  clients  on
treatment. The department informed the Committee that at the end of June  06
there were 18 941 patients on treatment.

Progress w.r.t. Community Home-Based Care (CHBC) is that during  2005/06  10
220 HBC clients was seen and of these 1871 were HIV clients, 857 TB  clients
and 187 TB/HIV. The department stated that 1 630 carers were  being  trained
on part qualification of the NQF level 1 of the  National  Auxiliary  Health
Worker Certificate.

The department stated  that  some  of  its  major  challenges  include:  the
integration/mainstreaming of the Comprehensive Plan in the  District  Health
System (DHS); the prevention/promotion of the behavioural change of  clients
and staff; and the  case  load  in  the  “high  prevalence  areas”,  due  to
migration.

In  conclusion  the  department  stated  that  the  implementation  of   the
comprehensive plan is progressing well; the HBC programme will be  expanding
rapidly; PMTCT programme has excellent outcomes; and the  VCT  programme  is
progressing well.

The department further briefed the Committee on the Hospital  Revitalisation
Programme in the Western Cape and quality assurance.

2.3. Clarity seeking, comments and questions

The department stated that they do train doctors and that there  is  a  need
to review the policy on those staff who took severance packages, since  many
have left and that the salary levels of nurses have to  be  looked  at.  The
department said that  six  (6)  nursing  schools  are  providing  in-service
training,  which  is  taking  place  at  the  facility  and  the  department
reiterated that the number of nursing schools has to increase.

The department noted that a site has  been  identified  in  the  Khayelitsha
area, but the delay is now with the City.

Members raised concern on the issue of Emergency Medical Services (EMS)  and
the department stated that they are working on this and  that  a  budget  of
R230 million has been set aside for this purpose. The MEC  also  noted  that
many volunteers are assisting in this programme.
With regard to infrastructure the department stated that they  had  problems
(e.g. R15 million which was underspent), but they  noted  that  the  current
budget of R149 million will be spent.

The department stated  that  TOP  is  performed  and  that  there  is  staff
rendering this service, but the  department’s  main  concern  is  the  young
girls coming repeatedly.

2.4. Recommendations

    • That the issue of nursing schools be taken up by the Committee to  the
      National Minister and the national Department of Health.
    • That the Committee allocate sufficient time for meetings with MECs and
      the departments



2.5. VISIT TO GUGULETHU KTC DAY HOSPITAL

2.5.1. Introduction

The  Facility  Manager  stated  that  the  hospital  provides  Comprehensive
Primary Health Care services and that they see patients with minor  ailments
who are referred from other centres. The hospital has 24  registered  nurses
and 8 doctors and it is  operational  over  weekends  and  public  holidays.
There is a psychologist at the hospital.

The hospital sees chronic patients e.g. diabetes, cardiac, asthma,  epilepsy
etc. Currently the hospital provides for the first level  of  TB,  but  they
are in the process of rolling it out comprehensively. The monthly intake  of
TB patients is 50 where they test to identify whether the patients  have  TB
and if so they refer them to the Gugulethu local clinic.

With regard to school health the Facility Manager said that nurses do  visit
schools in the area to educate learners regarding health issues.

2.5.2. Budget of the centre

The budget of the facility is centralised.

2.5.3. Infrastructure

The hospital has been upgraded during  the  past  years,  but  the  facility
manager stated that the community in this area is very destructive, but  the
hospital has 4 security guards at the gate and 3 inside  the  centre.  There
are leakages in the roof at the hospital and a requisition has been sent  to
Head  Office  for  the  repair  thereof.  There  are  8  computers  for  the
development of the staff as well as for the community.

2.5.4. Challenges

The facility  manager  informed  the  Committee  that  a  challenge  at  the
hospital is to recruit people to  work  after  hours  in  the  trauma  unit.
Another challenge is the long delays of EMS.

2.5.5. Clarity-seeking, comments and questions

The facility manager stated that  the  waiting  time  at  the  hospital  are
problematic and patients at times have to wait for 4 hours.

The facility manager noted that teenage pregnancies are very high  and  that
it is a problem in the area, and the hospital does not  perform  Termination
of Pregnancy (TOP), but that they do referrals.

The facility manager informed the Committee that there  are  various  vacant
posts and that there is a high vacancy turnover rate at the hospital.  There
is a full time social worker at the hospital and on every shift there  is  a
Registered Nurse in charge  and  even  during  the  electric  blackouts  the
hospital  experienced  minor  setbacks,  the  reason  being  that  there  is
generator at the hospital.

2.5.6. Recommendation
    • Members stated that the response time for EMS is a worrying factor and
      this will be taken up with the National Minister  of  Health  and  the
      Provincial MEC of Health.

2.6. VISIT TO LANGA WASHINGTON CLINIC

2.6.1. Background

Langa is the oldest “black township”  in  Cape  Town  and  contains  both  a
formal and informal settlement. A significant percentage of  the  population
resides in the informal settlement. This is a highly mobile  sector  due  to
both high rates of urban – rural migration to the former homelands areas  of
Ciskei and Transkei in the Eastern Cape and the  movement  between  informal
areas within Cape Town.
The rate of unemployment in the area is high with many inhabitants  existing
below the poverty line and the suburb is one  of  great  need  with  an  HIV
prevalence and the TB incidence is about 1500/100 000.

2.6.2. Infrastructure

Staff  at  the  clinic  comprises  a  facility  manager,  2  clinical  nurse
practitioners, 6 professional nurses, 2 enrolled nurses,  3  enrolled  nurse
assistants, 1 administrative assistant and 4 lay-counsellors.

The facility manager stated that it is envisaged to extend  the  clinic  and
that plans have been approved.

2.6.3. Services rendered

The facility manager informed the Committee  that  ARV  was  rolled  out  in
January 2004 and 25% of TB patients are on ARV  and  that  the  clinic  sees
about 800 patients per month for ARV.

The clinic is open from 8am – 16:30pm, but at  times  it  necessitates  that
staff comes in earlier because  of  the  TB  patients.  The  clinic  has  an
outstanding cure rate of TB which is at 89%.

With regard to VCT the clinic received a trophy  from  the  City  for  their
services rendered. In 2004/05 the head count  was  130  000  people  and  in
2005/06 112 000. The facility manager stated that  they  see  about  9000  –
14000 people a month.

2.6.4. Challenges

The facility manager stated that space is a problem at the clinic. There  is
also a shortage of clerks for  filing,  the  reason  being  that  files  are
piling  up  for  data  capturing.  EMS  is  a  major  problem  in  the  area
(especially response time), because in certain circumstances staff  have  to
drive patients with the council car to the hospital.

2.6.5. Clarity-seeking, comments and questions

The facility manager informed the committee that TB is on  the  increase  in
the area and the clinic does not  render  antenatal  services  (there  is  a
clinic close by) and for ARV there is 1 doctor  and  1  doctor  for  TB  who
comes in 3 mornings a week and the other doctor twice a week.

With regard to TOP, whoever needs it comes to  the  clinic  for  counselling
and then gets referred to the appropriate  facility.  The  facility  manager
stated that many young girls frequently come in for this service  (at  times
– the same girl - up to 4 times) and a study is currently being done  as  to
why they do not come for reproductive health. She further  noted  that  even
HIV patients do not want to use condoms.

The facility manager stated that at times the clinic runs  out  of  medicine
(at times for a month), and this is very demotivating  for  staff,  but  the
clinic does not run out of TB medicine and ARV.

The clinic’s waiting time is 60 minutes (1 hour), where  the  patient  comes
in, gets a file (every patient has a file), and then  waits  to  be  called.
There is 1 doctor for two mornings, 1 doctor 5 days  all  day,  1  doctor  4
days a week (which is to be changed from September 2006 to 5 half days)  and
1 doctor Friday mornings.

2.7. VISIT TO MICHAEL MAPHONGWANA COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTRE - KHAYELITSHA

2.7.1. Background

Michael Maphongwana Community Health Centre is based in Harare,  Khayelitsha
and it caters for the previously disadvantaged communities, with low  socio-
economic status. The facility is  rendering  all  the  primary  health  care
services.

The centre sees about 8 000 to 12  000  patients  per  month  for  different
medical reasons. Presently  there  are  115  staff  members  from  different
categories. The operational  budget  of  the  centre  amounts  to  R22m  for
2006/07. About 62, 8% of the budget goes for the remuneration  of  employees
and the remaining 38, 2% is for goods  and  services.  Operating  hours  are
07:30 – 16:30 and 24 hours for the MOU  labour  ward  as  well  as  security
personnel.

2.7.2. Clarity-seeking, comments and questions

TOP is done by the facility (12 weeks and below) and if 16  weeks  then  the
patient is referred to GF Jooste and there are people who  returns  for  the
service.

The centre manager stated that submissions have  been  made  to  expand  the
facility with various extensions, but he noted that a district  hospital  is
envisaged to be build across the facility

It was noted by the management that EMS response time is  poor  as  well  as
transport at the hospital itself.

The centre sees about 12 000 patients  per  month  and  the  center  manager
noted that Khayalitsha makes up 27% of  HIV/AIDS  patients  in  the  Western
Cape. He further noted that migration has an affect on the centre as well.

The centre  manager  further  noted  that  substance  abuse  is  not  really
significant in the area, but that teenage pregnancy is very.

2.8. Visit to Eben Donges Hospital – Worcester

2.8.1. Background

Eben Donges is a regional hospital, and serves  the  whole  Boland  Overberg
region. The hospital  is  currently  in  a  revitalisation  phase  and  when
completed in 2008, it will be bigger, with new equipment, and staff  trained
not only in their fields but also in new methods of management.

In the new out-patient clinics, patients will be able to  consult  different
kinds of doctors, therapists, social workers  and  counsellors.  The  trauma
centre is open 24 hours a day  and  no  patient  needing  emergency  medical
attention is shown away.

The hospital is one of two hospitals in the Western Cape that  is  currently
being revitalised by the department of Health. The 33-year-old  hospital  in
Worcester will see its  exterior  and  interior  completely  revamped,  with
extensive building alterations over the next 4  years.  In  2001  three  new
wards were built as part of a National Hospital  Upgrading  project  by  the
Department of Health. A casualty wing, a new out-patients department  and  a
new training centre is to be added to the main hospital building.
2.8.2. The Revitalisation project will include:

    • A new Emergency Unit, providing an adequate trauma unit, serving as  a
      first base for trauma on the N1.
    • Day Surgery Unit, providing services for procedures required  by  out-
      patients
    • A kangaroo unit, which will extend the existing capacity to 14 beds
    • Extension in the Intensive Care Unit  to  7  beds,  improving  on  the
      existing three bed ICU
    • An 8-bed Burns Unit
    • A 6 bed Acute Care Centre for Psychiatry patients
    • A new Human  Resource  Development  section,  equipped  to  serve  the
      training needs  of  the  entire  Boland/Overberg  Health  region  with
      training focussed on clinical issues.
    • A modern training centre with lecture theatre and classrooms  will  be
      built.
    • A renovated and extended out-patients department.
    • 4 operating theatres
    • Improved site and emergency unit security  to  ensure  the  safety  of
      patients and staff.

2.8.3. Clarity-seeking, comments and questions

The Hospital Superintendent said that TOP is done twice a week for  patients
under 13 weeks pregnant.  Patients over 13 weeks pregnant had this  done  at
Montagu Hospital as it was temporarily  stopped  at  this  hospital  due  to
unfortunate complications.  It will  resume  at  this  institution  as  from
August 2006. Eighty percent (80 %) terminations in the region are  under  13
weeks.   Although  few  terminations  are  repeats,  the  number  is  slowly
increasing and is a concern.  An increased effort will have to  be  made  to
promote contraception.

The Select committee raised the concern that the staff of the  hospital  are
“old, sick and lazy”.  The perception might have been raised because of  the
focus of this hospital on absenteeism.  The unscheduled leave  of  staff  at
this institution is under 3%, which is very good.  All  leave,  sick  leave,
extended sick leave (PILAR) and maternity leave is reported on  every  month
at the Monitoring & Evaluation meeting.

A contractor removes medical waste  3  times  a  week.   All  placentas  are
bagged and placed in a freezer until the contractor comes to remove it.   No
medical waste is kept in the wards.  A new waste management  area  has  been
added to the hospital.

Staff morale is generally good.  A staff satisfaction survey is planned  for
mid-August.  A previous Staff satisfaction survey showed that  staff  morale
is good.  Nursing is under some strain due to staff shortages,  which  might
affect staff morale.  The Revitalisation of  the  hospital  is  a  difficult
phase as it is expected to be fully operational in the middle of a  building
site.  To cope with this,  the  hospital  has  an  intensive  programme  for
change management.


The Hospital  Superintendent  informed  the  delegation  that  the  hospital
started training Auxiliary Nurses 10 years ago when it became apparent  that
a nursing crisis was looming. This has been a very  rewarding  programme  as
the hospital train’s people for the  local  region.   Thirty  eight  percent
(38%) of all nurses employed in the region were trained  by  this  hospital.
The hospital has 95 students this year and trains for the  adjacent  regions
as well. Learners in HR and IT are  also  accommodated  here  and  they  are
remunerated according to guidelines from  our  Head  Office.   The  hospital
hopes to be able to employ them at the end of their learnership.

Under-expenditure on staff:  The  hospital  was  given  an  additional  R3,5
million in the previous financial year to  appoint  additional  specialists.
Due to problems in recruiting specialists 2  were  appointed  only  by  July
2005 and the other 3 in February  and  March  2006.   Specialist  posts  are
expensive and the under-expenditure of more than R3 Million is due to  these
posts being vacant for so long.

Over expenditure  on  Goods  and  services:  The  over-expenditure  of  R1,3
Million was incurred  when  the  department  gave  approval  for  additional
payment of the blood & laboratory account for March 2006.

The management team has 2 vacancies at his stage:  the  Assistant  Director:
Quality of Care and one nurse manager post.   The  staff  establishment  for
the new revitalised hospital is 72% filled.

The hospital is a site for ARV management.  The adherence  to  treatment  is
good and the dropout rate is under 2%.  Mortality rates are also  very  low.
The hospital superintendent stated that of the 600 adults over  400  are  on
treatment. And of the 117 children, 78 are on treatment.

The time frame for completion of the revitalized program is end 2007.   This
is more than a year later as was envisaged  in  2003.  The  total  projected
cost is R200  million.    The  contract  does  allow  for  penalties  to  be
incurred if delays are due to the contractor.  Quality of  the  building  is
closely monitored by the hospital and a report on quality issues is sent  to
Dept of Public Works on a regular basis. The hospital is  aware  that  funds
need to be made available to maintain the  building  and  equipment  in  the
future.

The delegation enquired what the waiting time is at  the  hospital  and  the
hospital superintendent replied that the hospital did a waiting time  survey
and the average waiting time at admissions and the pharmacy is  90  minutes.
Some interventions were instituted and  a  follow-up  survey  showed  a  30-
minute decrease in waiting time.

With regard to the Renal Unit the hospital is a satellite of  the  Tygerberg
Renal unit and heamo-dialysis is done  for  local  patients.   There  are  6
chairs and the hospital can manage up to 7 patients.

With  regard  to  EMS  there  are  problems  with  the  local  EMS  due   to
understaffing of vehicles.

The hospital is very aware of the shortages  of  nurses  and  doctors.   The
local training of nurses addresses it  in  some  way,  but  the  losses  are
greater than the gains at this stage.  Recruitment of doctors is not such  a
problem, but retention is a problem, as doctors leave to go and specialise.

2.9. VISIT TO GEORGE HOSPITAL

2.9.1. Background

A major revitalisation process has been completed  at  the  George  Regional
Hospital  recently.  This  major  medical  facility  serves  as  a  regional
hospital for the Southern Cape/Karoo region, as well as a district  hospital
for  George  itself.  The  project  focussed  on  the  improvement  of   the
hospital’s infrastructure, technology and services  to  them  in  line  with
international standards.

The National Minister of Health,  Dr  Manto  Tshabalala-Msimang,  officially
opened the revitalised section of the hospital.

All 550 000 residents of the Southern Cape and Karoo  regions  will  benefit
from this facility. The project was completed  during  April  2006  and  the
revitalised hospital was opened on 30 June 2006. The  original  construction
period was 24 months and after  an  increase  in  the  scope  of  works  the
contract was extended to 32 months and amounted to a total cost R152m.

2.9.2. Clarity-seeking, comments and questions

Members enquired  whether  the  hospital  experiences  any  problems  of  TB
defaulters due to changes in addresses. The  Hospital  Manager  stated  that
the TB-programme is managed by the Regional  office;  the  hospital  manages
acute TB admissions, and discharges them to the local  clinics,  where  DOTS
and sometimes  Home-Based  Care  take  over.   However,  feedback  from  the
Regional office is that there are defaulters, the rate we are  unfortunately
not able to say.

Do you have a problem with absenteeism? The hospital  went  through  a  very
bad patch about three years ago,  when  absenteeism  in  the  nursing  group
reached 38%, the hospital then had a meeting with their Labour  Caucus,  and
agreed to follow the guidelines on leave and sick leave to the  letter.   It
subsequently improved.  Currently it is at  an  acceptable  level,  and  the
fact that the Health Risk Manager has  taken  over  the  investigation  into
applications for temporary disability, has taken a lot of stress  away  from
the manager.

Members wanted to know whether or not there are any problems with  EMS,  and
how does the hospital transport patients, and what are the  responses  rates
like. The Hospital Manager said that EMS does not report  to  the  hospital.
Local  problems  are  being  addressed  by  the  hospital.    Patients   are
transported by road ambulances from the surrounding towns,  as  well  as  by
Red Cross Air Mercy helicopter.   Patients  transferred  to  Cape  Town  are
transported either by road ambulance or fixed-wing aircraft.   The  response
rates for EMS remains a challenge.  Should be 40 minutes in our area and  15
minutes in the metropolitan area; it still needs a  lot  of  improvement  to
reach target.

There is a shortage of nurses in the country, are you going to start  nurse-
training? The  hospital  is  working  very  hard  to  establish  a  training
facility at George hospital.  Their submission to the South African  Nursing
Council was supposed to be discussed at the meeting on 20 July, but  due  to
a full agenda, has to stand over to the next meeting  in  October.   In  the
meantime the hospital has appointed (on contract) a manager of  the  school,
as well as a clerk and a secretary.  One lecturer has been  appointed  on  a
fulltime basis, and the advertisement for a second lecturer is in the  media
this  week,  also  for  a  contract  post.   The  reason  for  the  contract
appointments are because they do not have posts for a training  facility  on
their establishment.  The hospital plans to  accommodate  60  students,  and
will focus on assistant to staff nurse and staff nurse to  registered  nurse
training.  Accommodation for students  from  outside  of  George  remains  a
headache. As part of performance management each  nurse  has  a  development
plan.  These training needs are  incorporated  into  the  hospital’s  Skills
Development Plan.  Weekly in-service training sessions  take  place;  nurses
are sent on short courses eg ATLS, burns, midwifery,  etc,  and  some  study
with departmental bursaries (theatre, ophthalmology, admin).

In terms of Waste Management and incinerators  the  service  is  outsourced.
There is an Infection Control Committee, meeting every two months,  as  well
as an Infection Control Sister.

Members raised the concern that the hospital has overspent its  budget,  and
where they got the “budget” from? The hospital manager  stated  that  it  is
policy that the amount overspent  should  be  deducted  from  the  following
year’s budget.  So far it has never happened.   However,  in  the  last  two
years they did not overspend.

Payment of patient fees is a major  concern  across  the  country,  and  the
delegation enquired whether this is so  at  George  Hospital?  The  hospital
management team replied that they found that previously it was  usually  the
older patients who are very conscientious with regards  to  paying  for  the
services.  However, there are patients who lie about their income,  and  pay
minimally for the service.  The hospital would like to have a private  ward,
but because of bed-pressures it is impossible to do so.  The  hospital  does
attract private patients and patients on medical aid,  who  share  the  ward
with our state patients.  Because facilities are of a  high  standard,  they
actually have little to complain about.

During other oversight visits to provinces the delegation enquired if  there
are any repeat TOPs and are there strategies to prevent come-backs? The TOP-
programme is co-ordinated by the  Regional  Office  and  patients  are  only
referred to the hospital for  the  actual  procedure.   There  are  definite
repeats, and the Regional director has requested the programme  co-ordinator
to research the issue of come-backs and the need for TOPs  above  12  weeks.
Her stance is that the system should work optimally and  that  all  patients
should be captured before 12 weeks.

Due to the many power failures that the Western Cape has undergone does  the
hospital have adequate back-up in terms of electricity to prevent  what  had
happened in East-London? The hospital manager stated that they do  have  two
back-up generators which  are  tested  every  week,  and  maintained  on  an
ongoing basis.

The hospital manager stated that the learnership programme  is  co-ordinated
by the Regional  Office,  catering  for  the  needs  of  the  whole  region.
Currently we have learners for basic and post-basic pharmacy assistants  and
nursing assistants.

The delegation enquired w.r.t. the number of critical posts  which  are  not
filled and the hospital responded by  stating  that  currently  the  nursing
crisis is impacting on our service, simply because we cannot recruit  enough
nurses.  In the admin department we have a crisis in the  HRM-section.   For
the expansion and commissioning of new areas we need money.

The delegation wanted to know whether the budget is adequate in relation  to
your needs? The hospital manager stated that the standard  answer  would  be
the budget is not enough to cover all the needs.  However, using  population
as a guide is dangerous,  because  the  census  figures  are  not  reliable.
Using the Core Package of  Service  for  Secondary  hospitals  is  also  not
reliable, as the hospital has a component of Tertiary Services  that  should
actually be funded by the National Tertiary Services Grant.  If  that  could
be sorted out, as well as the  need  for  a  district  hospital  in  George,
leaving the hospital only to  concentrate  on  secondary  care,  the  budget
might be enough.

3. South African Social Security Agency (SASSA)


The Committee was briefed by the Acting  Regional  Head  of  SASSA  (Western
Cape), Mr D. Plaatjies.
Service delivery improvement initiatives which  was  embarked  on  by  SASSA
include the application turnaround time. The purpose is to reduce  the  time
from application to approval. The current turnaround  time  is  35  days.  A
pilot was launched in the Eastern Cape, Western  Cape  and  Mpumalanga.  The
pilot was completed in the Bellville office (Western Cape)  and  rolled  out
to the Worcester and Atlantis offices. It is envisaged to  be  implement  at
the other 13 local offices as from July 2006 till 31 March 2006. The  impact
of this is that: there are no backlogs, same day notifications, decrease  in
enquiries, savings on postage etc.

3.1. SASSA establishment in the Western Cape
With regard to the establishment in the Western  Cape  the  regional  office
has been established, but certain support functions were still performed  at
Head office of the Provincial Department of Social Development. The  interim
management team is in place at the regional office and 16 local offices  are
delivering full grant administration function.

3.2. Facilities and management systems

The regional office was completed and occupied by SASSA staff since  January
2006 and the ICT infrastructure is installed and operational as well as  the
financial support systems. A total of 18 local offices have been  identified
to move to new premises.

3.3. Recruitment

Various posts was identified as critical which was  subsequently  filled  at
the regional office as well as local office.

3.4. Western Cape Transfer Budget

The budget for 2005/06 amounted to R4 238 905.00 and the budget for  2006/07
amounts to R4 613 710 588.00 and a  monthly  amount  of  R368m  is  paid  to
beneficiaries. The beneficiaries  receive  their  monthly  payments  through
either banks, post office (Walvis Bay) or ALLPAY and  all  expenditures  are
monitored on a monthly basis.

Presently there are 755 411 beneficiaries  in  the  Western  Cape  receiving
various grants.

3.5. Improvement of paypoints

SASSA is continuously evaluating all pay points to  improve  the  conditions
under which monthly payments occur and this is done in conjunction with  the
service provider.

3.6. Protecting beneficiaries: Moneylending campaign

Specially designed pamphlets are distributed at pay points and  imbizos  and
from time to time identified pay points are  visited  and  moneylenders  are
confronted and warned and stakeholders were identified to  assist  with  the
monitoring process. Discussions were  held  with  Black  Sash  regarding  an
educational programme for beneficiaries, and a business plan  was  finalized
but the monetary allocation is still to be made to Black Sash.

3.7. Clarity seeking, comments and questions

The Regional Manager informed the Committee  that  the  current  application
turnaround time is 35 days.

The Agency stated that service should revolve around the  beneficiary  where
for e.g. it concerns general payments of grants; if there are older  persons
in the queue they should receive preference.

With regard to the payment of grants into bank accounts and  with  this  the
reduction of banking costs, SASSA stated that there  are  no  reduced  costs
with the banks, but that SASSA Head Office is in talks with  the  Commercial
Banks to reduce the costs and that this will form part of the new tender.

Members raised concern with regard  to  the  number  of  contract  staff  in
SASSA’s service. It was stated that these  contract  workers  have  a  fixed
term contract of 3 years, and SASSA noted that they  are  unable  to  create
permanency  for  these  workers.  They  further  noted  that  in  July  2006
Administration Clerk posts were  advertised  and  issues  that  need  to  be
looked at are racial and gender  issues.  SASSA  explained  that  posts  are
firstly  advertised  internally  to  ascertain  if  there  are  no  suitable
candidates within and then externally. Members enquired whether  the  salary
these contract workers receive is the only compensation, and  SASSA  replied
that the contract workers do receive an additional 30% benefits.

It was stated by the Regional Manager that  SASSA  has  adopted  a  Customer
Excellence throughout the country and it is  envisaged  that  the  level  of
service should be the same throughout the country, and with  this  that  the
Agency has to adopt and change the infrastructure, and one  e.g.  to  enable
beneficiaries to obtain their grant anywhere in the country.

3.8. Recommendation

    • Members raised concern when it was stated by SASSA that in  the  event
      that a beneficiary passes away the day or  a  couple  of  days  before
      payment, that that money which is due to the deceased beneficiary  can
      only be claimed after the person has been buried. Members stated  that
      in many instances that money “owed” will assist the family members  to
      bury the deceased.

3.9. VISIT TO SASSA REGIONAL OFFICE – BELLVILLE

At the Bellville Regional Offices the Agency gave  a  demonstration  to  the
delegation on the turnaround time of applications.
3.10. VISIT TO SASSA REGIONAL OFFICE - WORCESTER

3.10.1. Introduction

The  delegation   was   briefed   on   the   following:   Human   Resources,
Infrastructure, turn-around time  of  applications,  anti-fraud  mechanisms,
achievements and challenges at the regional office

3.10.2. Clarity seeking, comments and questions

On the issue of money lenders the Agency stated that this  a  project  which
has been running for years and that beneficiaries are  educated  as  to  the
“dangers” of this and the Agency  even  went  so  far  as  to  arrest  these
people.

The Agency stated that a specific day is set out for the payment  of  grants
to older persons and older persons do get preferential  treatment  on  other
pay days and the Agency  has  been  consulting  different  organisations  to
educate older persons.

Members  enquired  what  the  situation  is  with  regard  to   the   grants
beneficiaries received which is then given  to  institutions  e.g.  old  age
homes etc. The Agency stated that there is no set formula and that it  is  a
certain process which goes through  SOCPEN  and  that  it  is  an  agreement
between the institution and the beneficiary. The  Provincial  Department  of
Social Development stated that the monitoring of this is a huge problem  for
the department. They further noted that a Monitoring and Evaluation (M &  E)
Directorate has been established at Head  Office  which  visited  about  600
institutions. It is envisaged to decentralize M & E to the districts,  since
the districts are in a better position to deal with this.

With regard to foster care placements the department  stated  that  after  2
years the social worker must report to the department what has been done  to
place this child permanently. The department  stated  that  they  rely  very
much on strong community-based organisations.  The  department  stated  that
social workers are a major problem in the rural areas, but there  is  a  24-
hours service at  the  office  to  phone  the  social  workers  in  case  of
emergencies.

On the issue of the volunteers as commissioners of oaths the  Agency  stated
that they make use of the SA Police Service  as  well  as  Commissioners  of
Oaths  as  appointed  by  the  Department  of  Justice  and   Constitutional
Development, but that there are still problems.  SAPS  complained  that  the
Agency was clogging up their processes with the number  of  documents.  What
is needed is a network of commissioners.

SASSA  stated  that  they  do  make  available  funds  for  doctors  to  the
Department of Health, where these doctors go to the  clinics  and  hospitals
to check where the backlogs are.

3.10.3. Recommendations

       • That the issue of money lending and the confiscating of  cards  in
         the region are re-looked at and that the  culprits  must  not  get
         away with it and those beneficiaries need to be protected  against
         this “practice”.
       • That the shortage of Commissioners  of  Oaths  in  the  region  be
         addressed.


4.  DEPARTMENT OF HOME AFFAIRS


4.1. Visit to Department of Home Affairs Regional Offices – Worcester

The Provincial Manager (Western Cape) of  the  Department  of  Home  Affairs
briefed the Committee on state of affairs in the  province,  with  reference
to  Human  Resources,   Budget,   Infrastructure,   Service   delivery   and
Partnerships and outreach programmes.

After the presentation of the Provincial Manager, the Regional  Manager  for
the sub-region briefed the Committee.

The Regional Manager informed the Committee that the  District  Office  (DO)
Worcester is one of three districts under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Paarl
Regional Office.

He noted that Worcester is serving various areas including  Ceres,  Tulbagh,
Robertson etc, of which the furthest distance is 85 km. It operates  with  a
personnel of 17 officials. The online hospital in  the  sub-region  is  Eben
Donges Hospital in Worcester.

The  present  accommodation  utilized  by  the  DO  Worcester  was  recently
upgraded by the owner and a new counter was installed and  renovations  were
done to the bathroom facilities, etc and the office  was  painted  with  the
corporate colours of the department. Air-conditioners were  installed  in  7
offices.

4.2. Challenges

To keep rendering the services at mobile points; to expedite the  processing
of enabling document applications;  to  provide  the  relevant  training  to
officials; to secure suitable, additional accommodation for the current  and
new  additional  staff;  to  get  uniformity  in  the  application  of   the
Immigration Amended Act & Birth and Death Registration Act.

4.3. Achievements

The establishment of permanent service points/mobile venues in the  regions;
capacitating of offices in the regions; rendering service  to  the  poor  of
the poorest in remote areas  with  the  2  mobile  trucks;  filling  of  all
advertised posts; queue management systems implemented; optimal  utilization
of mobile trucks in the region.

4.4. Clarity-seeking, comments and questions

The delegation commented with regard to the migration of  clients  from  the
poor provinces.  How does this effect service  delivery  and  how  does  the
Department cope with the migration? The department replied that most of  the
clients in Paarl sub-region are from  the  Eastern  Cape.  Example,  Lesotho
citizens pretending to be from the Eastern Cape,  were  questioned  at  this
office by the Regional Manager.  It was established that they  are  in  fact
from Lesotho. The department often  receives  complaints  that  people  have
tried to obtain Identity Documents in  their  Home  Province  but  were  not
assisted by Home Affairs officials and the Malmesbury office reports that  a
councillor presented eight people as South Africans.   When  interviewed  in
depth, four of them were found to be from Lesotho.

Members enquired w.r.t. the turn-around times – and how does the  department
intend to adhere to turnaround times with the little  resources  (human)  to
their disposal? The department stated that staff are optimally utilised  and
recently 51 learners were deployed to assist.

Members raised concern why the approved structure is not capacitated  –  878
approved and only  458  filled?   Is  DHA  improving  skills  and  employing
unemployed and  qualified  persons?  The  department  stated  that  the  New
Organisational Structure was approved by Minister on 2006.03.16 and  out  of
the 878 approved posts 267 are not  funded.   All  unfunded  vacancies  were
funded over with the MTEF 2007 input. Only 153 funded  vacancies  remain  of
which: 76 Mabelane posts on level 2-5,  plus  67  was  advertised,  plus  10
posts  reserved  for  the  absorption  of  contract  workers,   153   funded
vacancies.


Members wanted to know  what  the  province’s  strategy  will  be  regarding
preparation for 2010. The department replied that  there  is  devolution  of
powers  to  Regional  Managers  for  the  approval  of  Temporary  Residence
applications  where  management  will  be  streamlined  to  enhance  service
delivery. Capacitating Saldanha Bay, Mossel  Bay  harbour  as  well  as  the
staff complement at the Cape Town International Airport. A request has  been
submitted for a budget (Cape Town Harbour, Mossel Bay Harbour, Saldanha  Bay
Harbour and Cape Town International Airport) in order to activate the  above
strategies.


The delegation raised concern regarding  the  deportation  list,  that  only
African people are reflected on the presentation.   How  many  white  people
were deported and why was this not reflected? The  department  replied  that
recently a paedophile German was deported as  well  as  a  Chinese  national
fugitive  before  justice  for  fraud  and  armed  robbery.  The  Cape  Town
Inspectorate  is  currently  busy  with  the  deportation  of  Laura   Brown
(American national) responsible  for  stem  cell  fraud.  If  Europeans  are
apprehended, they normally have enough funds to leave  voluntarily,  whereas
migrant workers often do not have sufficient funds to leave voluntarily  and
have to be deported. Whenever an illegal foreigner is apprehended  they  are
given the choice to leave on own funds or be deported on state  expenditure.
A Belgian Citizen was recently deported from Malmesbury through Lindela.

The  department  noted  that  birth  registration  at   hospitals   is   not
compulsory, only if the client wants to register the child  the  service  is
at hand. Only one hospital  in  Paarl  sub-region  Online:  Eben  Donges  in
Worcester.  A total of 281 births were registered  since  the  facility  was
opened.   Paarl  General  Hospital  will  go  online  as  soon  as  building
operation at hospital is completed.



What is DHA: Western Cape doing to curb corruption?
         • Ensure that proper control measures are in place.
         • Whistle-blowing/fraud prevention policy workshopped with staff
           members and written confirmation of adherence requested
           afterwards.
         • Supervisors urged to report irregularities.
         • Capacitated the Counter Corruption component of the Provincial
           Managers Office by the employment of a Control Security Officer
           (18 April 2006).
         • All cases of possible corruption are submitted to Directorate
           Counter Corruption for investigation.
         • The Province established a close working relation with
           Provincial NIA.
         • Province embarked on a project to vet all managers from level 7-
           14 with the buy-in of the National Intelligence Agency.


The delegation wanted to know how tight security at  ports  of  entry  is  –
foreigners  smuggling  drugs  enter  the   country   through   International
Airports.  How many of these cases did you register and how  do  you  manage
them? Identification of drug smugglers is the mandate of Customs and  Border
Police (Organized  Crime  Unit).  Interacting  does  however  exist  between
immigration and other  law  enforcement  agencies.   The  immigration  staff
facilitates the processing of admission of a person to the RSA. Security  at
Cape Town Harbour – responsibility of the  Maritimes  Company  and  Port  of
Entry Security Enhancement. Security at Cape Town  International  Airport  –
Airports Company.


Members enquired what interns and learners receive as remuneration form  the
department? The Provincial Manager stated that  interns  receive  a  monthly
stipend of R3 000.00 per month and Learners are remunerated with  R2  000.00
per month from the budget of the Director: Human Resources.


Where do you detain illegal foreigners before deportation? Local Police
station for a maximum period of 48 hours, Pollsmoor Prison and Malmesbury.


4.5. VISIT TO GEORGE REGIONAL DEPARTMENT OF HOME AFFAIRS OFFICES

4.5.1. Introduction

The Office Manager briefed the delegation on the following: Human
Resources, Budget, Infrastructure, Service Delivery and Partnerships and
Outreach Programmes.

4.5.2. Clarity seeking, comments and questions

The delegation enquired why the vacancies within the Region are  not  filled
and the department replied that all funded  vacancies  were  advertised  and
are in various stages of filling.


The delegation wanted to know how the regional  office  distributes  IDs  to
those people whose IDs are still in the office? The Department  stated  that
it has signed a contract with the South African Post Office. SAPO  officials
are collecting IDs from the offices. After distribution SAPO submits a  list
of applicants delivered to as well as pink cards where applicants sign  when
receiving his/her ID.  SAPO officials take great care when delivering  these
IDs by ensuring that the ID is handed to the owner.


Marriages are conducted at Regional Office George twice a week (Mondays  and
Wednesdays).  It sometimes happen that clients turn up without  knowing  the
designated day for solemnization  of  marriages,  these  clients  are  never
turned away if all  necessary  documents  and  witnesses  are  present.  The
George Office conducts 15 to 25 per month.


The department noted that this office experienced one incident of  fraud  in
2004; the case was investigated and finalized early in  2005.  The  official
was dismissed.  Since  then  the  Departmental  Fraud  Prevention  plan  was
workshopped with all staff. A control measure with regards to  the  handling
of cash was also enhanced.


The delegation enquired why  there  is  no  staff  at  Knysna  while  it  is
regarded as a district office and the department replied that  the  Regional
Manager is currently in the process of negotiating office  accommodation  in
the Knysna area. The establishment for District Office Knysna  was  approved
in 2006, but not funded for 2006/07 financial year.


The department informed the delegation that  during  the  migration  process
from the 1995 establishment to the 2004  establishment  a  mistake  occurred
during which the component number for DO Beaufort  West  was  abolished.  At
the time the staff deployed at the Beaufort West office was accommodated  on
the establishment of Oudtshoorn. A  component  number  for  District  Office
Beaufort West needs to be created.  The Provincial Office is addressing  the
issue.


In its presentation the department talked about the biometric system and
the delegation wanted to know whether any problems are experienced with the
Biometric system? The department stated that:

         • The Biometric system is time consuming as the official,
           registering a birth has to sign on 4 times (one has to put
           his/her finger on the device), for the registration and issuance
           of one birth certificate.
         • Officials enrolled on the Biometric System are not able to able
           to work on mobile trucks.


The  delegation  enquired  what  the  turnaround  time  is  for   processing
certificates and the department  stated  that  unabridged  certificates  are
issued on the spot and at times when computers are offline certificates  are
posted to the applicant.


During the period of the oversight visit the  region  was  flooded  and  the
delegation enquired what mechanisms are in place to assist  people  affected
by the floods. The Regional Managers  is  working  closely  with  the  local
Disaster  Management  Components  of  the  local  Municipalities.  After  an
assessment was made of the flooded areas  and  the  needs  of  the  affected
people, a submission requesting the waiving of  fees  are  directed  to  the
Director General via the Office of the Provincial Manager.


The delegation raised concern that it seems as  if  its  only  Africans  are
targeted by Immigration (evident from the presentation) and  deported  while
non-Africans are left to leave the country  on  their  own?  The  Provincial
Manager stated that the National Immigration Branch  of  the  Department  of
Home Affairs  has  a  mandate  to  investigate  arrest,  detain  and  deport
transgressors of the Immigration Act no  13  of  2002  together  with  other
related Government Act.  Well-qualified  and  trained  Immigration  Officers
countrywide carry the mandate indiscriminately.  As  according  to  the  Act
those who are declared as illegal foreigners are removed from Southern  Cape
to Lindela Repatriation centre, which  serves  as  an  exit  point,  to  the
country of origin. When an illegal foreigner is arrested, he or she will  be
given an option of either leaving the country on his or her own  account  or
either waits for Immigration officials to deport him or her at  the  state’s
account.  Those who are willing to deport  themselves  are  issued  with  an
Order to Leave the Republic (Form 21), to leave the republic on  their  own.
Some Africans and non-Africans at times opt to remove themselves out of  the
country especially when they have money to do so.  But most Africans  cannot
always afford to  deport  themselves  as  a  result  of  lack  of  financial
support.


The delegation wanted to know where illegal foreigners are kept prior  their
deportation. All illegal foreigners are kept temporarily in Police  Stations
around the Southern Cape for 48  hours.  They  are  further  transferred  to
Prince Albert Correctional Service Centre within 48 hours. Prince Albert  is
our  detention  facility  where   illegal   foreigners   await   for   their
deportation.  Prince Albert is about 150  kilometres  out  of  George.   The
centre  is  140  kilometres  away  from  George  Office.   The   centre   is
specifically assigned to accommodate illegal foreigners only.   Before  they
could be moved to  the  centre,  they  were  being  accommodated  at  George
Correctional Centre, which was  not  a  suitable  place.  Cases  of  assault
against the foreigners were registered. The detained are  deported  twice  a
month out of the Southern Region in a joint operation with  the  Immigration
Inspectorate of Cape Town.

WAY FORWARD

    • The Committee will undertake follow-up visits to the province, in
      order to provide oversight and monitor progress made with regard to
      some of the challenges raised by stakeholders during the oversight
      visit.
    • The Committee will take up some of the issues raised with the
      Department of Health, and will continue to provide oversight on
      departmental strategic plans to ensure that the relevant issues are
      taken up in strategic and operational plans.

                          THURSDAY, 19 OCTOBER 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)     Bill passed by National Assembly and transmitted for
        concurrence on 19 October 2006:


        (a)      Postal Services Amendment Bill [B 22B – 2006] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


             The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Labour
             and Public Enterprises of the National Council of Provinces.


TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    The Minister of Defence

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Castle of Good Hope for 2004-
        2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 214-2005].



National Council of Provinces


1.    The Chairperson

     The report published in the ATC of 16 October 2006, entitled “Report of
     the
     National Council of Provinces on the provincial week visit by permanent
     delegates to provinces” is withdrawn.
    _________________________________________________________________
                                  APPROVED

    M J Mahlangu, MP
    Chairperson of the
    National Council of Provinces

COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces


1.    Report of the Select Committee on Social Services on the Foodstuffs,
    Cosmetics and Disinfectants Amendment Bill [B 35B – 2005] (National
    Assembly – sec 76), dated 18 October 2006:

        The Select Committee on Social Services, having considered the
        subject of the Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Amendment
        Bill [B 35B – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 76), referred to it,
        reports the Bill with amendments [B 35C - 2005].

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional  Affairs
    on the  Provisional  Suspension  from  Office  of  Magistrate  Mr  I  X
    Masimini, dated 18 October 2006:

        The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
        considered the report on the provisional suspension from office  of
        magistrate I X Masimini, tabled by the  Minister  for  Justice  and
        Constitutional Development in terms of section 13 (3)  (a)  of  the
        Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of 1993) reports as follows:

          1) The Select  Committee  notes  that  the  Minister  for  Justice
             provisionally suspended Mr. I X  Masimini  from  office  on  17
             August 2006 in terms of section 13 (3) (a) of  the  Magistrates
             Act, 1993, and the Minister’s report was tabled  in  Parliament
             on the 21 August 2006.

          2) The Select Committee was advised that Mr.  Masimini  was  on  a
             previous occasion found guilty  of  misconduct,  on  three  (3)
             counts in that he had used “foul and/or injudicious language in
             court”.

          3) In terms of regulation 26 (17) (a) (iv) of the Regulations  for
             Judicial  Officers  in  Lower  Courts  1994,  imposition  of  a
             sanction was postponed by the presiding officer for a period of
             12 months. Mr. I X Masimini  was  ordered  to  subject  himself
             inter alia for psychological counselling and therapy sessions.

          4) Three (3) days after he was so enjoined Mr. Masimini  allegedly
             assaulted a woman at a tavern causing  an  open  wound  on  her
             chin.


          5) Four (4) months later Mr. I X Masimini appeared in court  on  a
             charge of assault with the intent to do grievous bodily harm.

          6)  A  misconduct  inquiry  was  set  down  for  hearing  by   the
             Magistrates Commission for  the  period  between  22-24  August
             2006.

          7) At its meeting of the 20 July 2006, the Magistrates  Commission
             resolved as follows: “… in those instances where  a  misconduct
             inquiry is instituted  following  criminal  charges  against  a
             magistrate,  the  misconduct  inquiry  not  be  proceeded  with
             pending the outcome of the criminal case. The  process  of  the
             inquiry is started by serving of the charge sheet. The  inquiry
             should thereafter be postponed indefinitely pending the outcome
             of the criminal case.”

          8) The misconduct inquiry accordingly was postponed sine die.

          9) The Committee is of the view that this resolution is  extremely
             unfortunate, and urges the Magistrates Commission to review its
             decision at the next available occasion.
         10) Given the Magistrates Commission’s  resolution  and  given  the
             fact that Mr. I X Masimini would receive his full salary  while
             on suspension, the Committee is of the view that the suspension
             of Mr. I X Masimini on full  pay  would  be  inappropriate  and
             would not promote the good  standing  of  the  Magistracy.  The
             suspension of the magistrate on  full  pay  would  not  further
             contribute to the efficacy of the court where he is  stationed.
             The Committee suggests that the magistrate be  utilized  in  an
             administrative capacity at the court he is stationed.

        The Committee accordingly recommends that the Council  not  confirm
        the provisional suspension of Magistrate I X Masimini.

    Report to be considered.

3.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
    on the Provisional Suspension from Office of Magistrate Mr. M.
    Matereke, dated 18 October 2006:

        The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
        considered the report on the provisional suspension from office of
        magistrate M. Matereke, tabled by the Minister for Justice and
        Constitutional Development in terms of section 13 (3) (a) of the
        Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of 1993) reports as follows:

          1. The Select Committee noted from the report that Mr. Matereke
             was previously suspended from office in respect of different
             criminal allegations and due to the fact that those charges
             were withdrawn, and the Magistrates Commission has decided not
             to pursue misconduct proceedings the magistrate’s suspension
             “lapsed”. During this time, Mr. Matereke has been away from
             office on full pay.
          2. The Minister for Justice provisionally suspended Mr. Matereke
             on the recommendation of the Magistrates Commission on the 17
             August 2006, and the Minister’s report was tabled in Parliament
             on the 21 August 2006.


          3. Mr. Matereke was convicted of murder and assault on 4 July
             2006, having first appeared in the Johannesburg Regional Court
             on 18 February 2003 i.e. 3 years, one month and 5 days before
             the Magistrates Commission charged him with misconduct.


          4. The Committee finds it completely unacceptable that there was
             this inordinate delay, and urges the Commission to finalise its
             proceedings and if possible to consider Mr. Matereke’s
             immediate removal from office, particularly given that he is
             currently in prison having been inter alia found guilty of
             murder.


          5. The Committee further urges the Magistrates Commission to
             review its recent decision to not proceed with misconduct
             hearings pending the outcome of criminal cases against
             magistrates.


          6. Accordingly the Committee recommends that the Council resolve
             to confirm the provisional suspension of Mr M. Matereke.

    Report to be considered.


                           FRIDAY, 20 OCTOBER 2006


TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

    a) Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention on the Protection and
       Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expression.

                           MONDAY, 23 OCTOBER 2006


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Defence

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Castle of Good Hope for 2005-
        2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 219-2005].


2.    The Minister for Public Enterprises

     a)   Report and Financial Statements of Alexkor Limited for 2005-2006,
        including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
        Statements for 2005-2006.

                          TUESDAY, 24 OCTOBER 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)     Bills passed by National Assembly and transmitted for
        concurrence on 24 October 2006:


        a) Measurement Units and Measurement Standards Bill [B 21B - 2006]
           (National Assembly – sec 75)
        b) Accreditation for Conformity Assessment, Calibration and Good
           Laboratory Practice Bill [B 29B - 2006] (National Assembly – sec
           75).

The Bills have been referred to the Select Committee on Economic and
Foreign Affairs of the National Council of Provinces.

2.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:
        (a)       Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the   Independent
             Communications  Authority  of  South  Africa   for   2005-2006,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General  on  the  Financial
             Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 133-2006].

    2.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Economic and Foreign Affairs for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Gambling
             Board for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 119-
             2006].

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of Khula Enterprise
             Finance Limited for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the International Trade
             Administration Commission of South Africa for 2005-2006,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 95-2006].


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Bureau of Standards for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
             46-2006].


    3.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report:
          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 8 – National Treasury
             for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements of Vote 8 for 2005-2006 [RP 128-2006].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Revenue
             Service (SARS) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
             167-2006].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 13 – Statistics South
             Africa for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 13 for 2005-2006
             [RP 57-2006].


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the Development Bank of
             Southern Africa Limited for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-
             2006.


          e) Activities Report of the Development Fund of the Development
             Bank of Southern Africa Limited for 2005-2006.


          f) Report and Financial Statements of the Reconstruction and
             Development Fund for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          g) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board
             (FSB) 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 91-2006].


          h) Report and Financial Statements of the Accounting Standards
             Board (ASB) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006
             [RP 102-2006].


          i) Report and Financial Statements of the Public Investment
             Corporation (PIC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
             14-2006].


          j) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial and Fiscal
             Commission (FFC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
             105-2006].


    4.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Public Protector of South
           Africa for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 212-2006].


        b) Report and Financial Statements of the Special Investigating
           Unit (SIU) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 130-2006].

        c) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 21 – Department of
           Defence for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements of Vote 21 for 2005-2006 [RP
           163-2006].


        d) Report and Financial Statements of the Armaments Corporation of
           South Africa Limited (ARMSCOR) for 2005-2006, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
           2005-2006 [RP 139-2006].


        e) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 22 – Independent
           Complaints Directorate (ICD) for 2005-2006, including the Report
           of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 22
           for 2005-2006 [RP 113-2006].


    5.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 17 – Department of
             Labour for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 17 for 2005-2006
             [RP 59-2006].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for
             Concilliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) for 2005-2006,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 106-2006].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Unemployment Insurance
             Fund (UIF) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 89-2006].


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation Fund for
             2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          e) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 7 – Government
             Communication and Information System (GCIS) for 2005-2006,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements of Vote 7 for 2005-2006 [RP 123-2006].


          f) Report and Financial Statements of the Sentech Limited for 2005-
             2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          g) Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Broadcasting Corporation Limited (SABC) for 2005-2006,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          h) Report and Financial Statements of the International Marketing
             Council (IMC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
             127-2006].
          i) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Post
             Office Limited for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


    6.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises and the Select Committee on Land and
        Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural Sector
             Education and Training Authority (Agri-Seta) for 2005-2006,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 66-2006].

    7.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises and the Select Committee on Economic
        and Foreign Affairs for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Manufacturing,
             Engineering and Related Services Sector Education and  Training
             Authority (MER-Seta) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for  2005-2006  [RP
             81-2006].


    8.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 25 – Department of
             Agriculture for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 25 for 2005-2006
             [RP 156-2006].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 29 – Department of
             Land Affairs for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 29 for 2005-2006
             [RP 226-2006].


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Ingonyama Trust
             Board for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 227-
             2006].


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Ncera Farms (Pty)
             Ltd for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural
             Research Council (ARC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006
             [RP 168-2006].


        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of Onderstepoort
             Biological Products Limited for 2005-2006, including the Report
             of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
             2005-2006.


        (g)      Report and Financial Statements of the National
             Agricultural Marketing Council (NAMC) for 2005-2006, including
             the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             for 2005-2006 [RP 1-2006].


        (h)      Report and Financial Statements of the Perishable Products
             Export Control Board (PPECB) for 2005-2006, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             for 2005-2006.


        (i)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Weather Service (SAWS) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006
             [RP 48-2006].


        (j)      Report and Financial Statements of the Marine Living
             Resources Fund (MLRF) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006
             [RP 173-2006].


        (k)      Report and Financial Statements of the Greater St Lucia
             Wetland Park Authority for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


        (l)      Report and Financial Statements of the Land Bank for 2005-
             2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


    9.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
        Affairs for consideration and report:
        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Financial
             Intelligence Centre for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
             132-2006].


    10.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Public Services for consideration and report:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
             Roads Agency Limited (SANRAL) for 2005-2006, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             for 2005-2006 [RP 144-2006].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Rail
             Commuter Corporation Limited (SARRC) for 2005-2006, including
             the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
             Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 155-2006].


          c) Report of the Regulating Committee of the Airports Company of
             South Africa and Air Navigation Services Company for 2005-2006.


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the Cross-Border Road
             Transport Agency (C-BRTA) for 2005-2006, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-
             2006 [RP 126-2006].


          e) Report and Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and
             Navigation Services Company Limited (ATNS) for 2005-2006,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2005-2006.
          f) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Maritime
             Safety Authority (SAMSA) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements (including the
             Maritime Fund) for 2005-2006 [RP 110-2006].


          g) Report and Financial Statements of the Railway Safety Regulator
             (RSR) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 200-
             2006].


          h) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Search and
             Rescue Organisation (SASAR) for 2005-2006.


          i) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Civil
             Aviation Authority (SACAA) for 2005-2006, including the Report
             of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
             2005-2006 [RP 98-2006].


          j) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 6 – Department of
             Public Works for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 6 for 2005-2006.


          k) Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Development
             Trust for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 122-
             2006].


          l) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 28 – Department of
             Housing for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 28 for 2005-2006
             [RP 141-2006].


          m) Report and Financial Statements of the National Urban
             Reconstruction and Housing Agency (NURCHA) for 2005-2006.


          n) Annual Financial Statements of the National Urban
             Reconstruction and Housing Agency (NURCHA) including the Report
             of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
             2005-2006.


          o) Report and Financial Statements of The Thubelisha Homes for
             2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
             the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          p) Report and Financial Statements of Servcon Housing Solutions
             (Proprietary) Limited for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-
             2006.


          q) Report and Financial Statements of the National Housing Finance
             Corporation Ltd (NHFC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-
             2006.


          r) Report and Financial Statements of the Rural Housing Loan Fund
             (RHLF) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.
    11.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration and report:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of The Freedom Park Trust for
             2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the William Humphreys Art
             Gallery for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 121-2006]


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the National Film and Video
             Foundation (NFVF) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
             111-2006].


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the South African State
             Theatre for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 152-
             2006].


          e) Report and Financial Statements of the National English
             Literary Museum for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          f) Report and Financial Statements of the Windybrow Centre for the
             Arts for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General
             on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.
          g) Report and Financial Statements of the War Museum of the Boer
             Republics for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          h) Report and Financial Statements of Blind S A for 2005-2006,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2005-2006.


          i) Report and Financial Statements of the National Library of
             South Africa for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 158-
             2006].


          j) Report and Financial Statements of Business and Arts South
             Africa (BASA) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
             135-2006].


          k) Report and Financial Statements of the Voortrekker Museum –
             Isigcinamagugu for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [PR
             107-2006].


          l) Report and Financial Statements of the Iziko Museums of Cape
             Town for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General
             on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 89-2006].


          m) Report and Financial Statements of the National Museum –
             Bloemfontein for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 152-
             2006].


          n) Report and Financial Statements of the National Arts Council of
             South Africa (NAC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          o) Report and Financial Statements of the Performing Arts Centre
             of Free State (PACOFS) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          p) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Library
             for the Blind for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          q) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Heritage
             Resources Agency (SAHRA) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006
             [RP 131-2006].


          r) Report and Financial Statements of the Afrikaans Language
             Museum for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          s) Report and Financial Statements of the Northern Flagship
             Institution for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 142-
             2006].


          t) Report and Financial Statements of the National Heritage
             Council for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          u) Report and Financial Statements of the Natal Museum for 2005-
             2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          v) Report and Financial Statements of the Department of Education
             for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements of Vote 15 – Department of Education
             for 2005-2006.


          w) Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Qualifications Authority (SAQA) for 2005-2006, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2005-2006 [RP 189-2006].


          x) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 31 – Department of
             Science and Technology for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 31 for
             2005-2006 [RP 162-2006].


          y) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council
             for Natural Scientific Professions for 2005-2006, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             for 2005-2006.


          z) Report and Financial Statements of the Africa Institute of
             South Africa for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


         aa) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 19 – Department of
             Sport and Recreation for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


         ab) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Drug-Free
             Sport for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 147-
             2006].

    12.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Local Government and Administration:

        (a)      Quarterly Report of the Auditor-General on the submission
             of financial statements by municipalities and the status of
             audit reports as at 30 June 2006 for the financial year ended
             30 June 2005 [RP 153-2006].

    13.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises and to the Select Committee on Public
        Services for consideration and report:
          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Industry
             Development Board (CIDB) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006
             [RP 198-2006].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Education
             and Training Authority (CETA) for 2005-2006, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2005-2006 [RP 68-2006].

    14.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration:

        (a)      A report to inform Parliament of a recent decision of the
             Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development to uplift
             the provisional suspension of a Magistrate, Nr I W O Morake
             from Lichtenburg, with effect from 14 March 2006;


        (b)      A report to inform Parliament of a recent decision of the
             Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development to uplift
             the provisional suspension of a Magistrate, Mr M S E Khumalo
             from Amsterdam, with effect from 25 April 2006;


        (c)      A progress report in respect of an inquiry into
             allegations of misconduct against Magistrate K Sulliman from
             Durban, in terms of section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates Act,
             1993 (Act No 90 of 1993);


        (d)      A progress report in respect of an inquiry into
             allegations of misconduct against Magistrate M K Chauke from
             Pretoria, in terms of section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates Act,
             1993 (Act No 90 of 1993);


        (e)      A progress report in respect of an inquiry into
             allegations of misconduct against Magistrate M S Makamu from
             Benoni, in terms of section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates Act,
             1993 (Act No 90 of 1993); and


        (f)      A progress report in respect of an inquiry into
             allegations of misconduct against Magistrate M F Mathe from
             Johannesburg, in terms of section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates
             Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


    15.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs and the Joint Standing
        Committee on Defence:

        (a)      The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 28
             August 2006 to the Chairperson of the National Council of
             Provinces informing Members of the Council of the employment of
             the South African National Defence Force in The Kingdom of
             Lesotho.

    16.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Economic and Foreign Affairs for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 30 – Department of
             Minerals and Energy for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 30 for 2005-
             2006.

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Council for
             Geoscience (CGE) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
             58-2006].

        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund
             Group of Companies (CEF) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund Group of
             Companies for 2005-2006 [RP 148-2006].


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Energy
             Regulator of South Africa (NERSA) for 2005-2006, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2005-2006.


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and
             Safety Council for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
             40-2006].


        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Diamond Board Fund for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
             138-2006].


        (g)      Report and Financial Statements of the Nuclear Safety
             Regulator for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 52-2006].


        (h)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Nuclear Energy Corporation Limited (NECSA) for 2005-2006,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 109-2006].


        (i)      Report and Financial Statements of the Electricity
             Distribution Industrial Holdings (Pty) Ltd (EDIH) for 2005-
             2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


        (j)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 32 – Department of
             Trade and Industry for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 32 for 2005-
             2006.


        (k)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Lotteries
             Board for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 164-
             2006].

        (l)      Report of the South African Council for the Non-
             Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction for July 2004 to
             June 2005.


        (m)      Report of the South African Council for the Non-
             Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction for July 2005 to
             June 2006.
        (n)      Report and Financial Statements of the Competition
             Commission for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 101-
             2006].


        (o)      Report and Financial Statements of the Competition
             Tribunal for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 134-
             2006].


        (p)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             National Accreditation System (SANAS) for 2005-2006, including
             the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
             Statements for 2005-2006.


        (q)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Quality Institute for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


        (r)      Report and Financial Statements of the Export Credit
             Insurance Corporation of South Africa for 2005-2006, including
             the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
             Statements for 2005-2006.


        (s)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 3 – Department of
             Foreign Affairs for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 3 for 2005-
             2006.


        (t)      Report and Financial Statements of the African Renaissance
             and International Co-operation Fund for 2005-2006, including
             the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             for 2005-2006.


    17.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises and the Select Committee on Land and
        Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:


        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Food and Beverages
           Manufacturing Sector Education and Training Authority (FoodBev-
           Seta) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 75-2006].


    18.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance:


          a) Annual Economic Report of the South African Reserve Bank for
             2006.


          b) Government Notice No 811 published in Government Gazette No
             29101 dated 7 August 2006: Dimension of, design for, and
             compilation of the year 2006 R2 silver crown and R2 gold coins,
             in terms of South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of
             1989).


          c) Government Notice No 1010 published in Government Gazette No
             29050 dated 28 July 2006: Listing and Classification of Public
             Entities 1. Listing 1.1 Agriseta: Schedule 3A National Public
             Entity 2. Delisting 2.1 Primary Agricultural Education and
             Training Authority (PAETA) as a Schedule 3A National Public
             Entity 2.2 Secondary Agricultural Sector Education and Training
             Authority (SETSA) as a Schedule 3A National Public Entity, in
             terms of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
             1999).


          d) Proclamation No R.31 published in Government Gazette No 29072
             dated 28 July 2006: Commencement of section 44(1), in terms of
             the Revenue Laws Amendment Act, 2005 (Act No 31 of 2005).


          e) Government Notice No 1011 published in Government Gazette No
             29050 dated 28 July 2006: Listing and Classification of Public
             Entities 1. Listing 1.1 Independent Regulatory Board for
             Auditors: Schedule 3A National Public Entity, in terms of the
             Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).


          f) Government Notice No 768 published in Government Gazette No
             29078 dated 4 August 2006: Amendment of Regulation 3 of the
             Development Bank of Southern Africa in terms of section 17(h)
             of the Development Bank of Southern Africa Act, 1997 (Act No 13
             of 1997).


          g) The Budget and Strategic Plan of the Auditor-General for 2006-
             2007 [RP 215-2006].


          h) Government Notice No 862 published in Government Gazette No
             29160 dated 25 August 2006: Stopping of Schedule 4 allocation
             to certain Provinces, in terms of the Division of Revenue Act,
             2005 (Act No 1of 2005).


          i) Government Notice No 870 published in Government Gazette No
             29180 dated 31 August 2006: Determination of interest rate for
             purposes of paragraph (a) of the definition of “Official rate
             of interest” in paragraph 1 of the Seventh Schedule to the
             Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


          j) Government Notice No R.914 published in Government Gazette No
             29206 dated 15 September 2006: Notice in terms of section
             7(2)(a) of the Statistics Act, 1999 (Act No 6 of 1999).


    19.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Social Services for consideration and report:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 18 – Department of
             Social Development for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 18 for 2005-
             2006 [RP 208-2006].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 4 – Department of Home
             Affairs for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 4 for 2005-2006 RP
             223-2006].


    20.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs:


          a) Proclamation No R.25 published in Government Gazette No 28973
             dated 27 June 2006: Commencement of the Regulation of
             Interception of Communications and Provision of Communication-
             related Information Act, 2002 (Act No 70 of 2002) Amendment and
             Repeal of Proclamations.


          b) Proclamation No R.33 published in Government Gazette No 29115
             dated 11 August 2006: Referral of Matters to Existing Special
             Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of the
             Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996
             (Act No 74 of 1996).


    21.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 20 – Department of
             Correctional Services for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 20 for
             2005-2006 [RP 206-2006].

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 24 – Department
             for Safety and Security for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 24 for
             2005-2006 [RP 213-2006].


    22.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Social Services for consideration and report and to the Select
        Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs:

        (a)      Southern African Development Community (SADC) Protocol on
             the Facilitation of Movement of Persons, tabled in terms of
             section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Southern African Development
             Community (SADC) Protocol on the Facilitation of Movement of
             Persons.

    23.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises and the Select Committee on Finance
        for consideration and report:


           a) Report and Financial Statements of the Finance, Accounting,
              Management Consulting and other Financial Services Sector
              Education and Training Authority (FASSET) for 2005-2006,
              including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
              Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 73-3006].

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Labour

    a) Report and Financial Statements of the Local Government Sector
       Education and Training Authority (LG-Seta) for 2005-2006, including
       the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
       2005-2006 [RP 79-2006].

                         WEDNESDAY, 25 OCTOBER 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bill


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


          a) Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 32 – 2006] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 77)


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

2.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)     Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 25 October
        2006:


          a) National Land Transport Transition Amendment Bill [B 38D –
             2005] (National Council of Provinces – sec 76).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     a) Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement 2006 [RP 239-2006].


        Referred to the Joint Budget Committee and the Portfolio Committee
        on Finance for consideration, in accordance with their respective
        mandates.


     b) Adjustments Appropriation Bill, 2006 [B32-2006].


        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration
        and report.


     c) Adjusted Estimates of National Expenditure 2006 [RP 240-2006],
        which includes:

            1.   Memorandum on Vote No 1 - "The Presidency", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2006-2007;


            2.   Memorandum on Vote No 2 - "Parliament", Adjustments
            Estimates, 2006-2007;


            3.   Memorandum on Vote No 3 - "Foreign Affairs", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2006-2007;


            4.   Memorandum on Vote No 4 - "Home Affairs", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2006-2007;


            5.   Memorandum on Vote No 5 - "Provincial and Local
                 Government", Adjustments Estimates, 2006-2007;


            6.   Memorandum on Vote No 6 - "Public Works", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2006-2007;


            7.   Memorandum on Vote No 7 - "Government Communications and
                 Information System", Adjustments Estimates, 2006-2007;


            8.   Memorandum on Vote No 8 - "National Treasury", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2006-2007;


            9.   Memorandum on Vote No 9 - "Public Enterprises",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2006-2007;


            10   Memorandum on Vote No 10 - "Public Service and
                 Administration", Adjustments Estimates, 2006-2007;


            11.  Memorandum on Vote No 11 - "Public Service Commission",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2006-2007;


            12.  Memorandum on Vote No 12 - "South African Management
                 Development Institute", Adjustments Estimates, 2006-2007;


            13.  Memorandum on Vote No 13 - "Statistics South Africa",
                 Adjustments Estimates,   2006-2007;


            14.  Memorandum on Vote No 14 - "Arts and Culture", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2006-2007;


            15.  Memorandum on Vote No 15 - "Education", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2006-2007;


            16.  Memorandum on Vote No 16 - "Health", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2006-2007;


            17.  Memorandum on Vote No 17 - "Labour", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2006-2007;


            18.  Memorandum on Vote No 18 - " Social Development",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2006-2007;


            19.  Memorandum on Vote No 19 - "Sport and Recreation South
                 Africa", Adjustments Estimates, 2006-2007;


            20.  Memorandum on Vote No 20 - "Correctional Services",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2006-2007;


            21.  Memorandum on Vote No 21 - "Defence", Adjustments
            Estimates, 2006-2007;


            22.  Memorandum on Vote No 22 - "Independent Complaints
                 Directorate" Adjustments Estimates, 2006-2007;


            23.  Memorandum on Vote No 23 - " Justice and Constitutional
                 Development ", Adjustments Estimates, 2006-2007;


            24.  Memorandum on Vote No 24 - "Safety and Security",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2006-2007;


            25.  Memorandum on Vote No 25 - "Agriculture", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2006-2007;


            26.  Memorandum on Vote No 26 - "Communications", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2006-2007;


            27.  Memorandum on Vote No 27 - "Environmental Affairs and
                 Tourism", Adjustments Estimates, 2006-2007;


            28.  Memorandum on Vote No 28 - "Housing", Adjustments
            Estimates, 2006-2007;


            29.  Memorandum on Vote No 29 - "Land Affairs", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2006-2007;


            30.  Memorandum on Vote No 30 - "Minerals and Energy",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2006-2007;


            31.  Memorandum on Vote No 31 - "Science and Technology",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2006-2007;


            32.  Memorandum on Vote No 32 - "Trade and Industry",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2006-2007;


            33.  Memorandum on Vote No 33 - "Transport", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2006-2007;


            34.  Memorandum on Vote No 34 - "Water Affairs and Forestry",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2006-2007;


        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration
        and report.

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Small Enterprises
        Development Agency for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General for the fifteen-month period ended on 31 March
        2006.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces


1.    Amendment of the Report of the Select Committee on Local Government
    and Administration, dated 17 October 2006:

    The report is amended by the insertion of the following addendum:
    “That the following conditions be attached to the approval.

          • The employment contract of Mr A S Minty should be extended for
            a period of five years, reckoned from 1 November 2006.
          • The Department of Foreign Affairs should develop a coherent
            succession strategy/plan and present it to the Select Committee
            on Foreign Affairs, within a period of six months, calculated
            from the date of approval of this application by Parliament.
          • The Department should include the implementation of the
            succession strategy/plan in their strategic plans.
          • The Department of Foreign Affairs should report annually on
            progress in the implementation of the succession
            strategy/plan”.


    Report to be considered.


