---
title: 'National Assembly - 01 November 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-11-01
---

WEDNESDAY, 01 NOVEMBER 2006

                                    ____





                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 15:05.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


              RETIREMENT OF SECRETARY TO THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY


                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I wish to announce that the Secretary to the
National Assembly, Mr Kasper Hahndiek, is to retire on 30 November 2006. I
now recognise the hon Chief Whip of the Majority Party.



              APPOINTMENT OF NEW SECRETARY TO NATIONAL ASSEMBLY


                             (Draft Resolution)
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House, on the recommendation of the Speaker, appoints Mr M K
   Mansura as Secretary to the National Assembly with effect from 1 December
   2006.

Agreed to.

The SPEAKER: It’s obvious that there are no objections to the appointment
of the hon Mansura with effect from 1 December. And, of course, at the
appropriate time, we will express ourselves on the service by the outgoing
Secretary to the National Assembly, Mr Hahndiek.


    APPOINTMENT OF DISCIPLINARY COMMITTEE IN RELATION TO ABUSE OF TRAVEL
                                  VOUCHERS


                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Two weeks ago, the hon House Chairperson, Mr Doidge, as Acting
Speaker, informed the House that court orders had been made against a
number of members of this House for charges relating to the abuse of travel
vouchers, after they had entered into plea bargains. He further informed
the House that the relevant court documents had been requested and that,
once they have been received, the presiding officers would announce what
steps they propose taking.

All relevant documents have now been obtained, relating to nine current
members of this House. It is now incumbent upon the House to decide what
steps it should take in respect of those members.

On a previous occasion last year, in similar circumstances, the Rules
Committee agreed that the Speaker should follow the disciplinary procedures
available in the Rules. Following that precedent, I am formally requesting
the Deputy Speaker to convene the disciplinary committee without delay to
advice me on appropriate action to be taken against the nine members
concerned.

I must further inform the House that the National Prosecuting Authority in
conducting its investigations, has identified 12 members of this House as
having utilised their travel vouchers for vehicle hire in contravention of
parliamentary Rules and regulations.

However, after preliminary enquiries, the National Prosecuting Authority
decided not to prosecute these members. I am also referring the available
information in respect of these members to the disciplinary committee for
advice.

Parties will be approached soon to designate members to serve on the
disciplinary committee. I trust parties will respond promptly so that we
can deal with this issue as expeditiously as possible.


                      QUESTIONS TO THE DEPUTY PRESIDENT


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, we move the draft
resolution printed in the name of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party on
the Order Paper, as follows:

   That, notwithstanding Rule 110(2)(b), which provides that questions to
   the Deputy President must not be scheduled for the same week in which the
   Deputy President is scheduled to answer questions in the Council,
   questions to the Deputy President be scheduled for today.

Agreed to.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

               (The late former President Pieter Willem Botha)

Die HOOFSWEEP VAN DIE MEERDERHEIDSPARTY: Mev die Speaker, ek stel sonder
kennisgewing voor:
   Dat die Huis –


   (1)      kennis neem —


         (a)     van die afsterwe van voormalige president Pieter Willem
              Botha op Dinsdag, 31 Oktober 2006; en


         (b)     dat van 1948 tot 1989, voor die aanvang van demokrasie in
              Suid-Afrika, voormalige president Botha gedien het as
              Parlementslid, Minister, Eerste Minister en Staatspresident en
              dat daar gedurende sy ampstermyn as Staatspresident voorlopige
              gesprekke gevoer is wat gelei het tot onderhandelings
              aangaande die oorgang na demokrasie; en


   (2)      besluit om sy meegevoel aan die familie, vriende en kollegas van
         voormalige president P W Botha oor te dra en om hulle gedurende
         hierdie moeilike tyd sterkte toe te wens.
(Translation of Afrikaans motion of condolence follows.)


[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without
notice:


   That the House–

   (1)      notes –
         (a)     the passing away of former President Pieter Willem Botha
              on Tuesday, 31 October 2006; and


         (b)     that from 1948 to 1989, before the advent of democracy in
              South Africa, former President Botha served as a Member of
              Parliament, Minister, Prime Minister and State President, and
              that during his term as State President preliminary
              discussions which led to negotiations regarding the
              transition to democracy were held; and


   (2)      resolves to extend its sympathy to the family, friends and
         colleagues of former President P W Botha and to wish them strength
         during this difficult time.]

Agreed to.



QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY


THE DEPUTY PRESIDENT

 Implications of Deputy President’s visit to India for enhanced co-operation
                     and strengthening of economic ties

13.   Ms K R Magau (ANC) asked the Deputy President:


      (1)   Whether her visit to India will enhance co-operation between
           South Africa and India in terms of skills acquisition for young
           South Africans, training programmes in the field of (a)
           engineering, (b) mathematics, (c) science and (d) vocational
           training, small, medium and micro enterprise (SMMEs) development
           projects and co-operative projects that will benefit rural
           women; if not, what is the position in this regard; if so, how;

      (2)   whether this visit has contributed to strengthen the India-
           Brasil-South Africa Forum (IBSA); if so, what are the relevant
           details;

      (3)   whether her visit will also enhance co-operation, strengthen
           economic ties between developing countries and provide platforms
           to promote a multi-lateral order that is conducive to
           international security and poverty eradication; if not, what is
           the position in this regard; if so what are the relevant
           details?                     N1847E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, and hon members, the question is about
co-operation with India and the International Political Science Association
as well. My visit to India focused on skills acquisition and the second
economy interventions. It focused on what we can do through Jipsa; what we
can do for the training of engineers and artisans; and what we can do for
mathematics, science and technology teachers as well as the broader
scientific skills.

India has implemented some of the most impressive mechanisms for fast-
tracking the creation of these skills within their economy and India has
become a leader in the production of engineers in a very short time. Our
visit therefore focused on understanding the models that they have used and
the possibility of applying those models in South Africa.

Agreements were reached with several institutions in India regarding the
placement of unemployed graduates for skills acquisition, as well as
gaining work experience. The placements that we have already arranged range
from the placement of those with a background in engineering and the built
environment in general to those who are seeking skills in finance, tourism
and ICT. We have received further offers for training in ICT, which the
Department of Communications is therefore pursuing.

My office and the Independent Development Trust as well as the Department
of Public Works and Umsobomvu are also in discussion with our colleagues in
India about using some of their trainers in South Africa, especially
concerning the model that involves the training of artisans, and
accreditation and work experience in the process of training. The artisans
will graduate with the tools, entrepreneurial skills as well as their own
generators so that they can also be self-employed.

I have been working with the Indians on training and building the capacity
of our small enterprises and co-operatives. To date, we have been able to
use Indian trainers to train 1 000 trainers mainly from community-based
organisations and NGOs. We have also been able to train 200 officials from
municipalities using the manuals that we have adapted slightly, which we
received from our Indian colleagues.

We have trained 400 credit officers because in every co-operative we have
also made sure that there is a savings club. We are doing this work
concerning credit, and microcredit in particular, with the Centre for
Microfinance at the University of Pretoria, who has also adopted the Indian
model.

Clearly, the relationship between India and ourselves has been
strengthened. Indeed, while we have not done work specifically in my office
in relation to India, Brazil and South Africa, this work should be able to
strengthen that relationship as well. I thank you.

Mnu M U KALAKO: Mandibulele, Sekela-Mongameli, ngempendulo yakho. Ndifuna
ukutsho ukuba siyancoma thina singabantu abahlelelekileyo nabangathathi
ntweni, ngezi nzame uzenzayo. Kambe ke sinale ngxaki yabantwana,
abangamadodana nabangamantombazana, abathi bakuphuma esikolweni bangafumani
ngqesho.
Ngoko siyathemba ukuba ezi nkqubo zakho ziza kunceda, ngakumbi ke ezi
zinxulumene noosomashishini abasakhasayo nemifela. Ezo zingena zwabha kule
nto uthe weza nayo, kuthiwa yi-Asgisa. Le nkqubo iya kwenza ukuba
ababandakanyekayo kula mashishini bakwazi ukungcamla nokuxhamla, ngakumbi
kuhlumo loqoqosho.

Masiyithethe inyani yokuba uhlumo lwezoqoqosho lusangcanyulwa ngabo
baneentsiba, bakwaziyo ukubhabha – masingaxokisani kuleyo into. Siyalincoma
ke eli nyathelo ulithathileyo, kuba liza kunceda oosomashishini
abasakhasayo nabantu abakwimifela ukuba baxhamle kuhlumo loqoqosho lweli.
Ndifuna nje ukwenza loo mbulelo, Sekela-Mongameli. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr M U KALAKO: Deputy President, let me thank you for your response. I
wish to say that we, as the disadvantaged and underprivileged people,
appreciate these efforts that you are making. However, we have this problem
of scholars, males as well as females, who do not get employed after they
have finished their studies.

We hope therefore that these programmes will help especially those who are
involved in small businesses and co-operatives. These are relevant to the
project you have introduced known as Asgisa. Those who are involved in
entrepreneurship will be able to enjoy the fruits of this programme,
especially regarding the advancement of economic development.
Let us be honest about the fact that economic development is still enjoyed
by those who have the means and can afford it; let us not fool one another
about that. We appreciate this initiative that you have taken, because it
will enable small businesses and the co-operatives to benefit from the
economic development of this country. I thank you for this, Deputy
President.]

The SPEAKER: I don’t know, Deputy President, whether there is anything that
you want to comment on? It does not look like you want to.

Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, one of the biggest
constraints in Asgisa is the lack of skills and it is clear that the Seta
policy of the government has failed miserably in this regard. India has
achieved miracles in skills training that have lifted millions out of their
second economy. The question is: Is the government prepared to abandon the
discredited Setas and concentrate on emulating India and, where necessary,
adapt the Indian programmes to our circumstances? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon member, we have not considered abandoning the
Seta system, but we have considered strengthening the Setas and making sure
that our Indian colleagues also assist us to strengthen the functioning of
our Setas. With the FET colleges coming on board, some of the people that
would go to Setas will also be assisted in the FET system.
I think it’s important that we do not paint all the Setas with one brush
because there are some Setas that are actually high performers. The ICT
Seta, the banks Seta and the mining Seta, for instance, are doing excellent
jobs. So there are a number that are doing a good job, but we also are the
first ones to admit that there are others that we are very concerned about.
The Minister himself, working together with the Presidency, is focusing on
those Setas that are underperforming, so that we can take correctional
action.

Members must remember that for some of our young people the entry point
into the Seta system is one that provides very low entry barriers in order
for them to access training. So if we take that away, we could also end up
frustrating a lot of young people. I agree with you that the quality of
training has to improve in some of the Setas.

Prince N E ZULU: Madam Speaker, while the three countries, ie India, Brazil
and South Africa, did acknowledge that the progress towards achieving the
Millennium Development Goals was exceptionally low, with this in mind, do
we have contingency plans to half poverty by the year 2015, as poverty is
our greatest challenge?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I think, hon member, that you are part of the
contingency plan, that is higher performance by MPs in their constituencies
to ensure that municipalities perform better and to ensure that you are
robust in your oversight so that we can see higher performance in relation
to government.

In addition, we are working very hard on the second economy framework. We
have been implementing the initiatives in a rather fragmented way. So we
are planning to pool all of those together because many of them are poverty-
alleviating type of activities. We have to do what we are doing much better
and I count on you as one of my contingency plans, hon member.
[Interjections.] Yes, you personally.

Mr H B CUPIDO: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, thank you very much for the
initiatives that have been taken since your visit to India. You mentioned
skills development and you have mentioned a few figures and different
fields. Would you enlighten the House a little bit more about the kind of
agreements that are there at this stage on developing the technical skills
and the product knowledge skills, especially of those entrepreneurs who’d
like to be involved in the tourism industry in South Africa? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, with regard to India, we do have a co-
operation agreement that is an overall agreement within which we can slot
all of these sectors that the hon member has referred to. We’ve tried to
send young people in the area of ICT because the Indians are so good in
that area. And regarding those that already had a background in ICT, we
wanted to have them gain experience in software development, in the area of
mainframes as well as high-level applications of ICT.

The majority of the group that is now in India have a built environment
background. However, where they are, they were operating at a very low
level, with very little possibility of getting hands-on experience in
exciting projects. Just as an example, concerning one of the young women
that we placed in the municipality of Mumbai, one of the areas that she has
been able to gain experience in is in planning and creating structures in
very small spaces that are very highly functional and versatile. Those of
you who have been to Mumbai know how congested that city is, but people get
by.

When we were in India, we had an opportunity to interact with her. She was
highlighting to us how much she has learned about how much space wastage we
have in South Africa because of the open lands that we have and how, over
time, in the context of land being a very scarce resource, we should
actually be thinking about the use of space. She would want to introduce
that approach.

One young woman who is working on the transport project is acquiring skills
in transport planning. Again, you know what it is like there and she is
working in one of the better functioning cities there. She is looking at
how to structure transport and plan for high growth levels. Again, for us,
that is also a very relevant skill.

There are some who are in tourism. Most of them are especially in hotels
that are owned by Tata. They are in all their hotels in different parts of
India. Of course, one of the regular complaints from them is that they are
homesick because they are all in different cities. There isn’t a city where
there is more than one, but that is part of toughening them up. They must
learn to survive wherever they are and they must do well.

But India is not the only country and I think those who are going to Dubai
would have left last week. A large number is going into the hospitality
industry there. We are also going to send quite a large number to the
Netherlands in various fields.

Now, as far as hospitality is concerned, it looks like it is the one area
where we would be able to place reasonably higher numbers because the costs
are lower. Part of the challenge to us is the cost of accommodation because
that tends to be quite expensive. When they are in the hospitality
industry, they get offered accommodation because they stay in the hotel,
and that enables us to send quite a large number.

We also want to send them to countries that are not English-speaking,
because in that industry the issue of language is also quite important.
Thanks to South African companies in the United Arab Emirates because they
have taken in some of our people for placements in the built environment
field. They have also taken engineers, planners and quantity surveyors.
Thank you.

     Deputy President’s stance on restriction of cheap clothing imports

14.   Dr P J Rabie (DA) asked the Deputy President:

      Whether, given the fact that the crime of treason is punishable by
      death in a number of countries, she will stand by her statement to the
      National Economic Development and Labour Council (Nedlac) that the
      Government will view any attempt to import clothing cheaply from other
      countries to cushion the blow of restrictions on cheap imports from
      China as treason (details furnished); if not, why not; if so, on what
      grounds will this qualify as treason?
      N1841E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Rabie, there is no death penalty in South Africa.
The retailers do not have to worry about that. They should not fear capital
punishment. The remark was made within Nedlac and that audience understood
the context. I have no intention of saying anything more on this subject. I
think we have serious work to do.

Dr P J RABIE: Hon Speaker and hon Deputy President, I am very thankful for
the way that you have answered me, but I think treason is quite a serious
matter and thought I had to ask you this. On this very day the quotas are
issued to the retailers and to the manufacturing sector in this country.
There is a fair degree of uncertainty regarding this particular quota. The
Governor of the Reserve Bank said that the South African textile
manufacturers have no chance against the manufacturers from China. My
question to you, Madam Deputy President, is: What is this present
government going to do to help our particular textile manufacturers to
compete effectively against the global markets, and especially those from
China? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: That is a new question. I thought you were in the
treason area. Now that you got rid of that, you are moving the goal posts.
Come back with a new question, hon member. You know the rules.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, with all due respect to
the Deputy President, that directly follows from this question. It is not a
new question.

The SPEAKER: Pardon me for calling on hon Masango from the same party. I
now call upon hon Meshoe.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Speaker, in a joint statement last week, Edcon,
Truworths, Woolworths, Foschini, Pepkon and Mr Price said restrictions on
cheap clothing imports from China imposed by government would have an
expected inflationary effect of 20% to 25% or more on prices of some
categories of clothing. Several retailers already indicated that they would
look to other countries, which would definitely include member states of
the Southern African Customs Union, Sacu, for cheap imports to cushion the
blow of restrictions on imports from China. Will the Deputy President
object to the unrestricted importation of cheap clothing from Sacu members,
particularly in the light of the fact that members of the Southern African
Customs Union made an agreement that goods between them will be traded free
of duty and quotas? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Again, that is a new question. But, anyway, let me
just talk to both members in a rather broad motherly manner. [Laughter.]

The challenge about this issue is that we are all, I think, committed to
Proudly South African and in that context there are gives and takes. We
have to do something to build South Africa’s manufacturing capacity in
certain areas where we have a reasonable chance to compete. We need space
and time to develop both the skills and the capabilities of the industries
which we have lost over time. We have a situation where we have an
opportunity to do that, flowing from the agreement that we have with China.


In an ideal world, we would close ranks as South African manufacturers, as
retailers, as government, even as consumers, to see how best we can do this
in such a way that we create jobs for South Africans and replace some of
the industries and the capabilities that we have made. To an extent,
therefore, we have tension between ourselves – those who want to create
jobs and pockets of the industry. I think that is what all of us should be
worried about. How do we break this cycle that expects us to make profit at
all costs? We should sacrifice sometimes in order to create opportunities
for new jobs in the industries we are in.

Regarding what we are going to do with Sacu, obviously, if Sacu is
importing things that are not manufactured within Sacu countries, it’s
still a problem. It means they are collaborating with South African
importers to cheat us regarding our intention of creating jobs for our
region. My guess is as good as yours about the dilemma that we have and
about what it is that we need to do in South Africa in order to create a
manufacturing base for our country. Thank you. Please, don’t ask me a
follow-up question.

Mr S J NJIKELANA: Hon Deputy President, let us look at this initiative from
a positive angle. Could you help by giving us a prognosis around this
agreement on the basis that, at the occasion when we were interacting
within Nedlac, you made reference to the fact that we can actually bring
back some jobs if we work as partners, that is partnership between
government, manufacturers and retailers?

Secondly, Business Unity SA, Busa, made mention of the fact that there are
several alternative routes at a practical level, when it comes to the
implementation of the agreement. I take it that those are quite positive
pointers, despite the fact that Busa was concerned about the process of
formulating and concluding the agreement, and the fact that Cosatu as well
has expressed its concerns around the massive imbalances between China and
South Africa when it comes to trade. I still feel, hon President, that,
with your wisdom, you can help us illustrate the effects as from the day of
the implementation of this agreement. What could be your prognosis on this?
Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: The hon member is expecting me to have some wisdom,
he should say if he has any. Without making predictions, sangoma-like
predictions, the most important thing is about how we are going to try and
co-operate and collaborate with manufacturers, retailers, training
providers and together try to convince the general public about the
opportunity that we have and the importance of making this opportunity
work.

If you look at the Western Cape, for instance, which was one of the parts
of the country that had a textile industry and KwaZulu-Natal, Pinetown in
Durban, some of the skills are still around. And, based on what I have
heard from some of the manufacturers, to train people and put them on the
machines is not very complicated. Most of those people only need matric in
order for them to be up and running. We do have an opportunity to close
ranks and move forward, but we are in this hostile environment and
atmosphere, which is denying us an opportunity to work together
constructively.

As government, we want to work with the industry and we want to see how we
can continue to talk to them. We will try to understand some of the genuine
challenges that they have. The Minister of Trade and Industry said that he
would look at the phasing in of the conditions of the agreement, so that
there is no big-bang approach. In general, we cannot unravel the agreement.
You know how hard it is to negotiate with the Chinese. We’ve come this far,
and negotiating the agreement should have been one of the most difficult
things but DTI was able to deliver on that one. Surely, we can do something
as members of the public and the industry in order to make this agreement
work. For me, what we should be looking for is to try and close the gap in
understanding, reduce the hostility among ourselves and try to work
together.

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, the ID wants to agree with the sentiment
that business should not try to undermine the plan of government to rebuild
this embattled clothing and textile industry. But the point that I want to
raise is the feminisation of poverty, because most of the people affected
by this are women. If we say we want to start again, will there be any help
from the government’s side to rebuild some of these factories that had
already been closed? Harm has been done and we need to look at a plan
whereby mostly women who are affected by this can get back into the
mainstream and be retrained. My question is: Would you assist with
rebuilding all of those factories that had already been closed? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: That’s a new question, but Patricia is my friend.
[Interjections.]

It is an important question, hon members. Yes, we always help, as you know.
In our work, concerning incentives and industrial strategy, which we are
going to talk about in a while, those are some of the problems that we are
trying to solve. When we agreed to have clothing and textile as one of the
sectors in Asgisa, there were a lot of arguments amongst ourselves about
how we were going to do this, because we were losing a lot. At that time,
we didn’t think that there was going to be a breakthrough in negotiations
with China. Hon Meshoe, faith made us leave the sector there, and there was
a breakthrough. Therefore, we have begun to prepare ourselves for the kind
of incentives and support that this sector is going to need in the same way
as we have been thinking about other sectors that we have within Asgisa.
The only difference is that, as far as clothing and textiles are concerned,
what we were looking at is saving and reducing the loss of jobs as well as
bringing back some of the jobs – not aggressive growth, as we look into
other sectors where there are less barriers compared to what we have in
clothing and textile. Faith helps, hon member. Thank you.
The SPEAKER: Hon members, before I move to the next question, I wish to
recognise guests that are in the gallery. It’s a delegation, mainly of
women, from Southern Sudan. [Applause.]

 Strategies to ensure mainstreaming of Asgisa initiatives and establishment
                  of remedial measures as informed by APRM

15.   Ms M Madumise (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      Whether, with reference to the Government’s firm decision to make the
      eradication of poverty and unemployment its core national programme of
      action, the national departments have firm and implementable
      strategies to ensure that (a) the initiatives of the Accelerated and
      Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa (Asgisa) are mainstreamed to
      all departmental programmes and (b) remedial measures, as informed by
      the African Peer Review Mechanism country self-assessment, have been
      put in place in order to implement the policy programmes of Asgisa; if
      not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                                         N2019E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, hon members, the initiative embodied
in the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa is
included in the annual reports and programmes of action of departments.
These programmes are announced every year by the President during the state
of the nation address. Detailed commitment of government in relation to
implementation is then posted on the government website for public
information. Cabinet gives regular reports on the programmes in relation to
what is happening at an implementation level.

Asgisa initiatives are therefore not only mainstream and departmental
programmes, but they are also prioritised in the programmes of action of
different departments.

With regard to the second question, I wish to first emphasise our
appreciation to the people of our country who participated actively in the
African Peer Review Mechanism and the country self-assessment. The draft
reports of action have come out of this process. It seeks to address some
of the fundamental challenges facing our society which were highlighted in
that report, some of which are already being addressed through Asgisa.

As members of this House would recall, the country self-assessment report
identifies poverty and unemployment as key challenges facing our society.
Under its broader programme on economic governance and management, the
programme of action arising from the APRM country self-assessment report
identified halving poverty and unemployment by 2014 as a critical goal.
This is, of course, the fundamental objective of government, which we are
planning to achieve through a variety of programmes that are contained in
the government-wide programme of action.
We should also note the observation made in the country self-assessment
report and the programme of action of government, that the issue of
scarcity of financial skills and management skills in the Public Service is
also cited as a critical challenge. As hon members know, we are busy
recruiting for those skills. Some of that work is being done through the
Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition, Jipsa. Thank you.

Ms M MADUMISE: Madam Deputy President, in your media briefing on the
Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa, in February this
year, you acknowledged that there are indeed capacity constraints in
certain sectors of government. Can you tell us whether there are any
specific intervention programmes being undertaken by our government to
capacitate government officials with the sense of leadership in policy
development and the implementation of Asgisa initiatives so that government
sectors can have an immediate positive impact on having ready access to
service delivery by the majority of our poor people?

Also, how is Asgisa contributing to the eradication of poverty and
unemployment facing our people? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Yes, hon member, some of the interventions for
capacitating our officials include the work that is being done in the SA
Management Development Institute, Samdi. As you know, Samdi’s reason for
existing is to support and train public servants. It’s now been
restructured. It has a new CEO, Prof Mark Orkin.

We also have another programme that is located in the Department of Public
Service and Administration, called Siyenza Manje, which got additional
funds in the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework last week. This programme
recruits retired personnel in the areas where we have a shortage, and we
place those people in different municipalities. I must say that they are
doing an excellent job. They are mentoring the people in those
municipalities, and in some municipalities, they are the core service
providers. We do need more, because we have not been able to deploy them in
all the municipalities who need them. Therefore, there is an additional
drive to recruit more so that we can place them in all of the
municipalities who need this service.

Earlier on, I talked about us doing placements, both in South Africa and
other countries. Some of the people we are placing actually are from
government. We have quite a lot of people from Public Works and from the
municipalities in the area of construction.

We also have a programme on project management for middle-level public
servants, which we are doing jointly with Samdi and Old Mutual. As we
speak, by the end of the year, we would have sent 100 young people to the
Old Mutual business school for these young people to gain skills in project
management. Already, the feedback that we are getting is that many of them
are finding these skills very useful, because they go into the course and
do coursework at their desks, and then they go back to their workplaces and
are expected to apply the skills that they learned immediately through
assignments. They come back to the class, and their lecturers even visit
them where they are based in order to look at how they are coping and
applying the skills.

On the issue of poverty alleviation and job creation through Asgisa, I
think it may be too early for us to claim grand success. Suffice to say
that when we begin to implement our policy on business process outsourcing
– and we have been able to conclude the kinds of agreements we are
negotiating with the potential investors – they will take a lot of young
people, especially those that we would have trained ourselves, together
with them. So, immediately, that gives jobs to those young people.

The Umsobomvu Youth Fund has also been very active in the placement of
unemployed graduates. Again, those who have been taken on board by those
companies immediately have jobs – now they are in their thousands – and
they are able to start working.

You also have companies like KPMG that we have provided with young
unemployed graduates who have skills in finance, and those young people are
not only being trained by those companies but they also have an opportunity
to become accountants. In fact, those who do well can even become chartered
accountants. So, there is a bright future. But, of course, the numbers are
still very modest, and we hope to do more, because we see that the private
sector has employment.

Our schools, our universities, at the end of the day, are the core
institutions to assist us to drive this. What we are doing now is using
stop-gap measures while we are supporting and getting these institutions to
work optimally.

Lastly, hon member, regarding this programme of co-operatives, all of the
people that we are working with there are grassroots people with very
limited income. I must also say that it is not as if we created these co-
ops ourselves. We found them there, but they were underperforming. What we
have simply tried to do, at least with the initial ones, is to improve
their performance so that they can create sustainable jobs and they can
employ more people. All of them are in the rural areas and, therefore, they
immediately respond to the issue of poverty. They are raising goats, they
are planting mushrooms, they are in plantations, they are in textile and
clothing, and all of those need very basic skills for people to get started
and to start earning some income, modest though it might be.

Mr K J MINNIE: Agb Speaker, agb Adjunkpresident ... [Hon Speaker, hon
Deputy President ] ... the hon Minister of Foreign Affairs stated in this
House that she is not following the Accelerated and Shared Growth
Initiative for South Africa, but that Asgisa follows the policy of the
Department of Foreign Affairs.

Will the Deputy President therefore explain to the House if this is the
common viewpoint in all departments, or whether they are required to adjust
their planning and their budgets to advance Asgisa? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: The hon member must remember that Asgisa did not fall
from the sky.

Asgisa is, if you like, cherry-picking activities of departments that are
already in place, and taking them to scale, addressing inefficiencies so
that the departments can do certain aspects of their programmes better. It
is not new programmes.

So, Asgisa has followed the departments, because we have not created any
thing new. In some cases we are working with the departments to find new
ways of doing something that was already in their business plan faster and
better. In some cases, we are succeeding; in some cases, we are not, but we
are not working in isolation. In fact, I don’t have Asgisa staff in the
Presidency. The people who are implementing – the Department of Health, the
Department of Education, and the Department of Trade and Industry –
interact with us regarding highlighting the activities.

It is probably only in Jipsa where we have more or less expanded the
secretariat, but the core people who make the Jipsa team work are drawn
from departments, industry, trade unions and the academia. So, hon member,
yes, I think the hon member was actually stating a correct fact.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Deputy President, while the eradication of poverty and
unemployment involves statistics, they also involve people, individuals who
need interventions specific to their situation. For this reason, the
services of qualified and dedicated social workers are critical and could
be used to greater effect in South Africa. For example, in Chile we see
municipalities who employ full-time social workers to identify needs and
link people with relevant services and job opportunities etc. Do government
initiatives include strengthening social services, not only within
government, but also within nongovernmental organisations that deliver
these services on behalf of government?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Yes, hon member. As you would see, last week, the
Minister again gave additional money for us to support the social work
profession so that we can have more qualified social workers. Those social
workers are not just being trained for government. They should go where
they are needed, as long as they stay in South Africa. That’s the main
thing.

We do support nongovernmental organisations. We would like them to perform
even better. In fact, in the work that we are doing now on addressing the
financial skills challenges within government, we also, when we have
training opportunities, invite community-based organisations and NGOs to
send people, because they also need these financial and project management
skills in order to do their work better.

We wouldn’t like to split hairs about the public sector and NGOs, because I
think, by and large, our work overlaps, and we are targeting the same
constituency. Thank you.

Mr L W GREYLING: Speaker, Deputy President, with reference to the African
Peer Review Mechanism, I was privileged to be on the macroeconomic
governance committee, so I was privy to some of the debates and policy
recommendations that emanated from it. One of the strongest recommendations
is that we need a more expansionary fiscal policy, and that we should be
looking at increasing our budget deficit from its absurdly low levels.

In this year’s Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, though, we have seen
the budget deficit once again come down, and in fact almost become a budget
surplus.
Deputy President, do you not agree that in our country, with such large
social and infrastructural backlogs, it is unjust to be running so close to
a budget surplus? Do you not agree that the reason for this is because our
government departments can simply not spend the money that they are given?
What does the government plan on doing to build the capacity of the state,
where vacancies have become the norm, extensively? If the government can’t
spend its money, then will it consider giving it to those who can, such as
NGOs and community organisations who are, in many cases, delivering on
statutory obligations?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Madam Speaker, which question is the hon member
dealing with now?

The SPEAKER: He is supposed to be raising a follow-up question.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I think that is a new question, hon member.

The SPEAKER: New questions must please be submitted as such.

Mr L W GREYLING: Can I address you on that? It is mentioned in here, around
the remedial measures as informed by the African Peer Review Mechanism
country self-assessment. So, I am referring to that particularly.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I still think that it’s a new question, hon member. I
want to do justice to that question, so don’t smuggle it in.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, let’s submit that question as a stand-alone
question.

 Timeframe for release of government’s broad industrial strategy, including
             business process outsourcing and tourism components

16.   Mr I O Davidson (DA) asked the Deputy President:

      When is it anticipated that (a) the Government will release its broad
      industrial strategy as envisaged by the Accelerated and Shared Growth
      Initiative for South Africa (Asgisa) and (b) the Business Process
      Outsourcing and Tourism components of the strategy will be released?
                                              N1842E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker and my good old friend, hon Davidson,
the reply to this question is that the National Industrial Policy Framework
has been presented in draft form at a range of forums, including Nedlac
where we have taken a bit of time because those members wanted more time to
take it back to their constituencies.

The government is currently finalising the draft framework because, at
least, on the side of the government we have received most of the inputs
that we were seeking. It is expected to be resubmitted to Cabinet before
the end of the year. In fact, in this month, November, so that it is on
schedule and will be published in 2007.

Regarding the business processing, outsourcing and offshoring, a strategy
has been presented to a wide range of stakeholders within government as
well as within the private sector and the unions. We have been working very
closely with the private sector. As you know, there is a body that brings
all the stakeholders together and just focuses on this issue.

The sector support programme has provided a focal point for a concerted
effort to enhance South Africa’s competitiveness in this sector. Five
streams of work set out in the business plan were approved in August 2005
and in each one of them some work has been initiated. The targeted
marketing campaign has been launched. A training programme to train an
initial 1 000 and ultimately 30 000 people will increase as the
opportunities become obvious.

A training programme to train an initial 1 000 and ultimately 30 000 people
has been designated and a proposal for its funding was prepared for the
Department of Labour. Minister Mdladlana has assured me that I will get a
nice answer from him regarding this issue. Incentive options have been
identified and quantified. A quality assurance system has been designated
and a proposal for the restructuring of the industry association has been
accepted by the industry body. The proposals necessary for the achievement
of the objective have also been developed.

Some of the details of what has been produced include a marketing strategy;
a database of 120 investors that are at different stages of work regarding
their investment; and a South African business process outsourcing, BPO,
value proposition at a country level. We have been able to compare our own
proposal with those of India, the UK and the USA. We have proposed the
following: a lead management team system; incentive framework and concept
document for each of the main categories of incentives; a skills
development plan, and a work readiness programme for the training of 30 000
people; a business plan for the development of the industry association;
quality assurance and standards setting systems for BPO firms; a concept
proposal for addressing the needs of the second economy and a draft
proposal for the creation of a special purpose vehicle.

The programme has been adapted to fall into three categories: building an
enabling environment; attracting and expanding investment; and supporting
the second economy. The main expected consequences of this are: to give
explicit recognition to the second economy component of the support
programme; and to flesh out some of the functions to be performed in that
component of the work, if it is to be effective.
Before the end of this year, a team that is composed of business,
government and other interested parties will be going overseas to market
our business plan and, of course, to answer some of the questions that
potential investors may be having about the environment in South Africa.

We do have a challenge concerning the cost of telephones. In fact, that is
the biggest challenge that we face with the implementation of this strategy
but we are working on that as well.

Similar to tourism, a strategy has been agreed on and the industry forum
has also been set. It has been working. We have identified, for instance,
the number of beds that the country needs. We have identified training and
the areas in which we should be training and, because of 2010, in any case,
we have been forced to do that quite thoroughly. The department has a team,
which is the team that was presented to Fifa and that overlaps quite a bit.

Concerning the placement programme that I was talking about quite earlier
on, clearly, most of the people who will benefit from that placement are
going to come from the tourism industry because that is where we seem to be
making quicker breakthroughs in having opportunities where people can gain
experience.

We are implementing aspects of the tourism strategy. And, as you know, we
increased the number of visitors that we want to have in South Africa from
7 million to 10 million per annum. And one of the problems that we had to
address in order to increase the number of people who can arrive in South
Africa was the airlift strategy.

So, we have gone a long way in addressing also the blockages in airlifting
and we were just about to conclude. The relevant Ministers will announce
what we have decided to do regarding the aspect of airlifts. I thank you.

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Thank you, hon Deputy President, for that very thorough
answer. My concern is simply that in February 2006 you laid plans on the
table about Asgisa, more particularly; you indicated that the industrial
strategy as well as the BPOs on tourism strategies were in the final stages
of completion. Its now nine months later and we still only have plans,
although it seems to be very thorough plans.

The point of this is that at some stage we have to start implementing these
plans. I wonder whether the Deputy President will address this issue in
these plans: Have reservations expressed by the Harvard International
Development Centre about Asgisa been addressed, more particularly the whole
question of stimulating the productive side of the economy, more
specifically the export-orientated side, and more specifically even
further, that side which encourages job creation?

Secondly, there is the question of savings and the third question regarding
the competitiveness, which refers to the whole Chinese situation. I thank
you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon member, the fact that we have not begun to
implement some of our plans does not mean that we are not implementing
anything. We are doing the training on BPO, which was part of the resource,
and that is implementation. The core people are being employed in the call
centres. We are interacting with some investors and some investors are busy
processing their investment plans. So, we cannot push the investors to
invest much. We don’t have much control over that timetable and that
schedule.

So, if you look, for instance, at the markets you will note that a number
of jobs in that industry have actually increased ever since we have started
working. But as I’m saying, the issue of telecommunications is probably one
that will be a deal breaker for most of them and that is the one that I’m
very worried about.

We should try and turn that around but actually there are number of
investors who have been able to go ahead notwithstanding that. I do want to
congratulate the provinces that have decided on their own to take the
initiative, as part of implementing the business plan. Gauteng Online is a
very aggressive and efficient team of people who, on their own, are rolling
out what they can. Calling the Cape, is doing the same and there is another
one in KwaZulu-Natal.

As government, we have designated 10 areas in the poorer areas where we are
going to locate some of the call centres and where we are asking the
investors to invest so that we can create jobs in those poor areas. So,
that work is actually going on. Now we are negotiating how we can take
these call centres into those areas and, of course, also provide for the
training of people in those communities.

So, implementation is happening. We are adapting the plan as we go along.
We are starting with the things that we can handle so that we do not come
to standstill because of not having all our ducks in a row. Regarding the
industrial strategy, we are implementing tourism. That’s why we all have
other things that we can talk about what we are doing for 2010.

We are talking about the increase in the number of tourists, because we
have not come a standstill. We are implementing and it is also an
industrial strategy. If you talk about biofuels, you would probably know
that there is a number of new companies in the area of biofuels that are
coming along. The departments that are involved in biofuels are also now
involved in looking at the regulatory environment that is going to be
needed.

There has been a lot of consultation. Consultation is work. Industry has
come on board, the farmers have also come on board as well as those that
are in the petroleum sector. They are making the necessary adjustment in
order for them to be able to implement better.

I take your point about manufacturing. We also feel that we should be
pushing. But, again, we also need industries to be the ones that create
manufacturing enterprises. We are trying to make the environment as
enabling as possible. But, at the end of the day, they have to make the
decision about investing in the manufacturing sector, clothing and textile
included.

Ms F MAHOMED: Thank you, Deputy President, for your detailed response.
Indeed, our country has risen from isolation and has moved on to being
integrated into the world economy. We are on track, Deputy President.

I am happy to say that we have enjoyed a remarkable competitive edge,
globally, since 1994. I thank you for your charismatic leadership. Deputy
President, could you please comment on the National Industrial Policy
Framework and say whether it is aligned to the Asgisa strategy?

Further, I hasten to say that the core principles of Asgisa serve as a
catalyst for changing the lives of the poorest of the poor and will have a
sustainable economic impact on them. I thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon member, just to give you a sense of the areas and
the strategic programmes that we are considering regarding the industrial
policy, one of the programmes is looking at the revision of industrial
financing, that is where most incentives have been addressed.

We are looking at large-scale customer sector programmes for a limited
number of key sectors. We are looking at liberating public sector
expenditure. Our infrastructure programme would fall under that programme.
We are looking at doing more work on innovation and technology, again, in
order to increase the number of “Made in South Africa” goods that go into
different industries.

In the infrastructure and construction sector, in particular, we are
obviously facing a challenge of having to contain the amount of inputs that
we are going to be importing for our infrastructure programme. That, again,
changes the bill for construction, if we were too dependent on imported
goods.

We are also looking at strengthening the competition policy and dealing
with import parity pricing as part of the industrial strategy. We are
looking at delivery of finance services to small enterprises hence the
consolidation of microfinance, as well as the study that is under way now
that is reviewing our development industrial institutions, ie your IDCs,
your Khulas and so on. Khula has been more advanced. I think the Minister
has already given an indication how we intend to reshape Khula.

Of course, in that strategy, we also addressed regional and African
industrial trade frameworks again so that we could enhance the amount of
trade that we do with Africa as well as focus on integrated and co-
ordinated industrial development within the region and on the continent.

Lastly, we are also looking at strengthening the capacity, organisation and
the co-ordination within government. I thank you.

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Chairperson, Deputy President, if I could just raise one
issue with you in respect of investment. You spoke about investment needed
by particularly the private sector. One of the interesting aspects of the
Harvard working paper was that they indicated that in South Africa, as far
as the Asgisa is concerned, for every 6% increase in investment, we were
looking at 2% increase in growth. So 6% would be to 2% growth, whereas the
international norm was quite the opposite. For every 1,7% increase in
investment we were getting 6,1% growth. That speaks to productivity. When
are we going to start talking about productivity in relation to Asgisa?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I think this big talk about skills has to do with
productivity because lower productivity has a lot to do with the fact that
people are not well equipped. Did you forget that there was apartheid here,
that there was Bantu education, that people were underskilled and so on? It
takes time to correct that? [Interjections.] No, it’s true hon members. I
think it is convenient for you to forget because maybe you were able to
benefit from it.
But having said that, it is a fact that because we have produced such a
limited number of people with technical skills, engineering and so on is a
problem for this country.

That is why, for instance, in the work that we are doing in Asgisa, one of
the things that we have started with is just to focus on the area of
artisans and engineers, because they are great stimulators of jobs. One
engineer is able to create employment opportunities for 50 or even, in some
cases, 100 other people they actually supervise.

And, if people are effectively supervised then, obviously, you will
increase productivity. We have also put this issue of productivity to
labour in Nedlac, because we need labour to come on board. Obviously they
must also encourage their workers to see productivity as a strength
because, through productivity, workers are also able to make the companies
that employ them secure their jobs for a much longer time.

Again, hon member, we should not make this a ping-pong issue. It is not an
easy thing. It is on our minds and we engage with it. When we talk about
skills, it is because we are looking for those skills that will enhance our
productivity. In our co-operation with Japan, that is one of the areas in
which we have asked them to help. As you know, the productivity rates are
very high there. But, also in South Africa, the issue of infrastructure has
also been a constraint to some of the companies. That is why we have
decided that if industry is not going to invest in infrastructure, then
government has to lead in addressing the issue of infrastructure because it
also constrains the rates of return to industry. I thank you.

Mr A HARDING: Madam Chair, Madam Deputy President, coming back to the
tourism component of the strategy, my question is as follows: Considering
the ownership of tourism in this country, where our people are largely
relegated to being drivers and being employees inside this industry, to
what extent does your strategy propose or envisage changing the face of
tourism business ownership in this country?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: It is not my strategy, hon member, but it is a
government strategy. Regarding changing ownership patterns in the tourism
sector, we are also worried about the fact that we do not see enough of our
people owning some of the big tourism institutions. In the tourism
empowerment charter, a considerable amount of time is given to that aspect
of empowerment.

I don’t have the details at my fingertips to see how well we are doing
there, but I do know that the Minister has been worried that we are
encountering a bit of resistance and the department will have to step in.
That is why when the DTI has gazetted the codes and everything we will have
the leverage to engage with those industries.

Of course, the issue also has to be looked at from a perspective of access
to finance because people have to buy into this. You know, as this side of
the House, instead of nationalising people’s industries, we opted for
empowerment where people buy their stakes. The burden that it has put on us
is that we actually have to find mechanisms to finance people. That’s why
it is important that our banks, also in the spirit of inclusiveness, must
financially assist those people who are getting into tourism.

I think it is unacceptable that you can really count with the fingers of
your one hand the black personalities that are strong in tourism: Jabu
Mabuza, Moss Mashishi and two other “laaities”, otherwise there is hardly
anybody who has been able to emerge. It’s a problem. The industry has to
look into itself.

                             PEACE AND SECURITY
                                  CLUSTER 1

MINISTERS:

 Initiatives to develop skills of inmates and to educate juvenile prisoners
307.  Ms S Rajbally (MF) asked the Minister of Correctional Services:
      (1)   Whether any initiatives are undertaken together with the
           Department of Arts and Culture to assist with the rehabilitation
           and skills development of inmates; if not, why not; if so, what
           initiatives;

      (2)   whether any programmes are being run together with the
           Department of Education to educate juvenile prisoners and offer
           skills development for adult inmates; if not, why not; if so,
           what are the relevant details?               N1984E

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, Madam hon Rajbally, the
response is as follows: Yes, there are initiatives that we have undertaken.
The Department of Arts and Culture, in partnership with the Department of
Correctional Services, is currently running three projects which are Arts
Against Crime and Arts Access; Nicro – Department of Arts and Culture; and
the Department of Correctional Services Arts and Culture Awards.

The Arts Against Crime project was launched in 2004 in the Kroonstad
correctional centre. Arts Access, driven by the Department of Arts and
Culture, is to be launched in all regions of the department. The Art
Therapy Centre – Lefika La Phodiso, will be running the introductory
workshops which aim at selecting suitable correctional officials for the
arts therapy course, which includes counselling and will start in 2007.

The training will be conducted in two stages: train the trainers and train
offenders. Training will be piloted in all six regions in each of the
centres of excellence per region and trained staff of the department will
do it. Training will be focused on the following elements: art therapy;
performance art; dance; music; theatre; drama; poetry; literature; art
instruction in fine art; jewellery-making; craft production; beadwork and
mural-making.

At this moment, the Department of Arts and Culture is currently running the
Age of Hope poetry competition with an external partner, Kgare ya Africa
Women in Arts, Culture and Media, at adult and youth female correction
centres to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the women’s march to the
Union Buildings that took place in 1956.

Regarding your second part of the question, yes, the department does
provide formal education and skills development programmes for the
sentenced offenders, which are aimed at improving the educational skills
and skills level of offenders. Have I run out of time already, Chairperson?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): You are not; I will tell you if you
are.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: I saw you smiling, Chairperson. So,
I have to look at you all the time and check.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): You are taking up your time. You have
33 seconds left.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Mr Selfe, she likes me. Thank you.
The following educational programmes are offered. In the general education
and training band, programmes offered under this band cover literacy
tuition, pre-adult basic education and training and Abet levels one to
four. These programmes are offered to both adults and youth. Further
education and training programmes offered under this band cover the
mainstream education, Grades 10 to 12.

Those who follow Correctional Services will know that last year we had a
100% pass rate for our students who enrolled for matric.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: They have lots of time to study.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: The Minister of Education says it is
because they have a lot of time to study. I think she is quite right.
Regarding higher education and training, all tertiary qualifications,
certificates, diplomas, junior and senior degrees are offered under this
band. We have had quite good certification going on with our offenders
around the Western Cape.

The following programmes are offered under skills development, kaMdladlana
[with special reference to Minister Mdladlana]. Vocational training implies
theoretical and practical training in which an offender, upon successful
completion, is eligible to be assessed and issued with a qualification by
the relevant Sector Education and Training Authority or the Institute for
the National Development of Learnerships, Employment Skills and Labour
Assessment. This is offered to all categories of offenders.

Basic occupational skills training, entrepreneurial training, computer
training and engineering studies are done by our sentenced offenders in all
of our centres. Thank you, mama Rajbally.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Chair, I want to say thank you to you hon Minister for
your very comprehensive answer. It is always overwhelming to note progress.
Government pilot projects are a further affirmation of addressing
rehabilitation.

My first question to the hon Minister is: Would there be any form of
accreditation for those successfully rehabilitated? My second question is:
What initiatives are taken in providing support to such people?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Rajbally, sorry, you may ask one
supplementary question.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, both are on the same question. It’s just one
and two.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): OK, I will allow it if the Minister
sees them as related – that question two is related to question one,
because that is all I can allow.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Are you allowing me, Madam Chair?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Please, go ahead.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Chairperson. Minister, what initiatives are taken
towards providing support to those entering the labour market in regard to
their skills being utilised? Thank you very much.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, hon Rajbally, yes,  they
are interconnected. Thank you very much for noting the progress that we  are
engaged in. I do hope that other Members of Parliament can do  the  same.  I
know that there are members who  really  go  out  and  check  on  all  those
things. Madam Patricia de Lille is one of those people who does that, and  I
know that for a fact. I know that James Selfe does that too.

Yes,  everything  that  they  get  is  accredited  by   the   qualifications
authority,  as  we  have  mentioned  here.  They  then  get  some  form   of
recognition, which they are given when they leave our correctional  centres.


There are initiatives in our reintegration policy to try and  get  work  for
them when they come out. We talk to big business  and  small  business,  and
make sure that they get work. Yesterday I was launching the building of  the
Kimberley prison. I emphasised in Kimberley that the subcontractor  who  got
the job has to take subcontractors  from  Kimberley  and  also  be  able  to
employ our former inmates within those subcontractors. It’s  something  that
I am going to be checking on all the time. Thank you very much.

Nkk M L  NGWENYA:  Sihlalo,  ngithi  kuNgqongqoshe  impendulo  yakhe  yinhle
kakhulu.  Kepha,  Ngqongqoshe,  wawushilo   ukuthi   ukuqondiswa   kwezimilo
zeziboshwa akusiyo inkinga yoMnyango Wezobulungiswa kuphela, kodwa  kufuneka
kube khona ukubambisana  ngokusemandleni  phakathi  kweMinyango  kahulumeni.
Ngqongqoshe, ake ucacisele le Ndlu ukuthi ngabe eminye iMinyango  kahulumeni
isisebenze kangakanani  ekubuyiseni  izimilo  zeziboshwa,  njengokuhambelana
ngokwehlukana kweminyaka yobudala nezidingo zazo?  Ngiyabonga.  (Translation
of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Mrs M L NGWENYA: Chairperson, I want  to  say  to  the  Minister  that  his
response is very good. However, Minister, you said that  the  rehabilitation
of inmates is not the responsibility  of  your  department  only,  but  that
there must be collaboration between government  departments.  Minister,  can
you tell this House about the progress made thus  far  by  other  government
departments with regards  to  the  rehabilitation  of  inmates  taking  into
consideration their ages and their needs? Thank you.]

UMPHATHISWA WEENKONZO ZOLULEKO: Enkosi Mam’uNgwenya. Ayisithi sodwa
abasebenza ngalo mba, sincediswa ngamanye amasebe afana nelezeMfundo, iSebe
lezoPhuhliso loLuntu, iSebe lezoBugcisa neNkcubeko ... (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Thank you, Mrs Ngwenya. We  are  not
the only ones who are working on this  matter;  we  are  being  assisted  by
other departments like the Department of Education, Social  Development  and
Arts and Culture ...]

... as I have mentioned here, and the Department of Justice, who  work  with
us in the cluster to try  and  make  sure  ...  ukuba  siyabambisana  kwinto
esiyenzayo.[... that we work in partnership in what we are doing.]

We have a project or an operation  within  Correctional  Services  known  as
Operation Masibambisane, where we are  asking  even  the  municipalities  to
assist us to make sure that when offenders get out, they  really  assist  us
in making sure that offenders are taken in and  socially  integrated  within
those communities where they live. I am happy  to  mention  that  there  are
lots of communities, even traditional leaders, who really work  with  us  in
this type of thing.

Mam’uNgwenya, we will try by all means to incorporate other  departments  as
much as possible in the  work  that  we  do.  There  are  stakeholders  like
Khulisa, Nicro and other organisations that are working with  us.  They  are
also contributing to making sure that izimilo zeziboshwa [the  behaviour  of
prisoners] - I don’t like  calling  them  “iziboshwa”  [prisoners],  I  like
calling them offenders - are really looked at properly.

Mr J  SELFE:  Chairperson,  the  Minister  knows  that  prisons  work  where
prisoners work. If the purpose of imprisonment  is  rehabilitation,  inmates
must either learn or work when they  are  in  prison.  Yet,  only  14,9%  of
inmates, according to the annual  reports,  are  involved  in  any  sort  of
educational  programmes  and  3,5%  of  inmates  are  involved   in   formal
education.

When we went to the King Williams Town prison the other  day,  there  was  a
classroom and a teacher, but there were no people in the classroom. I  think
that that is the problem that the Minister of Education needs  to  take  up,
because  there  were  people  there  that  should  have  been  subjected  to
compulsory education but who simply refused to undertake education. When  is
the Minister going to make it compulsory for inmates to learn  or  work  and
to take the necessary enabling steps  to  make  this  feasible?  Thank  you,
Chair.
The MINISTER  OF  CORRECTIONAL  SERVICES:  Chairperson,  it’s  a  very  good
question. It’s quite a  fantastic  question.  As  you  just  mentioned,  hon
Selfe, one of the things that we have noticed is exactly that. But you  also
have to look at the buildings that we have. Some of them do not comply  with
what we want to do, hence we are now building  this  new-generation  prisons
so that we have classrooms, computer rooms and everything. Some of  the  old
prisons are really a problem, because we have to look at the safety  of  the
members and the safety of the offenders as well.

We are putting together a compulsory policy  now.  We  are  talking  to  the
Human Rights Commission because they have raised some issues  on  making  it
compulsory for everybody but we are trying our best to overcome that.

There will be a compulsory policy on all education  and  all  programmes  so
that nobody is lazing around and does nothing within the  prisons,  starting
with the juvenile centres. Not anybody would be  allowed,  because  we  will
then be using that as an incentive for them to move  from  one  category  to
the other category and they can look forward to those  types  of  incentives
so that they can learn something.  You  cannot  have  a  person  staying  in
prison for 15 years, coming out and then having learned absolutely  nothing.
So, help us. When we bring that policy to the portfolio committee  you  will
be there, and you will probably  be  applauding  because  we  will  then  be
enforcing it from there onwards.
Mrs  C  DUDLEY:  Chairperson,  hon  Minister,  are  any  initiatives   being
undertaken in collaboration with faith-based organisations  to  assist  with
the rehabilitation and skills development of inmates? And  do  inmates  have
unfettered access to spiritual instruction and guidance, and  what  are  the
relevant details? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Another good  question.  We  do  have
faith-based organisations working within our correctional centres.  In  each
and every centre we have chaplains. We try and mix our chaplains across  all
faiths so that it’s not one faith only operating there.

If you look back at the remissions we had, we even had a service  where  all
faiths came together to pray, to do all kinds of things for  the  prisoners.
But, within the centres themselves they are given that chance so  that  they
are able to link up with  these  faith-based  organisations  and  work  with
them.

Actually, spiritual or faith-based programmes are the  most  popular  within
correctional centres, because some prisoners  just  want  to  go  into  that
direction and not consider other programmes that we have. So,  if  ever  you
have a chance to visit, please feel free to visit any  of  our  correctional
centres. You will be able to pick up immediately when you go in  there  that
there are faith-based organisations operating there. I  am  always  checking
on that, even on Sundays, not just the praying and the preaching,  but  also
taking them through some of the spiritual levels  that  people  have  to  go
through.

So, if ever you want to go there, I can give you my biometric card to  enter
any prison in South Africa. You can enter any prison and check for  yourself
what is going on. [Interjections.] Do you want it for  yourself  or  do  you
want to visit? You want to walk into prison and  sleep  there.  Okay,  thank
you. [Laughter.]

  Assistance by SA Police Service to private security personnel involved in
                         cash-in-transit operations

309.  Ms M M Sotyu (ANC) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:

      What assistance will the SA Police Service render to private security
      companies involved in cash-in-transit operations?
                                              N1987E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, the National Commissioner
of the SA Police Service recently held discussions with some unions whose
members transport cash around the country. At that meeting, the union
leaders were assured that police would help with the training of such
security personnel. It is of course the responsibility of the relevant
security companies to arm the security guards with the appropriate firearms
required for their defence as they perform their duties, subject to the
requirements of the Firearms Control Act. Thank you very much.

Ms M M SOTYU: Chairperson, Comrade Minister, we know that a number of
private security companies complained about the condition of vehicles used
for cash in transit, training, working conditions and other factors
associated with their employment. Can the Minister also highlight the
responsibility, if any, of the private security companies in the industry
and that of those companies that make use of such vehicles?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: We are working together with
businesses in South Africa to deal with all sorts of problems that we have
in the fight against crime. We are also discussing with those who are
involved in financial institutions in South Africa as well as the private
security industry.

There are certain things that we are pointing out and there’s an admission
that some of these matters do need to be addressed. The first one is that
when you trace, particularly cash-in-transit heists, you must ask yourself
this question: How is it possible that anyone, apart from those who handle
the money at source, know that there is that amount of money being
transported and the routes that the security cash vans are going to take?
We believe that we need to address that particular matter. There are
certain suggestions that we have which we are discussing with businesses.

The second point is the matter of the vehicles themselves. Those vehicles
are not reinforced vehicles or armoured vehicles. They are ordinary kombis
that are being used to carry this cash. We are discussing that matter as
well.

But, with respect to the security guards themselves, there are certain
things we are talking about there, including training them to have a basic
understanding of what is happening and the expectations on their part. That
will include, of course, training them in the use of firearms. But, it is
the security companies that must equip those security guards adequately in
order for them to be able to withstand any attacks. We are prepared to do
whatever is necessary to ensure that they receive adequate training and
that there are measures to deal with their protection as well.

There are companies that have adopted some measures that we would want to
suggest. In fact, at some point we want to come back to Parliament and look
the Private Security Industry Regulatory Act again to see if we can’t amend
it so that there are regulations or minimum standards that can be adopted
by some of these security companies to deal with this particular problem.
Thank you.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Chair, Minister, while one would prefer, for obvious
reasons, not to use the army except for cordon-and-search, guarding and
border patrol duties, as an interim measure and until longer-term measures
are in place – and we would suggest here the training of specialised police
units – should we not use the army to guard cash-in-transit vans and, if
not, why ever not?
The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: As I said before, we are discussing
these matters with companies that are involved in the transportation of
money in South Africa, allow us to deal with that matter. Calling out the
army to do those kinds of functions has problems. Let’s not, by trying to
address a particular problem, create more problems for ourselves. Let’s
deal with this matter in a way that we believe we should. Therefore, at the
moment, we don’t believe that calling out the army will be an appropriate
way to address this particular problem. [Interjections.]

Mr V B NDLOVU: Chairperson, I heard you, Minister, saying you are dealing
with businesses regarding armoured cars. I’m a little bit sceptical about
that, but I wanted to ask you this: If government is dealing with
businesses regarding armoured cars, would that not put the police
themselves in jeopardy? If that is happening, the private security
companies will have armoured cars the way other people have armoured cars.
Won’t that put the security of the country in jeopardy per se?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: No, it wouldn’t, hon Ndlovu. All that
would happen is that, and this happens in many countries, the vehicles we
use to ferry cash around would be reinforced vehicles. It has nothing to do
with armoured vehicles, vis-a-vis for instance, the military or police
vehicles. It’s armoured vehicles for purposes ... maybe let me not use
armoured. It will be reinforced vehicles to ensure therefore that what is
happening at the moment does not happen in future. As you are aware, one of
the things that happens is that the criminals come with smaller cars and
ram them into these vehicles, which then fall over. We are saying that we
need reinforced vehicles at least to protect the people; reinforced
vehicles that cannot be broken into as is the case today. We need
reinforced vehicles that cannot be penetrated by bullets as is the case
today.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chair, hon Minister, even though you are not in favour of
using the army to protect the security guards in the interim, the fact is
that lives would be protected and something needs to be done urgently in
the meantime while you are looking for a solution to the problem. The fact
that another cash-in-transit heist took place this morning in Limpopo
indicates that, whatever the police have been doing since the meeting
between the national commissioner and the representatives of the transport
workers’ union, to seems not be producing the desired results. So, what I
want to know is: What other action is government planning to take besides
training in order to minimise the dangers that transporters of money are
subjected to on a daily basis?

Secondly, will the guards be issued with high-calibre weapons to match
those that are used by their robbers? Thank you.
The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: With respect to the firearms, I’ve
already indicated that the security companies have to equip the people that
they have employed. It is their responsibility to do that. It is not the
responsibility of the government to arm private individuals. It’s not the
function of the government.

With respect to your other question, there are some things, hon Meshoe,
that we can’t be talking about or discuss openly like this. There are
measures that we are looking at to address this particular problem. Among
other things, as I said, we are discussing with businesses. We will have a
meeting again on Friday which is going to look at some of the things we
need to do quickly to deal with some aspects of crime in this country.
Thank you.

     Targets set by Minister of Safety and Security with regard to crime
                                  reduction

333.  Ms D Kohler-Barnard (DA) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:

      (1)   Whether, in following the example of a number of MECs, he has
           set his own targets with regard to the reduction of crime; if
           not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details;

      (2)   whether he will resign if these targets are not met; if not, why
           not?                                                     N2017E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson ... [Interjections.] ... I
am sorry, the order had changed. Government has set a target of between 7%
and 10% annually for the reduction of serious and violent crimes,
especially contact crimes. We are working towards those targets. As the
annual report of the SA Police Service for the financial year 2005-06 will
show, those targets were attained in many types of crime except for murder,
rape and indecent assault. I am convinced that, as policing improves in
South Africa by way of better training and resources to the police and
partnerships that are being forged with many civilian stakeholders, there
are going to be more decreases in crime.

Indecent assault was the only crime that in 2001-02 through to 2004-05 went
up. It went down marginally in 2005-06. With better policing, that will
continue to improve. The downward trend is going to continue. The targets
are being met and where this has not happened, it will happen. Thank you.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Mr Minister, in the corporate world, you would be
asked to resign if you failed at your job. Now you have, so why does this
principle not apply to you and your commissioner?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Hon Kohler-Barnard, the ANC, as you
know, was formed in 1912, and it was only in 1994 that the struggle that
the ANC has been involved in eventually triumphed, after 82 years. One of
the things that have been key to the prosecution of that struggle has been
resilience. All the revolutionaries who were part of the ANC never walked
away from the challenges that were posed by apartheid. I am not, as a
member of that ANC, going to walk away from the challenges that crime poses
in this country. [Applause.]

Ms J E SOSIBO: Minister, we cannot allow criminals and criminal activities
to decide who does and who does not become the political head of the fight
against crime. What is more important is what we are doing together as law-
abiding citizens of South Africa to stop crime. Minister, can you indicate
to this House what measures you as the political head have put in place to
measure the progress made in the fight against crime, and to ensure that
the SA Police Service meets and exceeds its own stated objectives?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: There are many things that we have
done to improve policing in South Africa. That is why the crime levels
continue to go down, and that is as a consequence of the things that we
have done and we are continuing to do, because we are changing the way that
policing is done in order for us to drastically reduce the crimes that are
happening in South Africa.

There is evidence that crimes have been reduced drastically in a number of
crime types. There are 21 crime types we deal with and many of them
decreased except, as I have said, for murder, rape and indecent assault.
The reason that these three crime types have not gone down as was
contemplated in terms of the targets set by government is the fact that
these crimes relate to what we have defined as social crimes. It is crimes,
therefore, that happen where the victim and the perpetrator know one
another. It is crimes, therefore, that happen in isolation and, in many
cases, behind closed doors.

But even that matter is going to be addressed as we continue to put more
police officers on the streets for visible policing in what we have defined
as sectors. Thank you.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Sihlalo ... [Ubuwelewele.] Bengisacela ungikhuzele umsindo.
[Chairperson ... [Interjections.] Can you call the House to order for me,
please.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order, please!

Mr V B NDLOVU: Chairperson, I just wanted to ask the Minister about contact
crime. It seems as if it’s going up and not going down, as you have just
said. The perception outside – these people don’t have the figures the way
we have and the way we discuss it in the portfolio committee - is that
contact crime is higher than it is supposed to be. In other words, the
people are murdered more easily than is supposed to be the case. How then
can we change that perception? That is first question coupled with how and
when are we going to see the visibility of the police, because it seems as
if the problem we are going to have is that although we won’t have each
street with its own police, we must have the police visible on the ground.
How are we going to implement that and when?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Minister, I don’t see the link
between the last question and the question that is on the Question Paper
but feel free to answer it if you wish.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Yes, Chairperson, let me answer
nonetheless. Firstly, it is incorrect to say contact crimes are going up
rather than going down. They are going down. What I have said is that
murder, which is one of the contact crimes; rape which is one of the
contact crimes; and indecent assault, one of the contact crimes, have not
gone down into the category of the targeted 7% to 10%. But they went down,
nonetheless.

I know that the issue of statistics is an issue that gets discussed this or
the other way all the time. That is happening in many countries. It has
been happening over many years. Two people can at times read statistics
differently but, in the police, what happens is that we take the statistics
of the reports that go to the police stations as they are recorded there.
We take statistics from there and, of course, the only way in which the
public, in the end, will have an understanding about that is when we engage
and talk about these things all the time.

By restructuring, we are trying to resolve the issue of visibility on the
ground and, as we shift, therefore, there will be more resources on the
ground. There are going to be more police officials who are going to be in
the sectors that we have created. Therefore that visibility will be there
and everybody will see it. We have already done that in a number of areas.
But you are correct, more needs to be done for purposes of providing our
people with better safety and security measures. Thank you.

Mr A HARDING: Madam Chair and Minister, on the issue of statistics, it was
recently reported that cash-in-transit heists were up to 74%. Now, given
that kind of statistic and given the particularly violent nature of these
crimes, has the time not perhaps come to establish a special unit inside
the SAPS to deal specifically with cash-in-transit heists?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: There is such a unit that has been
established. In fact, there are a number of operations that we talk about
that the police are involved in, and those operations are being done on the
basis of those special units. One of them is called Operation Greed, which
deals specifically with cash-in-transit heists and bank robberies.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Minister, it seems very much that
this question was supposed to have been answered previously, and that it
does not link to the issue of targets. Thank you very much. There is then a
further opportunity for a follow-up question.

Mr A HARDING: Madam Chair, can I address you on that? The question was
asked specifically in relation to crime statistics and the operational word
that I used in my question centred around statistics.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: I just want to give you some
statistics to show what we have been able to do. I have been giving these
statistics in the House but I want to give you an update. As from 15 July
to 15 October, in the past three months, we arrested 456 suspects involved
in 318 cases, people who have been involved in serious and violent crimes
like murder, attempted murder, rape, hijacking and armed robberies.

Those arrests were effected by this special unit we are talking about but
that’s not the total number for the three months. The entire total, if you
take other crimes that these people have committed, is 1 192 suspects
arrested in connection with 1 508 cases. A number of these suspects are
people who are repeat offenders involved in up to three cases, again
serious and violent cases. Some of them are people against whom warrants of
arrest were issued. For instance, 287 of them were involved in 456 cases.
All of this, in three months, has been done by these dedicated detectives
who are part of these units that deal with matters like this, including, as
I said, a dedicated unit that deals with bank robberies and cash-in-transit
heists. Thank you.

    Mechanisms to keep juveniles awaiting trial for petty offences out of
                                   prison

317.  Mr D V Bloem (ANC) asked the Minister of Correctional Services:

      (1)   Whether, with reference to the Inspecting Judge’s annual report
           on the need to keep children away from prison unless exceptional
           circumstances dictate, any mechanisms are in place to ensure
           that only those children who have committed serious offences are
           in prison, taking into account each specific case; if not, why
           not; if so, what mechanisms;

      (2)   whether any inter-departmental mechanisms are in place to keep
           out of prison juveniles awaiting trial for petty offences,
           taking into account the need for a holistic approach to the
           problem; if not, why not; if so, what mechanisms?
                                                   N1995E

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, yes, hon Bloem, there
are mechanisms in place to ensure that children are kept away from prisons.
It’s one of those things that are very painful when one goes to a prison
and you see children there. The Deputy Minister of Correctional Services is
seized with the task of making sure that we get children out of prison.

The intersectoral committee has been established to ensure an integrated
approach in the removal of children from the correctional facilities. The
Department of Correctional Services has developed a matrix system that
indicates the name of the child, registration number, gender, age, nature
of the crime, date of admission, date of appearance in court, name of the
court and the magisterial area.

The developed matrix assists us with the identification of children who
have committed petty crimes and those who have committed serious offences.
The information, according to the matrix, is then submitted monthly to the
Department of Social Development, and the Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development.

The Department of Social Development’s probation officers conduct
assessments and compile pre-sentence reports for alternative placement of
the children, such as home-based supervision and referral to secure care
facilities.

Incidentally, today, hon member Bloem, I got a letter from the MEC for
social services and poverty alleviation telling me exactly where some of
these children go to, and I will make the copy of this letter available to
you. We have reached an agreement with the Department of Education that
children who are designated to reform schools be removed timeously from
correctional centres.

With regard to the second question, yes, the interdepartmental mechanisms
are in place. Presentations were made by us to the magistrates in all the
provinces in order to put up mechanisms for the removal of children from
our centres, as well as identifying challenges and coming up with solutions
for speeding up the process.

We have also established a task team on the management of awaiting-trial
detainees with the aim of reducing the overpopulation of awaiting trials.
The draft policy on the management of awaiting-trial detainees has been
developed by my department.

The Department of Social Development renders diversion programmes that
prevent children from entering the criminal justice system. The discussions
were held between my department and that of hon Zola Skweyiya, and heads
from provinces, to identify services that are age-appropriate for the
different categories of children. Thank you very much.

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, Minister, it will always be a serious concern
for all of us to see so many children in our prisons. I am sure that the
Minister will agree with me that the serious overcrowding makes it more
urgent that we find alternative accommodation for these children, outside
of prisons. Thank you.
The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, it will always be quite
a terrible thing to keep children in prison, but I think one of the things
that we need to emphasise is the issue of family units. Family units are
very important in helping us to divert and make sure that these children
don’t commit offences.

Again, I would like to issue a clear invitation to members that they should
please go to these prisons and check for themselves how bad the situation
of overcrowding is. Finding 14-year-olds and 15-year-olds in prison does
break one’s heart as an adult, and for an adult who is also a father or a
mother to see them there is really heartbreaking.

I do hope that we can have that kind of empathy to go and visit the
children, talk to the magistrates and try to get these kids out of prison.

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Chairperson, if we want to arrest the vicious
cycle of re-offending, hon Minister, we must keep children charged with
petty offences as, you said, out prison or out of our correctional
services, to be politically correct. We must adopt a more holistic
approach.

Surely, the long-term solution lies in the passing of the Child Justice
Bill that has been delayed, for some reasons, for far too long. What steps
will the hon Minister take as a member of the relevant Cabinet cluster to
facilitate the speedy passage of this Bill, which will go a long way in
addressing the problem?

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, I want to say to the
hon Shah my understanding is very simple. I sit in a cluster with other
Ministers and I do know what’s going on within the justice system. They do
know what’s going on with Correctional Services. I am not in the business
of pushing my colleagues or sitting on them, as you can see if I do sit on
them it would cause chaos. So, I try not to be pushy, but to be very polite
to my colleagues and work with them very closely.

So, there is that close working relationship and we will keep on trying our
best to make it very easy for us to work together. Regarding the issue of a
holistic approach, that is the kind of holistic approach we want in the
cluster and we have it.

Lastly, it’s very painful – again I repeat this – when we were in
Oudtshoorn the other day with the Deputy Minister, on our way to Beaufort
West, and we passed by the juvenile centre there. And, again we got to see
those 15-year-olds and 16-year-olds. When I phoned the family wanting to
know why the child was there, the family told me: Please, Mr Balfour, keep
him there. There are young women who are in that prison and are expecting
babies. It really breaks one’s heart to go and see such things.

However, it’s up to us as the leadership of Parliament, and the leadership
of Correctional Services and the criminal justice system to make sure that
the systems do work. At the moment I have that view that we are getting
there; the systems are beginning to get moving and we will eventually have
that holistic approach.

Mrs S A SEATON: Chairperson, thank you Minister for your answers. Yes, it
is indeed a very sad situation when juveniles are in prison. Obviously the
department is doing what it can but there is still a very serious concern,
specifically with the awaiting-trial juveniles, more specifically because
these juveniles do not receive any education while they are awaiting trial.


We know that there are many juveniles that have been sitting there for many
more than nine months, some of them as long as 18 months. Don’t you think
that it is time that legislation was passed? And this is where I think you
should, perhaps, use your weight, Minister, to sit on your colleagues ...
[Laughter.] Is it not time that legislation be changed so that individual
juveniles may not be imprisoned for longer than three months without being
brought to trial and to be able to sort this out? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, Madam Seaton, I know
that you are one of the people who care quite a lot about what’s going on
with these children. When they are on trial it takes longer and they don’t
get any education, but what I clearly got today from the MEC Mqulwana is
that when they are on trial she will be able to provide them with
education, sports and recreation. She clearly mentioned all kinds of
programmes that she will put them through.

Sometimes there are delays in the system and it is really frustrating when
one sees these delays but we are trying to address that, with my colleagues
in the criminal justice system. I don’t for a moment believe that it is the
legislation that is the problem. The problem is the case flows that are not
going through quickly enough. I do work with them and there are areas in
Hatfield where they are doing very well. There is also a system in Port
Elizabeth which is working very well. We are beginning to pilot these
programmes into other areas so that these juveniles are out of the system
on time.

However, when one sees them having been there for a year or two, it pains
one, because one would want either the closure of the case or the start of
the sentence for whoever is sentenced so that they don’t live in limbo for
a very long time. But we are trying our best. I am telling you, it’s not an
easy thing.

I have said it in this House many times that Correctional Services is a
challenge and it needs a tough cookie to be able to get that challenge
going. And I know I am still tough and not soft yet. [Interjections.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Chairperson, hon Minister, I have been at this since 17
July 2000, when I got that court order, case number 1 530 from the High
Court against five Ministers. I must say that during my last visit, on 11
September, conditions had improved. It is much cleaner but the overcrowding
is the cause of all the problems. On that day, you had 1 141 between the
ages of 17 and 20, and another 93 between the ages of 14 and 17.

Subsequently, I have had a meeting with the Legal Aid Board and I will be
meeting with you on 7 November, and also with the Inspecting Judge. Of
course, I want to agree with you that more MPs must go up there and also
use whatever means. My question is really that we have been talking a lot
about this interdepartmental working together, but still the magistrates
don’t do their job because they don’t enquire ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, your time for asking a
question has expired. Hon Minister, there was no question.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, you see, when you are a
politician and you are given a chance to speak, please speak.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): In this House we go according to the
Rules, hon Minister.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, it’s just a comment.
[Laughter.] You are quite correct, hon De Lille. You have seen that there
is some improvement. We have tried to put some wheels into motion about
this. You visited the Legal Aid Board and we have a very good relationship
with the law society. I have visited with them so that they can see for
themselves what’s going on, and they are doing that. I am quite happy with
that but we still need to move more speedily to address some of these.

We have been talking about it and we are doing something about it as well.
I cannot, for the life of me, say anything against magistrates standing
here. I can’t. I always have to talk to the Deputy Ministers and the
Minister and then try and get them to get things moving. [Interjections.]
Chairperson, I need your protection. These members are calling me “a
koeksister”. [Laughter.] I need your protection.

Ek is nie ’n koeksister nie. ’n Koeksister is nie so groot soos ek nie. En
ek is ook nie ’n vetkoek nie. [Gelag.] [I am not a koeksister. A koeksister
is not as big as I am. And neither am I a vetkoek. [Laughter.]]

So, we are looking into all those things, hon De Lille. Thank you very
much.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr E W TRENT: Chair, I hereby give notice that I intend moving the
following motion:


   That this House—


        1) noting that an all-time high of ten qualified or worse audit
           opinions were issued by the Office of the Auditor-General to the
           government departments; and


        2) resolves to debate what steps should be taken to hold the
           responsible Ministers accountable.

Mr K J MINNIE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I intend moving the
following motion:
   That this House —


     1) notes that the pensioners of the Transnet Second Defined Benefit
        Fund had not received any increases above the statutory 2% provided
        for in the past five years; and


     2) debates the need for special measures to address the income
        shortfall that has developed for members of the TSDBF.

The House adjourned at 17:07.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS
                          THURSDAY, 26 OCTOBER 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Arts and Culture for consideration and report:

          a) Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity  of
             Cultural Expressions, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of  the
             Constitution, 1996.

          b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention on the Protection  and
             Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expression.

    2.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration:


          a) A report on the withholding of remuneration of Mr  M  Matereke,
             an   additional   magistrate   at   the   Magistrates    Court,
             Johannesburg, who is under provisional suspension, in terms  of
             section 13(4A)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act  No  90  of
             1993).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     a) Government Notice No 1035 published in Government Gazette No  29299
        dated 13 October  2006:  Third  Reporting  Exemption  in  terms  of
        section 74 of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001  (Act  No
        38 of 2001).


2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development
     a) Report of the Auditor-General  on  the  summary  of  statements  of
        monies kept in trust in the Guardian’s Funds for the year ended  31
        March 2004.


     b) Government Notice No R.605 published in Government Gazette No 28942
        dated  15  June  2006:  Commission  of  Inquiry   to   conduct   an
        investigation into the alleged illicit activities of certain  South
        African companies or individuals relating to the United Nations Oil-
        For-Food Programme in Iraq: Extension of period to report, in terms
        of the Commissions Act, 1947 (Act No 8 of 1947).

                           FRIDAY, 27 OCTOBER 2006

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the  Ombud  for
        Financial Services Providers for 2005-2006, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Government Employees Pension
        Fund (GEPF) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the  Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 211-2006].

2.    The Minister for Public Enterprises


     a) Report and Financial Statements of Denel  Proprietary  Limited  for
        2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on  the
        Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     a) Free Trade Agreement between the European  Free  Trade  Association
        (EFTA) and the Southern African Customs  Union  (SACU),  tabled  in
        terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


     b) Explanatory Memorandum to the  Free  Trade  Agreement  between  the
        European Free Trade Association (EFTA)  and  the  Southern  African
        Customs Union (SACU).


4.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


     a) Memorandum of Understanding on the  Trilateral  and  Allied  Fields
        between the Governments  of  the  Republic  of  South  Africa,  the
        Federal Republic of Brazil and the  Republic  of  India  under  the
        India-Brazil-South Africa (IBSA) Dialogue Forum, tabled in terms of
        section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


National Assembly

1.    The Acting Speaker

     FIRST REPORT OF THE RULES COMMITTEE OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY, 2006



     Pursuant to a meeting of the Rules Committee on 11 October 2006, co-
     chaired by House Chairpersons Mr G Q M Doidge and Mr K O Bapela, Mr
     Doidge on behalf of the Speaker presents the First Report of the Rules
     Committee of the National Assembly dated 11 October 2006, as follows:



     A.     Rule amendments: House Chairpersons



     The Committee having considered rule amendments resulting from the
     establishment of the posts of House Chairpersons recommends that the
     indicated rules or subrules be amended as follows:


     Rule 14 pertaining to the Election of other presiding officers be
     substituted by:


     14.    (1)   This House must elect three members as House Chairpersons
     for the duration of the House.

          (2)    The Speaker must allocate functions and responsibilities
     to the House Chairpersons and announce such allocations in the ATC.


     Rule 15 pertaining to the Relief of Speaker be substituted by:


     15.    The Deputy Speaker or a House Chairperson must preside during a
     sitting of the House whenever requested to do so by the Speaker.



     Subrule 16(2) pertaining to the Absence of Speaker be substituted by:
     16.    (2)   Whenever both the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker are
     absent or unable to perform the functions of the Office of Speaker, the
     Speaker or, if the Speaker is not available, the Deputy Speaker, must
     designate one of the House Chairpersons to act as Speaker.



     Rule 17 pertaining to the Continued absence of Speaker and Deputy
     Speaker be substituted by:


     17.    Whenever this House has been informed of the likelihood of the
     continued absence of both the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker for longer
     than seven consecutive parliamentary working days, this House may
     appoint a member to act as House Chairperson while the House
     Chairperson so designated acts as Speaker, until the Speaker or the
     Deputy Speaker becomes available or this House decides otherwise.



     Rule 37 pertaining to the Chairperson [of an appropriation committee]
     be substituted by:


     37.    The Chair of an appropriation committee may be taken by a House
     Chairperson or a member appointed by the Speaker for that purpose.



     Rule 159 pertaining to the Composition [of Rules Committee] be
     substituted by:


     159.   The Rules Committee consists of –
  a) the Speaker;
  b) the Deputy Speaker;
  c) the House Chairpersons; and
  d) no more than 50 other members appointed by the Speaker.


     Subrule 163 (1) pertaining to Policy matters requiring decision during
     recess be substituted by:

     163.   (1)   If during a recess a matter of policy arises that requires
           a Rules Committee decision but cannot await finalisation when
           the session resumes, the Speaker may convene a meeting of those
           of the following office-bearers who are available to decide on
           the matter:
        a) the Speaker;
        b) the Deputy Speaker;
        c) the House Chairpersons;
        d) the Chief Whip;
        e) the Deputy Chief Whip of the majority party;
        f) the chairperson of the relevant Subcommittee of the Rules
           Committee under whose jurisdiction the matter in question falls;
        g) the most senior whip of each of the other parties in the
           Assembly or alternate of such whip; and
     (h)    a committee chairperson designated by the Committee of
           Chairpersons.



     Rule 178 pertaining to the Composition [of the Subcommittee on
     International Relations] be substituted by:


      178. The Subcommittee on International Relations consists of –
        a) the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker;
        b) the House Chairperson designated by the Speaker;
        c) three members of the majority party in the Assembly;
        d) one member from each of the three largest minority parties in
           the Assembly;
        e) one member from each of two of the other minority parties in the
           Assembly;
        f) one member from the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs
           designated by the committee; and
        g) three chairpersons of Assembly committees designate by the
           Committee of Chairpersons.


     Subrule 188 (1) pertaining to the Composition [of the Programme
     Committee] be substituted by:


     188.   (1) The Programme Committee consists of -
        a) the Speaker;
        b) the Deputy Speaker;
        c) the Leader of Government Business;
        d) the House Chairpersons;
        e) the Chief Whip;
        f) the Deputy Chief Whip of the majority party in the Assembly;
        g) the whip of the majority party responsible for programming;
        h) another two whips of the majority party designated by that
           party;
        i) one whip and two additional representatives of the largest
           minority party in the Assembly designated by that party;
        j) one whip and one additional representative of the second largest
           minority party in the Assembly designated by that party; and
        k) one whip of each of the other minority parties in the Assembly
           designated by the party concerned.


     Subrule 196 (1) pertaining to the Composition [of the Committee of
     Chairpersons] be substituted by:


     196.   (1) The Committee of Chairpersons consists of –
       a) the House Chairpersons; and
       b) the chairperson of each Assembly committee and each Assembly
          member who is a chairperson or co-chairperson of a joint
          committee, or an Assembly member of the committee designated by
          the chairperson.


     Subrule 197 (1) and (2) pertaining to the Chairperson [of the Committee
     of Chairpersons] be substituted by:


     197.   (1)   The House Chairperson designated by the Speaker presides
     at meetings of the Committee of Chairpersons.
     (2)    If the designated House Chairperson is not available another
     House Chairperson may preside at a meeting of the Committee.



     Rule 218 pertaining to the Composition [of the Chief Whips’ Forum] be
     amended as follows:


     Subrule 218 (1) be substituted by:
     218(1) The Chief Whips' Forum consists of –
  a) the House Chairpersons;
  b) the Chief Whip
  c) the Deputy Chief Whip of the majority party
  d) the most senior whip of each of the other parties represented in the
     Assembly; and
  e) a committee chairperson designated by the Committee of Chairpersons.


     New subrule 218(2) be added as follows:
     (2)    The Speaker and the Deputy Speaker may attend meetings of the
     Forum or designate someone to attend on their behalf.


     The numbering of existing Subrules 218(2) and 218(3) be adjusted to
     218(3 and 218(4).



     Rule 224 pertaining to the Scheduling function of Chairperson of
     Committees be substituted by:
     Scheduling function of the designated House Chairperson



     224.   The House Chairperson designated by the Speaker must implement
     any policy, directive or guideline on the scheduling and co-ordination
     of meetings of all committees and subcommittees.





     B.     Memorandum of Understanding




     The Committee recommends that:




     The Memorandum of Understanding on the establishment of a Regular
     Exchange Mechanism between the National Assembly of South Africa and
     the National People’s Congress of the People’s Republic of China, which
     was tabled and referred to the Committee in accordance with the
     resolution adopted by the House on 20 September 2006, be ratified by
     the House (see Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 6 October
     2006, p 2123).




     Report to be considered.










     ___________________________                   ____________________

     G Q M Doidge, MP                              Date

     Acting Speaker

                           MONDAY, 30 OCTOBER 2006


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Defence

     (a)    Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the African Union Contributing
         Resources to the African Union Mission in Burundi (AMIB), tabled
         in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
         between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
         African Union Contributing Resources to the African Union Mission
         in Burundi (AMIB).


     c) Protocol between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and
        the Government of the Republic of Angola on Defence Cooperation,
        tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     d) Explanatory Memorandum to the Protocol between the Government of
        the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
        Angola on Defence Cooperation.


     e) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
        and the Government of the Republic of Belarus on Military-Technical
        Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
        1996.


     f) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government of
        the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
        Belarus on Military-Technical Cooperation.

     g) Agreement between The Republic of South Africa and the Kingdom of
        Belgium on A Military Partnership, tabled in terms of section
        231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     h) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Republic of
        South Africa and the Kingdom of Belgium on A Military Partnership.


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly


1.    Report on  the  Study  Tour  by  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Social
    Development to Australia (07-11 August 2006), dated 25 October 2006:



    Having undertaken a study tour to Australia on social  security  related
    matters  on  07-11  August  2006,  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Social
    Development reports:




    1.      Background

    In the year 2003, the Portfolio  Committee  on  Social  Development  was
    tasked to legislate for the  establishment  of  the  new  South  African
    Social Security  Agency  (SASSA),  which  would  over  time  assume  the
    responsibility of payment  and  administration  of  social  grants.  The
    establishment of SASSA was necessitated by the severe weaknesses in  the
    management and administration of social  grants  often  resulting  in  a
    failure on the part of government to ensure that those entitled  to  the
    benefit were provided with the best possible service. This continued  to
    lead to ongoing litigation and substantial  negative  publicity  in  the
    press.


    SASSA is a Cabinet-endorsed focused and specialized institution that  is
    meant to take responsibility for the management and delivery  of  social
    grants. Its strategic intent is to facilitate improvement in the quality
    of services provided  to  beneficiaries  and  ensure  that  the  minimum
    standards operate countrywide, for consistent  and  predictable  service
    delivery. This, it is hoped will lead to  efficiency  gains  which  will
    manifest themselves in the reduction in the cost of service delivery  as
    well as the drastic minimization of fraud associated with  social  grant
    administration and payment. The establishment of the  Agency  will  have
    far  reaching  implications,  requiring  expert  management  of  people,
    structures and processes.


    Subsequent to passing the  SASSA  legislation  in  2003,  our  committee
    could, sadly, not effectively interact with  the  provincial  and  local
    government stakeholders on some of the unfolding developments leading up
    to the establishment of such an Agency as it was hamstrung by  the  work
    on the recently finalized Children and Older Persons’ Bill in the  years
    2004 and 2005 (first half). Given the breathing space at its disposal at
    the moment resulting from the conclusion of the committee’s  legislative
    work in June 2005 and also as a gesture of its commitment to wanting  to
    contribute towards ensuring that transition from the old to a new  grant
    administration dispensation takes  place  as  envisaged,  the  Committee
    adopted a proactive approach and visited the province of North  West  on
    01-05 August 2005.


    The visit was in sync  with  our  Committee’s  oversight  role.  It  was
    intricately linked to our Committee’s mission of  reviewing,  developing
    and  monitoring  the  implementation  of  appropriate  legislation  that
    responds to the social development needs of the people and that  assists
    in  reducing  poverty  and  social  exclusion,   and   ensuring   public
    participation. Also ensuring that the policies  and  social  development
    services  implemented  by  Government  are  focused   on   comprehensive
    protection against vulnerability and on strengthening the social fabric.


    Prior and subsequent to the  visit  to  North  West  our  committee  had
    facilitated a number of interactions  with  officials  from  the  social
    security branch in the national Department  of  Social  Development  and
    South African Social Security Agency on such  pertinent  issues  as  the
    reporting mechanism of SASSA to Parliament,  SASSA’s  Business  Plan  as
    well progress made and challenges currently experienced with  regard  to
    its rollout plan and its general transitional  arrangements;  update  on
    the Human Resource issues one of which was the issue of the transfer  of
    staff and assets.


    Having been to provinces and also interacted with SASSA  officials,  the
    committee then took stock of its  own  capacity  to  exercise  effective
    oversight over SASSA and arrived at a conclusion that  its  ability  and
    skill to  exercise  effective  oversight  over  SASSA  could  be  better
    strengthened and sharpened if it could, among other things, visit, among
    other institutions, Centrelink in Australia and look at what  they  have
    to offer at operational and  policy  level.  Moreover,  to  explore  the
    systems that Australia has in place in governing how  institutions  like
    Centrelink interface and account to the Australian  Parliament  and  the
    inherent challenges characterizing this  relationship.  The  committee’s
    view was that whatever experiential knowledge  it  gathered  during  its
    study tour in Australia, it would use it to strengthen its oversight arm
    in its relationship with the recently established South  African  Social
    Security Agency.

    2.      Delegation


    - Tshivhase, Ms T.J (Chairperson and delegation leader)
    - Direko, Ms W.I (MP)
    - Masutha, Mr M.T (MP)
    - Waters, Mr M. (MP)
    - Fukula, Mr M (Committee Secretary)


    3.      Summary


    Committee’s delegation led by Mrs  TJ  Tshivhase  undertook  a  fruitful
    study tour to Australia,  on  07-11  August  2006.  The  delegation  had
    Canberra, the capital  town  of  Australia  as  its  base.  It  met  and
    interacted with various Australian stakeholders connected to, in one way
    or another, social security system, ranging from Members  of  Parliament
    to  various  state  Agencies’  officials.  Furthermore,  it  visited   a
    Centrelink Customer Service Centre in Belconnen, to  have  a  first-hand
    experience of how  this  front  line  office  was  dealing  with  social
    security clients or customers, as they  are  known  in  Australia.  This
    proved to be quite a useful site visit.


    Some  interesting  innovations  and  devices  caught  the  eye  of   our
    delegation. One of those is Centrepay, a free direct bill-paying service
    offered to customers receiving money from Centrelink. The other one  was
    the Child Support Scheme administered by the Child Support Agency.   The
    Child Support Scheme was introduced in the late  1980s  to  address  the
    problem that, following separation, most  non-resident  parents  (mostly
    fathers) were providing little,  if  any,  financial  support  to  their
    children, even where court orders had been made,  with  consequent  high
    levels of child poverty and high costs to the public purse.


    Another useful innovation that could be explored further was the  access
    card, which is touted as a major breakthrough in the efforts  to  ensure
    different data interface and thus guarantee data  integrity.  This  card
    will be used as a single form of  identification  for  accessing,  among
    other things, health as well as the social security services.


    Below is a  list  of  some  of  the  activities  from  our  delegation’s
    itinerary:



      Meeting: Department of Families,  Community  Services  and  Indigenous
      Affairs (FACSIA)


      Visit to Belconnen Centrelink Customer Service Centre


      Visit to Centrelink National Support Office: Meeting with Deputy  CEO,
      CIO John Wadeson


      Meeting with Chair and Members of the Standing Committee on Family and
      Human Services


      Meeting with the Chair and members of the Senate  Finance  and  Public
      Accounts Committee


      Meeting: Ms Annette Ellis MP, Deputy Chair of the Australian  -  South
      Africa, Parliamentary group

    ✓ Meeting; Child Support Agency


    4.      PURPOSE OF THE OVERSIGHT VISIT
      ✓ To explore how Centrelink ‘s operational systems
      ✓ To look at what oversight  responsibility  Parliament  in  Australia
        has over its centralized social security agency similar to our South
        African Social Security Agency (SASSA).
      ✓ To see  how  the  centralized  social  security  agency  relates  to
        Parliament in Australia.
      ✓ To interact with Members of Parliament in Australia  on  the  future
        political, social and economic as  well  as  strategic  thinking  in
        respect of its centralized social security agency.
      ✓  To  look  at  challenges  facing  Australia’s  centralized   social
        security agency.
      ✓ Lessons from Australia for South Africa


    5.      Meeting with FACSIA – Monday, 07 August 2006


    Delegation met with representatives from  the  Department  of  Families,
    Community Services and Indigenous  Affairs  (FACSIA).  The  purpose  was
    mainly to  check  the  kind  of  a  relationship  FACSIA  has  with  the
    Centrelink.


    FACSIA was established in  October  2004  to  improve  the  development,
    delivery and coordination of Australian Government  social  and  health-
    related services. It brings together six  agencies,  the  Child  Support
    Agency, Commonwealth Rehabilitation  Services  (Australia),  Centrelink,
    the Health Insurance Commission, Australian Hearing and Health  Services
    Australia.


    FACSIA is responsible for a wide range  of  programs  and  services  for
    individuals, families and  communities,  including  social  support  for
    seniors, people with disabilities, carers, youth and women. In addition,
    it has responsibility for childcare, housing and Indigenous affairs.


    FACSIA is the Australian government's  principal  source  of  advice  on
    social policy issues. It is however  not  the  sole  custodian  of  this
    function.  It  shares  it  with  other  government  and   non-government
    organisations. Although It develops the social security  policy,  It  is
    however  not  responsible   for   overseeing   the   actual   day-to-day
    administration of the social security system in Australia.


    In its interaction with the FACSIA representatives, our  delegation  was
    told of an interesting future policy innovative in the form of an access
    card. It is touted as a major breakthrough in the efforts to ensure data
    interface and thus guarantee data integrity. This card will be used as a
    single form of identification for accessing, among other things,  health
    as well as the social security services.


    Our delegation heard that there were few cases of  fraud  or  corruption
    from officials working within the FACSIA.


    6.      Meeting with Centrelink officials – Tuesday, 08 August 2006


    Delegation met with Mr John Wadeson, Deputy CEO  and  Chief  Information
    Officer from Centrelink’s National  Support  Office.  The  crux  of  our
    delegation’s meeting with Mr Wadeson dwelled more on what Centrelink was
    all about including the services it is offering.

    6.1 Background information on Centrelink


    Centrelink is a  service  provider  to  over  6.4  customers,  including
    retired people, families, sole parents, people looking for work,  people
    with a short-term incapacity, people with a disability, students,  young
    people,  indigenous  people  and  people  from  diverse   cultural   and
    linguistic backgrounds.


    Its vision is reportedly  to  make  positive  difference  to  Australian
    individuals, families and communities particularly  during  transitional
    periods in their lives.


    It has one government directed outcome, which is ‘effective delivery  of
    Australian services  to  eligible  customers.  This  outcome  is  to  be
    supported by the output ‘efficient  delivery  of  services  to  eligible
    customers.


    Centrelink generates its revenue through Business Partnership Agreements
    or similar arrangements with client agencies. Funds are appropriated  to
    the policy agencies and paid  to  Centrelink  in  return  for  specified
    services.


    Centrelink delivers services on behalf  of  about  25  client  agencies.
    These cover a wide  range  of  outputs  in  the  form  of  products  and
    services.


    It seeks to build a stronger community by:
      ✓ Simplifying access to government services  by  providing  a  single
        entry point;
         ✓ Providing innovative and  personalized  services,  opportunities
           and support that are culturally  appropriate,  during  key  life
           events;
         ✓ Maintaining a high level of  customer  service,  while  ensuring
           strong accountability to stakeholders; and
         ✓  Building  quality  relationships  with  our   stakeholders   to
           continually improve the social well being of Australian society.


    6.2 Centrelink’s business at a glance


     ✓ It has about 6, 5 million customers.
     ✓ It has over 1000 service delivery points nationally.
     ✓  It  administers  over  63  billion  Australian  dollars  in  program
       payments annually.
     ✓ It receives about 28 million phone calls annually.
     ✓ It sends approximately 90, 6 million letters to customers annually.
     ✓ Grant payments are made fortnightly into a  bank  account.  Those  in
       rural areas, get a cheque payment.


    6.3 Centrelink’s Information Technology environment


     ✓ 25000 staff users all connected to the same Centrelink system.
     ✓ About 1, 9 million customers registered for  self-service  online  or
       telephone service.
     ✓ Interactive voice response facility in all Centrelink call centres.


      6.4 Centrelink’s current focus


      ✓ Improved and innovative customer service applications for  face-to-
        face and online customer channels.
      ✓   Infrastructure   enhancements   to   support   expanded   service
        requirements.
      ✓  Better  linking  and  collaboration  with  other  government   and
        businesses.
      ✓ Welfare-to-work


    6.5 Reporting of employment income and customer death


    ✓ Verification of employment income is  done  in  conjunction  with  the
      Tax Office.
    ✓ When a customer dies,  the  relevant  department  notifies  Centrelink
      automatically.


    6.6  Interesting  Centrelink’s  self-service  transaction  innovation  –
    Centrepay


    This is a free direct bill-paying service offered to customers receiving
    money from Centrelink. Grant beneficiaries can through Centrepay  choose
    to pay bills by having a regular amount deducted  from  your  Centrelink
    payment.


    Centrepay is voluntary. Customers who choose to  use  Centrepay  benefit
    from its convenience and security, knowing that their payments are under
    control. Instead of having large bills every month or quarter customers’
    bills are paid in manageable amounts from the customers’ grant  payment,
    making it easier for them to budget Centrelink, however, has to  approve
    the institution to which the money is paid. It also  has  the  right  to
    curb the advance payment.


    Centrepay does not charge a customer any fee to deduct  the  money  from
    his/her payment,  unlike  other  methods  available  for  paying  bills.
    However, the  organization  or  person  to  which  Centrepay  sends  the
    deduction is charged a fee.


    Because the service is voluntary, a beneficiary can manage,  suspend  or
    cancel the deduction at any time.


    7.      Visit to Belconnen Centrelink Customer Service Centre – Tuesday,
        08 August 2006


    Our delegation visited the Belconnen Centrelink Customer Service Centre.
    This is a frontline office catering for day-to-day needs  of  Centrelink
    clients.


    The  Centre  is  equipped  with,  among  other  things,  the   following
    interesting resources:


         ✓ A job-search machine with a data base of all jobs  available  in
           Australia.  The job search is free service.
     ✓ A free public telephone line for job enquiries.
     ✓ Social workers on hand.
     ✓ Job capacity assessors – looking at  people’s  needs  and  doing  job
       placements.
     ✓ Customer Relations Line for customers with problems.
     ✓ Queue management system.



    8.      Meeting with the Chairperson and members of the Senate  Standing
    Committee on Finance and Public Administration  –  Thursday,  10  August
    2006.



    Delegation met with this committee with the same the view as with  other
    committees it met to, among other things,  look  at  how,  formally,  it
    relates with Centrelink, if there is any formalized relationship between
    two.
    The Standing  Committee  on  Finance  and  Public  Administration  is  a
    committee that falls within the purview of the Senate  House  where  the
    ruling government majority has reportedly no control.  The  Finance  and
    Public  Administration   portfolio   coverage   includes   Parliamentary
    Departments,  Prime   Minister   and   Cabinet,   Finance   and   Public
    Administration and Human Services.
    The committee, our delegation was told, does oversee Centrelink as  part
    of broader oversight  role  over  government  administration.  It  looks
    mainly at service delivery aspect of welfare as opposed  to  policy.  It
    therefore has no role in  setting  the  guidelines  or  regulations  for
    Centrelink operations.
    The committee listed the following as commonly  reported  problems  with
    Centrelink:
  ✓ Problems with Centrelink operational policies
         ✓ How Centrelink arrives at decisions – people  do  not  know  the
           basis upon which decisions are made.
  ✓ Misplacement and misuse of evidence by Centrelink officials.
  ✓ Rudeness of Centrelink officials.
  ✓ Reported abuse of clients by Centrelink officials.
         ✓ Overpayment and the expectation to have  the  money  paid  back.
           Some clients find it difficult to cope with this.
    9.       Meeting  with  the  Standing  Committee  on  Family  and  Human
       Services, Wednesday, 09 August 2006
    The standing committee on Family and Human Services is one  of  thirteen
    general-purpose investigatory committees established  by  the  House  of
    Representatives of the Parliament of Australia.
    In summary, the role of the  Standing  Committee  on  Family  and  Human
    Services is to carry out inquiries into matters referred to  it  by  the
    House of Representatives or a Minister of the Commonwealth Government.
    Our delegation  heard  that  this  committee  does  not  have  a  direct
    oversight role over Centrelink.  It however has  an  indirect  oversight
    role through consideration of annual reports of different government and
    agencies like Centrelink that have to be tabled in Parliament. If  there
    is any concerning matter involving Centrelink, it could  thus  call  the
    latter to account.  Constituency Offices also serve as a platform for an
    indirect oversight exercise by Members of Parliament, by following up on
    issues raised by people in the communities they service, our  delegation
    was told.


    10.     Meeting with officials from  the  Child  Support  Agency  (CSA),
        Friday, 11 August 2006.


    The CSA is a government institution, integrated within  Centrelink  that
    operates as part of the Department of Family and Community Services.  It
    is responsible  for  managing  programs  and  delivering  child  support
    services through the Child Support Scheme. Because it is not part of the
    social security system, it therefore does not guarantee payment. The CSA
    only passes on money collected from the contact  parent.   It  therefore
    does not have funds of its own to pay residence parent.


    11.     Child Support Scheme


    The Child Support Scheme was introduced in the late 1980s to address the
    problem that, following separation, most  non-resident  parents  (mostly
    fathers) were providing little,  if  any,  financial  support  to  their
    children, even where court orders had been made,  with  consequent  high
    levels of child poverty and high costs to the public purse.


    It came about as a result of the recognition that the  system  in  which
    child maintenance was dealt with through the courts  on  a  case-by-case
    basis had failed. Court orders were unrealistically low and difficult to
    predict. They also took little or no account  of  the  rising  costs  of
    living. Furthermore, they were all too often ignored.


    Almost  two-thirds  of  non-custodial  parents  failed  to  meet   their
    obligations to their children. To enforce a court order  was  considered
    time-consuming, expensive and frequently unproductive for the  custodial
    parent. Many non-custodial parents to ignore successive court orders and
    seemed to regard supporting their children optional. Not  only  did  the
    children suffer, but also increasing  numbers  of  children  were  being
    supported by the tax paying rather than by their parents with  whom  the
    responsibility properly lay. Escalating welfare bill and growing numbers
    of children living at the poverty level prompted the government to  act.
    The Child Support Scheme was introduced to overcome the problems.


    The  fundamental  shift  brought  about  by  the  Scheme  was  that  the
    registration of a child support liability with the Child Support  Scheme
    converts “a personal obligation into  a  debt  owed  to  the  Australian
    government  collected  by  the  Child  Support   Agency.   Through   the
    elimination of the need  for  private  enforcement  action,  the  Scheme
    sought to improve the working relationship between parents  by  reducing
    the stress and fear often associated with bargaining over money. It also
    sought to offer a degree of predictability and certainty about  payments
    with respect to amount, regularity, and the timing of payments.


    Central to the Scheme is the administrative assessment of child  support
    liability via the application of the child support formula. This formula
    is expressed as a percentage of the non-resident parent’s gross  taxable
    income (after a self support component has been deducted) and  is  based
    on the number of dependent children under the daily care  of  the  other
    parent – with provision for special circumstances.  The  Scheme  removed
    the need for parents  to  have  recourse  to  court-based  discretionary
    assessment, which typically produced low child maintenance amounts  that
    did not adjust for Inflation.


        The following mechanisms are used against fathers  that  renege  on
         their maintenance:


       ✓ Have their tax monies intercepted.
         ✓ Have garnishing  orders  on  their  salaries  –  NB.  Garnishing
           orders do not require a court action.
       ✓ Money is deducted from their bank accounts.
       ✓ They are denied permission to travel abroad.



RECOMMENDATIONS


The Portfolio Committee on Social Development recommends that:

✓ The Committee commends Parliament for  having  allowed  it  to  undertake
  the study tour to Australia. It is however of the  view  that  as  it  is
  expected to oversee SASSA; an entity that  has  a  budget  of  about  R55
  billion, which  is  somewhat  unique  in  South  Africa,  another  bigger
  delegation or two including a researcher should be allowed  to  undertake
  similar study tours to other  countries  with  a  similar  socio-economic
  profile as South Africa. This, it  believes,  will  assist  immensely  in
  capacitating and orientating its membership about  the  critical  aspects
  relating to expert management of people, structures and processes in  the
  Agency. The fact that the rollout of SASSA is currently underway and  the
  committee is expected to effectively oversee it requires that  Parliament
  provides the committee with adequate  financial  resources  to  undertake
  such trips as a matter of urgency.




  Report to be considered.


2.    Report on  the  Study  Tour  by  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Social
 Development to the South African Social Security  Agency’s  (SASSA)  Head-
 Office, Pretoria (Gauteng); and the regional offices in the  Eastern  Cape
 (East London and Port Elizabeth) and Northern Cape  (Kimberley)  provinces
 (21-24 August 2006), dated 25 October 2006:



Having undertaken an oversight visit to the South  African  Social  Security
Agency’s Head-Office in Pretoria; and regional offices in the Eastern  Cape,
and Northern Cape provinces on 21-24 August 2006,  the  Portfolio  Committee
on Social Development reports:



1.    Background


In the year 2003, the Portfolio Committee on Social Development  was  tasked
to legislate for the establishment of the new South African Social  Security
Agency (SASSA), which would over time assume the responsibility  of  payment
and  administration  of  social  grants.  The  establishment  of  SASSA  was
necessitated by the severe weaknesses in the management  and  administration
of social grants often resulting in a failure on the part of  government  to
ensure that those entitled to  the  benefit  were  provided  with  the  best
possible  service.  This  continued  to  lead  to  ongoing  litigation   and
substantial negative publicity in the press.

SASSA is a Cabinet-endorsed focused  and  specialized  institution  that  is
meant to take responsibility for  the  management  and  delivery  of  social
grants. Its strategic intent is to facilitate improvement in the quality  of
services provided to beneficiaries and ensure  that  the  minimum  standards
operate countrywide, for consistent and predictable service delivery.  This,
it is hoped will lead to efficiency gains which will manifest themselves  in
the reduction in the cost  of  service  delivery  as  well  as  the  drastic
minimization of  fraud  associated  with  social  grant  administration  and
payment.  The  establishment  of  the  Agency   will   have   far   reaching
implications,  requiring  expert  management  of  people,   structures   and
processes.
Subsequent to passing the SASSA legislation in 2003,  our  committee  could,
sadly, not effectively interact with the  provincial  and  local  government
stakeholders on some  of  the  unfolding  developments  leading  up  to  the
establishment of such an Agency as it was  hamstrung  by  the  work  on  the
recently finalized Children and Older Persons’ Bill in the  years  2004  and
2005 (first half). Given the breathing space at its disposal at  the  moment
resulting from the conclusion of the committee’s legislative  work  in  June
2005 and also as a gesture  of  its  commitment  to  wanting  to  contribute
towards ensuring that transition from the old to a new grant  administration
dispensation takes place as envisaged, the  Committee  adopted  a  proactive
approach and visited the province of North West on 01-05 August 2005.

The  visit  was  in  sync  with  our  Committee’s  oversight  role.  It  was
intricately linked to our Committee’s mission of reviewing,  developing  and
monitoring the implementation of appropriate legislation  that  responds  to
the social development needs of the people  and  that  assists  in  reducing
poverty and social exclusion, and ensuring public  participation.  And  also
ensuring that the policies and social development  services  implemented  by
Government are focused on  comprehensive  protection  against  vulnerability
and on strengthening the social fabric.

Prior  and  subsequent  to  the  visit  to  North  West  our  committee  had
facilitated  a  number  of  interactions  with  officials  from  the  social
security branch in the national Department of Social Development  and  South
African Social Security Agency on such pertinent  issues  as  the  reporting
mechanism of SASSA to Parliament, SASSA’s Business  Plan  as  well  progress
made and challenges currently experienced with regard to  its  rollout  plan
and its general transitional arrangements;  update  on  the  Human  Resource
issues one of which was the issue of the transfer of staff and assets.

Having been to provinces and  also  interacted  with  SASSA  officials,  the
committee then  took  stock  of  its  own  capacity  to  exercise  effective
oversight over SASSA and arrived at a conclusion that its ability and  skill
to exercise effective oversight over SASSA could be better strengthened  and
sharpened if it could, among other things, visit, among other  institutions,
Centrelink in Australia, an agency around which SASSA is modeled. This  view
was also strongly echoed in the  Committee’s  strategic  planning  workshop,
recently held at Gordon’s Bay in May 2006.

Empowered with invaluable information derived from its visit  to  Centrelink
and interaction with some of the key stakeholders  in  the  area  of  social
security  in  Australia,  the  committee  again  turned  its  attention   to
oversight work over SASSA. This translated  into  an  oversight  to  SASSA’s
Head-Office; and the regional offices in  the  Eastern  Cape,  and  Northern
Cape provinces on 21-24 August 2006 focusing mainly  on  the  progress  made
with regard to the broader SASSA roll-out process and  the  aligned  service
delivery improvement initiatives.

Significantly,  the  visit  came  against  the  backdrop  of  a  mention  by
President Thabo Mbeki in his State of the Nation Address early this,  of  an
eminent  establishment  of  SASSA  by  01  April  2006.   This  was  further
reinforced by an announcement by Minister Dr  Z  Skweyiya  while  delivering
his Budget Vote 18 Speech  on  28  March  2006  in  the  National  Assembly,
Parliament to the effect that the first phase of the  establishment  of  the
national social security agency was on track  for  completion  by  31  March
2006. And that as formalized in a MinMec meeting with the  MECs  for  Social
Development in the provinces on 27 March 2006, the  agency  would  initially
take over social assistance payments in Gauteng, the Western  Cape  and  the
Northern  Cape  provinces,  with  the  process  being  completed  for  other
provinces by March 2007. And lastly, him  stating  that  the  Department  of
Social Development had already  entered  into  contractual  agreements  with
provinces to ensure the seamless transfer of  staff  and  the  uninterrupted
provision of service.
2     Delegation

    ✓ Tshivhase, Ms T J (Leader of the delegation)
    ✓ Bogopane-Zulu, Ms H I - MP
    ✓ Direko, Ms I W - MP
    ✓ Gumede, Ms MM - MP
    ✓ Mr LPM Nzimande - MP
    ✓ Masutha, Mr M T – MP
    ✓ Morwamoche, Mr KW - MP
    ✓ Sibanyoni, Mr JB - MP
    ✓ Solo, Mr B - MP
    ✓ Waters, Mr M - MP
    ✓ Weber, Ms H - MP
    ✓ Dudley, Ms C - MP
    ✓ Rajbally, Ms S – MP
    ✓ Mr MC Fukula – Committee Secretary
    ✓ Mr F Abrahams - Researcher
    ✓ Mr F Holliday – Assistant to Mr Nzimande
    ✓ Mr A Kakaza – Committee Assistant
Mr Bogopane-Zulu – Assistant to Mrs. Bogopane-Zul

3.    PURPOSE OF THE OVERSIGHT VISIT

To generally follow up on the  progress  SASSA  has  possibly  made  in  the
following key interim matters:
Stabilizing head office organizational structure  and  recruit  people  with
requisite skills
    • Efforts to assume full accountability  for  operation  of  the  SOCPEN
      System.
    • Recruitment of  requisite  skills  and  people  in  regional  offices,
      particularly finance staff.
    • Completing the ring-fencing process in collaboration  with  provincial
      departments.
    • Completing the ring-fencing process in collaboration  with  provincial
      departments
    • Assess the conditions at pay points and  systems  currently  in  place
      following SASSA’s establishment.
    • To familiarize itself with the challenges facing  the  SASSA  roll-out
      process

4.    Reported progress made on SASSA’s broader roll-out process.

4.1. 1      Summary
Taking the  cue  from  the  spirited  and  confident  account  given  by  Mr
Makiwane, the CEO of SASSA, the prevailing mood  at  SASSA  Head-Office  and
the regions visited, one can safely conclude, was generally one of  cautious
optimism. Remarkable strides have reportedly been made in  facilitating  the
shift of grant administration from  the  provincial  Departments  of  Social
Development to  SASSA  with  most  of  the  pertinent  transitional  matters
positively dealt with. SASSA has to a commendable degree managed  to  fulfil
its mandate of stabilizing its head  and  regional  offices’  organizational
structures and recruit people with requisite  skills,  particularly  finance
staff, which do not move over from provincial departments.

The process of  putting  up  the  essential  Information  Technology,  Human
Resource and physical infrastructural  networks  has  also  unfolded  fairly
smoothly without any reported disruptions to the  mechanism  and  system  of
grant payments. SASSA has, as a matter of example, now assumed full  control
and the inherent accountability for operation of the SOCPEN system.

The much talked-about possible  stalemate      surrounding  the  process  of
transferring  the  ring-fenced  staff  from   the   Department   of   Social
Development to SASSA  was  apparently  avoided,  very  much  to  everybody’s
relief.

Notwithstanding the good picture created, SASSA has also  given  very  frank
and clear report about the lingering and worrisome challenges  it  is  still
battling in the  areas,  among  others,  of  fraud  prevention,  litigation,
equity plans (employing disabled people) and service delivery improvements.

4.1.2 Integrating the provincial Social Assistance functions into SASSA

Our delegation was told that, as part of facilitating a  smooth  integration
of  the  provincial  social  assistance  functions  into  SASSA  a   Service
Agreement  (Agency  Agreement)  had  been  signed  between   the   national;
provincial departments and SASSA. Underpinning this  Service  Agreement  was
said to be a provision for  continued  corporate  services  (finance,  human
resources, information technology and communications) support  to  SASSA  by
the provincial departments of social development.

The Service Agreement is expected to remain in place until regional  offices
of SASSA have sufficiently built and acquired  the  essential  and  critical
capacities to operate as independent entities.

As alluded to by Minister Skweyiya, in his Budget Vote speech  on  28  March
2006, our delegation  was  informed  that  the  Gauteng,  Western  Cape  and
Northern Cape provinces constitute a  group  of  provinces  prioritized  to,
with the support by teams comprising staff from the SASSA  national  office,
SASSA  regional  offices  and   the   Provincial   Departments   of   Social
Development, be  trend-setters  in  taking  full  responsibilities  for  the
social assistance functions in  their  respective  regions.  Our  delegation
learned that project plans covering detailed steps  on  the  acquisition  of
critical  staff,  appropriate  facilities,  and   the   corporate   services
competencies necessary for effective organization have also  been  developed
for the rest of the unprioritized provinces.

It was revealed that the Western  Cape,  Northern  Cape,  North  West,  Free
State and Eastern Cape were already housed in separate  buildings  with  the
Gauteng and Limpopo expected to  move  in  to  separate  buildings  only  by
August and September 2006  respectively.  All  the  regional  offices,  even
those that are in the process of still securing alternative facilities  have
separate office facilities to those of the Provincial Departments of  Social
Development.  It  is  envisaged  that   the   provinces   will   have   been
reconstituted as functional SASSA regions by the end of December 2006.

From the onset of April  2006,  about  6246  personnel  consisting  of  both
senior managers  and  low  ranked  staff  have  been  transferred  from  the
provincial and national Departments of Social Development to the Agency.  Of
these  transferred  staff,  approximately  135  were   from   the   national
Department of Social  Development,  with  the  highest  numbers  coming  the
Eastern Cape (1372), and from KwaZulu-Natal (1128). The  lowest  numbers  of
transferees came from the Northern Cape region (206).

All the transferred staff were reportedly furnished  with  transfer  letters
in  consistence  with  the  terms  of  the  agreement  reached  within   the
Collective Bargaining Council  between  the  Agency,  Department  of  Social
Development and the Labour Unions. The Agency records reportedly  show  that
all transferred employees have  confirmed  their  transfer  by  signing  the
letters that acknowledge their acceptance to be transferred.

4.1.3 Operationalising the SASSA national office

The head office is said to be  fully  operational  with  a  Chief  Executive
Officer at the helm propped by the Executive Managers.  Senior  managers  in
areas critical to building the strategic and operational capacity  of  SASSA
have also been filled. The appointments of key  and  critical  personnel  is
said to stand to date at 160 people.



The Agency’s finance unit, headed by a permanent Chief Financial Officer  is
reportedly  sufficiently  capacitated   with   qualified   and   experienced
personnel both in the senior as well as  lower  ranked  technical  level  to
transact,  manage,  and  administer  revenue  and   expenditure   processes,
procedures and the overall accounts of  SASSA.   This  complemented  by  the
government systems such as the Basic Accounting System (BAS);  the  salaries
processing system (PERSAL) and the procurement system (LOGIS), provides  for
better control over funds and cash flow.



The Agency is also capacitated with an active  Tender  Committee  comprising
membership stretching to  the  Departments  of  Justice  and  Constitutional
Development and Social Development as well as  the  National  Treasury.  The
committee regularly meets to consider, review and approve  service  provider
proposals from different branches. This branch of the Head-Office is  fairly
capacitated with the nucleus IT personnel supporting critical  business  and
IT processes.

A  business  agreement  involving  SASSA  and  SITA  has   reportedly   been
concluded, which will see the latter continuing to provide  Information  and
Communication Technology Support Services and maintenance  of  the  Agency’s
critical systems, such as SOCPEN, whilst it is  finalising  its  Information
and Communication Technology Strategy that  will  enhance  fraud  mitigation
process where the leakages in the SOCPEN and fraud detection and  prevention
are addressed.


The  funds  flow  process  for  the  payment  of  grants,  between  National
Department  of  Social  Development,  SASSA  and  the  provinces  has   been
finalized, our delegation was told.



Corporate governance arrangements, policies and procedures  and  delegations
of Authority and accounting policies are reportedly also in place.



A communication strategy is said to  have  been  developed  and  is  in  the
process of being rolled out.



An analysis of current status of litigation has  reportedly  been  completed
and a litigation strategy to deal with both the backlog cases  and  possible
future has been developed.



4.2.  Service delivery improvement initiatives


4.2.1 Applications Turnaround Improvement



SASSA has reportedly completed a pilot  project  in  three  offices  in  the
Western Cape, Eastern Cape and Mpumalanga regions and  achieved  an  average
of between 1 and  3  days  turnaround  in  these  offices.  SASSA  will  now
investigate a  full  implementation  of  these  business  processes  in  all
regions, monitor the turn around time  and  address  any  challenges,  which
might arise.



4.2.2 Enhanced Payment Model



A national grant payment model has  reportedly  been  developed  which  will
ensure uniform processes across SASSA in all regions. The model is  said  to
being developed in consultation with other  stakeholders  such  as  National
Treasury and will be published with a view to implement before  the  end  of
2006/07 Financial year. Added to that are efforts to improve on the  current
status quo where only less than 20% beneficiaries are receiving their  grant
payments through the  banks.  SASSA  has  thus  reportedly  signed  a  draft
Memorandum of Understanding with the Banking Association of South Africa  to
encourage more grant beneficiaries to receive their grant payments  via  the
banks.


4.2.3 Optimal Service Delivery Infrastructure Network



As a way of seeking to address the challenge of sub-standard  conditions  in
most paypoints and service offices, SASSA  is  said  to  have  developed  an
optimal service delivery infrastructure network to support service  delivery
through the optimal provision of  access  points  or  applications  and  the
payments of social grants. A  review  has  been  completed  on  the  current
distribution of service points and an optimization of locations of  district
and service offices are underway. SASSA revealed that it  was  currently  in
discussion with the Department of Public Works on a  possible  comprehensive
rollout of service office throughout the country.


4.2.4 Improved Access to Services in Rural Areas



SASSA is reportedly in a process of procuring about 40 mobile service  units
equipped with essential material to complement efforts to enhance levels  of
service delivery in the deep rural areas. A tender is said to  have  already
been issued for the procurement of mobile  units  with  the  evaluation  and
implementation of the tender only expected during  the  2006/2007  financial
year.
4.2.5  Anti-fraud  measures  to  improve  the  integrity  of  social   grant
administration



The Agency is vigorously dealing with the inherent SOCPEN problems  such  as
illegitimate beneficiaries by looking at things that lead to  corruption  of
the database.

The Agency has reportedly a full-fledged fraud unit, complemented  by  among
other  things  a  fraud  hotline  through  which  fraud  linked   to   grant
administration and payment could be reported. Received  fraud  tip-offs  are
reportedly handed over to the Special Investigation Unit (SIU)  for  indepth
investigation.

5. Report on the regional roll-out process focussing on the visited  Eastern
Cape and Northern Cape regions.

5.1 EC REGION

5.1.1 Summary

The Eastern Cape region  does  not  form  of  the  group  of  3  prioritized
provinces. It was only chosen to serve as a benchmark of  outlaying  regions
in terms of what preparatory processes are in place for  a  later  roll-out.
As was the case with the SASSA Head-Office the mood at  the  regional  level
in the Eastern Cape was generally  upbeat  underpinned  with  a  strong  and
manifest sense of everything-is-under-control confidence. This strong  sense
of confidence permeated even into those  areas  where  there  were  reported
challenges such  as  litigation  and  syndicated  grant  fraud  particularly
around the Port Elizabeth and Queenstown areas. Concerns raised  by  MEC  Ms
Xasa  around  the  general  accountability  issues  between  SASSA  and  the
Department of Social Development could not obscure the upbeat mood either.

The region’s confidence is predicated on the many positive  achievements  it
reports to have made  since  01  April  2006.  These  include  several  best
practices such as the Management Information System, Medical Assessment  and
Vendor Management Units. And moreover the  fact  that  the  Agency  in  this
region is totally separated from the Department  of  Social  Development  at
regional level and is also functionally separate at lower level in terms  of
core service function.

5.1.2 Human Capital

It was reported that the Region has  a  function  human  capital  management
system. Of the 1400 Social Security personnel transferred to  SASSA  in  the
region as from 01 April 2006, we were  told  that  900  were  on  short-term
contracts. Of the 57 critical posts advertised to date, 52  were  reportedly
filled with women constituting 90 per cent thereof.

The task of recruitment of critical staff  was  cited  as  a  time-consuming
challenge.

5.1.3.      Financial management

The region was very in line with the Head-Office report fully functional  in
the area of financial management equipped, among other things, with BAS  and
Procure-to-pay systems. Evidence thereof is borne by  the  fact  the  region
has successfully completed  its  first  Annual  Financial  Statement  and  a
financial audit for 2005/06.

Challenges were  reported  in  respect  of  commitments  carried  over  from
2005/06 fiscal year; utilisation of the  Department  of  Social  Development
Bank Accounts for transfer of payments, as well as the  actual  division  of
ring-fenced assets and liabilities.

5.1.4.      Infrastructure

The regional office is reportedly fully established and operational as  from
01 April 2006.  At service office level, we were  informed  that  SASSA  was
still sharing offices with the provincial Department of Social  Development.
A national tender for 7 district offices independent from the Department  of
Social Development is to have been approved and due advertisement.

Prioritization of procurement for area and  service  office  levels  coupled
with poor conditions in some service offices was highlighted as  a  critical
challenge.

5.1.5.      Legal services

The regional office has an established legal services unit  located  in  the
Corporate  Services  Division.  Its  sternest  challenge  is  reportedly  to
provide  clarity  on  who,  between  SASSA  and  the  Department  of  Social
Development, is responsible for litigation cases that were filed before  and
after 01 April 2006.

5.1.6.      Grant administration

The roll-out of the enhanced Management  Information  System  (MIS)  in  the
Nelson Mandela Metro has been touted as a long required  panacea  to  reduce
the region’s turnaround time in grant application and  thus  improve  levels
of customer satisfaction. The system is a  computerised  resource  mechanism
that hosts grant applicants’ files and is able to track movements  of  files
and eradicate any possibility of missing files, which has been a  source  of
many litigation actions.

The regional office has an established  and  functional  Medical  Assessment
Unit, which is  credited  improving  the  quality  of  disability  and  care
dependent assessments. The Unit  reportedly  has  15  doctors,  2  for  each
district who do quality control  of  disability  applications  focussing  on
technical issues.

After encountering problems with contracted payment  companies,  the  office
has seen wisdom in establishing its own functional  Vendor  Management  Unit
beefed  with  monitors  who  visit  paypoints  randomly  to  check  on   the
happenings there.

The office also boasts a  functional  beneficiary  maintenance  unit  and  a
centralised registry.

The issue of poor  infrastructure  (poor  office  and  road  conditions)  in
outlying areas continues to be a hindering challenge  for  the  region.  The
reliance on the other stakeholders such as the Departments of  Home  Affairs
(IDs); Health (medical assessments) and  Justice  (foster-care  matters)  is
reported to be a concerning challenge. The fact that there is  currently  no
clear policy on appeals is also cited as  a  challenge  to  the  efforts  of
improving grant administration.

5.1.7.      Fraud prevention programme

In the face of sophisticated and  highly  organized  grant  fraudsters;  the
Agency has reportedly had to put  strict  control  measures  to  effectively
outsmart the fraudsters. The control measures include  the  introduction  of
pre-numbered  application  forms  as  well  as  the  Management  Information
System, which also functions as a tracking  tool.  If  there  is  a  missing
document, the MIS does not allow the system to move.

As a way of reigning in on fraudulent child support grant,  the  Agency  and
its Compliance Unit is sharing notes with the Department  of  Education  and
conducting random checking of whether the children listed for child  support
grant are indeed in existence. There is also a task team made  up  of  SASSA
and Department of Home Affairs  officials  dealing  with  the  challenge  of
fraudulent birth certificates. The Port Elizabeth (PE) area was singled  out
as the hotspot for fraudulent grant activities, with  an  unacceptably  high
number of disability grants in the Eastern Cape region. Alcoholics and  drug
addicts were reportedly receiving permanent  disability  grants.  Linked  to
this high number of disability grants was a syndicate operating  in  the  PE
area, which was colluding with  Department  of  Health  officials  who  were
selling it TB cards  to  be  used  in  fraudulent  grant  applications.  The
syndicate was arrested in 2004 and convicted  in  2005.  A  Nigerian  doctor
implicated in fraudulent grant activities has reportedly been arrested.  His
case was expected to come before the courts during the last week  of  August
2006. The arrest of the Nigerian doctor led to the arrest of the  Department
of Social Development who was working with a syndicate operating around  the
Queenstown area. The Department of Social Development  has  reportedly  been
found guilty and jailed for seventeen years.

A scam involving another  syndicate  operating  around  the  Port  Elizabeth
area, working with officials from the Department of Home  Affairs  who  were
producing fraudulent was also reportedly  uncovered.  Department  of  Social
Development officials working with the syndicate have been identified.  This
syndicate case was also expected to be heard during the last week of  August
2006.


About 3109 government  employees  illegally  receiving  social  grants  have
reportedly been identified. Their  grant  payments  have  been  stopped  and
their case has been referred  to  the  South  African  Police  Services  for
criminal prosecution.175  Municipality  employees  accessing  social  grants
illegally have also been identified  and  their  case  is  reportedly  being
dealt with by the Scorpions. SASSA’s Compliance Unit is dealing with a  case
involving 14252 civil pensioners accessing social  grants.  SASSA  has  also
arrested 2 attorneys  in  the  Queenstown  area  who  filed  for  litigation
against the Agency without the knowledge of affected grant beneficiaries.

6.    Northern Cape Region

6.1   Summary

The Northern Cape region is one of the group of  3  regions  prioritized  to
implement the process  of  establishing  and  operationalising  SASSA.   The
information provided by  the  Regional  Office  clearly  suggests  that  the
Agency establishment and operationalisation process in  the  region  is  not
yet fully realised. Although it reportedly has all  the  financial  policies
in place, the Regional Office still  does  not  have  its  own  finance  and
information technology support services. It still sources  the  latter  from
the provincial Department of Social Development,  courtesy  of  the  Service
Agreement signed between SASSA and the  Department  of  Social  Development.
Only by the end of October 2006 is the Regional Office expected to be  fully
capacitated.

The highlight of the Regional Office, very much like  the  Eastern  Cape  is
its hosting of the MIS which will  replace  the  manual  records  management
process with an electronic system.

The Agency is accommodated  in  its  own  separate  premises,  called  SASSA
House, based in Kimberley. 20 new officials have reportedly  been  appointed
in the HR, SCM, Finance, ICT and  Executive  office  and  the  rest  of  the
critical vacancies are reportedly  expected  to  be  filled  by  mid-October
2006.
Whilst the Agency operates independently at regional level, at district  and
local service office level, it still shares the operational costs  with  the
provincial  Department  of  Social  Development.   Among   the   highlighted
positive  developments  in  this  region,  has  been  the  cordial   working
relationship between the Agency and  the  provincial  Department  of  Social
Development.

6.2   Service delivery improvement initiatives.

6.2.1.      IT and Communication systems

The  regional  service  improvement   initiatives   boast   the   Management
Information System,  which  is  seen  as  critical  in  reducing  litigation
chances through implementing an organised registry  that  is  electronically
managed through the system and thus averting the scourge of  missing  files.
Its other  advantages  are  recorded  as  its  ability  to  standardize  the
registry processes; help create a  centralised  registry;  ensure  efficient
file tracking, track user performance and  effect  adherence  to  norms  and
standards. The Region has also unveiled a  regional  initiative  called  the
Trans African Technology System (TAT). TAT is a grant management  system  to
support risk management, data interrogation and detect fraud. It is  a  pre-
screening system before processing grant applications onto SOCPEN  and  also
to generate ineligible cases  for  investigation.  Complementing  these  two
initiatives is about  30  telephone  interpreting  facilities  installed  in
service offices throughout the Northern Cape region. These facilities  cater
for all the regional languages.

6.2.2.      Grant application turn-around time

The region is  reportedly  compliant  with  the  21-day  national  norm  for
approval of applications despite the challenge  of  vast  distances  between
offices and is currently working on a new service delivery model,  otherwise
called “same day approval” project.  The  latter  is  at  the  moment  being
piloted at only the fully resourced district  offices  and  the  rollout  is
expected to  cover  all  areas  depending  on  the  pace  of  infrastructure
improvement.  Since  the  rollout  of  the  project,  about  2287  same  day
approvals have reportedly been finalised.

6.2.3.      Status of pay points

The bulk of the 240 active pay points serviced by  Cash  Paymaster  Services
(CPS) throughout the Northern Cape region is said to be complying  with  the
national norms and standards for pay  points  such  as  water  availability,
wheel chair ramps and first aid kits. All pay points reportedly  have  fully
fledged helpdesks and finish payment  operations  before  12h00.  Supporting
this is reportedly a contingent of about 710 strong and  trained  volunteers
organized in  volunteer  committees  spread  throughout  the  different  pay
points. It is important to note that our delegation could  not  verify  this
kind of information as there were  no  active  pay  points  making  payments
during our visit. We were informed that paydays are only from the  first  to
the tenth day of the month.

The exploitation of beneficiaries by merchants who  are  reportedly  forcing
them to buy at their shops where  food  prices  are  allegedly  inflated  is
cited as a disturbing  challenge  facing  the  installation  of  smart  card
machines in the region.

6.2.4.      Grant administration

Data  cleaning  initiatives  have  reportedly  culminated  into  a  regional
initiative to review  all  expired  temporary  disability  grants.  Affected
beneficiaries  are  reportedly  informed  of  their  eminent  grant  payment
termination in advance by 3 months. Statistics indicates that for the  month
of June 2006, about 880 grants had been reviewed. Data cleaning  initiatives
have also exposed about 14818 cases of invalid identity numbers.  About  99,
5% of these cases have reportedly been sorted, with the remaining linked  to
duplicate identity numbers being  rectified  with  the  Department  of  Home
Affairs.

RECOMMENDATIONS

The Portfolio Committee on Social Development recommends that:

    • The South African Social Security Agency (SASSA) be commended for  the
      efforts that have gone into ensuring that the transfer of  the  social
      assistance function from the Department of Social Development  proceed
      smoothly.

    • SASSA reports to Parliament with regard to the  establishment  of  its
      own premises in those provinces where this had  not  happened  at  the
      time of the oversight visit, and that it reports on this matter before
      the end of 2006.

    • SASSA reports to Parliament with regard to the pilot projects for  the
      speedy assessment, verification and approval of grant applications.

    • SASSA reports to Parliament on measures put in place in  each  of  the
      regions to  ensure  that  persons  with  disability  are  assisted  in
      applying for social assistance. Such  a  report  should,  inter  alia,
      reflect on the accessibility of SASSA offices, possible strategies  to
      ensure  the  availability   of   sign   language   interpreters,   the
      availability of information and  application  forms  in  Braille,  and
      general skills levels among staff with regard to the needs of  persons
      with disabilities

    • SASSA reports to Parliament on steps taken to ensure that it  complies
      with the requirements of the Employment Equity Act as  it  relates  to
      the employment of persons with disabilities.

    • SASSA reports to Parliament on  measures  taken  against  any  of  its
      personnel implicated in, or found guilty of fraudulent  activities  in
      relation to social grants.

    • SASSA reports to Parliament on the progress made with regard to paying
      grants into bank accounts, as well as challenges experienced  in  this
      regard.

The Committee further recommends that:

    • The Department of Social Development brief it on the policy challenges
      with regard to the relationship between access  to  disability  grants
      and access to antiretroviral treatment.

    • The Department of Social Development  brief  it  with  regard  to  the
      manner in which it monitors SASSA, and what  reporting  mechanisms  it
      envisages to utilise when reporting on this matter to Parliament.

    • The Department of Social Development brief it on  progress  made  with
      regard  to  implementing  an  appeals   mechanism   in   relation   to
      unsuccessful applications.

Report to be considered.

                          TUESDAY, 31 OCTOBER 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)     The JTM on 24 October  2006  in  terms  of  Joint  Rule  160(3)
        classified the following Bill as section 75 Bill:

          a) Transnet Pension Fund Amendment Bill [B 30  –  2006]  (National
             Assembly – sec 75)

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Retirement of Secretary to National Assembly

    I wish to announce that the Secretary to the National  Assembly,  Mr  K
    Hahndiek, will, after  36  years  of  service,  be  retiring  from  the
    Parliamentary Service with effect from 1 December 2006.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


    a) Special Report of the Auditor-General on his term of office, 1999 to
       2006 – In support of Democracy [RP 224-2006].


2.    The Minister of Defence

     a) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the  Republic
        of South Africa and the Government of  the  Republic  of  Chile  on
        Defence Cooperation, tabled in  terms  of  section  231(3)  of  the
        Constitution, 1996.


     b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of  Understanding  between
        the Government of the Republic of South Africa and  the  Government
        of the Republic of Chile on Defence Cooperation.


     c) Agreement between the Government of the Republic  of  South  Africa
        and the Government of the Czech Republic concerning the  Protection
        of Classified Defence  Information,  tabled  in  terms  of  section
        231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     d) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the  Government  of
        the Republic of South  Africa  and  the  Government  of  the  Czech
        Republic  concerning   the   Protection   of   Classified   Defence
        Information.


     e) Supplementary Arrangement between the Government of the Republic of
        South Africa through its Department  of  Defence  and  the  Federal
        Ministry of Defence of the Federal Republic of  Germany  concerning
        the Provision of Support during Exercise Good Hope from 6  February
        2006 to 20 March 2006, tabled in terms of  section  231(3)  of  the
        Constitution, 1996.


     f) Explanatory Memorandum to the Supplementary Arrangement between the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa through  its  Department
        of Defence and the Federal  Ministry  of  Defence  of  the  Federal
        Republic of Germany concerning  the  Provision  of  Support  during
        Exercise Good Hope from 6 February 2006 to 20 March 2006.


     g) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the  Republic
        of South Africa  and  the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  India
        concerning the Training of South  African  Navy  Personnel  by  the
        Indian Navy, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
        1996.


     h) Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of  Understanding  between
        the Government of the Republic of South Africa and  the  Government
        of the Republic of India concerning the Training of  South  African
        Navy Personnel by the Indian Navy.


     i) Agreement between the Government of the Republic  of  South  Africa
        and the Government of the Republic of India on Supplies of  Defence
        Equipment, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of  the  Constitution,
        1996.


     j) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the  Government  of
        the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic  of
        India on Supplies of Defence Equipment.


     k) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa as
        represented by the South African  Department  of  Defence  and  the
        Government of the Republic of Mali as  represented  by  the  Malian
        Ministry of Defence and  War  Veterans  on  Defence  and  Technical
        Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
        1996.


     l) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the  Government  of
        the Republic of South Africa as represented by  the  South  African
        Department of Defence and the Government of the Republic of Mali as
        represented by the Malian Ministry of Defence and War  Veterans  on
        Defence and Technical Cooperation.


     m) Agreement between the Government of the Republic  of  South  Africa
        and  the  Government  of  the  Russian  Federation  on   Reciprocal
        Protection of Intellectual Property Rights used and established  in
        the course of Bilateral Defence-Industrial Cooperation,  tabled  in
        terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     n) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the  Government  of
        the Republic of South Africa and  the  Government  of  the  Russian
        Federation on Reciprocal Protection of Intellectual Property Rights
        used and established in the course of Bilateral  Defence-Industrial
        Cooperation.


     o) Agreement between the Government of the Republic  of  South  Africa
        and the Government of the Russian Federation concerning  Protection
        of Classified Defence and Defence-Industrial  related  Information,
        tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     p) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the  Government  of
        the Republic of South Africa and  the  Government  of  the  Russian
        Federation concerning Protection of Classified Defence and Defence-
        Industrial related Information.


     q) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the  Republic
        of South Africa through its Department of Defence and The  Ministry
        of National Defence of the Republic of Tunisia concerning  Military
        Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
        1996.


     r) Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of  Understanding  between
        the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  South  Africa  through  its
        Department of Defence and The Ministry of National Defence  of  the
        Republic of Tunisia concerning Military Cooperation.


     s) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the  Republic
        of South Africa and  the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Uganda
        concerning Defence Cooperation, tabled in terms of  section  231(3)
        of the Constitution, 1996.


     t) Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of  Understanding  between
        the Government of the Republic of South Africa and  the  Government
        of the Republic of Uganda concerning Defence Cooperation.


     u) Supplementary Arrangement between the Government of the Republic of
        South Africa and the Government of the of  the  United  Kingdom  of
        Great Britain and Northern  Ireland  concerning  the  provision  of
        support during Exercises, Training and Operations, tabled in  terms
        of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     v) Explanatory Memorandum to the Supplementary Arrangement between the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and  the  Government  of
        the of the United Kingdom of Great  Britain  and  Northern  Ireland
        concerning the provision of support during Exercises, Training  and
        Operations.


     w) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the  Republic
        of South Africa and the Government of the United Kingdom  of  Great
        Britain and Northern Ireland concerning the provision of  personnel
        of the United Kingdom Armed Forces and the United Kingdom  Ministry
        of Defence to advise the Department of Defence of the  Republic  of
        South Africa on aspects of Democratic Defence Management and  Peace
        Support Operations, tabled  in  terms  of  section  231(3)  of  the
        Constitution, 1996.


     x) Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of  Understanding  between
        the Government of the Republic of South Africa and  the  Government
        of the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Northern  Ireland
        concerning the provision of personnel of the United  Kingdom  Armed
        Forces and the United Kingdom Ministry of  Defence  to  advise  the
        Department of Defence of the Republic of South Africa on aspects of
        Democratic Defence Management and Peace Support Operations.


     y) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the  Republic
        of South Africa and the Government of the United Kingdom  of  Great
        Britain and Northern Ireland concerning the provision of  personnel
        of the United Kingdom Armed Forces and the United Kingdom  Ministry
        of Defence to advise the Department of Defence of the  Republic  of
        South Africa on aspects of Democratic Defence Management and  Peace
        Support Operations, tabled  in  terms  of  section  231(3)  of  the
        Constitution, 1996.


     z) Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of  Understanding  between
        the Government of the Republic of South Africa and  the  Government
        of the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Northern  Ireland
        concerning the provision of personnel of the United  Kingdom  Armed
        Forces and the United Kingdom Ministry of  Defence  to  advise  the
        Department of Defence of the Republic of South Africa on aspects of
        Democratic Defence Management and Peace Support Operations.


    aa) Memorandum of Understanding between  the  United  Nations  and  the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa  contributing  Resources
        to “United Nations Operation in Burundi” (ONUB), tabled in terms of
        section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


    ab) Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of  Understanding  between
        the United Nations and the Government  of  the  Republic  of  South
        Africa contributing  Resources  to  “United  Nations  Operation  in
        Burundi” (ONUB).


    ac) Declaration of Understanding between the Government of the Republic
        of South Africa and the Government of the United States of  America
        concerning  the  Provision  of  Equipment  and  Training  from  the
        Department of State of the  United  States  of  America  under  the
        African Contingency Operations Training and Assistance Programme to
        the South African Department of Defence, tabled in terms of section
        231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


    ad) Explanatory Memorandum to the Declaration of Understanding  between
        the Government of the Republic of South Africa and  the  Government
        of the  United  States  of  America  concerning  the  Provision  of
        Equipment and Training from the Department of State of  the  United
        States of America under the African Contingency Operations Training
        and  Assistance  Programme  to  the  South  African  Department  of
        Defence.


    ae) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the  Republic
        of South Africa as represented by its Department of Defence and the
        Ministry of Defence of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam concerning
        Defence Cooperation, tabled in  terms  of  section  231(3)  of  the
        Constitution, 1996.


    af) Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of  Understanding  between
        the Government of the Republic of South Africa  as  represented  by
        its Department of Defence  and  the  Ministry  of  Defence  of  the
        Socialist Republic of Vietnam concerning Defence Cooperation.


    ag) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the  Republic
        of South Africa and the Government  of  the  Republic  of  Zimbabwe
        concerning the Secondment of the Air Force of Zimbabwe Personnel to
        the South African Department of Defence, tabled in terms of section
        231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


    ah) Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of  Understanding  between
        the Government of the Republic of South Africa and  the  Government
        of the Republic of Zimbabwe concerning the Secondment  of  the  Air
        Force of Zimbabwe Personnel to  the  South  African  Department  of
        Defence.

3.    The Minister of Finance


    a) Consolidated Financial Information for year ended 31 March 2006  [RP
       241-2006], tabled in terms of section 8(1)(a) of the Public  Finance
       Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

                         WEDNESDAY, 1 NOVEMBER 2006

TABLINGS

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     The President of the Republic submitted  the  following  letter
        dated 18 October 2006 to  the  Speaker  of  the  National  Assembly
        informing Members of the Assembly of the employment  of  the  South
        African National Defence Force in the Democratic Republic of Congo:

CREDA PLEASE INSERT - Insert T061101E - PAGES 2431-2432


