---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 25 May 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2006-05-25
---

THURSDAY, 25 MAY 2006
                                    ____


              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:08.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION


Mr S SHICEKA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House, I shall move:

   That this House –


   (1)      notes the increasing lack of safety on our trains;


   (2)      further notes that over 17 people have been brutally murdered
        and scores injured by being thrown off moving trains;


   (3)      further notes that the government promotes the usage of public
        transport, in particular trains;


   (4)      therefore resolves that Metrorail and our law enforcement
        agencies should ensure -


        (a) that the killings that happen on this affordable form
            of transport be stopped immediately;


        (b) that the perpetrators of these heinous crimes be
            arrested forthwith; and


        (c) that in the medium to long term, robberies are also dealt with
            decisively in order to promote safety on our trains; and


   (5)      requests the Select Committees on Security and Constitutional
        Affairs and Public Services to monitor progress in this regard and
        continuously report to the Council.



The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I
shall move on the next sitting day of the Council:

  That the Council –


  (1) notes our country’s common commitment to the inherent dignity and
        respect of all our people, and notes with dismay the reckless
        comments that were made by the hon Ms Hilda Weber, a Member of
        Parliament, and a representative of the Democratic Alliance, to a Mr
        John Mthimunye from Dennilton in Mpumalanga;


  (2) takes this opportunity outright to condemn such dazed comments that
        deliberately entrench the stereotyping of our people based on their
        physical appearances; and


  (3) states categorically that such blatant racial and discriminatory
        comments undermine the tireless efforts of our government, civil
        society organisations and the people of South Africa to fight
        against the stigmatisation of our people based on their appearances
        or ailments, particularly those who live with HIV/Aids; and


  (4) calls upon -


        (a) the Democratic Alliance to demand that the hon Ms Hilda Weber
              issues a formal apology and is reprimanded for such reckless
              comments that have done irreparable damage to the inherent
              dignity of Mr Mthimunye; and


   b) all civil society organisations and the Department of Health to
      formulate the necessary appropriate responses to ensure that such
      comments are not repeated, especially from our public representatives,
      and to ensure that these comments do not perpetuate the stigmatisation
      and discrimination of our people.


Thank you.



                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                               (Policy debate)


Vote No 28 – Housing:


The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: [Interjections.] I am sorry, before I call the
hon Minister, there is one Order which I skipped. There is a motion which
needs to be moved, before we go to that debate, under the motions without
notices. It is a motion arising from the Chief Whip.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE NCOP: Thank you, Chairperson, for your indulgence.




                                 AFRICA DAY


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: I move without notice:

   That the Council –


     1) notes that today, May 25, is Africa Day and that it is the day when
        Africa celebrates the founding of the Organisation of African Unity
        on 25 May 1963 in Addis Ababa in Ethiopia;


   (2)      recalls that for almost four decades the OAU waged a struggle
        against colonialism and ethnic strife and promoted unity,
        multiculturalism and a sense of common purpose among the people of
        Africa;


   (3)      believes that the new challenges confronting us today demand of
        the people of Africa to unite in action to work for the further
        strengthening of the African Union and Nepad as we pursue the goal
        of creating a peaceful, democratic, prosperous, healthy and stable
        continent, fully living up to its promise and potential; and


   (4)      calls upon all humanity to unite in the struggle for the
        entrenchment of the culture of human rights and the eradication of
        poverty in Africa and the world.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: As there is no speaker’s list, I shall now put
the question, and the question is that the motion be agreed to.

As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether the heads of delegations are present in the
House. Can you please indicate whether you are present?

HON MEMBERS: Yes.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: In accordance with Rule 71, I shall now allow
the provinces an opportunity to make a declaration of vote, if they so
wish. Is there any province that wishes to do so? None.

We shall proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this alphabetically
per province. The delegation heads will then have to indicate to the Chair
whether they vote in favour, against or abstain. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Gauteng e ya e tshehetsa. [Gauteng supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mrs M N OLIPHANT: KwaZulu-Natal steun. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo steun. [Limpopo supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Kapa Bokone e ya e dumela. [Northern Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke a rona. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Steun. [Supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: All nine provinces have voted in favour. I
therefore declare the motion agreed to in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: As the first Order has already been read, I
will now allow the Minister to deliver her Budget Vote. Hon Minister, there
is a podium on this side.

HON MEMBERS: Malibongwe! [Let it be praised!] [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Chairperson and members of the Council, it is a
privilege for us in Housing to present our budget on Africa Day. It is
appropriate for us, because one of the most pressing problems facing our
continent is the provision of shelter.

The rate of urbanisation experienced by the continent is the highest, far
outstripping that of Asia. Therefore, in my capacity as the chair of the
Conference of African Ministers on Housing and Urban Development, I take
this opportunity to wish this Council well on this day, and to thank them
for giving us this opportunity, once again, to raise the very urgent matter
that Africa needs to contend with and to ensure that we put it very high on
the agenda of our development.

Chairperson and hon members of the NCOP, this journey that has brought us
here as the Department of Housing has been an exciting one over the year,
but equally, it is one that continues to provide us with immeasurable
challenges. But perhaps this has to be the way of life of people who have
been tasked with the delivery of the rights of our people. In this age of
hope, the spirit of our nation is yet coming alive, raising expectations,
making the challenge even harder. We continue to rededicate ourselves
because we cannot fail our people.

I want to comment at this point that I am very glad to see that amongst us
today are two of my MECs for housing, who will hopefully support us cutting
their budget, and sending it to provinces that are more in need of money
than their provinces.

Last week, I had the honour to be present at a gathering of the Shack/Slum
Dwellers International and the Federation of Urban and Rural Poor. With
representatives from 22 countries, key amongst these Malawi, Ghana, India
and Brazil, they had convened the conference to deliberate on ways to
increase the potential of partnerships with government. Their mission is to
encourage communities to save, thus enabling themselves to build their own
houses. In this way, since 1995, with the SA Homeless People’s Federation,
they have built 15 000 houses around the country, and secured land tenure,
especially for women.

In recognising the potential that they have in helping accelerate housing
delivery, I readily agreed to a partnership, and provided the Federation of
Urban and Rural Poor with R185 million to build an equivalent of 5 000
houses in the provinces of Limpopo, KwaZulu-Natal, North West, Mpumalanga,
Eastern Cape and Free State. [Interjections.] I am hopeful that by the time
I wind up, I will have received, from my two MECs here, a bid to outdo any
of the other provinces.

We also made commitments that, where we had provided land, slum dwellers
would construct the houses on their own. In turn, they made a commitment to
grow their numbers to ensure that within the shortest possible time, there
will be no informal settlement in the country that does not have any
representation from them.

At the closing of the conference, an old friend of the poor, the Presiding
Bishop, Rev Ivan Abrahams of the Methodist Church of Southern Africa, also
stepped forward to offer church land. For me, this was truly an important
moment that I believe would enable us to deliver not only at an accelerated
pace, but also to deliver with the full participation of our people in all
the important processes from policy formulation, planning to actual
delivery.

In recent years, the influence of this most important sector in housing has
been rapidly declining. The result has been an erosion of institutional
capacity in the housing sector and a weakening of housing delivery that
reduced the capacity for policy advocacy and community consultation. I am
glad to confirm that guided by the new strategy, and thus giving power to
the people, we are now closing this yawning gap.

We are intensifying our work relationship with community-based
organisations and various nongovernmental organisations to build a strong
and cohesive housing sector. These include the Federation of the Urban and
Rural Poor, the Built Environment Support Group, the Kuyasa Fund, the
Utshani Fund and Rooftops, amongst others.

Additional to this partnership, through the National Youth Commission, the
youth of our country responded to the call I made last year when Parliament
convened a special session at the birthplace of the Freedom Charter,
Kliptown. In Limpopo, specifically in Modimolle, the National Youth
Commission has mobilised 95 youth out of a total of 200 that will be needed
to undergo training and development to acquire skills in the various
aspects of actual construction. They will soon be joined by youths from the
Eastern Cape at Makana and Ndlambe Municipalities, and the youth from
Mangaung Municipality in the Free State, and the youth from Mpumalanga. The
programme is a special programme, the objective of which is to empower the
youth.

The initiatives on building partnerships culminated in September last year
in the signing of a social contract for rapid urban delivery with 47 very
important stakeholders. The stakeholders comprised groupings from the
material supply industry, the banking sector, the professional bodies in
the built environment such as architects, quantity surveyors, conveyancers,
developers, housing institutions, government departments, the Chamber of
Mines and nongovernmental organisations that are interested in housing.

Each signatory to the social contract made a commitment to be a member of
the plenary assembly, which was to establish a modus operandi to review and
monitor progress made towards achieving the ideals of the social contract
for rapid housing delivery. The first plenary assembly took place on 15
March 2006 to look at issues such as development planning, land and legal
matters, delivery, consumer education, capacity-building and communication,
development planning and the housing supply chain.

The social contract brings together all the sectors so that we can mobilise
them and gain from their experience and their support to ensure that we can
accelerate housing delivery. I believe that through it, we will reach the
goal of eradicating informal settlements by 2014.

Further, in giving power to the people in this age of hope, what we mean to
do is that we would also attend to the issues relating to the empowerment
of women. In this regard, we ring-fenced 30% of each provincial housing
department’s allocation to improve access to housing projects by women
contractors. In 2005, already, an amount of R1,9 billion has been provided
to emerging female contractors.

A section 21 company, Women for Housing, has also been very creative and
active in our housing programmes. In August 2005, the group was involved in
an initiative with Habitat for Humanity and us and the Gauteng department
of housing in the construction of 13 houses in Protea South, Soweto, with
350 volunteers. I must add here that at top of the list of those volunteers
was the Acting Premier of Gauteng. The project was one of the most
significant, with components of programmes for women in housing
construction. It offered many of the participating members an opportunity
to gain practical experience. The practical experience ranged from a
technical construction skills base to leadership and teamwork skills. A
similar event is planned for 2006.

I am encouraged by the fact that despite the limitations they face, in
particular with regard to access to finance and training opportunities,
Women for Housing nonetheless intend to show their spirit. The challenges
that confront them will, however, be our focus in the current financial
year, with a view to resolving some of the problems.

Repeating the trend of the incredible international support we had prior to
1994, hon members will be glad to know that an Irishman called Niall Mellon
has been making forays into our country since 2003. He has bought a holiday
home in Hout Bay where he would otherwise have relaxed and stayed,
surrounded by affluence and security. However, each time he comes to South
Africa, what he does is find sites of extreme poverty. And then, bringing
with him volunteers from Ireland, he has helped us build, to date, 500
houses, specifically in Imizamo Yethu. [Applause.] Last year, he brought
700 volunteers that included amongst them the legendary British boxer,
Chris Eubank, to build 120 houses in two weeks. For Netreg, which is part
of the N2 Gateway Project, he launched a show house in April.

To support the initiative, we have made a commitment to provide him with
land. His is a concrete demonstration of the potential that can be unlocked
by those who have resources and the poor at their mercy and in their heart.
I take this opportunity to thank Niall Mellon and his volunteers for he has
pledged that for this year, given land, he will build a thousand houses
somewhere in one province. [Applause.]

Because we would want to see the escalation and enhancement of all these
activities implementing our own part of the social contract, we are already
reviewing all legislation that has an impact on the implementation of the
Breaking New Ground Strategy. In this regard, a study of the relevant
provincial legislation has been completed. This will now be fed into the
Committee for the Review of Legislation that is in the process of finishing
their work. Members of this committee have already identified some of the
blockages and very soon I should be getting a report from them.

In November last year, Minmec approved the policy regarding the Fast-
tracking of Housing Solution for People Living in Areas of Stress by using
the Emergency Housing Circumstances Programme. Pilots under the programme
will be implemented in Gauteng, the Eastern Cape and the Western Cape. In
Gauteng, the pilot will be in Protea South, in Tsakane, Extension 10, in
Ekurhuleni and in Sicelo Shiceka, Extension 5, in Sedibeng. [Applause.]

Chairperson, can I recover the two minutes I have lost?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: You may continue, Minister.

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: The Eastern Cape’s pilot project will be
in the Ikwezi Municipality in Klipplaat, which was hit by a tornado in
February 2005. I would like to say in this respect that one of the
provinces that had opted out of this emergency programme has now realised
that in fact it should have been part of this programme.

We went on a Deputy Presidential Imbizo in Taung in the North West over the
weekend where we witnessed with our own eyes the enormity of the challenges
we face in dealing with emergency houses as a result of the flooding. None
of us sitting here would have been able to withstand the kind of situation
faced by those people in the dead of winter. I have requested the director-
general and officials to work in collaboration with the province and the
municipality to urgently find a solution using this programme.

I am informed that a solution has indeed been found and that Nedcor has
offered us assistance to ensure that we can provide emergency shelter for
the people of Taung. I would like to thank them from the bottom of my heart
for this gesture.

In the Western Cape, two sites have already been identified and we will be
moving very swiftly to make sure that we can put up emergency housing.

The banking sector has been mobilised to support initiatives to break new
ground in housing delivery. Negotiations, as you would probably have heard,
with the banks to release R42 billion that was pledged for this purpose,
have been concluded. But apart from the banks giving this kind of support
they have their own initiated projects, some of which are in
Olievenhoutbosch in Gauteng, in Mpumalanga and, I believe, also here on the
N2.

After concerns were raised by hon members about the credibility of housing
lists last year, I resolved to ensure that the matter would be attended to.
As reported last year in the National Assembly, an audit company was
appointed in this regard. The task of auditing the list has now been
concluded in the pilot which we are running on the N2 and I can proudly
claim that the waiting list for Cape Town has now been successfully
audited. [Applause.]

We have marked out the criteria with the communities and the website for
this is up and running. We request you as members of the National Council
of Provinces to please help us to ensure that you help your constituencies
access this information and check whether their details are registered on
the waiting lists. The success of this registration process will help us
ensure that we can sell it to other provinces.

With the steps that we have taken, I am satisfied that we can confidently
speak about realising accelerated delivery, starting this financial year.
The provinces are delivering and I am very happy with their delivery and
would like to say that, even if the two representatives were not here
today. In the 2005/2006 financial year, we saw an increase in the actual
number of houses that the provinces delivered. Thank you very much MECs,
you make me very proud. [Applause.] In this regard, Chairperson, I was
actually saying to one of my MECs that my biggest problem now is that I
might need to get added security because wherever I am in Gauteng and in
other provinces, I have these old ladies coming to kiss me because they are
so grateful that we are delivering and I might need to be protected from
this.

I want to announce today that provinces have been able to spend a total of
95% of the integrated Human Settlement Development Grant allocated to them;
a huge improvement indeed and I am very happy with the progress that we
have made. We have a slight problem, though, in the province of the Free
State, which has only spent 75% of its budget, but we are working on the
matter.

In Gauteng the National Home Builders Registration Council conducted audits
of the rectification programme of the Gauteng department with approximately
7 203 subsidised houses constructed from the year 1994 to 2002. The pilot
project commenced in October 2005 and ended in March this year. It focused
in townships of Lakeside, Bramfisherville and Thintwa. A process has now
been undertaken to rectify these houses. I am informing you about this
because, as you do know, we have a problem with houses that are falling
apart. Shoddy work that we have discovered has been left for our people to
deal with. We had said that we are expecting provinces themselves, and the
municipalities, would be able to assist people who find themselves in this
kind of situation. We started in Gauteng and we are hoping that when this
is a success, we can roll it out across the country.

Last year, the housing Minmec embarked on a process of reviewing the
allocation formula in a manner that would reflect the principles and
objectives of breaking new ground. We ensure that the new formula
recognises the changing dynamics in human settlement patterns and movement
in our country. Some of the factors we will have introduced now relate to
the recognition of the migration patterns, the rural housing needs and the
component of alignment in the National Spatial Development Perspective
principles. We will also recognise the need to ensure that we in housing
can collectively prioritise key developmental projects that can be
determined, funded and driven centrally.

In order to provide support in particular for the implementation of the
comprehensive plan, the department will be restructured with the view to
creating expertise in the fields of operations programmes, project
management, monitoring, evaluation and capacity-building. Therefore,
Chairperson, we will establish separate units in the department to support
provinces and municipalities with, for instance, informal settlement
upgrading and the development of social housing. We are also looking
towards expanding the existing capacity-building unit within the
department, which will focus on supporting housing consumer education as
well as municipal accreditation.

Being greatly encouraged by the improvement that we have had in these areas
that I have mentioned, I need to get to the point now that perhaps most of
you could have been waiting for. I want to announce the following budgetary
allocations for our provinces for the financial year 2006/2007: The Eastern
Cape has been allocated R761,994 million; the Free State has been allocated
R522,601 million; Gauteng has been allocated a whopping R1,7 billion;
KwaZulu-Natal has been allocated R1,048 billion; Limpopo has been allocated
R521,331 million; Mpumalanga has been allocated R421,002 million; Northern
Cape has been allocated R104,774 million; North West has been allocated
R613,405 million; and the Western Cape has been allocated R598,800 million.
The total that they are putting as the baseline allocation is R6 349,949
for this financial year.

Having made that announcement, Chairperson, I would like to say thank you
very much for giving me this opportunity. [Applause.]

Mr R J TAU: Hon Chair, hon Minister, MECs present, comrades, the Strategy
and Tactics of the ANC state that:

 A critical element for national emancipation should be the elimination of
   apartheid property relations. This requires the deracialisation of
   ownership and control of wealth, including land; equity and affirmative
   action in the provision of skills and access to positions of management;
   consolidation and pooling of the power of the state, institutional and
   social capital in the hands of the motive forces of our revolution;
   encouragement of the co-operative sector, as well as the systematic and
   intelligent ways of working in partnership with private capital in a
   relationship that will be defined by unity and struggle; co- operative
   engagement and contestation on fundamental issues.


   It requires the elimination of the legacy of apartheid’s super
   exploitation and inequality, and the redistribution of wealth and income
   to benefit society as a whole.

The reason I chose to quote the strategy and tactics of the ANC so
extensively is precisely because I want to highlight the extent to which
the ANC is consistent with its programme of advancing and deepening the
national democratic revolution through its government programmes. This
debate, therefore, is a reflection of that.

We are engaged in the Housing policy debate, but we cannot do that without
locating it within the context of the reconstruction and development of our
country. This debate is, therefore, located within the context of land
redistribution or agrarian transformation for housing, water provision for
sanitation, skills for the construction of housing, co-operatives,
especially women’s co-ops and for the socialisation of capital.

It must also be further understood as an instrument of deracialising the
ownership patterns through the development and support of new and emerging
contractors. Of course, as stated in our Strategy and Tactics, “all this
cannot be done without an intense struggle”.

Consistent with our resolve to build a better life for all our people, and
the principle as expressed in our Strategy and Tactics, our 2004 Manifesto
states that:
  We shall build more subsidised houses and introduce medium-density
  housing closer to places of work, and provide those who have as yet not
  received such housing with service standards for more.


To illustrate our commitment to the promises we made to the people in this
regard, our Minister announced the comprehensive human settlement plan,
which, in all respects, seeks to do exactly what we promised our people and
the country. Coupled with that is the radical reconstruction of the subsidy
bands that our people will qualify for as of now.

Our programme of Taking Parliament to the People has once more reminded us
that greed and dishonesty will always stand in the way of consolidating the
revolutionary gains we have made since 1994. While our government does its
best for our people to live a decent life, we find unscrupulous
contractors, who build poor quality and incomplete houses with the motive
of maximising profit rather than service delivery.

These are people who would stop at nothing in siphoning off the resources
of the state by promising to build quality houses, only to disappear after
laying the foundations. These are vultures that continue to drain the few
resources made available to improve the poor living conditions of the
workers and the poor.

We are, nevertheless, comfortable with the systems that have been put in
place by the department to stop the corrupt activities, including, amongst
other things, dealing with the officials who collaborate with these
vultures.

During our oversight visits to provinces we noticed a number of blocked
projects and poorly completed projects. Having raised this aspect with the
department on a consistent basis, finally the department responded by
presenting positive and clear measures on how it envisages remedying the
situation during this financial year. All that is left is for the provinces
to implement this remedy, and of course we shall monitor the implementation
processes as they unfold in provinces.

It is now up to the provinces to roll up their sleeves and utilise their
allocated 3% of the budget to unblock the projects and ensure that our
people benefit positively from them. We have also noted a disturbing
tendency by some bad farmers - I’m saying “some” because not all farmers
are bad – who contribute destructively to the reconstruction and
development of our country by refusing to co-operate with government in
availing land for the construction of houses.

And to worsen the situation, they even force their workers to establish
informal settlements and demand housing from government, by so doing
increasing the burden of the state. As the ANC, we call upon such farmers
to repent, for the ANC is coming to walk and to work with you to ensure
that together we build houses for our people.

We have noted as public representatives, together with the department, that
it is important to develop a strategy in order to educate our people to
value their houses as economic assets and, therefore, as a bargaining tool
for further economic advances.

Perhaps, hon Minister, the campaign proposed by the committee should be
called “Operation: O se ka wa rekisa borulelo jwa gago” [Do not sell your
roof]. It is our belief that such a campaign would go a long way towards
the education our people not to sell their RDP houses or rent them out,
only to stay in a shack, but rather to value them as that critical
instrument that can reconstruct their lives for the better economically.

That also goes for the development of housing co-operatives, particularly
for single rural women. I am quite impressed, but I won’t necessarily be
going into detail, as I had planned in my speech. I think the Minister
dealt with this issue quite extensively and I don’t want to spoil it. I’m
quite impressed with the extent to which young people and women have played
a critical role and benefited from the process of housing delivery in the
country.

One of the critical points we identified as a committee is the capacity of
provinces to spend to the fullest the housing grants allocated to them.
Yes, of course, we acknowledge their remarkable improvement. We appreciate
the fact that there is an improvement in that regard.

Most of the provinces have spent over 90% of their allocated grants.
However, it is our belief that the money was allocated for 100% expenditure
or more. Therefore, we appeal to the provinces to spend more than they have
been allocated in order to get our support.

One other important aspect we have observed from provinces is the capacity
of the municipalities to play ball, that is through the process of
accreditation. In the public hearings that have been convened most
provinces have indicated that they have pilot projects. And as a committee,
we believe that perhaps it is time now that we looked beyond piloting and
towards ensuring that local municipalities play that critical role of
ensuring that they also play their part in the provision of housing for our
people.

That, of course, goes with the strengthening of the capacity of
municipalities to improve service delivery in housing, because it would be
pointless to just give them accreditation without ensuring that there is
proper infrastructure, human resources, capital resources, proper
understanding and training to ensure that they do not make mistakes in the
process of being accredited as developers. Rather, we need to look at how
best to put in place systems that will increase the capacity of
municipalities.

Indeed, the land belongs to all those who work it. Of course, as the
chairperson of the select committee with a particular bias towards a
particular province, it would be uncalled for of me not to raise this
point. The point is that one of the provinces that have been seriously
affected by the phasing out of the cross-boundary municipalities is the
Northern Cape.

It is important that once all these agreements and processes have been
completed, and provinces are capable of really engaging in some of the
challenges that they are faced with, the Northern Cape’s budget is
increased remarkably next year. Of course, everything will then be in the
hands of the Northern Cape, including the issue of Kgalagadi. So I think
this is a critical aspect to look at. [Interjections.]

Hon Chair, we are steadfast; we are committed; we are consistent with our
historical mission as the ANC. The committee, therefore, is here with a
clear mandate, to support the Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

Nkk M N OLIPHANT: Ngiyabonga sihlalo. Ngqongqoshe ohloniphekile, amalunga
alendlu kanye nezithunywa ezikhethekileyo. Okokuqala nje sihlalo ngizofisa
ukusho ukuthi kufanele sibheke ukuthi ngabe umgomo ka ANC usukela kuphi.
Okokuqala ngo 1955,abantu basemzansi ne Afrika bakhuluma bathi, bonke
abantu base mzansi ne Afrika bayoba nophahla phezu kwabo nokuvikeleka
nokunethezeka. Bonke abantu bayoba nelungelo lokuhlala lapho bezikhethele
khona. Ngokwalengxenye yomqulu wenkululeko, namhlanje sinomhlahlandlela
wezezindlu owaphunyezwa yiPhalamende ngonyaka ka 1997. Yingakho sithi
sinethemba ngohulumeni oholwa ukhongolose,futhi lo mthetho uvumela abantu
ukuthi babeke imibono ngokuthi hlobo luni lwezindlu abazifunayo.

Uma ngingafakazela lokhu engikushoyo, laba abangazi ngoba bahlale bekhona
abangazi, bangahamba bayobheka kwaZulu Natal endaweni ebizwa ngokuthi I
Pisangs river, lapho Utshani fund, wasebenza khona ukuthi abantu bazakhele
bona ngaphansi kohlelo lwe people’s housing process. Ungaya futhi nakhona
la eduze,e Victoria Mxenge e Western Cape. Okuhlaba umxhwele kakhulu-ke
ukuthi abantu besifazane laba engikhuluma ngabo, yibona abakha lezi zindlu.
Yingakho namhlanje sithi asibhiyozele iminyaka engamashumi amahlanu,ngenxa
yeqhaza elabanjwa abantu besifazane ukulwela inkululeko yalelizwe ngokwenza
imashi eyayilibangise e Pitoli futhi basaqhubeka basahola kulelizwe.
Yingakho namhlanje sinongqongqoshe wesifazane kazwelonke futhi yingakho
sibona kukhona umehluko naye elandela ezinyathelweni zomunye ungqongqoshe
wesifazane. Ngikhuluma nje futhi kunano ngqongqoshe wesifazane osuka e
Gauteng , yingakho  iGauteng ihamba phambili. Ngiyathemba ukuthi kusobala
ukuthi ubuholi babantu besifazane buhamba kanjani.

Ngiyafisa ke ukusho ukuthi kunomehluko phakathi kwezindlu ezakhiwa yilaba
bantu besifazane kanye nezindlu ezakhiwa izinkampani zokwakha. Uma ungaya
eVictoria Mxenge indlu eyayinkulu kunazo zonke yayi yikhulu namashumi
amabili ngamamitha uma uyiqhathanisa naleyo eyakhiwa yinkampani yokwakha
engamashumi amathathu nambili amamitha kodwa ngoxhaso lwemali olufanayo.
Mhlawumbe ke ngqongqoshe okunye esingafisa ukuthi ukwenze ukuqinisekisa
ukuthi I NHBRC iyalandelela ikakhulukazi empahleni yokwakha esetshenziswa
izinkampani zokwakha ngoba bathenga izimpahla zokwakha ezishibhile ukuze
bakwanzi ukuthola inzuzo eningi.

Ngiyafisa futhi-ke kungqongqoshe ukuthi sibuke ukuthi uMnyango wezeZindlu
ungenza kanjani ukuthi ubambe iqhaza, ikakhulukazi ohlelweni lwe
Accelerated Shared Growth Initiative Of South Africa. Uma sibheka ukuthi
indlu yakhiwa kanjani,indlu uthi uma usuyakhile usuyiqedile. kudingakala
ukuthi ingakakhiwa indlu kube nendlela eya kuleyondawo, kuphinde kudingeke
amanzi kuleyondawo ngaphambi kokuthi uqale indlu. Uma indlu seyakhiwe
seyiphelile bese kungena nogesi. Uma sekungene ugesi kwaphelela konke
endlini, abantu abahlala endlini izinto abazifunayo zokuqala
isitofu,ifriji,I televison kanye ne radio.

Lokhu kuba nomthelela ekutheni abantu abenza lezizinto basemathubeni
okudalekelwa imisebenzi ukuze abantu bakwazi ukuhlomula ekwakhiweni
kwezindlu, nasekwakhiweni kwalezi zinto okufanele bazisebenzise kulezo
zindlu. Ngiyafisa ke futhi ukusho ukuthi enye into Ngqongqoshe ebuye
isiphazamise ukuthi uxhaso lwezimalo lokuthenga izindlu esikhathini
esiningi izinkampani zokwakha ziyaye zithi, ingxenye yakhona ziyisebenzisa
kwingqalasizinda lapho bezokwakha khona izindlu, kodwa ngokohlahlo-mali
lwePhalamemde kunoxhaso lwengqalasizinda ezingeni lomasipala kanye
nasezingeni lezifundazwe.

Into esifuna ukuthi ungqongqoshe ayibheke ,indlela angahlanganisa ngayo
ingqalasizinda yezindawo ngokuhlukana kwazo ukuze kungathi le mali encane
yokwakha isakhiwo iphinde isetshenziselwe ingqalasizinda.Okunye ukuthi
iyiphi indlela umnyango ongahlanganisa  ngayo ikakhulukazi emnyangweni
wezamanzi,ezemigwaqo,ezikagesi kanye nomnyango wezemisebenzi yomphakathi
ngohlelo lwama Seta,ukuqhubeka nokuqeqesha ikakhulukazi abantu besifazane
kanye nentsha ukuze bakwazi ukubamba iqhaza, nokuqhubekela phambili.

Siyazike ukuthi umzansi ne Afrika uzimisele ukuthi abantu balelizwe  babambe
iqhaza  kukho  konke   ukuze  bathuthukise  izimpilo   zabo   zibe   ngcono.
Ngicabanga  ukuthi  iyona  ndlela  yokuqala  le  esingayisebenzisa  ekutheni
sikwazi ukuthuthukisa  ikakhulukazi  izindawo  zasemakhaya  ngoba  isikhathi
esiningi  kubonakala  sengathi  ukuthuthukisa  izindlu   emakhaya   kusalela
ngemuva. Mhlawumbe bekungaba  kuhle  ukuthi  ungqongqoshe  ngoba  ngicabanga
abantu  basemakhaya  bazikhuthalele  ukuzisebenzela   bona   ngokwabo.   Uma
singavula uhlelo njengoba umhlonishwa u  TAU  eshilo  ukuthi,  uma  singenza
ukuthi abantu bakwazi  ukusebenza  ngokohlelo  luka  vuka  uzibambele,abantu
basemakhaya bayakwazi ukulibamba lelo qhaza. Siyethemba  ngqongqoshe  ukuthi
ngokubambisana  nezifunda   kanye   nezifundazwe,   siyokwazi   ukuqhubekela
phambili. Ngiyabonga Sihlalo. (Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Mrs M N OLIPHANT: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon  Minister,  hon  members  and
distinguished delegates, firstly I wish to look at the history of the  ANC’s
policy. In 1955 the South Africans declared that all  the  people  of  South
Africa should have houses, security and comfort. “All people  shall  have  a
right to live where they choose.” According to this section of  the  Freedom
Charter, today we have a housing framework that was fulfilled by  Parliament
in 1997. That is why we are saying we have hope in  the  ANC-led  government
and this Act allowing people to make their opinions known  about  the  types
of houses they want.

To support what I am saying, those who don’t know can  visit  KwaZulu-Natal,
the area called Piesangs River, where the Utshani Fund  assisted  people  to
build houses themselves under the People’s Housing  Process.  You  can  also
visit  an  area  called  Victoria  Mxenge  in  the  Western  Cape.  What  is
impressive is that I am talking about women;  they  are  the  ones  who  are
building  these  houses.  That  is  why  we  are  commemorating   the   50th
anniversary; because of the role played by women in the liberation  of  this
country by marching on Pretoria, they are still leading this  country.  That
is why today we have a woman national Minister and she is following  in  the
footsteps of another female Minister. As I am speaking to  you,  we  have  a
female Minister from Gauteng, which is why Gauteng is leading. I  think  the
present situation concerning women in leadership is clear.

I also want to say that there is a difference between houses built by  these
women and those built by construction companies.  In  Victoria  Mxenge,  the
biggest  house  was  120m²  compared  to  those  that  were  built  by   the
construction company, which were 32m², with the same  financial  assistance.
Minister, you must also  see  to  it  that  NHBRC  standards  are  followed,
particularly concerning building  material  that  is  used  by  construction
companies. They buy cheap material so that they would  be  able  to  gain  a
large profit.

I would be grateful if the Minister could investigate the  role  that  could
be played by the Department of  Housing,  particularly  in  the  project  of
Accelerated and Shared Growth of South Africa, Asgisa. If  we  look  at  how
you build a house, before starting, you need a  road  and  water.  When  you
finish the house, you need to connect electricity. After  that,  people  can
occupy the house and the first appliances that they need  are:  a  stove,  a
fridge, a television set and a radio.

This has an impact on job creation because people who are doing  these  jobs
and those who are working with appliances benefit from the  construction  of
housing. Minister, the financial assistance for buying  houses  is  also  of
great concern to us. Most of the time the construction companies  are  using
a portion of that money for infrastructure where houses  are  to  be  built.
However,  in  terms  of  Parliamentary  budget  allocation,  the  issues  of
infrastructure  are  in  the  hands   of   municipalities   and   provincial
governments.

The other thing that we would like the Minister to address is  the  way  she
can integrate infrastructure in different areas so that  we  won't  use  the
budget for infrastructure instead of housing. Another point is in  what  way
can the department collaborate with the Departments  of  Water  Affairs  and
Forestry,  Transport,  Minerals  and  Energy  and  Public  Works   in   Seta
programmes, to continue and train women and youth in  particular  to  enable
them to participate and grow.

We know that the South African government is committed to bringing the
community on board so that they would participate in improving their lives.
I think this is the way we could use to develop rural areas, because in
terms of housing development, they are lagging far behind. It would be
better if the Minister - because in rural areas people are committed to
working for themselves – could open up the project, as hon Tau said, of
Vuka Uzibambele. [Let up and do it yourself.] The rural community can play
that role. Minister, we hope that with co-operation with other provinces
and regions, we will make progress. Thank you, Chairperson.]

Mr G R KRUMBOCK: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, millions of
people in our country exist without security and dignity because they do
not have access to adequate housing or shelter. To give credit where credit
is due, national government recognises this need and, consequently, the
Minister of Finance indicated last year that the housing budget would
increase by more than R2,5 billion over the MTEF period starting in 2005.
This year’s budget has increased by 30% compared to 2005–06 and it is
further forecast to expand to R9,5 billion by 2008-09.

Our first major challenge, however, lies in our capacity to deliver. The
unpleasant truth is that, over the medium term, government is delivering
less with more. In 1997-98, nearly 296 000 houses were delivered as opposed
to only 129 000 completed or under construction in 2004-05, according to
the Department of Housing’s annual report. In the short term, we have seen
a decline from 203 000 units in 2003 to 193 000 in 2004, and the
aforementioned 129 000 last year. Over the past seven years the department
has delivered an average of 181 000 per year, against the backlog of 2,4
million homes.

Meanwhile the number of people located in informal settlements without
proper housing continues to grow and is outstripping our insufficient
capacity to deliver. Indeed, the government projected, in its 2002 annual
report, a housing backlog of 3,1 million homes by 2010 and 3,3 million
homes by 2015. These projections were calculated in a year where housing
delivery exceeded 200 000 units. And one wonders whether even a backlog of
3,3 million homes is achievable, considering last year’s delivery of only
129 000 homes. Clearly, capacity rather than funding remains the key
challenge, which requires serious and sustained attention.

Our second significant problem remains the quality of many of the houses
that are delivered. Correctly, the NHBRC’s motto of “Quality is our
priority” is correct. The annual report of 2005 is a literal mine of
information which could be reinterpreted to suggest a number of ways in
which we can address the quality control problem.

In referring to the NHBRC, I feel I can do no worse than in the same budget
debate last year, where the Minister replied that there was absolutely
nothing in my address that she agreed to. Considering that my speech was an
implicit affirmation of the government’s Gear policy and an endorsement of
the President’s commitment to do away with job-crushing labour legislation
as it affects the housing industry, I must say I found the Minister’s
response most surprising. But then, again, there is a lot of that going
around these days.

Last year, I referred to the lack of progress on the star rating or grading
system for registered contractors. Having fought for this improvement for
many years, even testifying as a private citizen to the housing portfolio
committee in the late 1990s in this regard, I was pleased to see that the
NHBRC chief executive officer’s report disclosed that the organisation, I
quote: “Has introduced an exciting plan as an incentive for homebuilders,
the grading system.”
The DA believes, and stated at the time, that incentivising sound business
practises would make better builders more competitive, lower the cost of
homes and align market forces with government policy. It was thus
gratifying to read the CEO’s statement that this plan will encourage
homebuilders to strive for a better grade by providing a quality home and
enhance their business status.

The CEO’s report is dated 31 March 2005. All the regulations in this regard
have been drafted and it is therefore disappointing to learn that, more
than a year later, the grading system is still not operational. Apparently
all that is required is promulgation by the Minister and I can only urge
her to do so as soon as possible.

One of the lessons that the NHBRC has learnt from the forensic audit is
that more training should be provided to emerging homebuilders, as the
quality of construction is not yet at the desirable level. Hon Tau also
referred to that in his address. The fact is, most homes in South Africa
are not covered by an NHBRC warranty. The number of homes rolled out by the
NHBRC between March 2002 to March 2005 amounted to 152 122 units, whereas
the number of units delivered by the Department of Housing alone over this
period totalled 526 755 units. A minimum percentage of NHBRC-enrolled homes
required remedial work for monies drawn from the warranty fund - just R2,8
million in the year ending 31 March 2005, out of a net profit of R291,4
million for that year, a mere 0,99%.

The warranty fund stood at R939 million at that time and is presently
valued at R1,2 billion. It is a pity that Treasury regulation restrict the
NHBRC investments to listed bonds, securities and cash, whereas greater
flexibility would allow more aggressive investments in Blue Chip equities
and more rapid appreciation in the fund over the longer term. Nonetheless
an independent actuarial service has confirmed that the NHBRC as a whole is
solvent and in a sound financial position. Moreover the income statement
revealed that inspections comprised just 17,6 % of total expenditure for
the year.

In view of low claims on the warranty fund and relatively low expenditure
on inspections on the one hand, and a solvent organisation of over one
billion rand of warranty funds in reserve, is it not time that a fresh look
be taken at providing training and warranty cover in the area extensively
covered by People’s Housing Projects? Even if warranty claims were to
double, this would still amount to less than 0,5% of the total warranty
fund and would go a long way to addressing quality construction issues that
have not yet been adequately addressed.

I would like to conclude by commenting on the statement that hon Tau made
in his address. I was very intrigued to hear his comments, with respect to
unscrupulous building contractors who are fleecing vulnerable people, in
this regard. It is my understanding that nobody can build houses for profit
or receive financing unless they are in fact registered with the NHBRC. So,
clearly, something is falling through the cracks, and I would like to
appeal to the Minister to investigate hon Tau’s concern, that he raised in
this House. I do believe the issue that he raised requires and warrants
close attention. I thank you, Chair.

Mr J F VAN WYK (Northern Cape): Chairperson, Hon Minister of Housing, hon
members, it gives me great pleasure to participate in this debate,
especially because we are celebrating Africa Day. This reminds us that we
should not look at our struggle against poverty and underdevelopment in
isolation but that the creation of our new democratic South Africa is part
of the creation of a better Africa and a better world.

Housing remains one the greatest and most daunting challenges government is
faced with. The extent of the challenge derives from the size of the
housing backlog, the desperation and impatience of the poor and homeless.
The Northern Cape housing and local government department, regarding the
goals of the provincial government, continues to work through these
challenges whilst endeavouring to alleviate the pressure of the housing
crisis.
Achieving good delivery in the housing processes concerning the past 12
years has not always been an easy task. The department was able to provide
a substantial number of houses through intensive capacity-building
programmes which took place across the province, resulting in an increased
skills base for housing development.
Now that the delivery of housing is in full swing in our province, there
are unfortunately no sufficient funds to meet the total housing needs in
the Northern Cape. New legislation and policy changes have placed an added
burden on the department and municipalities in the province, thus making
planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the housing
programme more difficult.

The Northern Cape has received R104 million from national allocation in
this current financial year for housing development. In the light of this,
the province is planning to construct 2001 housing units for the year. Out
of these, 654 houses will be delivered through current projects. Eight
hundred and seventy-four houses will come from block projects and 473
houses from new projects. A total number of 1 060 new sites will be planned
and serviced in the province.

This budget allocation is noble but not adequate if compared with real
facts, which will add a new dimension to the problem we are faced with in
housing development. The housing department cannot initiate enough projects
in the Northern Cape. This budget will mostly be used to unblock and
complete blocked projects as well as to complete some of the running
projects which were initiated towards the end of the 2003-04 financial
year.

In the Northern Cape a larger product was ensured by setting a minimum
house size of 36m² whilst the national Department of Housing had laid down
the 32m² as a minimum house size at national level. Nevertheless, the
province has succeeded in some cases by delivering houses larger than 50m².
In some cases it has also delivered houses that are 54m² in size. This,
however, has created high expectations amongst the people who sought to
benefit from the subsidy scheme.

The poor expected bigger houses, but in reality the subsidy can only
provide a basic liveable structure with the most basic services. Policy
development continued into delivery practice and various attempts were made
to increase the size of the houses because beneficiaries wanted the biggest
structures they could get. This made it difficult and impossible for the
developers to sustain the housing projects, and caused a number of these to
come to a complete standstill.

These incidents occurred because key factors such as location, fluctuating
input prices and distances were not considered enough when developers were
encouraged to build bigger houses. Building materials are not always
readily available in the Northern Cape province and therefore had to be
brought in from other provinces, and transporting them over long distances
increased the building costs. We do encounter instances where these
materials had not been tested for SABS compliance and do not comply. We are
currently in the process of sorting this out.

These factors, together with a number of other related problems, have
caused the downfall and financial ruin of many developers and contractors
in the province. As a result, many projects were stopped or abandoned by
the developers and have not shown any progress over a long period. These
are the projects we refer to as “blocked projects”. For that reason, the
department is consequently engaged in a process whereby all the blocked
projects have been allocated additional funds, with a view to completing
them. An independent consulting firm has been appointed by the national
housing department to assist the Northern Cape with this process.

Other factors that have affected the delivery of houses concern policy
changes. A number of SMMEs were appointed to manage projects but the lack
of proper project management skills has caused delay on some projects – not
forgetting community conflict. Housing has also experienced budget
shortfalls and cash flow problems, and this has been a major cause of most
projects coming to a complete standstill.

All of the above factors impacted severely on the successful implementation
of the projects, and also caused the delay of some projects over long
periods of time. This only goes to show that the process is well managed,
in the face of a dire need for additional funding. However, the matter was
never adequately addressed.

The process to unblock and complete all blocked projects only, in the 2006-
07 financial year, will require an additional budget of no less than R150
million. The allocation of R104 million will be inadequate and is therefore
not sufficient to fund all the housing projects. This therefore gives rise
to the shortfall that I have mentioned, concerning the blocked projects
process only, which, in terms of a national decision, must be completed by
31 March 2008. It is therefore critical that additional funds be sourced
for the 2006-07 financial year in order to prevent further disruption in
the implementation of the housing programme in our province during the
ensuing financial years.

There are also a number of shortcomings in the area of institutional
capacity. The data on the computerised housing subsidy management system is
not up to date concerning all projects. Information relating to projects,
financial information and beneficiary information needs to be cleaned up
and corrected. Again, I need to say that the national department has
availed additional capacity to complete this task. We wish to express our
gratitude to the Minister in this regard.

The filing system of individual application forms needs to be upgraded in
order to link the filed application forms with the applicants’ ID numbers.
Due to insufficient funding, this process will only be attended to during
this current financial year. Data lines from our regional offices in
Springbok, Upington and De Aar need to be upgraded in order to successfully
decentralise housing subsidy management systems functions to the service
point. This is very applicable to the Northern Cape. This matter was also
raised with the national Department of Housing and the department is
currently busy assisting us with the upgrading of data lines.

We also need to appoint more building inspectors. Though we have made a few
appointments, more building inspectors are still required. The department
has approached Thubelisha Homes, a national housing institution, to assist
with unblocking and completion of blocked projects in the Pixley region.
Because of their involvement, already, there are signs which show
improvement in project management and monitoring in that specific region.

The Housing Act of 1997 stipulates a new and important role for
municipalities in the housing process. Local government, the sphere of
government closest to the people responsible for the social and economic
wellbeing of the people, must therefore be on the forefront of housing
delivery. Our vision and mission is to ensure that that happens.

While the department of housing and local government is responsible for
determination of housing policy to facilitate the provision of adequate
housing in the Northern Cape, it is equally important that provincial
government supports and strengthens municipalities to manage the delivery
process.

The province, as part of the new comprehensive plan Breaking New Ground has
begun a process to accredit competent municipalities to administer national
housing programmes. Current plans call for the national housing department
to embark on a 10-year phased approach towards the accreditation of South
Africa’s full complement of municipalities. Due to the lack of municipal
capacity and the vast distances between towns in the Northern Cape, the
Northern Cape is targeting five district municipalities as well three
larger municipalities for accreditation.

The national Department of Housing regards the accreditation of district
municipalities as a pilot for the country. The legal framework to formalise
the housing mandate for the district municipalities will be finalised
during this MTEF period. This programme was launched formally in our
province in February this year.

Due to the breaches of contract, the department is still busy with legal
action against defaulting contractors. The process is currently ongoing and
some meetings have taken place with the role-players. The legal action
against contractors is separated from the process of completing the
incomplete houses. The State Attorney’s office is involved in this.
Municipalities and the department have jointly looked at ways to secure
funding to complete the affected projects.

The CHAIRPPERSON OF THE NCOP: I am afraid your speaking time has expired,
MEC.

Mr J F VAN WYK (Northern Cape): Thank you very much, Chairperson.

Ms N P MAGWAZA (Western Cape): Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, I
am not the chairperson of the housing committee. I am standing in for the
MEC for local governance and housing in our province, but I am the
chairperson of community development.

The struggle is far from over. The struggle continues, more particularly to
get our people housed, to give them back their dignity and to put an end to
homelessness. We are motivated to continue with this struggle when we
improve on our achievements year after year, particularly in the Western
Cape, where we inherited a housing backlog from the past inhuman
government.

Our province currently has a housing backlog of 360 000 houses. In the City
of Cape Town alone, we have a backlog of 260 000 houses. Our housing budget
enables us to deliver 16 000 houses per year, and 18 000 serviced sites.

This clearly demands innovative ideas. In relation to that, we view
partnerships as the way to go. We are calling the private sector to the
party, and so far tremendous progress has been made.

Let me just state that we cannot ask for partnerships if we are unable to
spend what is allocated to us. We first have to spend what is allocated to
us and then continue with the negotiations to lead us into partnerships.

The department of local government and housing in the Western Cape has
achieved a 100% expenditure of the housing conditional grants allocated to
it. This includes the R77 million rolled over from the 2004-05 financial
year, and the R456 million allocated to the 2005-06 financial year. Over
and above these amounts, various provincial departments contributed funds
for human settlement, given the urgency of the needs in our province. In
fact, the department of local government and housing in the Western Cape
has spent 107% of the funds allocated to it. With this kind of a scenario,
we are able to present a formidable case to all potential partners.

Coming to the upgrading of the informal settlement programme, we have
people who are living in very appalling conditions. Their hope is that the
government will intervene, improve and totally change their miserable
living conditions.

The Upgrading of Informal Settlement Programme as well as the Emergency
Housing Programme, the EHP - I will refer to it later - are our instruments
to bring relief. The UISP is a programme that delivers services to the
families in informal settlements on a phased basis. Provision of basic
services brings relief to many families, and is followed by the provision
of a higher level of services and, finally, to structures.

A total of 16 projects worth R366 million have been approved as part of the
UISP, and many of these will be financed over more than one financial year.
In the City of Cape Town, some of these projects are at Enkanini,
Silvertown, Khayelitsha, and Wallacedene in Kraaifontein. Some of the other
projects are Knysna Vision 2002, Bossiesgif in Plettenberg Bay, and
Asazani/Zinyoka in Mossel Bay.

Regarding the Emergency Housing Programme, this programme provides
temporary assistance in the form of secure access to land, basic services
or shelter in cases of exceptional housing need. Municipalities use the EHP
to bring relief to communities devastated by shack fires, by issuing
emergency starter kits consisting of corrugated iron sheets, wood, a
doorframe and a window, nails and hinges, and PVC sheeting. Although it
cannot be regarded as adequate housing, it has at least brought immediate
relief to those in despair.

A total of 29 projects to the value of R200 million have been approved.
These projects have included the provision of emergency housing to people
living within a rail reserve in Khayelitsha, and the relocation and
provision of basic services to 413 households in Clanwilliam, to 2 000
households in Grabouw and to 800 households in Middelpos, Saldanha Bay.
Over 25 000 households will be benefiting from such emergency assistance.

Regarding the provision of basic sanitation, we may be talking about the
eradication of the bucket system, but the department of local government
and housing in my province is saying that the problem is actually more than
that.

For example, those of us who sometimes use the N2 to Somerset West, or any
other area beyond Khayelitsha, will notice that there are people from Site
C who relieve themselves along the N2. Clearly these people do not even
have the bucket system. The people from Site C might just be an example,
and they may just be the tip of the iceberg.

The MEC of housing, the hon Richard Dyantyi, has commissioned a detailed
study of the sanitation backlog in the province, so that he can be in a
position to develop a systematic plan to provide basic sanitation for all
by 2010. The study is being guided by a steering committee comprising the
department of local government, the department of water affairs and
forestry, and the department of agriculture. The final report will be
available in September 2006.

What we cannot afford to do is to wait for the report with arms folded. The
local government and housing department of the Western Cape is driving a
bucket eradication programme, in the Project Consolidate municipalities of
Theewaterskloof, Kannaland and Cedarberg. Our projects in Bonnievale and De
Doorns form part of these initiatives.

In partnership with the Development Bank of Southern Africa, we will make
technical expertise available in municipalities for this programme. The MEC
has also urged all municipalities to make use of their municipal
infrastructure grant, grant allocation and own funding to extend basic
sanitation in their areas.

Altogether, R6,9 million of special MIG funding was allocated for basic
sanitation for 2005-06. Drakenstein, Hessequa, and Bitou have already spent
100% of this funding, and Stellenbosch, Theewaterskloof, Oudtshoorn and
Knysna are making good progress.

A special MIG allocation for basic sanitation is again being made available
for 2006-07, and R14 million will be allocated, as follows: to the
municipalities of Matzikama, R2,7 million; the West Coast District
Municipality, R2,4 million; Overstrand, R1,1 million; Kannaland, R2,3
million; Mossel Bay, R2,2 million, and Eden District, R3,8 million.

This focus on basic sanitation is in addition to the provision of 18 412
serviced sites across the province, all of which have been at an acceptable
level of sanitation.

About the implementation of the new human settlement approach, the backlog
that I spoke about earlier on has indicated to us that we need to chase
numbers.

This has led to some unintended consequences. We have sometimes overlooked
quality in favour of quantity, and we have built houses on land that is
easily available but far from economic opportunities. We have done well to
deliver so much in such a short space of time, but we must do better. We
must move beyond the brick, and create integrated and sustainable
communities.

The Breaking New Ground policy unveiled last year tells us how we can do
better. We must do things differently; our communities need to be located
close to economic opportunities. We can no longer tolerate urban sprawl,
which is financially and ecologically unsustainable, and we need to densify
our settlements. Our settlements must be neighbourhoods which include
recreational, educational, health and social facilities in an effort to
practically implement the Breaking New Ground policy.

The department embarked on a broad stakeholder consultation process that
culminated in the hosting of a successful Sustainable Human Settlement
Summit on 24 and 25 November 2005 in Stellenbosch. The key message was
``Beyond the brick: From inspiration to implementation’’, which is also the
theme of this speech.

The provincial Human Settlement Strategy has evolved throughout this
consultation process. It will be finalised in June and will be rolled out
in the province. I thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Hon members, I want to recognise
the hon Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Housing, the hon Zoë
Kota, in the gallery.

Mr M A MZIZI: Sihlalo noNgqongqoshe kanye noNgqongqoshe bezifundazwe
isandla sedlula ikhanda. Okumhlophe kodwa. [Chairperson, Ministers and
provincial ministers, I greet you all.]

Chairperson, it is possible to go without many things in this life; but you
cannot go without a place to sleep. Ungakweswela konke kodwa hhayi indawo
yokulala. [You can go without many things, but you can’t go without
shelter.]

It is important to look at the 2006-07 housing budget with a sharp eye. The
budget amounts to R6,8 billion. We know what we inherited from the previous
government. Akudingi ukuchazwa lokho. [That does not need to be explained.]
We have a backlog of about 2,4 million houses. Kungenxa yaleziyazinto
ezazikhona kodwa ... [It is because of those things that existed ... ]

The critical and burning issues are the following: Shacks, back yard shacks
and informal settlement shacks. These problems are increasing. An
additional factor to that is unemployment that puts  pressure on household
income and land.

When detailing these issues, we don’t just want to make critical
statements. We need to work together to make sure that our people benefit.
The question of the Prevention of Illegal Eviction from Unlawful Occupation
of Land Act arises. We should take cognisance of the fact that many RDP
houses are also illegally occupied.

Other things are developers who build structures that are not suitable for
the needs of the owner and then disappear into thin air without finishing
that dwelling. We support the People’s Housing Process and feel that it
should be used to address these shortcomings.

Ngqongqoshe, ngikusho lokhu ngesimo esikhona. Uma ungaya laphaya – ngoba
ngizwile umfowethu uTau laphayana, bathi aBesuthu: “Mmetla kgola o lebisa
ho wa habo" – uma ungaya laphayana eMagagula High, isimo lapho asisihle
ngoba abakhi babaleka nezimali. Kukhonjwa izindlu nje ukuthi zakhiwe
laphaya kodwa yisiganga. Akukho sizinda, akukho lutho nje. Kwaze kwagcina
sesiya enkantolo nalowo owayakha lapho engingeke ngimusho ngegama ngoba
phela igama lomuntu liyadula, kodwa-ke isimo asisihle.

Okunye kule mizuzwana esasele, Ngqongqoshe, yindaba yamahostela. Ihamba
ngonyawo lonwabu ngoba phela kuthiwa ayalungiswa. Kwaqhamuka igama
elalilibi lapha okwakuthiwa kwakhiwa imizi ezohlala imindeni. Zagxuma
izinsizwa zabheka phezulu zathi, “Sinemizi emakhaya senifuna ukusiganisa
lapha Mzizi? Asizikuganwa lapha.” Selishintshiwe-ke lelo gama. Sengathi-ke
kungashesha okwenzeka laphayana emahostela ngoba, Ngqongqoshe, emahostela
kuhlala obaba nomama nezingane.

Uma uya ngasezindlini zangasese-ke, akukho zindlu zangasese ezingcono.
Zihlala zonke nje lapho emhomeni wesitimela. Awu bakithi, yihlazo lelo
ngoba phela sibadala uma singaka, asifuni ukukubona lokhu kwenzeka.
Sengathi kungashesha nalokho, Ngqongqoshe kwamahostela kwakhiwe lezo
zindlu. Abantu bayezwisisa kanti abanye abezwisisi kodwa-ke sengathi manje
abantu kufanele bafundiswe futhi batshelwe ukuthi benzeni. Uma kungase
kufezeke lokho, i-IFP iyaseseka lesi sabiwomali. Ngiyabonga. Ihlombe.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[I am saying that because of the prevailing situation. If you go to – I
heard by brother Tau say that the Sothos say: Mmetla kgola o lebisa ho wa
habo [Blood is thicker than water] - Magagula High, the situation is not
good, because contractors just disappeared with funds. They said houses
were built but there are only open spaces. There is no infrastructure,
barely anything. We ended up going to court with the person who was doing
the construction work. I won’t mention the name as it’s confidential. All
in all, the situation is not good.

In the few minutes that are left, Minister, I would like to touch on the
issue of hostels. Renovations are going at a snail’s pace. We came up with
the wrong concept, saying we are building family houses. People were
shocked and they said: “We have homes in rural areas, do you want us to get
married here, Mzizi? We are not going to get married here.” We have since
changed that concept. The renovation of hostels should be accelerated,
because hostels accommodate men, women and children.

With regard to toilets, there are no proper toilets. They all live in a
train coach. This is a disgrace, because we are old. We don’t want to
witness these things happening. That must be accelerated also. Houses must
also be built. Some people understand and others don’t. However, people
must be educated and informed what to do. That must be achieved. The IFP
supports this budget. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Hon Chair, hon Minister, hon members of the House, much
progress has been made in the delivery of new houses, provision of site and
subsidy allocation. The Human Settlement Framework is a step in the right
direction.

Having said this, I want to focus on some of glaring bottlenecks or issues
in the housing sector. And I’m happy to have heard from the Minister that
the back yard dwellers and integrated housing waiting lists have been
sorted out as that has caused a lot of friction here; political parties
have used people as footballs and we are happy that that is settled.

Service site availability and the time it takes to make land available is
tedious. There needs to be more intergovernmental co-ordination in this
process. Often it is paper being shifted from city to province and back
again; and never-ending committee meetings makes for an inefficient
process. Sites should have a co-ordinator and stores.

I want to focus here on the Western Cape and I want to use that figure of
350 000 houses in backlog and our only being able to build 16 000 houses
and having 18 000 sites. So, it tells us that we will never get there if we
are just going to build houses. It might be that “site and service” is the
way we need to go because our people are able and willing to do this. All
they need is the site, a serviced site, stores, and co-ordination that
might help them. We have heard of other women who are getting on and we
have seen that before and we could have adequate materials swiftly where
people make their own building blocks and so forth.

So, I want to suggest the major way we need to go in the future and also
that we give houses to people who cannot afford or do not have good or
solid jobs. The banks have come and bought these houses for a song or just
taken them back. So, that might find us the way to go.

Once again I must congratulate the Minister on the efforts in bringing
banks on board to meet challenges set in the Financial Sector Charter
regarding affordable low-cost housing. However, we require affordable inner-
city housing to change a tenant mix, as presently only luxury apartment-
style complexes have been built, especially in Cape Town. More interaction
is required between provinces, with the Cape Town City Improvement District
to identify sites in the city for affordable housing. The slow pace of
development in District Six is a worrying concern.

The People’s Housing Process is an important policy delivery tool, but it
must be supported by good technical assistance and perhaps a new funding
mechanism is required to subsidise this process.

Hon Minister, through my nationwide travels, I have often seen the same
large contractors working on housing development. The tender processes for
building houses must accommodate more emerging contractors. We support the
Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr K PANDAY (KwaZulu-Natal): Madam Chair, thank you very much for the
opportunity to speak in this debate this afternoon and I wish also to thank
the hon Minister for her presentation of the budget. Man needs a roof over
his head in order to survive; that is a fact. Man has to be housed in
accordance with our Constitution; that is a fact. Government has to provide
housing; that is a fact. Although we are building houses, are we building
enough? That is the question.
Whatever the reasons for not meeting our housing needs, the homeless are
suffering. What do we do? Look at models in the rest of the world and see
if we can fast-track housing. That is one of the possible ways.

As a further suggestion, we should encourage more self-help schemes; or we
should go on a massive production year, called 2006-07, from June to June,
a housing year or a year of housing. Let us open the floodgates, identify
housing land, develop sites, get every contractor – the emphasis is on
“every”, big or small - negotiate the best prices for building materials,
and start delivery of houses on a massive scale. The whole of South Africa
must be abuzz with the construction of houses.

Madam Minister, if we don’t adopt some drastic, innovative and creative
ideas, we will, year in and year out, take stock of our role, and every
year without fail we will realise that we are not achieving enough. We have
the will. We have the capacity. We have the ability. We will have to
translate these into action with vigour and speed. Lest I be misunderstood,
delivery is taking place but we require a boom, some kind of acceleration.

In the remaining time available to me I wish to dwell on our experiences in
the kingdom. KwaZulu-Natal is the most populous province in South Africa,
with the highest rural unemployment rate, at approximately 40%. The
topography is an additional financial burden. In Breaking New Ground, rural
housing has been given priority, and slum clearance is a very high priority
at the moment.

Whilst national government has been very sympathetic to our commitment to
providing housing and addressing the backlogs - taking into account that
the slum clearance, Breaking New Ground and the trend towards local
authorities taking over responsibilities - our budget is insufficient.

Madam Minister, our province is not getting an equitable share. More money
is needed in KwaZulu-Natal. Whilst the R1,048 billion that you have
announced a little while ago is appreciated, we need more; even more than
the current highest amount of R1,7 billion given to another province.
Remember that KwaZulu-Natal has the highest population. As a province we
need to become more involved in the production of houses, and not just act
as a mere funding agent. And national government has to help to improve the
monitoring process of the implementing agents.

Of further statistical concern is the age dimension. KwaZulu-Natal’s
youthful population of approximately 50% and the implication of the age
dimension imply that the province will have to identify programmes that
will address the needs of the youth population. KwaZulu-Natal is also noted
for a high number of child-headed households, partly due to the prevalence
of HIV and Aids.

In addition to our responsibilities, there is the demand for aid in terms
of homes for orphans. We therefore appeal, from a provincial level, that
there should be constructive communication between national and provincial
governments to fast-track housing delivery. Posterity will record and
recognise the role played by the current legislators, and it will
appreciate our real commitment and praise us for what we have done for
generations to come. I thank you. [Applause.]

Njingalwazi J MAPHALALA (KwaZulu-Natal): Sihlalo ohloniphekile, kuyinjabulo
futhi ukukhuluma namhlanje ngosuku lwase-Afrika olwenza ukuthi uma sibheka
emuva sizizwe sibancane kakhulu uma sibona osekwenzekile. Okokuqala,
mangisho ukuthi igama lokuthi abantu bakhelwe izindlu, igama mhlawumbe
okudingeka lishintshwe kuthiwe abantu abakhelwe imizi khona izingqondo
zethu nezingqondo zabantu zizokwazi ukuma esimweni ngoba ngokwakithi umuntu
akakhelwa indlu. Uye asho athi, “Ngakha umuzi – nansi indlu yami”. Manje-ke
sisuke sathatha indlela okungesiyo eyethu sathi abantu abakhlewe izindlu.
Ngeke leyonto siyigcine. Umuntu wakhelwa umuzi bese-ke ehlonipheka
engqondweni yakhe ukuthi wakhelwa umuzi, nanku nje. Okokuqala lokho
Ngqongqoshe okubalulekile.

Kuliqiniso ukuthi kuningi osekwenziwe ukwakhela abantu bakithi izindlu
kodwa-ke igama kufanele lishinstwe. Kuningi okufanele kushintshwe
ikakhulukazi isakhiwo sezindlu akusiso esalapha e-Africa, isakhiwo
sokufika. Esalapha e-Africa izindlu zesintu okuthiwa orondo. Mababe khona
orondo noma ngingasho ukuthi yibo bodwa kodwa baxube. Singalahli konke
okwakithi sithathe okokuhamba size sijwayele khona bese singazazi ukuthi
thina singobani. Kubalulekile ukuthi kube khona ukuxuba ezakhiweni. Izazi
zokwakha mazixube khona sizokwazi nathi ukuziqhenya.

Sikhuluma manje ngokuzalwa kwe-Afrika. Uma ngabe sithi i-Afrika ayizalwe
sisho nje ngomlomo kungabonakali izimpawu, sizogcina singamalulwane. Makube
khona ukuxuba ngoba ukuphela korondo ukuphela kwamathempeli akithi. Urondo
lona yithempeli lakithi lapho sishisa khona impepho, sibasa khona futhi
sibeke konke okwakithi. Ukuphela korondo kuyinto nje esuka lena
emalokishini kwakhiwa izindlu ngoba kuqedwa yona inkolo yakithi.

Kubalulekile ukuthi singalubhekeli phansi udaba lokuphela korondo uma
sihlaba ngoba sisahlaba. Baningi kakhulu abangesiwo amakholwa ngokwenkolo
yasentshonalanga abafaka izimpondo zezimbuzi, bahlabe babuye bakhulume
ekuhambeni kodwa lokho kwenzelwa korondo. Ngakho-ke makube khona ukuxuba
impela kakhulu. Akusho ukuthi sikubukela phansi osekwenzekile.
Kuyakhinyabeza kakhulu ukuthi kungabikhona. Okubaluleke kakhulu,
Ngqongqoshe, esikubongayo okuvelile enkulumweni yakho imali lena eyizigi
eziyi-185 zamaRandi ezinikezwe enhlanganweni i-Urban Poor Federation ukuze
abantu bazakhele bona izindlu. Kubalulekile lokho.

Umuntu umuzi wakhe wayezakhela wona awuthande futhi awubheke ukuthi ube
khona kodwa-ke uNgqongqoshe angalahli futhi ayekele abantu bakithi,
balambile. Leyo mali izodliwa yizingwenya. Kuningi okwenzekile
njengokubakhona kohlelo lwe-RDP kodwa imali yabantu yadliwa yizingwenya.
Kufanele uma kuphuma imali ilandelelwe futhi ibhekwe ukuthi bayisebenza
ngakho yini. Lowo oyikhiphile ababheke kuze kuyofika esentini lokugcina
ukuthi bayayisebenzisa yini ngoba baningi abantu asebengamaqili.

Yinto ebaluleke kakhulu lena evela enkulumeni yakho ukuthi izigidi ezingaka
zinikezwe abantu ukuze kuphume izindlu eziyi-5000 ezingakhiwa. Nokho
kufanele abe khona obhekayo ukuthi zakhiwa ngempela yini futhi abantu
babekwe esimweni ngoba uhulumeni uma engalamuli, ngeke kwenzeke lutho.

Kuke kwathiwa akukhulunywe ulimi lomdabu, kwaliwa eLimpopo abantu bengafuni
ukuya olimini lwabo. Balwa kwasuka umsindo. Hhayi ukuthi kufundiswe ngalo,
belwela nje ukuthi alufuneki nje ezinganeni zabo. Kwasuka umsindo kwathi
abanye bacishe baboshwa. Ngakho uhulumeni kufanele alamule ukuze sibuyele
kahle ezintweni zakithi zase-Afrika - ibuyile futhi izalwe kabusha.
Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Prof J MAPHALALA (KwaZulu-Natal): Hon Chairperson, it is a pleasure for  me
today to speak on Africa Day, which makes us feel small if we look  back  at
what we have achieved. Firstly, Minister, let me say that maybe the  concept
of saying we are building houses for people should be changed  and  referred
to as building homes for people. In our African culture, you don’t  build  a
house for a person. You normally say:  “I  built  a  home  and  this  is  my
house.” We have adopted a culture  that  is  not  ours  if  we  say  we  are
building houses for people. We can’t sustain that. You build a  home  for  a
person and he is respected. That is the first thing, Minister.

It is true that a lot has been done in terms of building houses for the
people. However, the concept must be changed. There are a lot of things
that must be changed, particularly the structure, which is not African,
it’s imported. The African structure is the traditional rondavel. We must
have rondavels, and not only rondavels, but mixed styles. We must not
forget our own things and adopt others’, then get used to it and end up
forgetting who we are. It is important to have a mixture in construction.
Construction experts should mix the type of houses so that we can also be
proud of ourselves.

We are talking about the African Renaissance. When we talk about the
rebirth of Africa, and we only talk about it, and there are no signs, we
will end up being stupid, like bats. They must mix houses because the
disappearance of rondavels is the destruction of our temples. The rondavel
is the place where we burn impepho [incense], make fire and keep our
traditional things. Its destruction is something that emanate from
townships, where they build houses to destroy our culture.
It is important not to overlook the issue of rondavels if we are still
practicing slaughtering because we are still practising it. There are lot
of people who are not Christians in the tradition of the Western culture.
They hang up goat’s horns, slaughter animals and appease the ancestors. All
that is done in rondavels. Therefore, houses must be mixed. We are not
undermining what has been done. What is important, Minister, and we are
grateful for that, is that in your speech you allocated R185 million to the
Urban Poor Fund so that people can build houses themselves. That is very
important.

A person used to build a house for himself, and take care of it. However,
the Minister must not abandon people, they are hungry. The criminals will
use that money. A lot has happened, like the RDP, but the money was used by
criminals. If the funds are allocated, whether they are used properly must
be monitored. The person who allocated the funds must monitor its usage
down to the last cent, because there are a lot of crooks today.

What you said in your speech is very important, the allocation of millions
of rands to people so that they can build the equivalent of 5 000 houses.
However, we must have a person who is in charge and sees to it that houses
are built and people are monitored, because if the government does not
intervene, that won’t happen.

It was said that we must speak indigenous languages, but they fought in
Limpopo; they don’t want to use their language. They don’t want indigenous
languages to be used by their children. There was tension and some were
nearly arrested. The government must intervene so that we will be able to
go back to our African culture. Africa is back. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Ms N MOKONYANE (Gauteng): Hon Minister, members of the NCOP, distinguished
guests, I would like to give a few responses to some of the issues that
have been raised before I come to my response to the budget. These concern
the issues that have been raised by the chairperson, in that provinces need
to spend 100% or more.

I think provinces will strive towards spending 100% and nothing more,
because in terms of the Public Finance Management Act we are not expected
to spend more than we have. [Laughter.] We also understand that if you have
a rand, you always make sure that you don’t dispose of that entire rand.
You must leave a few cents so that your account can remain open.
[Laughter.]

Therefore there has to be an appreciation that whilst we are given the
money, we can’t - and it would be very incorrect and questionable - spend
100% of what has been allocated. We should strive towards making sure that
we spend it on what it has been budgeted for.

I do agree with you, hon member Mzizi, on the issues facing hostels. I
think the major challenges facing us with regard to the hostels are the
subsidy policy for hostel upgrades and our being able to develop an
integrated policy on affordable rental accommodation.

On the issue that has been raised by the member of the DA on the decline of
the number of houses that have been built, I think there also has to be an
appreciation that we have moved from the previous policies in terms of
housing development to the inclusion of provision of security of tenure.
Therefore, when you look at what has been spent in terms of the housing
budget, you also need to look at what the housing budget has funded in
terms of the installation of essential services, the servicing of sites and
the transfer of land ownership.

In Gauteng one can indicate proudly that as we speak here today, over and
above the top structures that have been built, we can also account for 120
000 serviced sites, having used the housing subsidy, precisely because we
have come to realise that a one-size-fits-all approach will not assist us
in dealing with the challenges of housing and the provision of shelter.

Hon Minister, it is an honour for me to be part of this debate in response
to what you have presented to the House as the programme of delivery for
government. This presentation and debate come after a long consultation
between national, provincial and local government on how best to address
the challenges of housing facing the nation based on a common approach.
Since we subscribe to and believe in the principles of participatory
democracy and a people-centred development approach, we always make it our
business to engage with the masses so that our policies and strategies are
a result of such meaningful engagements. Consequently, we have come to
understand that the task of building sustainable and viable communities in
this country requires a concerted effort by all sectors of our society.

In as much as it is the responsibility of government to create conducive
conditions and implement programmes geared at improving people’s lives, it
is equally important for the private capital sector to inject resources
required to achieve our national goals. The striking reality is that our
endeavours to push back the frontiers of poverty and radically decrease the
rate of unemployment will not be adequately attained if all the critical
components of our economy are not in sync with our national transformation
agenda.

Needless to say, housing still remains one of the fundamental conditions
that we need to satisfy in our quest for a better life for all. As a
result, we as the Gauteng housing department have developed strategies and
policies that attempt to promote, firstly, the building of sustainable
communities through diversified housing typologies on well-located land;
secondly, the provision of security of tenure through the eradication of
informal settlements using the very housing subsidy; and, lastly, the
provision of affordable rental accommodation, amongst other things the
hostel renovation programme.

Being the smallest province geographically in South Africa, Gauteng remains
the beacon of hope for many impoverished people in this country, if not
across the continent. The population numbers in Gauteng have increased
astronomically, from 7,3 million in 1996 to 8,8 million in 2001. It is
estimated that 62% of this population earn less than R3 500 per month.

This situation presents a number of challenges and anomalies for the
provincial government. On the housing front, we are faced with the
challenge of an increase in informal households, which is currently
estimated at 870 246 households. Basically, this means that the province
has seen an increase in informal households from 24,98% in 1996 to 27,68%
in 2001.

Such an increase has adverse ramifications for infrastructural development
in Gauteng. Also, the majority of the people referred to are not
necessarily people who prefer Gauteng as their home, but they are people
who have come to Gauteng for various other reasons, and they have come from
different provinces and from different parts of our continent.

The housing demand, as a result, has increased from 32,6% in 1996 to 35,3%
in 2001. Compounding this situation is the fact that the migration of
households to Gauteng is estimated at 25 500 per annum. This has an impact
on the housing demand database, something that has always been referred to
as a waiting list backlog which is estimated at 52 500 households per
annum.

Considering this situation within this context, it transpires that the
appropriation grant allocated to Gauteng needs to be realistically reviewed
so that the challenges can be adequately addressed. It may be reflected as
a whopping R1,7 billion, but this may not necessarily satisfy the targets
to deal with the backlog and the needs. For instance, the current funding
accommodates the delivery of 49 500 housing units annually. In terms of our
projection, this will lead to an increased housing backlog of 765 000 units
by 2020.

In conclusion, one of the other things that we need to appreciate is that
Gauteng has not just depended on the allocation from national government.
We have also created our own innovative ways of generating funds and
promoting partnerships through the Gauteng Partnership Fund in terms of
which we’re working together with the private sector and financial
institutions.

We have also made the issue of housing development a key component of the
Gauteng Growth and Development Strategy, and have considered innovative
ideas, including the introduction of alternative technology in terms of
housing development.
Yes, if anything, we would have said that we needed more money so that we
could deliver, but what we want to urge our people and beneficiaries in
Gauteng to do is to give us an opportunity and let’s utilise what is at our
disposal. Let’s make sure that this has a greater impact on housing
delivery and on improving quality of life. By working together, let’s then
move forward and seek additional resources as we improve our own capacity.

This is not a question of accreditation. It is not an issue of who must
actually deliver, but it is about proper planning, better co-ordination,
better partnerships, better communication and, more importantly, always
conveying a message of hope and not a message of disgruntlement and
discouragement because no one has done what we have with so few resources
and the pressures that we have had. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr F ADAMS: Hon Chairperson, Minister, MECs, members, officials, in his
state of the nation address of 2006, our President, the hon Mr Thabo Mbeki,
drew the nation’s attention to the hope that is abundant and growing in our
country. I quote:

   ... that our people are firmly convinced that our country has entered its
   age of hope. They are convinced that we have created the conditions to
   achieve more rapid progress towards the realisation of their dreams. They
   are certain that we are indeed a winning nation.
Today, as we debate the Housing Budget Vote, and from what we have heard
from the Minister and the department, we can confirm that in our country we
have seen a strong emergence of hope; a hope made ever more heroic given
the great battles we fight on a daily basis against our inheritance from
the past divisions and alienation that persist into the present. Out of all
this, the heroes of hope are those who steadfastly consolidated in the 1956
Women’s March in Pretoria.

The role of women was a central player of our liberation, which also helped
finally to place the task of the emancipation of women as one of the
central tasks of the national democratic revolution. [Interjections.]

HON MEMBERS: Amandla! [Power!

Mr F ADAMS: The heroes of hope are those who formally adopted the Freedom
Charter at the 1956 national conference of the ANC, finalising the process
of providing a truly mass base for the popular acceptance of the Charter.
Those heroes, at the Soweto uprising 30 years ago, entrenched their role,
as the youth, to be one of the motive forces of the national democratic
revolution and made it inevitable that this revolution should define youth
empowerment and development as one of its fundamental tasks.

It is therefore correct that the best way to celebrate and commemorate the
struggles of our women and youth is to prioritise delivery to them. Thank
you to you, Minister, and your department for doing this.

Section 26 of the SA Constitution states that: “Everyone has the right to
have access to adequate housing”, hon Krumbock, and “The state must take
reasonable legislative and other measures, within its available resources,
to achieve the progressive realisation of this right.”

As the achievements of this department have been highlighted today by the
hon Minister in her Budget Vote speech, we clearly witnessed the progress
this democratic ANC-led government has made in the realisation of its
obligations, coupled with the magnitude and likely continuing increase in
the housing backlog. As we celebrate the 10th anniversary of our
Constitution, let us be motivated by the fact that South Africa, as a
democratic country, is a government based on the will of all the people and
has a Constitution which is among the best in the world, as well as being a
caring government with housing programmes for the poorest of the poor.

It is clear that the principles underlying the ANC’s housing policy, namely
that housing is a right, housing should contribute to social equity, and
housing is a critical component of development, community control over and
participation in the housing delivery process is of the utmost importance
in reaching our targets in delivering housing to the people.

The ANC housing policy is more than the delivery of a product; it is a
process that contributes to the cultural, economic and social developments
of the entire society and is therefore part of our strategy to improve
people’s total living conditions.

The ANC recognises that housing is a significant part of our economic
development strategy, and that the resources devoted to the provision of
housing will have to be consistent with the need to maintain macroeconomic
balances. Housing investment is implemented in such a way that it promotes
labour-based delivery in the context of acceptable labour practices, and
improves the capacity of small and medium-sized builders in the delivery of
houses.

I believe that the provision of housing is taking place within a total
developmental framework, which will facilitate the restructuring of the
apartheid cities, townships, towns and rural areas. It is clear that the
housing strategy is based on sustainability in the short, and medium to
long term. This does not mean that we do not have challenges. This
government knows that grinding poverty defines the lives of many of us, as
evidenced in the sprawling informal settlements.

This government knows that mothers are desperate to find an end to tik and
other drugs that have transformed their families and homes in front of
their eyes. No one knows more about the impact of trauma in our communities
resulting from alcohol and manifesting itself in acts of violence inside
and outside the household. Minister, on the Cape Flats druglords are taking
control of RDP houses to further enhance the sale of their drugs. We need
to stop that.

The age of hope provides us with the best opportunity in South Africa to
make a decisive shift towards prosperity. Every lesson we have learned in
our first decade of freedom has placed us on the threshold of prosperity.
We have learned crucial lessons about how to reverse the legacies of the
past and to navigate a sustainable pathway to a prosperous future in the
intensely interconnected world of the 21st century. The people of the
country have learned to trust the ANC to run this country with its modern
economy, also to deepen a culture of democracy and human rights, as well as
how the machinery of the state can begin to serve the majority without
bankrupting the fiscus or isolating the economy.

Earlier in the week the hon leader of the DA went on a campaign trail,
promising people a lot of things. Firstly, he said that the housing waiting
list must be a consolidated one, but who came up with the initiative? It
was the hon Minister and her department, not the DA. It is misleading the
people, saying here that a consolidated housing waiting list must be
formed. [Applause.] [Interjections.] If you read the policy documents of
the ANC; I think we must provide the hon Krumbock with them and one day
just tie him up in a room and let hi m study the policy documents of the
ANC. I think we will provide him with coke, and some biscuits too, so that
he can listen and learn. [Interjections.]

The battle plan against poverty and underdevelopment must be safe, healthy,
integrated communities, and the facilitation of strong civic rights. We
must similarly trust in the ability of the Constitution to carve out a home
for all South Africans. You do not have to be white and you do not have to
be black; you must simply be what God has ordained you to be.

The hon Leon, again, on his journey ... op sy reistog op soek na stemme sê
hy dat 70% van die “Gateway” vir plakkers is – vir Joe Slovo – en 30% vir
“back yard dwellers”. Wat gebeur? Is die man nie besig om rassehaat aan te
wakker? Is die man nie besig om rassespanning aan te wakker, terwyl die ANC
sê dit moet stop nie? Die ANC sê: “You don’t have to be black, you don’t
have to be white; we will provide housing for everybody.” Wat maak die DA?
Hulle kom net aan die bewind, Minister, dan sny hulle mense se water af,
asook krag. [Tussenwerpsels.] Hulle het net aan die bewind gekom.

Wat is volgende, Minister? Dit gaan weer soos in 2000 gebeur, Minister.
Hier sê 'n vrou, en ek haal aan: “Die DA weet hoe Tafelsig in 2000 gebrand
het. Dink hulle die mense daar buite is dom? Nee, glad nie. They are
liberated. Glad nie dom nie.” [Interjections.]  [Applous.]

Wat volgende gaan gebeur, Minister, is dat hulle weer ons mense gaan
uitsit. Volgende gaan hulle weer hardloop om ons mense uit te sit.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[... on his journey in search of votes he said that 70% of the “Gateway”
was for squatters – for Joe Slovo – and 30% for “back yard dwellers”. What
is happening? Is the man not inciting racial hatred? Is the man not
inciting racial tension, while the ANC says that it has to stop? The ANC
says: “You don’t have to be black, you don’t have to be white, we will
provide housing for everybody.” What does the DA do? As soon as they come
into power, Minister, they cut of people’s water and electricity.
[Interjections.] As soon as they came into power.

What is next, Minister? It will be the same as in 2000, Minister. A woman
says here, and I quote: “The DA knows how Tafelsig burnt in 2000. Do they
think that the people out there are stupid? No, not at all. They are
liberated. Not stupid at all.” [Interjections.]  [Applause.]

What is going to happen next, Minister, is that they are going to evict our
people. Next they are going to run yet again to evict our people.]
I want to conclude. Successive generations of ANC leaders have laid down
their lives for this principle, which is the cornerstone of our
Constitution. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: I just want to respond very briefly to some of the
concerns that were raised by members here because I think some of them are
quite valid.

The hon madam chair raised her concern about the co-ordination of the value
chain that is involved in housing and is concerned that we should correct
this and consolidate it so that the subsidy is used for the correct
purposes. I want to assure her that we are dealing with this. We have
started the process and at the next Minmec we will conclude this process.
We are just as concerned as you are.

I just want to understand from the perspective of the NCOP what the
underlying principles are around which we participate in these debates.
Faced with the huge challenge that we are faced with, I cannot understand
why every year the hon Krumbock is concerned with issues which, in my view,
pertain to his personal circumstances. It is about the NHBRC and
developers. Is it possible that he is a developer? I do not know. And, is
this a forum to which people are allowed to bring their personal problems?
I think there is something extremely unethical about this and I would like
you to please rule against it and in future I would like to ask the Chair
to please ensure that this debate is about real issues that face our
people, which is the urgent housing need. [Applause.]

On the issue that has been raised by the hon MEC of the Northern Cape - he
has very eloquently outlined it and it has also very eloquently been
outlined by the MEC from Gauteng - just what it is that we do with the
money that we are given, because I am hearing this refrain from the DA that
we are getting more money to do less. I just want to say to you, that what
... [Interjections.] - Krumbock again – the hon member from Gauteng has
outlined exactly what we are doing. We are not only building houses, but we
are also supplying basic services in line with our programme as we build
houses, and we are using the subsidy for that.

In addition to that, we are also using the subsidy to unblock some of the
projects as the MEC from the Northern Cape has indicated; unblocking
projects that have been blocked which we had found historically blocked.
These are some of the things that we were doing, but in addition - this is
very important, and I want hon Krumbock to understand this - we have
developed a new way of counting the houses that we are dealing with.

In the past we used to count the houses that were complete or were in the
process of being completed as completed houses. Now we have a clear
distinction; we count the houses that are complete at the time we report to
you and the houses that are in the process of completion. Let me give you
the total over the last four to five years. In 2002-2003 we had completed
203 000 houses and in 2003-04 there was a dip, it was 193 000 houses. But
we have completed 252 833 houses to date. Never before have we notched a
number as high as this. [Applause.]

Now, I do not know where the DA goes to learn its mathematics, but it is
plain, simple arithmetic. We are giving more, doing more with the more
money. But, also very importantly, I would like you to understand that
there is another concept - we are getting more for better quality as well.
This is what we are doing with the money that we get. Now please go out and
spread the message as it is, not the kind of convoluted logic that you
bring here.

I want again to urge Comrade Tau that I think you need to hold a workshop
so that hon members here who belong to the DA are actually in line with
what we are doing so that we do not waste too much of our time – I have
already wasted five minutes – dealing with something that is completely
irrelevant. If there were workshops, they would understand what we were
dealing with. [Laughter.]

I want to say to bab’uMzizi – I could not have said it better myself:
“Singakusola konke emhlabeni kodwa hhayi indawo lapho sizobeka khona
ikhanda.” [“You can go without many things, but you can’t go without
shelter.”]

I do not know how we can encapsulate this in some of the messages that we
are sending out. Thank you very much for this. I am also very glad that you
are now saying to me that the people who are in the hostels have begun to
change their mind about bringing their women home.

Ngiyathokoza bab’ uMzizi ngoba nami ngingumama nje ngingathanda ukuthi
omama bahlale nobaba ezindlini zabo. [I am happy, Mr Mzizi, because I, as a
woman, would like to see women staying in houses with their husbands.]

If only we can bring you on board so that we send this message out for we
do not want to live in a situation where we have fragmented families
because we would be creating another problem. But if we can take you on
board to send this message, we are only doing it in the interest of the
national good. Thank you very much for your support and I am certain we can
bring you on board to deal with this thing.

Baba uMzizi, ukuhamba konwabu [moving at a chameleon’s speed], ... is not
the kind of language that I thought is associated with this regime. Now
that you have said that to us, we are going to show you that in fact we are
walking at a rabbit's speed. [Laughter.]

On the issue of shoddy workmanship that has been raised here by several
speakers, please be assured that we are just as concerned as you are about
this and we are doing something about it. In future, baba uMzizi, you will
be able to stand here and mention the name of a culprit in public because
by that time we shall have blacklisted him. We are doing something to
ensure that we deal with this matter. I do know that this was raised by a
number of people here.

I have also taken note of the advice on how we can do things better and
faster, which was said by the special representative from KwaZulu-Natal,
baba uMagwaza and hon Hendrickse. I am glad too that two of my MECs are
here and they have taken this advice. I am sure that in the next Minmec we
will take this on board.

With regard to the Aids orphans’ homes, hon member, we are considering
this. It is becoming a huge problem. We have to consider this against the
backdrop of the fact that we as Africans are uncomfortable with the concept
of orphanages and now we are faced with a problem and we have to take a
decision. At the next Minmec we will be dealing with this matter. Thank you
for bringing it to our attention.

Baba uMaphalala, I welcome your input on the designs of houses, not because
of izimpondo zegusha [sheep’s horns] but because it is a real problem,
especially in the rural areas. If we go to the rural areas and build the
kinds of houses that we have in the urban areas, then we are destroying the
aesthetics of the rural areas.

What we have just done now is complete a very exciting project with the
NHBRC in Gauteng, where we had a competition on innovation technologies.
The competition was a success and we hope that it will continue, but
perhaps the next phase would be on innovative designs, when perhaps we can
go back and see how we could build rondavels in the rural areas. Perhaps we
can do away with izimpondo [the horns] because I am not sure that they will
be part of the design acceptable in housing, hon magwaza.

Finally, Chairperson, please allow me in the two minutes that is left to
introduce to the NCOP my new director-general, who is very well-known to
you, Benny Kotsoane, who is sitting over there, and my MEC for safety and
security. [Applause.] He is feeling so much at home that he has wandered
off. He was almost seated right in front of you, Chairperson, and he had to
be ushered back to where he is right now.

Also allow me to introduce my ``girlchild come to work’’ who has been here
for two successive days, Sindile Thabethe from UCT.  She hopes one day to
be sitting where MEC Mokonyane is sitting right now. That is her ambition
in life.

Allow me to welcome Yusuf Abramjee of 702, an invaluable ally of ours in
Housing, who together with myself and the Gauteng department has launched a
project in Cosmo City to build 702 houses by December this year.

Members stand invited to the occasion where we will be handing over these
houses dead on time in December. Will the 16th be an ideal date, Mrs
Mokonyane? Yes. Members stand invited. On 16 December we will be handing
over 702 houses. This brings me to a very important point that I want to
make before I sit down. I convey my gratitude to the members of the select
committee that, if 702 can go out and build 702 houses, we here who are
concerned about the plight of our people daily, we can do better.

I would like, through you, Madam Chair, to challenge the NCOP to come out
with us and build houses so that we can turn some of the advice that we
have into concrete reality. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Thank you, hon Minister, for
sharing with us such important information. I also want to thank the two
MECs that are present here and also the representative of the MEC for the
Western Cape. I really do appreciate that, because you have shown that at
least you understand the intergovernmental relations and its importance and
I hope you will also discuss that and encourage your colleagues also to
take part in these debates. I want to thank our special guests in the
gallery and the special delegates from various provinces.

The Council adjourned at 16:13.
                                  ________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1.   Membership of Committees


     1. Ms B A Hogan has been elected as Chairperson of the Standing
        Committee on Auditor-General with effect from 24 May 2006.


     2. Mr V G Smith has been elected as Chairperson of the Ad Hoc
        Committee on Appointment of Auditor-General with effect from 24 May
        2006.


TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


     (a)    A report in terms of section 9(5)(b) of the Magistrates’ Courts
     Act, 1944 (Act No 32 of 1944), a list containing information with
     regard to vacancies in the offices of magistrates which have remained
     unfilled for a continuous period exceeding three months as on 31 March
     2006.


        a) (b)   Proclamation No R67 published in Government Gazette No
           28282 dated 29 November 2006: Commencement of sections 40 and
           62(6) of the Regulation of Interception of Communications and
           Provision of Communication-related Information Act, 2002 (Act No
           70 of 2002): Amendment of Proclamation.

2.    The Minister of Science and Technology


     (a)    The Corporate Strategy of the Department of Science and
        Technology for (2006/7) 2005/6 to 2008/9.

3.    The Minister of Home Affairs


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 4 – Department of Home
         Affairs for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 53-2006].



COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Council of Provinces


1.    Report of the Select Committee on Education and Recreation on United
    Nations Education, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO)
    Convention Against Doping in Sport, dated 24 May 2006:

        The Select Committee on Education and Recreation, having considered
        the request for approval by Parliament of the United Nations
        Education, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) Convention
        Against Doping in Sport, referred to it, recommends that the
        Council, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve
        the said Convention.


    Report to be considered.


