---
title: 'National Assembly - 26 May 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-05-26
---

FRIDAY, 26 MAY 2006
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 9:02.

The House Chairperson Mr Q D M Doidge took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr T D LEE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I intend moving the
following substantive motion:

   That this House expresses its dismay at the undue delay by the National
   Prosecuting Authority in deciding whether to prosecute the MP, hon
   Patricia de Lille, with regard to her acceptance of a substantial
   donation from a person known as “Mr Big” at his home, known as “The House
   on the Prairie”.
I thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, on behalf of the ACDP, I hereby give notice that I
shall move:

   That the House debate the alarming trend of the closing down of Christian
   community radio stations in a country where the most recent census
   identified 79% of South Africans as belonging to one or other Christian
   organisation.


Thank you.




                      LAUREUS AWARD TO MR ERNST VAN DYK


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chair, I move without notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      notes that last Monday, 21 May 2006, Mr Ernest van Dyk, a South
        African from Boland, won the prestigious Laureus Award at the
        Laureus World Sports Academy, otherwise known as the Oscar of the
        sporting world, in Barcelona, Spain;


   (2)      further notes that Mr Van Dyk, a disabled athlete, holds two
        world records and has won the Boston Marathon six times in his
        wheelchair;


   (3)      recalls that Mr Van Dyk became the first ever disabled person to
        qualify for a sports science degree at the University of
        Stellenbosch; and


   (4)      congratulates Mr Van Dyk on winning the Laureus Award, and
        wishes him well in his endeavours.


Agreed to.

                                 TAX RELIEF

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu M R SONTO (ANC): Sihlalo, umbutho wesizwe, i-ANC, uyasamkela
isibhengezo esenziwe nguMphathiswa weZemali, uQabane uTevor Manuel,
sokunika oosomashishini abancinane, kuqukwa noonotekisi, uxolelo
ngokungahlawuli irhafu. Esi sibhengezo siquka wonke usomashishini
osakhulayo ongazange abhalise njengomhlawuli werhafu ngoMatshi wonyaka
ophelileyo. Ukuze uxhamle kwesi sibhengezo, ishishini lakho kufuneka libe
lenza ngaphantsi kwezigidi ezihlanu zeerandi ngonyaka.
Thina singamalungu ombutho wesizwe i-ANC siyabulela, sidomboza, sisithi
abantu bakuthi mabalithathe ngothakazelelo eli thuba livezwe nguMphathiswa,
ngoba intlawulo-rhafu yolu hlobo sibinza ngayo singabemi ekwakhiweni kobomi
obungcono. Ndiyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa member’s
statement follows.)

[Mr M R SONTO (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC welcomes the announcement made by
the Minister of Finance, Comrade Trevor Manuel, to offer tax amnesty to
small businesses including the taxi operators. This also refers to small
businesses that did not register for taxation in March last year. You can
benefit from this announcement if your business profit is less than R5
million a year.

As members of the ANC, we are grateful. We appeal to people to grab this
opportunity unveiled by the Minister, because this kind of tax payment will
contribute towards a better life for all. I thank you. [Applause.]]


                 ABSENCE OF MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R JANKIELSOHN (DA): Chairperson, where is the Minister of Safety and
Security when his country needs him? On Wednesday the Leader of the
Official Opposition, hon Tony Leon, and I visited victims of crime in
Gordon’s Bay.

The family that we visited faced an orgy of violence perpetrated by a gang
of youths on Monday night. This included the bludgeoning to death of an
elderly neighbour with a meat tenderiser, the threatening of the family
with knives and the rape of a pregnant woman.

Fifty-one people are murdered every day in South Africa and their families
should rightly ask, where is the Minister? Our women and children are being
raped and should rightly ask: Where is the Minister?

Our citizens are being thrown off trains and we should ask: Where is the
Minister? People are being tortured by criminals and should rightly ask:
Where is the Minister? Is the Minister responsible for our safety in
Kampala, Bujumbura, in his office in Pretoria, not in Parliament? The
problem is that nobody knows.

While government is failing in its primary responsibility of protecting its
citizens, no one in government is seen to be taking responsibility for
this.

The President should immediately relieve the Minister of Safety and
Security from all additional responsibilities, especially those abroad, and
ensure that he is on our streets carrying out his primary responsibility,
which is to ensure the safety of security of all South Africans. Thank you,
Chairperson.

                     ELECTRICITY SUPPLY IN WESTERN CAPE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S A SEATON (IFP): Chairperson, it is common knowledge that the Western
Cape has just entered a very risky period for secure and uninterrupted
electricity supply. With only one reactor at Koeberg operating and the
demands for electricity increasing, as it gets colder, the Western Cape
could be soon subject to power cuts or so-called load-shedding by Eskom.

Eskom has launched a number of projects to manage demand within the
capacity of the current generation ability. This is laudable and we support
such demand site management measures. One of these measures allows owners
of two-plate electric stoves to swap them for two-burner gas stoves. Many
people have already taken up this offer and it appears that the project is
very successful.

However, it is with some dismay that we have learned that gas suppliers are
unscrupulously increasing the price of gas to gain windfall profits in the
short term. In our view this is nothing short of exploitation for personal
gain. If one takes into account the fact that people from low income and
poor areas have taken up the Eskom offer in good faith, this exploitation
by gas suppliers should be condemned in the strongest terms.




                         CRIME REDUCTION PROGRAMMES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S MAHOTE (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC works to intensify campaigns at all
levels to reduce crime, the proliferation of illegal weapons, drugs,
corruption, and other fraudulent activities. We express our support for the
law enforcement agencies.

Recently, cocaine, dagga and other drugs worth millions of rands were
seized at Johannesburg airport and other ports of entry as well as in
Emfuleni, one of the townships in the Western Cape. These substances
destroy our young people and our future. The success of this operation was
brought about by the close co-operation between the community and members
of the SA Police Service.

This success also means less drugs on the streets of our townships and
safer communities for our children and women. The ANC calls on all our
people to work closely with the SA Police Service and other law enforcement
agencies in our effort to fight crime. I thank you.




                     SEX TRADE AND THE SOCCER WORLD CUP


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs C DUDLEY (ACDP): Thank you, Chair. It has been reported that Germany,
host of the 2006 Soccer World Cup, is expecting anything up to 40 000 extra
sex workers who would be smuggled into the country to meet the demand in
the weeks to come.

According to a recent report released by the UN Office on Drugs and Crime,
titled “Trafficking in Persons: Global Patterns”, the trend of an increase
in human trafficking is aimed at boosting the sex trade ahead of the 2010
Soccer World Cup.

South Africa needs to combat these activities. The ACDP has submitted
questions to both the Department of Safety and Security and Home Affairs to
put tighter measures in place to ensure that South Africa does not face the
same dilemma as Germany. These numbers should make us all gravely
concerned.

Human trafficking is feeding into the existing culture of degradation of
women and children through prostitution and the debates around legalising
it. South Africa has a long history of legalising and condoning inhumane
behaviour. Legalising apartheid did not make it right and certainly did not
exempt anyone from the destruction caused by it.

The UN Office on Drugs and Crime report highlights the inevitable
consequences of legalising the sex trade, which opens the door for further
abuse through trade in human flesh; because the line between legal and
illegal is so thin and could easily be crossed. It is also a breeding
ground for other ills, such as drug dealing and crime in general.

The ACDP does not support the legalisation of sex work out of a concern for
the safety of those used in that trade. The ACDP would like to see a
situation where there is legislation to protect the women and children used
in this cruel trade, with an emphasis on targeting the user. I thank you.
[Time expired.]




                     IMPROVED ARTS AND SPORTS FACILITIES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr M M DIKGACWI (ANC): Voorsitter, gedurende sy begrotingstoespraak in die
Wes-Kaapse Wetgewer het die LUR vir Kultuur en Sport, Mnr Whitey Jacobs,
weer die ANC se verbintenis tot die opheffing van al ons mense bevestig. ’n
Bedrag van R65 miljoen is begroot vir biblioteekdienste in die provinsie.
Die geld sal aangewend word om twee nuwe biblioteke te bou, nuwe boeke aan
te koop en mobiele biblioteke na vyf landelike gemeenskappe uit te brei.

’n Bedrag van R18 miljoen is ook beskikbaar gestel vir die bekendstelling
en die implementering van die massa-sportdeelnameprogram by skole. Mnr
Jacobs het aangekondig dat 140 sportassistente aangestel gaan word en hulle
sal as sportadministrateurs, tegniese beamptes en skeidsregters opgelei
word.

Vier streke sal elk R500 000 ontvang vir ontwikkeling van plaasarbeiders.
Die ANC glo dat hierdie begroting duidelik die ANC se wens om armoede te
verlig, ons mense op te hef en ’n beter lewe te skep, weerspieël. Die
begroting spreek duidelik die uitdagings in die departement en die
behoeftes in die provinsies aan.

Mnr Jacobs en die ANC in die Wes-Kaap moet gelukgewens word met die balans
wat in die begroting weerspieël word. Vandag is inderdaad beter as gister
en môre sal beter wees as vandag. Ek hoop die DA sal verstaan. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr M M DIKGACWI (ANC): Chairperson, during his speech in the Western Cape
Legislature the MEC for Culture and Sport, Mr Whitey Jacobs, once again
affirmed the ANC’s commitment to the uplifting of all our people. An amount
of R65 million has been budgeted for library services in the province. The
money will be spent on building two new libraries, buying new books and
extending mobile libraries to five rural communities.

An amount of R18 million has also been made available for the introduction
and implementation of the mass sports participation programme at schools.
Mr Jacobs announced that 140 sports assistants would be appointed, and they
will be trained as sports administrators, technical officers and referees.

Four regions will receive R500 000 each for the development of farm
workers. The ANC believes that this budget clearly reflects the ANC’s
desire to relieve poverty, uplift our people and create a better life. The
budget clearly deals with the challenges in the department and the needs in
the provinces.

Mr Jacobs and the ANC in the Western Cape must be congratulated on the
balance reflected in the budget. Today is indeed better than yesterday, and
tomorrow will be better than today. I hope the DA will understand.
[Applause.]]




                           VIOLENCE ON OUR TRAINS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N T GODI (PAC): Chair, the PAC joins the rising and legitimate chorus of
concern and condemnation of the escalating violence and fatalities on our
trains, especially in the Western Cape and Gauteng. Whilst no conclusive
evidence has been brought forth, various commentators have linked this to
the ongoing strike by security workers. In some respects the linkages could
not be so glaring. The absence of security guards at railway stations and
on the trains has given leeway to the Lumpens to terrorise commuters at
will.

The PAC calls on the employers, who we believe can afford the workers’
legitimate demand of 11%, to speedily settle with the unions in the public
interest. But if, on the other hand, striking workers are responsible in
any way for some of these activities, it will not only be misguided and
counterproductive, but it will be highlighting that, once again, class
solidarity has been broken by the divide-and-rule tactics of the employers.

The PAC calls on all of us to exert pressure on the employers to settle
with the unions. How many of us here can go for two months without a
salary? Thank you.




                       CONFUSION OF MINISTER OF LABOUR


                            (Member’s Statement)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): The UPSA. The UPSA. It was nearly
an ``oops’’! [Laughter.]

Mr S SIMMONS (UPSA): That is so, Chair. Chair, during the Labour Budget
debate on Wednesday, 17 May of this year, the hon Minister stated that I
was confused for calling for a national minimum wage. As usual, it was the
hon Minister who was confused. This is a confusion of the hon Minister’s
own making, for not listening attentively to my contribution.

Legislation that provides for minimum wages is often counterproductive,
leading to job losses, which South Africa cannot afford. This type of
legislative provision has a negative effect on small and medium businesses’
ability to play a positive part in the national objective of creating more
jobs, as they are the employers least capable of meeting minimum wage
requirements.

This is clearly not in line with government objectives with regard to the
Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa programme, hence
my call for the government to review the composition of this principle.

I question whether the government’s target to halve the unemployment rate
by 2014 is a realistic one, given the fact that South Africa would have to
grow its GDP by at least 9,3% until 2014, according to well respected
economists.

I conclude by expressing my party’s serious concern relating to the
implementation of the employment equity legislation and affirmative action.
The hon Minister didn’t deem it necessary to comment on these important
issues but rather exposed his own confusion. I thank you.




                          POWER FAILURE IN HOSPITAL


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD (DA): Thank you Chair. The Democratic Alliance has the
sad duty today to proffer heartfelt condolences to the four families whose
babies died in their incubators at the Eastern Cape Cecilia Matewane
hospital, as a result of the power failure and a nonworking generator. One
of them was just one day old.

Having spent months of touring public hospitals last year, I had had no
option but to place this hospital on the list of the five worst hospitals
in the country. That the Minister said that I should instead have been
boosting public confidence in the public health sector is bad enough, but
that she and her Department of Health ignored this party’s information that
this hospital had millions of rands of obsolete clinical and engineering
equipment is a blot on the character of every single ANC MP, but first and
foremost on that of the Minister, who knew and who chose to do nothing. The
deaths of these babies lie at your door.

Let me quote my colleague, the hon Roy Jankielsohn: “Where is the
Minister?” The Democratic Alliance calls on this House to debate this issue
as a matter of the greatest importance.

           INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION IN FIGHTING DRUG TRAFFICKING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nkskz N D MBOMBO(ANC): Lo ngumpoposho ngentsebenziswano. Singumbutho
wesizwe iANC satsho ngazwinye ukuthi siyakuthi, gqolo sisebenzisana noluntu
lwehlabathi ekwakheni ubuhlobo uxolo kwakunye nozinzo. Oontamnani
bamapolisa bebambisene namapolisa aseMelika, eBrazil kunye nawaseColombia
athe abamba imigulukudu evelisa yaye ithengisa iziyobisi kumhlaba wonke.

Aba nqalintloko ngabanye babafunwa ngamandla emhlabeni ngokubanzi. Le
mpumelelo ibonakalisa ngokuthe gca okwekati emhlophe ehlungwini ukubaluleka
kwentsebenziswano phakathi kwamazwe omhlaba nasekwakhiweni ubuhlobo
phakathi kwabantu. Umbutho wesizwe uyakuthi, gqolo ukuqinisa amatyathanga
obuhlobo nentsebenziswano kumazwe omhlaba naseluntwini lonke. Ndiyabulela.
Phambili ngoKhongolozi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa member’s
statement follows.)

[Mrs N D MBOMBOLANE (ANC): This message is about co-operation. The ANC
declared unanimously that it would work with the international world in
building friendship, peace and stability. Our police, in association with
the American police, the Brazilian police and the Colombian police, have
arrested drug syndicates that produce and sell drugs throughout the world.

They are some of the most wanted criminals in the entire world. This is a
clear indication of the importance of co-operation between countries and
the people at large. The ANC will continue to strengthen relations,
friendship and co-operation with the entire world and with the people. I
thank you. [Applause.]]


                   CONFERENCE OF ALL NEWLY ELECTED MAYORS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P F SMITH (IFP): Chairperson, thank you. Perhaps in a departure from
traditionality, the IFP would like to congratulate the Department of
Provincial and Local Government on a job well done yesterday, when it
convened a very successful conference of all the newly elected mayors of
the country’s 283 municipalities to interact with them on improving the
performance of their councils over the next five years.

The objectives were to brief mayors on government strategic objectives; to
discuss a number of key performance areas; to better involve sector
departments in liaising and working with councils and to facilitate
solutions in respect of the key performance areas. We believe the
department needs to strongly focus on supporting municipalities and see
this as an excellent example of what it needs to be doing and what it
should have been doing far more over the past five years. It is sorely
needed and we strongly support it.
Thank you.




                     TAKE A GIRL CHILD TO WORK CAMPAIGN


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M V MERUTI (ANC): Thank you, Chairperson. The African National Congress
has noted with pleasure the growth of the campaign called, “Take a girl
child to work.” We also appreciate that this year the sponsoring company
chose women’s struggle heroes as the theme of the project. We wish all
those citizens, business entities and organisations that continue to
support this very important project, well in their endeavours.

Even as we celebrate these efforts aimed at the girl child, there remains a
serious threat to the wellbeing and rights of the girl child. We condemn in
the strongest terms those that continue to abuse and exploit our young
daughters through human trafficking and prostitution. Thank you.




                      ASYLUM APPLICATION OF ROY BENNETT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D H M GIBSON (DA): Chairperson, all of those who care about human rights
will join me in expressing complete dismay at the asylum application
refusal in respect of Roy Bennett, former Zimbabwean member of parliament.
[Interjections.] You don’t care about human rights. He represented an
overwhelmingly black constituency in that parliament and his main crime was
that he didn’t support your friend, Mr Mugabe. He supported the opposition.

His direct crime was that he had a scuffle in parliament, and for that he
served many months in jail. You might remember what happened here, when
there was a similar scuffle with Dr Schoeman and the current Deputy
Minister of Justice. They had to apologise to Parliament, and one was out
for one day and one was out for two. Mr Bennett was sent to jail with hard
labour for a year.

Members will know that on being released from jail, Mr Bennett was faced
with considerable persecution. He lost his farm. He has lost every single
thing. His wife was chased out and he was kept in jail until the
parliamentary election was over. There is a promise of more persecution to
come.

As for his application for asylum here, you would think that the people of
South Africa would feel that they should be on the right side of history.
Instead, we have turned it down. I want to say that it is an absolute
disgrace, and if there are any members of the SACP, COSATU and perhaps the
ANC who care about human rights and justice, they will join me in opposing
this.


                ANC’S CARE FOR THE PEOPLE OF THE WESTERN CAPE


                            (Member’s Statement)
Mnr J D ARENDSE (ANC): Voorsitter, tydens die Begrotingsrede van die Wes-
Kaapse LUR vir Openbare Werke en Vervoer is die volgende goeie nuus
aangekondig: daar is geen verhoging in die voertuiglisensiegelde vir die
huidige boekjaar nie; drie distrikshospitale gaan in die Paarl, Khayelitsha
en Mitchells Plein gebou word; 17 skole is òf in aanbou òf gaan gebou word;
uitgebreide instandingshoudingsprogramme gaan van stapel gestuur word vir
provinsiale paaie, asook vir die bou van nuwe paaie.

Voorts het ons LUR, mnr Marius Fransman, ook begroot vir 250 studiebeurse
vir tegniese onderrigontwikkeling en die loods van ’n leerderprogram om 1
000 nuwe ambagspersone op te lei. Daar gaan ook op dienste om die verhoging
van openbare vervoer te verbeter gefokus word.

Hierdie begroting is grootliks gefokus op gemeenskapsontwikkeling en is ook
daarop gemik om ons mense in die openbare sektor in te bring, deur middel
van werkskepping en ontwikkeling. Die DA-beheerde stadsraad moet ophou om
op valse wyse voor te gee dat die goeie werk net deur hulle gedoen word;
trouens, hulle het nog niks gedoen nie. Wie bou die skole en hospitale in
hierdie provinsie? Dis die ANC. Wie bou die nuwe paaie en hou die bestaande
paaie in stand? Die ANC. Hierdie provinsie word deur die ANC regeer en dit
bewys net weer eens dat die ANC ’n organisasie is wat omgee vir mense,
veral vir die mense van die Wes-Kaap. [Applous.] (Translation of member’s
statement follows.)

[Mr J D Arendse (ANC): Chairperson, during the budget speech of the MEC for
Public Works and Transport the following good news was announced: there is
no increase in the vehicle licence fees for the present financial year;
three district hospitals are to be built in Paarl, Khayelitsha and
Mitchells Plain; 17 schools are either being built or will be built;
extensive maintenance programmes are to be launched for provincial roads as
well as for the building of new roads.

Furthermore, our MEC, Mr Marius Fransman, also budgeted for 250 bursaries
for technical training development and the launching of a learners’
programme to train 1 000 new artisans. Services to improve public transport
will also be focused on.

This budget largely focuses on community development and is also aimed at
bringing our people into the public sector by way of job creation and
development. The DA-controlled city council must stop falsely pretending
that the good work is only done by them; in fact, they have done nothing
yet. Who is building the schools and hospitals in this province? It is the
ANC. Who is constructing new roads and maintaining the existing roads? The
ANC. This province is governed by the ANC, and this just proves once again
that the ANC is an organisation that cares for people, especially the
people of the Western Cape. [Applause.]]




               ABSENCE OF THE MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Thank you, Chairperson, I
would like to respond to the repeated question from the DA’s side about
where the Minister might be. Well, quite frankly, the Ministers are out
there doing their work. One might ask the question of the DA, where is the
DA? Well, they are in the House, Chairperson, grandstanding on very
sensitive issues and appearing to be doing popular things here in the
house. Where will they be after this House’s sitting? You will find them in
the Marks Building, in the pub. That is where you will find them. The other
day I was walking to attend a meeting in the Marks Building - and I won’t
mention the name of the person - the person I encountered there from the DA
is a prominent person and his biggest complaint was that the pub had closed
and he was looking very aggrieved by the closed pub. That is the mindset,
but once here the grandstanding will happen. The DA should ask the
question: What are the underlying causes of the crime that we are now
trying to combat? Who is responsible for the inequality, the poverty and
the misery of so many South African citizens that we are now trying to work
together with all parties of integrity to address? Any party with integrity
will stop their grandstanding and work together with all other parties to
address these problems.

They speak about human rights. It is the very abuse of human rights that
has brought about the misery, inequality and underdevelopment in our
country that we are now trying with seriousness to address, but they caused
it. Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! It becomes difficult
sometimes from the chair not to smile. The Secretary will read the next
order of the day.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


Debate on Vote No 31 – Science and Technology:

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Hon Chair, hon members, our guests
in the public gallery, our five-year old granddaughter moved in with us
recently and she keeps us on our toes in more ways than one. The other day
she asked me: “Grandpa, why is your beard black and white?” She then asked
if she could touch it, and I said, yes. She ran her fingers over the beard
and exclaimed: “Yo, its rough!” She offered to make it nice and I asked how
she planned to do that. She replied: “I will just pull it.” Needless to
say, the offer was declined. She, and many others of our young, at
different levels of their development, will inherit this country, its
wealth and its institutions from us. We hold South Africa in trust for
them.

The other day I met a young businessman who had spent six months in
Malaysia undergoing some training and he said he could not help noticing
how industrious the Malaysians were. He said that he had asked some of them
why they work so hard. In reply they said: We do it for our children. We
are building a better Malaysia for our children. Hon Chair, those are
exactly our sentiments. We are doing our best to build a better country for
our children so that even those who are still fascinated by the black and
white beard of their grandparents will find, when the time comes, that they
have opportunities to thrive.

In the 2004-05 financial year, my department spent 99,9% of its budget and
received a clean and an unqualified audit from the Auditor-General.
[Applause.] In the financial year ended in March this year we also managed
to spend 99,84% of our budget and are anticipating another clean audit.
This is a demonstration of hard work and discipline on the part of
officials in my department. They try hard to stick scrupulously to plans
and budgets, and the Deputy Minister and I are immensely proud of them. We
hope they will continue the good work. [Applause.]

We have moved the department’s headquarters to the new state-of-the-art
building within the Scientia complex, which also houses the NRF and the
CSIR. We would like to thank the National Treasury, the Department of
Public Works and the CSIR for their support and contribution to make the
move possible. We are now part of extended science and technology precincts
that include, amongst others, the South African Biodiversity Institute, the
Innovation Hub and the Council for Geoscience. We hope this will provide a
pleasant working environment for personnel in my department and that in the
near future will please those who presently still believe they can make the
scruffy black and white beard better by simply pulling it.

Speed is required to accelerate our competitiveness as a nation and
alleviate the plight of the needy and the marginalised. Technological and
scientific innovations lie at the heart of our hopes because they can act
as accelerators for South Africa’s economic growth. The more we can
innovate, the faster we can do it, the richer our lives can be, and the
sooner will the goals of Asgisa be realised. Over millennia, and
particularly in today’s world, speed and the capacity to innovate are what
count. Those who cannot develop the necessary acceleration run the risk of
being left permanently behind, and there are no prizes for those who choose
not to compete.

In economic terms, our intended speed for economic growth of 6% is to a
great degree dependent on innovation, on the introduction of new products
and services and the mastery of key technologies by our society. My
department’s view of our present and future activities can be summed up in
one word: partnerships. Science, in many of its manifestations, can become
self-centred to the point of obsession. As a country we cannot afford the
indulgence of seeing science merely as love for exploration and discovery.
Business, government and civil society share a vision for a successful
future and we must share all the material and human resources that can turn
that vision into reality.

The use and development of technology must address the needs and
aspirations of our people. South Africa’s immediate need is to attain
technological self-reliance, tailored to bring about swift and tangible
improvements in the living conditions of all our people. Our scientists and
technologists must always be alert to even the smallest developments that
can better and make affordable South Africa’s materials, services and work
processes.

My department is responsible for ensuring that South Africa maintains and
strengthens its competitiveness by increasing our investment in relevant
research and development initiatives. Our intermediate goal is to dedicate
1% of our gross domestic product to research and development by 2008.
Indications are that national expenditure on research and development,
which had declined by 1994 to 0,69% of the GDP, has now begun to pick up
significantly. In 2003-04 South Africa’s public and private expenditure on
research and development was 0,81% of the GDP and it is anticipated that
the 2004-05 survey will show a further increase, putting us on course to
reach the 1% target by 2008.

Over the Medium Term Expenditure Framework, government funding for research
and development to my department has increased by R1, 2 billion. This
increase largely funds core science and technology infrastructure, such as
the Centre for High Performance Computing, nanotechnology centre, astronomy
and space science.

Attractive tax incentives to boost research and development are now being
put in place. I am sure you will recall that when my colleague, the finance
Minister, Trevor Manuel, addressed the House earlier this year, he
announced the creation of a more favourable regime for arresting the
depreciation of research and development capital and an increase in the
deduction allowable for current research and development expenditure from
100 to 150%.

These are indeed welcome developments to a very positive conclusion of
phase one of my department‘s efforts in this area of work. The tax
incentives effectively reduce the real cost of a company’s investment in
research and development, thus stimulating the investment climate by
rewarding inventiveness, which in turn raises returns and bolsters the
economy as a whole. When companies invest in research and development they
create work for more scientists, engineers and technology experts.

Phase two, which begins this year, involves my department’s working with
the South African Revenue Service to ensure that industry understands how
to access the incentives and to encourage more small and medium-sized
businesses to invest in research and development.

Our ageing national equipment infrastructure is rapidly becoming obsolete
and our ability to timeously and routinely replace out-of-date equipment
has been a cause for considerable concern. We cannot work at the cutting
edge without constantly sharpening our tools. Our attempts to obtain a more
substantial budget for replacing the aging equipment infrastructure have
generated a commitment of R211 million to higher education institutions and
science councils over the MTEF.

South Africa’s bilateral and multilateral science and technology
initiatives are also experiencing spirited growth. This positive atmosphere
is largely due to our resolve to keep South Africa and the continent
abreast of international developments. By 2001-02 international funding of
research and development in South Africa had grown to 6% from near zero in
1994 and by 2003-04 foreign funding stood at 10% of total research and
development spending. International breakthroughs include South Africa’s
increased participation in the European Union sixth framework programme and
in the implementation of Africa’s Consolidated Science and Technology Plan
of Action, in which South Africa has played a leading role.

In our subregion, South Africa is playing a key role in developing a
vibrant science and technology platform. We now have a Southern African
Development Community Ministers’ Council on Science and Technology, which
is leading in the development of a SADC protocol. This protocol will guide
the implementation of the subregional science and technology plan.

In line with our theme of speed, one of our flagship projects is the
development of a high-speed broadband network in the region. This is the
UbuntuNet project, which we will link through the South African National
Research Network to Europe via the Geant connection, giving South Africa
and its research community a high-speed network. The first phase of
implementing this network has begun with total funding of R178 million over
the MTEF.
I am pleased to report that South Africa continues to register remarkable
progress in the field of astronomy and space sciences. The astronomers of
the world have discovered our top-notch resources, and the country is
increasingly seen as a strategic provider and developer of next-generation,
ground-based observation facilities. This should not be seen as an
indulgence, but an imperative.

Working in these areas provides an excellent long-term platform that we
hope to use as a training ground for our young scientists in the areas of
mathematical and computational modelling. Even those who are still curious
about the black and white beard of their grandparents will find, in future,
that we did lay a good foundation in science and technology for them.

South Africa is also poised to be a leader in African space and astronomy
programmes. We are establishing a SA Space Agency to unite the work of
several institutions, and harness these capacities to leverage billions of
rands through which we hope to boost the economy and create more jobs. We
plan to obtain Cabinet approval to formalise this new partnership, later in
the year.

These initiatives follow a number of recent high-profile and crucially
important developments. The first of these developments is the construction
of the most powerful optical telescope in the southern hemisphere, the
South African large telescope, located at Sutherland in the Northern Cape,
which was officially opened by the President in November last year. This
telescope is now fully operational.

The second is establishing the high-energy stereoscopic system observatory
in Namibia, the most powerful cosmic ray instrument in the world.

The third is bidding to host the $1,5 billion Square Kilometre Array radio
telescope, again the largest in the world and also in the Northern Cape. If
successful, this will translate into foreign investment of R9 billion with
a spin-off of major contracts for engineering companies in South Africa.
[Applause.]

The fourth is building the Karoo Array Telescope in the Northern Cape,
which will become operational in 2009 and is a partnership between my
department and the Northern Cape provincial government, operated through a
dedicated innovation team.

Fifthly, we will launch South Africa’s second low earth-orbiting satellite
this year. This is a R26 million project that will again expand our
satellite engineering capabilities. This programme is managed by
Stellenbosch University as part of a joint effort between the university,
the Department of Science and Technology, DST, Sunspace and the CSIR
Satellite Application Centre.

We are doing this at a time when both Algeria and Nigeria have produced
such micro satellites, and are discussing with us a programme to develop a
cluster of satellites called the African Resource Management Constellation.
The vision is to develop and build in Africa satellites, which can assist
in disaster prediction and mitigation, projection of crop yields, tracking
urban and rural development, and a host of other applications. Other
industrial applications are likely to spin off from this progress.

The sixth development is signing bilateral agreements with the Russian
Space Agency, which has expressed an interest in launching satellites from
South Africa.

The seventh is signing partnerships and co-operation agreements with the
European Space Agency and the US National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, amongst others.

We have also drafted a new policy on intellectual property rights from
publicly funded research. This was approved by Cabinet in January for
public consultation, and is intended to ensure that we derive maximum
benefit from the R2,8 billion that government invests annually in research
at universities and science councils.

The policy aims to unify the myriad approaches that the South African
institutions have taken to protect their researchers’ ideas, and to share
the benefits derived therefrom. While patenting by publicly funded
institutions has grown worldwide in the past decade, this has not happened
in South Africa, partly because of the lack of a coherent policy and well-
defined incentives and obligations.

Public workshops have been undertaken in Pretoria, Durban and Cape Town to
elicit the views of researchers, industry, universities and science
councils, and once this process has been completed, the policy will be
refined and legislation drafted.

In collaboration with National Treasury, my department has structured a
framework for reporting on science and technology expenditure across
government. This framework includes a survey instrument with
internationally benchmarked definitions. It will allow science and
technology expenditure reporting by all government departments to be
integrated into Estimates of National Expenditure reports, after which the
department will be able to analyse such expenditure and give a
comprehensive review of the trends, intent and scope of science and
technology spending.

Appropriately, the department has been given the lead in developing
promising and emerging areas of science and technology. We also support
other government departments to make informed decisions involving the
sciences, innovation and technological applications to support their
service-delivery initiatives.

Among the pressing national challenges we face, is the alarmingly small
human resource pool in science and technology. In this regard, we note with
relief that the 2005 State of Skills in South Africa released by the
Department of Labour shows that the vast majority, some 95%, of engineers
and medical scientists find employment within six months after graduation.
This finding is a key pointer of how we can deal with the growing challenge
of graduate unemployment. My department is conducting a follow-up survey of
the science graduates who were not included in the earlier survey.

We continue to face a basic problem with both the quantity and quality of
entrants to higher education programmes in the sciences and engineering. We
also find that those who succeed at undergraduate level seldom enter
postgraduate research. We have to bring larger numbers of younger
researchers into the system, and ensure that they develop viable research
careers. This is a key focus of my department.

We intend to work more closely with the Department of
Education in building the capacity of our institutions, to produce more
scientists and engineers, and improve the attractiveness of academic
careers and increase the time spent by young academics on research.

Having highlighted the challenges in human capital development, I would
like to address some of my department’s interventions in this regard.
Firstly, through the Research Chairs Programme, we intend to produce 210
new and highly relevant research professorships by 2010. These research
chairs will underpin the renewal of higher education research founded on
our national needs. This is intended to spawn a substantial increase in the
number of new entrants into the National System of Innovation, in order to
develop sufficient capacity to increase our output in the critical science
and technology areas identified by the National Research and Development
Strategy.

Secondly, the department has also established a common value system for the
Centres of Excellence. Six centres were launched in 2004, with a budget of
R25 million, and they will be funded for a 10-year cycle. A seventh centre,
the SA Centre for Epidemiology, Modelling and Analysis, was recently
launched. It will focus on research and human capital development in
mathematical modelling of HIV/Aids, malaria and tuberculosis on the African
continent.

Thirdly, we are confident that these measures, including the Research Post-
Doctoral Fellowship Programme, will begin to increase the number of highly
qualified South Africans in critical areas of science and technology.
However, we need new efforts to ensure success.

Fourthly, we have initiated Phase 2 of the special internship programme in
science and technology at our research councils and the Tshumisano
Technology Stations.

Fifthly, the Youth into Science Strategy will be presented to Cabinet this
year. We hope it will attract dedicated resources to implement the
expansion of the Dinaledi Programme, by providing career guidance and
extending the Network of Science Centres Programme. The implementation of
the strategy will also provide an effective tool for tracking young people
with potential, and introducing new measures to alleviate the financial
burden on successful undergraduate students to enable them to pursue
postgraduate research on a full-time basis.

Embedded in all these programmes are measures to ensure that the
participation of blacks and women in science and technology is intensified.
[Applause.]

From the technology sector’s perspective, the decisions we are required to
make in the field of nanotechnology are interesting and typical of the
complexities characterising the entire field of science and technology. We
have now published our Nanotechnology Strategy. Nanotechnology, and its
building block, nanoscience, promise to produce smaller, cheaper, lighter
and faster devices with greater functionality that use fewer raw materials
and consume less energy. Nanotechnology will drive the business revolution
into the 21st century. We are determined to ensure South Africa joins the
international competitiveness race that nanotechnology expertise promises
to provide.

Possible areas in which nanotechnology can find applications include:
firstly, the development of “intelligent drugs” that allow for slow release
of medicine into the body for the treatment of diseases such as TB and HIV;
secondly, programmable nanomachines that can clean up waste dumps, or even
human arteries; and thirdly, nanosensors that can measure changes in the
environment such as moisture levels and temperature.

In the area of information and communication technology, we will establish
the Centre for High Performance Computing. This national resource will
support a diverse base of researchers and scientists, and facilitate the
collaboration and multidisciplinary approach needed to solve today's
complex computational problems. Its research objectives are to provide high-
end computing and computing expertise for all research in South Africa in
natural sciences, medicine, engineering and social sciences. Its first
major capacity will be located at the University of Cape Town.

The centre will function as a national innovation platform and deliver a
significant return on investment for the country, by harnessing the
application of high-performance computing for positive social impact,
particularly on research on major infectious diseases such as HIV/Aids and
promoting advanced manufacturing technology.

The Centre for High Performance Computing and the SA Research Network,
which I mentioned earlier, form the backbone of an emerging cyber
infrastructure in South Africa. This infrastructure will support research
initiated in other elements of our science and technology infrastructure,
such as the Square Kilometre Array, the National Bioinformatics Network and
the Global Earth Observation System of Systems.

The biotechnology sector is also attracting a fast-growing portion of
research and development funding. Funding for genetic engineering grew by
360% between 2002 and 2004. Investment growth in related fields such as
biochemistry, genetics and molecular biology, microbiology, genetic
engineering and biotechnology exceeded 46%.

South Africa has a very high level of commitment to biotechnology,
underpinned by a vibrant research sector. In this regard, we are also
committed to developing biotechnology on a continental level. On 5 August
2005, the CSIR, representing South Africa, initiated a southern regional
hub of the Nepad African Biosciences Initiative. Research related to
agriculture, human and animal health, environment and industry, is being
prioritised.

Between 1996 and 2000, South Africa produced 222 scientific articles on
genetics and 459 scientific articles on microbiology. By comparison with
other African countries, Kenya came closest to this level of research
output with 53 and 173 scientific articles, respectively.

In terms of patents, South Africa appears on the list of countries with
more than 100 European Patent Office applications during 2000. We are the
only African country on the list, and 3% of our patent applications are
related to biotechnology. Singapore leads the list, with 12% of its
applications specifically relating to biotechnology. Biotechnology is a
very promising field of activity indeed, and our successes in this area
have encouraged us to bid to host the International Centre for Genetic
Engineering and Biotechnology.

The South African candidate host institution for the centre is the
Institute of Infectious Diseases and Molecular Medicine at the University
of Cape Town, which is co-ordinating South Africa’s efforts in this
network. Our national bid will be submitted next week, on 31 May. This
network will provide a unique environment for research and training of
African scientists on issues that have a direct impact on the wellbeing of
the African population.

The Deputy Minister will dwell on some of our initiatives geared at
impacting on some of the challenges we face as a developing country.

I am pleased to announce that the second biennial International Science,
Innovation and Technology Exhibition, or Insite, will be hosted at the
Sandton Convention Centre from 24 to 27 September 2006. [Applause.]

Insite 2006 will showcase our country’s achievements in science and
technology and provide a platform for our international partners to
tantalise us with theirs.

The deployment of Dr Rob Adam, after six and a half years as Director-
General of Science and Technology, to the Nuclear Energy Corporation of
South Africa, has left a huge gap within the department, which will take
some time to fill. However, it is pleasing to note that Dr Adam has not
been lost to us, and we hope to continue to work with him to develop our
national system of innovation.

We heartily welcome Dr Philemon Mphathi Mjwara as the new director-general.
[Applause.] Dr Mjwara is a distinguished scientist and former member of the
executive of the CSIR. As head of the CSIR National Laser Centre, he was
instrumental in establishing the African Laser Centre. I am confident that
Dr Mjwara possesses the right mix of skills and expertise to speed up our
responses to national imperatives.

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that speed gained equals time gained.
To live in the past is to deny the existence of the future. We challenge
all young people to join in the great struggle for careers in science,
engineering and technology. Your parents laid the foundations for a great
nation in this land. Now it is up to you to use your minds, your skills and
your talents to make us a winning nation.

Fortunately, there are no speeding fines on the road to progress and
prosperity. We can go as fast as we like. This includes those who still
marvel at the black and white beard of their grandpas. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Mr E N N NGCOBO: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister, hon
members, hon guests in the gallery, allow me to first open my speech by
asserting the position of the ANC in the Portfolio Committee on Science and
Technology, namely that we support Budget Vote No 18.

I support the budget on Science and Technology because I believe that there
can be no viability or success of any other sector of our economy without
science and technology being positioned as the engine of our national
economic growth.

Developing countries today face enormous problems of poverty, hunger,
malnutrition, epidemics, environmental degradation, dwindling natural
resources and acute shortage of energy and potable water as a consequence
of poor technological infrastructure within their states.

The global population passed a mark of 6 billion at the beginning of this
century, and it is expected to touch the mark of 9 billion by 2050. About
90% of these will reside in developing countries, and South Africa’s
economic population forms part of this lot.

Thus science and technology has to help find a solution to these problems,
a task that has become even more difficult because of natural calamities
and hazards such as hurricanes, earthquakes, tsunamis, etc.

Science by nature is international, meaning that every nation can
contribute to it. Yet much of the global population are left out of this
process, thus creating a knowledge divide. Science is essential, not only
for the development of knowledge but also as a basis for the development of
technologies and a national innovation system for the economic growth of
world nations and communities.

Furthermore, even decision-making has to be based on the best available
knowledge from scientific research. This is as vital for the poorest farmer
in Africa as it is for the CEOs of multinationals and political leaders
around the world.

One of the major challenges of the 21st Century is reformulating science
within the context of sustainable development. That is to say, we have to
bring social sciences and natural sciences together in order to address
issues of sustainable use of earth’s natural resources. This we can only
achieve by developing a scientific agenda that is all participatory,
involving different sectors of our society.

We in South Africa, like other scientific communities in the world, must
begin to provide bridges over the knowledge divide. Since information is
not knowledge, we must make an endeavour to bridge the digital divide,
which may not, of course, necessarily be enough on its own. Nevertheless,
science education must but ensure a scientifically literate population that
can transform information to knowledge. Our young people must be attracted
to careers in science and technology and we must strive to have at least
one research university fully dedicated to science education based on a
sound foundation of scientific research such as is the case with Imperial
College of Science, Technology and Medicine in the UK, just to mention but
one example. Yes, a university with such a kind of academic potential of
scientific research power and intellect, as well as revolutionary social
outlook, as to make it possible for this endeavour to produce a director of
an aerospace research centre from the ordinary daughter of a rural peasant.

This effort should be in addition to that already in place in various
universities, which the Department of Science and Technology has tasked
with special functions to focus on areas of scientific research interest,
as it has identified these as centres of excellence.

The latter move by the Department of Science and Technology was but one
step in the right direction in the development of our science system.
Indeed, to build a true knowledge economy where scientific knowledge can
act as a basis for technological innovation and the development of national
entrepreneurship there is no middle road but to encompass a wide
interpretation of sciences, including natural, social, technological and
health sciences.

Science and society are as indivisible as Juno’s swans. It is a well-known
fact that science is not popular in schools and universities and not well
understood by politicians and the public as well.

There is a three-body problem to be recognised within the concept of
science and society, that is, the interaction of science, government and
the news media. It is an odd situation in which none of the three elements
is entirely compatible when each is working according to its normal
standards.

This problem arises from the fact that politicians assume that science can
provide definite answers to their dilemmas whilst on the other hand
scientists, when asked to give guidance to politicians, back away from
categorical statements and prefer to talk about an array of potential
outcomes expressed in probabilities with error bars. This difficult
situation between the two parties is further aggravated by the intervention
of the press, which typically lobbies to provide the core information from
which both groups have to make their decisions. This culminates in an
unfortunate situation where politicians miss the opportunity to learn about
the correct information on well established scientific consensus around
some specific sections of many controversial subjects like stem cells in
bio-technology, nuclear safety in nuclear power technology, climate change
in environmental affairs, etc. Such are the challenges that decision-makers
have to think through if science and technology has to become a component
of our society. [Applause.]

What is the role of Parliament and its committees in this whole exercise?
The role of Parliament and its committees is to give effect to visions and
missions of various institutions of government by processing legislation
that gives effect to the aforementioned objectives and goals. Subsequently,
Parliament has to exercise effective oversight over the implementation of
such supportive legislation to the departments and all the related
institutions of the state.

According to the Public Service regulations, the executive authority of the
department, in our case the Department of Science and Technology, is
required to prepare a strategic plan for the department, stating amongst
other things the department’s core objectives based on the constitutional
and other legislative mandates, functional mandates, service delivery
improvement programmes, etc, just to mention a few of these requirements.
But over and above this there are also regulations issued in terms of the
Public Finance Management Act of 1999, which provides for further
requirements that strategic plans must relate to the medium-term
expenditure framework as well as be submitted to Parliament at least seven
days before the Budget Vote debate of the department.

In this regard, it comforts the Portfolio Committee on Science and
Technology to submit before this House that indeed our Department of
Science and Technology and the entities associated with it were able to
meet these stated requirements. Presentations on strategic plans of various
entities, including the Department of Science and Technology itself, were
made before the Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology over the
period beginning on 7 March 2006 to 29 March 2006. The portfolio committee
was satisfied: Firstly, that the strategic planning process presented was
clearly defined; secondly, that there was prioritisation of what would be
accomplished in the future and clear identification of what would and would
not be done; thirdly, that critical success factors during the strategic
planning process were clearly addressed; fourthly, that the strategic plans
were flexible enough to accommodate any unforeseen changes to external
environmental factors and lastly, that all the components of their
strategic planning process were linked and integrated from the top to the
bottom, that is, from the vision and mission statements right down to
performance measures and targets.

In particular, the Department of Science and Technology as the mother body
in the science system was able to demonstrate to the portfolio committee
how hard they had worked to steer the department to be aligned with the
President’s focus arising from his state of the nation address, that is,
with regard to understanding where the economy was heading and the related
development needs. Furthermore, I also include here efforts such as the
department’s push for an increase in expenditure and research and
development in both the public and private sectors.

The Department of Science and Technology was also instigative of the tax
incentive announcement that was made by the Finance Minister in his budget
speech, which is that a tax reduction of 15% would be made for private
sector research effort, thus enhancing the push for the projected 6%
economic growth by 2014.

The department has also long been configuring itself for social delivery to
address issues of poverty that can make some social impact, including being
part of the processes around government machinery with regard to
modernising the economy using science and technology applications.

Centres of excellence, the SA Research Chairs Initiative, the Bio-diesel
Joint Initiative and many other such initiatives are but some of the inputs
that the department has made to address important themes of our ANC-led
government.

In terms of databases’ as raised by the President in his state of the
nation address, the department has developed support programmes for
internships, which are parallel to Accelerated Shared Growth Initiative of
South Africa work.

With regard to the indigenous knowledge system, the department has upgraded
this focus area to a sub-programme of the department, which means that it
is now enjoying more attention than ever before.

Despite all the good efforts of the department as elaborated above, there
were a few disappointments which the portfolio committee made a note of
with regard to some of the Department of Science and Technology’s
associated entities, and the necessary recommendations were made to the
department and these entities to have the situation improved. Some of these
include a lack of co-ordination among these entities in their similar
activities with common objectives; a failure to roll out on a nationwide
scale those projects that seem to be working and making a social impact; a
lack of swift, responsive decision-making on those projects that seem to be
working but at the same time seem to be costly to sustain due to scarcity
of local skills and other related challenges - for example, the hydroponics
and leather projects in Beaufort West; a lack of prioritising additional
funding for strategic divisions in some departmental institutions of
strategic importance to our nation’s research potential and security, such
as the wind-tunnels in the aerospace division of the CSIR; ageing geo-
mapping equipment in the case of the Council for Geo-science, which is at
the centre of our mineral economy, which in turn forms the heart and soul
of our very existence as a viable economy on the continent and in the
world.

I have chosen to highlight these oversight observations of our portfolio
committee not because I aim to discredit the department’s credible efforts
and successes, which no doubt are unquestionable in so far as the
development of our science system is concerned at this juncture of our
national democratic revolution; on the contrary, my main objective here is
actually to make a parliamentary appeal to the National Treasury and the
Budget Committee on behalf of the department and the relevant associated
entities that they be given a hearing with regard to funding in order that
they may be able to meet national mandates.

Strategic plans, which are not based on realistically available financial
resources, are simply wish lists and public relations documents rather than
management tools that can be used as instruments for accountability. Unless
Parliament exercises meaningful and effective oversight, which must be
preceded by reasonable budget allocations to departments for them to
execute their national mandates, the so-called strategic planning and
budgeting is most likely to degenerate into nominal compliance with formats
where complex methodologies such as balanced scorecards, log-frames, etc,
become substitutes for strategic thinking rather than reflections of
strategic choices. Thank you very much, Chairperson. [Applause]

Me A M DREYER: Voorsitter, Suid-Afrika het ’n trotse rekord op die gebied
van wetenskaplike ontwikkeling en tegnologie, vanaf die vroegste tye tot
nou toe. Tegnologiese ontwikkeling het eintlik in Suider-Afrika begin. Ons
kan dit terugvoer tot by die Wieg van die Mensdom in my kiesafdeling,
Mohale City in Gauteng. ’n Besoek aan die lewende museum daar, Maropeng,
wys duidelik dat tegnologie in die vorm van die eerste klipgereedskap, saam
met die mensdom, meer as 2,5 miljoen jaar gelede in der waarheid hier
ontstaan het. Sedertdien het sy prestasie Suid-Afrika wêreldwyd tussen die
voorstes geplaas.

Bepaalde tekortkominge bedreig egter hierdie tegnologiese voorsprong: die
groeiende energiekrisis en die gereelde kragonderbrekings in Johannesburg
en Kaapstad onderstreep watter belangrike rol tegnologie in ons daaglikse
lewens speel. Ek wil graag vier uitdagings noem: Eerstens, probleme met
krag en riolering is dikwels te wyte aan ’n vaardigheidskrisis en die
ernstige tekort aan tegnici, vakmanne en ingenieurs. Die Suid-Afrikaanse
Instituut vir Siviele Ingenieurswese reken die bedryf het reeds tussen 3
000 en 6 000 bykomende siviele ingenieurs nodig om projekte vir ekonomiese
uitbreiding die hoof te bied. Hierdie tekorte word dramaties geïllustreer
as ons Suid-Afrika met ander lande vergelyk. Suid-Afrika het tans ongeveer
een siviele ingenieur per 3 000 mense, teenoor Brasilië, wat ongeveer een
siviele ingenieur per 200 mense het. Dit is die rede hoekom Brasilië besig
is om ’n tegnologiese wêreldleier te word en die hoogs gesofistikeerde
Embraer-vliegtuie uit te voer.

Die enigste langtermynoplossing is eenvoudig om meer siviele ingenieurs te
produseer. Dit bring ons egter by die volgende uitdaging. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Ms A M DREYER: Chairperson, South Africa has a proud record in the area of
scientific development and technology, from earliest times until the
present. Technological development actually started in Southern Africa. We
can trace it back to the Cradle of Humankind in my constituency, Mohale
City in Gauteng. A visit to the living museum there, Maropeng, clearly
shows that technology, in the form of the first stone implements, did in
fact start here, together with humankind, more than 2,5 million years ago.

Since then its achievement has placed South Africa amongst the foremost
countries in the world.

However, specific shortcomings threaten this technological lead: the
growing energy crisis and the regular power failures in Johannesburg and
Cape Town emphasise the important role technology plays in our daily lives.
I would like to mention four challenges. Firstly, problems with power and
sewerage are often due to a skills crisis and the serious shortage of
technicians, experts and engineers. The South African Institute of Civil
Engineering estimates that the industry already needs between 3 000 and 6
000 additional civil engineers to cope with projects for economic
expansion. These shortages are dramatically illustrated when we compare
South Africa to other countries. At present South Africa has approximately
one civil engineer per 3 000 people, compared to Brazil, which has
approximately one civil engineer per 200 people. This is the reason why
Brazil is becoming a technological world leader and is exporting the highly
sophisticated Embraer aeroplanes.

The only long-term solution is simply to produce more civil engineers.
This, however, brings us to the next challenge.]

Science and maths, as school subjects, are essential to the later study of
engineering but the teaching of these subjects faces serious obstacles.
Research by the Centre for Development and Enterprise shows that in 2001,
about 14% of South Africa’s maths teachers did not meet the minimum
requirements of the education department. The proportion of Matric students
taking maths has dropped about 20% over the last 20 years. To excel, we
must improve the standard of teaching maths and increase its popularity as
a Matric subject.

A third challenge is the lack of sufficient national investment in research
and development. Figures released by the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development show that worldwide the average national
investment in research and development across public and private sectors
annually is about 2,1% of GDP – with Korea spending much more. South Africa
is far behind with only 0,76% of GDP. That is why South Africa imports
Hyundai motors from Korea. Drastic action is necessary to rectify this
problem.

The DA therefore welcomes the fact that the Department of Science and
Technology will receive an additional allocation of R1,2 billion over the
medium term, mainly to support research infrastructure and to train
scientists. Well done, Minister.

A fourth and last challenge is that of freedom of experimentation. Freedom
is vital for the development of science and technology, as the collapse of
the Communist countries in Eastern Europe’s economies clearly shows.
History shows, time and again, how political interference and ideological
motivation have stopped and even reversed technological advances. During
the fifteenth century, China had treasure fleets, each consisting of
hundreds of ships with crews of up to 28 000, sailing as far as the East
Coast of Africa. But then the Chinese authorities stopped sending fleets,
disallowed oceangoing shipping, and eventually dismantled the shipyards.
Then China lost its technological lead to the formerly backward Europe.
This destiny-changing event happened because of an ideological decision
that was taken within a highly centralised system.

Science prospers ... [Interjections.] I’ll come to that just now, but it is
good to take some lessons from history. Science prospers in a free society
that encourages diversity and guarantees intellectual property rights. I am
sure Minister Mangena will agree with a fellow mathematician, the highly
acclaimed Robert Oppenheimer, who said of the relationship between science
and society: There must be no barriers to freedom of enquiry. There is no
place for dogma in science. The scientist is free and must be free to ask
any question, to doubt any assertion, to seek any evidence, to correct any
errors. [Applause.]

Private initiative plays a crucial role in the development of science and
technology. Minister Mangena argues that research and development is
critical to economic development, and we agree with him. When he is
concerned about the marked reduction in research and development work by
the private sector, we share that concern with him. More than half of the
current national spending on research and development is still conducted by
the private sector. They will play an even bigger role if they are given
the necessary incentives. Thus the DA welcomes the bigger tax breaks for
companies.

Encouraging co-operation between state and other institutions and also
joint ventures will lead to exciting developments, and I will mention two
examples.

Eerstens, danksy samewerking tussen die staat en nie-staatinstellings – en
die Minister het daarna verwys in sy toespraak – is Suid-Afrika, in menige
opsigte, steeds op die voorpunt van tegnologiese ontwikkeling. Suid-Afrika
se eerste satellite, SunSat, deur die Universiteit van Stellenbosch
ontwikkel, word nou opgevolg deur Leo, met ’n skerper beelddefinisie. Leo
gaan om die aarde wentel en waardevolle inligting na ons toe terugstuur,
ter ondersteuning van landboudienste, die toepassing van omgewingswetgewing
en die bestuur van ons waterbronne, asook oor dreigende natuurrampe, soos
orkane en tsoenami’s. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Firstly, thanks to the co-operation between the state and non-government
organisations – and the Minister referred to this in his speech – in many
respects South Africa is still in the lead with regard to technological
development. South Africa’s first satellite, SunSat, developed by the
University of Stellenbosch, is now succeeded by Leo, with sharper image
definition. Leo will orbit the earth and transmit back to us valuable
information in support of agricultural services, the implementation of
environmental legislation and the management of our water resources, as
well as regarding imminent natural disasters such as hurricanes and
tsunamis.]

Secondly, a South African multiparty delegation recently attended a
congress of the Interparliamentary Union in Kenya. I was privileged to be
part of the team, consisting of members Madikiza of the UDM – he is not
here today; Lucas of the IFP; Greyling of the ID; Njikelana, Mgabadeli and
Bapela of the ANC, with the NCOP Deputy Chairperson Peggy Hollander as the
leader. On our last evening in Nairobi, the SA High Commissioner Memela
hosted a function in honour of a South African team that is promoting a
new, cleaner diesel fuel, developed from gas to liquid in a joint venture
between Sasol and Chevron.

The team was driving their 4X4 vehicles throughout Africa, from Cape Town
to Qatar, promoting this new fuel. Their vehicles were parked outside the
hotel and attracted a lot of attention from the public and media alike. The
vehicles were clearly marked, African Renaissance. I am holding this up and
I hope you can see it. There is the South African team with one of our
delegates and the vehicle clearly marked. The DA supports Minister Mangena,
the professional officials in his departments, their objectives and this
Budget Vote. The DA agrees: A South African Renaissance requires - no,
indeed demands - a greater focus on science and technology. [Applause.]

Mr A MLANGENI: On a point of order: The hon Dreyer makes some very
important and interesting points, which would have been appreciated if she
were a member of the Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology. When
has she joined it, because I don’t remember seeing her in that committee?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O BAPELA): I don’t think it is a point of
order. Let us leave it like that.

Mr W P DOMAN: The hon member must just check his ATCs and then he’ll know.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O BAPELA): Thank you. I said that it was not a
point of order. I am ruling it out of order. I want to take this
opportunity to recognise two guests on the gallery as being among the
guests of the Office of the Speaker. They are Basetsana Ramokoka from the
Fezeka High School and also Tersia Cupido, grade 10, from the Harold
Cressey High School. There they are. They were just about to walk out.
[Applause.] They are here as part of Parliament’s Take a Girl Child to
Work. Parliament is also involved in that project. I want to acknowledge
their presence.

Mnr H J BEKKER: Mnr die Voorsitter, dit is ’n voorreg om te volg op die agb
Dreyer, en as die probleem van die agb Mlangeni ook ter sprake is daar, sal
hy nog ’n slag weer moet dink as hy my hier sien! (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[Mr H J BEKKER: Mr Chairman, it is a privilege to speak after the hon
Dreyer, and if the problem of the hon Mlangeni is also under discussion
there, he will have to think again if he sees me here!]

In 2003-2004 South Africa spent about R10 billion on research and
development. That’s about 0,81% of our gross domestic product. That amount
was already R3 billion more than the 2001 figure and shows that the country
realised the importance of diverting more financial resources to research
and development.

Mr Minister, your announcement today that you will endeavour to increase
funds allocated to research and development to 1% of GDP is a step in the
right direction. We wish you well in your crusade to change the mindset in
South Africa. The IFP welcomes that recognition on the part of government.
However, we still lag far behind countries such as Sweden and Finland,
which spend 4% and 3,5% of their GDPs respectively.

South Africa’s research and development spend is less than that of even
countries like China and the Russian Federation. In addition to the
comparatively low spending of South Africa, the country has a further
problem in that we have only 2,2 researchers per 1 000 employees. Even
though South Africa had recently realised that more funding for research
and development was needed, it financed about 30% of the country’s total
research and development spending whilst the balance came from statutory
bodies and the private sector.

The private sector, in particular, spends about 50% of all research and
development money and performs 55% of all the research and development work
in South Africa. It is therefore clear that we have a three-way problem:
not enough funding, not enough scientists and researchers and not enough
research and development performed by state institutions. It is therefore
poignant to ask the question: What must South Africa do to advance science
and technology, and research and development to create world-class
technologies and products? The answer is straightforward: spend more, train
more scientists and researchers, and create an enabling environment in
which they can perform to the best of their ability.

Our country’s history is rich in world-class scientific and technological
innovations. There is no reason why its present and its future should not
be the same. If we do what the IFP proposes, we are confident that South
Africa’s scientists can come up with innovative technologies and products
that will not only feature on the high technology world stage but can also
make a difference in the daily lives of our people, many of whom live in
abject poverty and at this stage do not always benefit from scientific
advances, or sometimes such advances do not reach our rural community who
count amongst the poorest.

In order to achieve success in science and technology, we have to start at
school level. It will be of little use if we increase funding but still
have a limited number of scientists and researchers who will do something
with it. We must prepare our children at school level so that they can
pursue science and technology at tertiary level.

The shocking figures of Matric, regarding mathematics, also indicate the
need and shortage of qualified and dedicated science and mathematics
teachers in this country. South Africa must therefore concentrate more on
science education of our children. Schools must be resourced fully with
scientific equipment, especially computers so that the younger generation
can be fully computer literate. More children should be encouraged to take
science subjects and mathematics to fully prepare them for eventual careers
in science and technology and also for innovation. Only if our younger
generation turns to science and technology early will we be able to reap
the rewards later.

Minister, your recognition of this essential switch in education priorities
is indeed welcomed. Not only do we require scientists but our greatest
shortage concerns technical assistance and technicians. Many of these
technicians can be trained through practical training, which can even be
done outside our universities and technikons.

We are proud of the positive moves that are taking place at the moment.
Also, I would like to mention in this regard Denel, particularly Kentron
and Denel Optronics. They should find partnerships in developing advanced
surveillance and defence systems. The added benefit, particularly through
partnerships with British Aerospace and Saab Gripen, will lead to financial
success, which can eventually turn the financial fortunes of Denel around.
In public entities, research and development - as well as worthwhile
innovative projects in the private sector - should be supported.

Thank you, hon Minister, for your efforts regarding ground-to-space
surveillance. That goes even far beyond the SALT at Sutherland. Should we
be successful with our bid regarding the site in the Northern Cape, this
will be a tremendous developmental boost for one of the poorest areas in
our country. Our best wishes go with the government with regard to this
particular aspect.

Mr Minister, in the few seconds that I am left with, I want to say that we,
from the IFP side, support this budget indeed. We wish you and the Deputy
Minister very well. You are doing outstanding work and we admire that.
Thank you very much. [Applause].

Mr A R AINSLIE: Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Minister and colleagues,
thank you very much. Chairperson, I thought the hon Mr Mlangeni made a very
valuable point. If the hon Mrs Dreyer attended the portfolio meetings, she
would know that the matter of science education and mathematics education
at schools is being dealt with by both the Department of Science and
Technology, and the Department of Education.

In fact, we had a meeting on this very question on Wednesday, at which the
hon member was absent. If for whatever reason she cannot attend these
meetings, she should get a briefing from her colleagues, who also ought to
attend.

The ANC noted at its 51st National Conference at Stellenbosch, in 2002,
that the eradication of poverty is an indispensable requirement for
sustainable development. It further noted that local economic development
is critical for employment-creating growth. The conference resolved to
develop local economic development strategies that stimulate local
production and commerce, including home industries, and to build
institutions that stimulate commercial initiatives and broaden ownership.

It is in this context of eradicating poverty and creating local economic
development that we must locate the Budget Vote of the Department of
Science and Technology. Science and technology impacts on every aspect of
human activity, from space science and medical science to agricultural
science and sports science.

The issues that the department deals with often cut across other
departments, for example, issues of water, energy and sanitation. It is for
this reason that there is close collaboration between the Department of
Science and Technology and other departments. In South Africa, an important
aspect of science is its application in meeting the needs and challenges of
the second economy, poverty, unemployment, and marginalisation.

In this regard, the department, through the entities falling under its
control, and in co-operation with other government departments, is making
an important contribution to the elimination of poverty, the creation of
employment and bridging the divide between the formal and informal
economies.

The crosscutting nature of the department’s interventions, the need for
departmental collaboration, and the social impact that technology can make
are well illustrated by an example given by the Deputy Minister in the
department’s 2004-05 annual report. The Deputy Minister reports that the
Department of Science and Technology and the Buffalo City Municipality
launched a pilot project focusing on the water, sanitation and energy needs
of 290 homes.

The municipality’s approach to water-borne sanitation was unsustainable.
Officials came up with an innovative solution, and demonstrated that dry
sanitation can be placed inside the house, without odour or hygiene
problems. They have also shown that the so-called grey water can be safely
managed on site by the homeowner.

The result is that there will be no need for sewerage reticulation or
treatment works, and the municipality will save money and the system will
be more environmentally friendly. As the Deputy Minister pointed out, this
project also illustrates that poverty alleviation and large innovative
projects can be simultaneously managed in a complementary manner. The
success of such initiatives is borne out by their wide social impact.

The department employs three key approaches in its attempt at eradicating
poverty: Firstly, poverty alleviation strategies; secondly, income-
generating initiatives, and thirdly, sustainable human settlement
strategies, which include initiatives to improve service delivery.

I wish to spend a little time in looking at the projects, which fall under
the categories of poverty alleviation and income generation.

The department has been involved in a wide range of poverty alleviation
projects. Many of these are on display outside in the foyer, next to the
old Assembly Chamber, and we appeal to members to spend some time there, to
look at what is available.

Some of these projects include beekeeping; indigenous food; mohair in the
Eastern Cape; leather in KwaZulu-Natal and North West; seeds, essential
oils, plant fibre in Mpumalanga and Limpopo, and papermaking in the Free
State and Western Cape, to mention a few.

It is important for Members of Parliament, especially the ANC Members of
Parliament, to be aware of any projects falling in their constituencies or
in their regions. Our interventions in nurturing such projects and guiding
them when problems arise can mean a difference between success and failure.

This has certainly been the case in my rural constituency of Ndwendwe in
KwaZulu-Natal, where we have projects linked to small-scale mining and
agriculture. One gains the sense that, after two years of monitoring the
success and sometimes the failure of these projects, the department now has
a sense of what works and what does not work.

This is important if we are to replicate successful projects in other parts
of the country. There have been some exciting successes, and I want to
mention one in a little bit of detail because I believe it illustrates some
important points.

The Hydroponics Project at Beaufort West in the Karoo is managed by the
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research. Hydroponics is the ancient
science and art of growing plants in a medium other than soil. In the case
of Beaufort West, the medium used is koya. This is irrigated with water in
which all essential plant nutrients have been dissolved. This results in
rapid plant growth and higher yields compared to conventional cultivation.

During the portfolio committee’s oversight programme last year, we visited
the project. It is a section 21 company, employing over 60 people, most of
them women. The company was started in 2002 with funding from both the
department and the province.

The Beaufort West Municipality has been very supportive of the project. It
contributes in the form of basic infrastructure, and the provision of
discounted electricity and water. The company produces a variety of
vegetables and herbs, including tomatoes, spinach and coriander. Some
products are sold locally. The bulk is transported in refrigerated vehicles
to two up-market national food chains in Cape Town. The company aims to
deliver up to 1 000 kg of fresh products per week.

The project meets certain key requirements for the success of projects of
this type. Firstly, it was undertaken after in-depth research and proper
feasibility studies. Secondly, workers are thoroughly trained, and the
training is ongoing, and high standards of quality control are applied.
Thirdly, reliable markets were identified early in the development of the
project. As in any sustainable commercial enterprise, the search for new
markets and production opportunities is ongoing. Fourthly, the support of
local stakeholders was secured early in the project. The local municipality
has played an important role in its success. The project also indicates the
key developmental role that government entities falling under the
department, such as the CSIR, can play.

One little cloud on the horizon with regard to this project is its cost. If
we do not manage to bring the costs down, then the long-term sustainability
of this project could be in question.

There can be little doubt that in the few short years of the department’s
existence, it has used the application of science and technology to make an
important contribution to eradicating poverty and the creation of
employment.

As a country, we have set ourselves the target of halving poverty and
unemployment by 2014. The Department of Science and Technology has a
pivotal facilitating role to play in achieving this development goal and
other development goals. The committee’s oversight visits; our numerous
interactions with the department and entities under its control suggest
that there are several areas where we can improve if we are going to make a
meaningful contribution to the eradication of poverty.

The Human Sciences Research Council has undertaken a survey of the
department’s poverty alleviation projects in agriculture, small-scale
mining, and in health and energy sectors. In its preliminary findings, it
has found that the existing batch of technology transfer projects is too
small to have a meaningful impact on South Africa’s poverty.

Too many projects have a technology transfer strategy that is out of sync
with the resources and the needs of the country, and there is a need for
evidence-based technology transfer strategies. Chairperson, is this watch
correct?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): It is not yet time.
Mr A R AINSLIE: Chairperson, following from some of our recent meetings
with the department, I believe that some of these concerns are being taken
care of, and it would be useful if the committee could in fact get a copy
of this HSRC report, and any other reports and any audits that have been
undertaken regarding the various poverty alleviation projects that fall
under the department. Thank you. With that I conclude. The ANC supports the
Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Mr V C GORE: Hon Minister, Deputy Minister and hon members, the Department
of Science and Technology remains one of the unseen and unsung heroes,
compared to other departments in South Africa.

The department continues to move ahead with intent and to make an impact on
the South African society that is often disproportionate to the resources
allocated. In this regard, the ID would like to pay tribute to the outgoing
Director-General, Mr Rob Adams, for the excellent work he has done in
establishing a solid foundation for the department, and we are looking
forward to working with the new Director-General, particularly around Dr
Adam’s establishment of a legacy of innovation.

In particular, the department has been able to put South Africa on the
world map in terms of international research in the field of space and
astronomy research, especially with the opening of the SA Large Telescope.
It is hoped that this accolade, together with the Karoo Array Telescope,
bodes well for the awarding of the Square Kilometre Array Telescope in
South Africa.

Despite these successes, the ID has a number of concerns that we would like
to table. These concerns should not be construed in any way as a lack of
support for the department’s work, but I believe that if these are
addressed, it will add even further to its impact on this country.

Firstly, the ID is concerned that government, in particular the Department
of Science and Technology, continues to spent unnecessary amounts of money
on the pebble bed modular reactor (PBMR). The ID believes that the PBMR
technology is a black hole for resources, and will not have the economic
and social impact as promised.

Additionally, there is a gross imbalance between the amounts of money spent
on nuclear energy and research, and the amount of money spent on renewable
energy resources such as solar, wind, biofuels, geothermal and wave energy.

By way of comparison, R650 million has been spent on pilot projects for
internationally developed research around the PBMR while a paltry amount of
R50 million has been allocated to South African homegrown solar power
research.

The time has come, hon Minister, to put our money were our mouth is,
particularly with making solid commitments to renewable energies, and our
South African commitments to the Kyoto Protocol.

The ID is fully supportive of the department’s efforts around increasing
the levels of skills in maths and science competency through programmes
such as Public Understanding of Science, Engineering and Technology.
However, we believe that these efforts should be doubled, if not trebled,
to accelerate the use of technology in overcoming the socioeconomic
challenges of this country, such as poverty eradication and job creation.
[Time expired.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Chairperson, hon members, as
government, we have set ourselves ambitious but realistic targets to
achieve higher levels of economic growth. We are well on track. Most
analysts say that we are likely to hit the 6% growth target well before
2010. And many economists say that there is no reason why we cannot achieve
an even higher level of growth. But, as the Minister has stressed, we need
to do a number of things with speed to get us there. I would like to add to
this theme: the application of science and technological innovation will
not only enable us to achieve faster growth, it will provide us with the
tools to achieve greater growth and to ensure that our growth path is
sustainable.

Of course, economic growth is only part of the challenge. We have always
been very clear that growth is not an end in itself; it’s a means to an
end, and the ultimate goal is the substantial improvement in the lives of
our people. Shared growth does not mean that there will be some kind of
trickle-down to the poor - it means that our programme to eradicate poverty
and to provide all our people with access to clean running water, decent
sanitation, better education and health services and electricity forms part
and parcel of our chosen economic growth path.

All of these challenges have to be tackled with a sense of urgency and with
speed, and we will need to apply the best of our country’s scientific
expertise to ensure that our policies and programmes have maximum positive
impact on the lives of the poor and that they are sustainable in the face
of scarce and dwindling resources.

The question is: What is the role of science and technology in economic
growth and in the improvement of the quality of life of our people? And
what is the Department of Science and Technology doing in this regard? The
short answer is: a lot! But it is for you, hon members, to satisfy
yourselves that we are moving in the right direction and that we are
applying our budget in the right way.

On the economic front, Minister Mangena has mentioned a number of
programmes that have significant potential to make our country more
competitive internationally and to achieve greater and more rapid growth.
It is widely accepted that among the most serious challenges we face is the
scarcity of well-trained people in certain critical areas. And along with
that comes entrepreneurial ability as well as access to capital and
technology at the SMME level.

A strong economy, and especially one that can achieve the goal of shared
growth, requires a dynamic small business sector. It was in recognition of
this, as well as the realisation that there was a serious gap in the
provision of technical support to SMMEs, that the Tšhumišano Trust was set
up. The programme aims to enhance the innovative capacity and
competitiveness of SMMEs. The Tšhomišano Trust currently supports 10
technology stations covering a range of needs in diversified sectors,
including chemical engineering, electronics materials and processing
technologies, moulded plastics and clothing and textiles. These technology
stations are based at technology universities and technikons around the
country.

The most recently established station focuses on food processing
technologies, and is based just up the road at the Cape Peninsula
University of Technology. I would like to give you a brief description of
the work that is being done at this station. I believe this will give hon
members a better appreciation of the immense potential this programme has,
not only in achieving better performance of our SMMEs, but also in making
these key sectors more competitive.

South Africa’s fresh produce exports account for R12 billion in foreign
exchange revenue. Its growth over the past decade has been facilitated
largely through supply-chain infrastructure in terms of ports, local
manufacturing of tank containers and packaging materials, quality control
and certification bodies.

Post-harvesting and coal chain technologies are evolving at a rapid pace.
If we are to maintain and improve our competitive position in the global
market, we will not only have to introduce new technologies in this
industry, but we will also have to develop our own brand of innovation. If
we fail to innovate, we risk losing market share to competing countries
such as Chile, Brazil, Argentina and Australia. This includes post-harvest
technologies for cooling, disease control, preservation, sorting, packaging
and storage and freight technologies such as refrigerated tank containers.

This food processing station will also do work on packaging technologies,
including biodegradable packaging, nano-silver enhanced packaging,
collapsible crates and pellets, systems control and automation. This would
offer significant economic opportunities to SMMEs in the manufacturing
sector.

The other exciting new development is the establishment of additional
technology stations in agri-food processing in Limpopo and Mpumalanga.
These initiatives, emanating from the department’s izimbizo that were held
in 2003 and 2004, will address an important need in these relatively
underserved provinces. The first of these stations will be launched before
the end of July 2006.

The department is confident that its investment in these areas of
technology will make a real difference in maintaining or developing a
competitive edge in these industries.

I would like to turn now to some of the work the Department of Science and
Technology is doing on the energy front in partnership with the Department
of Minerals and Energy. The Minister correctly said that the Department of
Science and Technology is essentially about working in partnerships with a
number of departments. It will not be possible for our economy to realise
its full potential unless we have a reliable energy supply. Our mines
depend on it, our factories depend on it, and so do our hospitals and
schools. Access to a reliable and affordable supply of energy is crucial to
both our economic growth targets and our social development programmes. No
country in the world has managed to substantially reduce poverty without
increasing its energy use.

What makes this work that we are doing in this field particularly
challenging, though, is that we are not only grappling with the challenge
of affordable and reliable access. Our choices are critical. Over-
exploitation of fossil fuels has resulted in serious pollution and
contributed largely to the disturbing changes in global climate patterns.
The oilfields are fast running dry. Some 92% of our electricity comes from
coal-fired generators, but the supply of coal is not infinite.

In the ANC election manifesto, we made a commitment that all South African
households would have access to electricity by 2012. Huge progress has been
made since 1994, and we are confident that we will meet the target, but our
scientists and researchers will have to give careful thought to a number of
questions: How are we going to extend the benefits of energy access to
people who live in remote rural areas and to many of our poorest people who
live in informal settlements? What should we do to reduce our reliance on
fossil fuels? And what is the Department of Science and Technology doing to
address these challenges?

Although we have a good grasp of the challenges, we need to do some hard
research to identify the best solutions, given our needs and our finite
resources. Much of this research will be done at the Energy Research
Institute to be launched later this year by the Department of Science and
Technology and the Department of Minerals and Energy. SANERI, as this
institute will be known, will be housed at the Central Energy Fund. A total
of R20 million has already been transferred to the fund to get the work
going, and we will invest more than R100 million over the next three years
to develop knowledge and applications in this field.

SANERI is designed to generate new ideas and to develop practical
guidelines for how we can best take advantage of what nature offers us in
the form of clean and renewable energy. Every country has its own potential
renewable energy resources: some have enormous hydroelectricity potential,
others have biomass or wind power. Iceland, for example, gets 70% of its
energy from geothermal and hydropower sources. Wind supplies 20% of
Denmark’s energy. Our challenge is to identify the energy options available
to us and to develop the technologies to fully exploit our own resources.

Harnessing the huge energy potential from sunlight in our own sunny country
is a good starting point. Solar panels are reliable and are already cost-
effective in certain applications such as provision of power to remote
locations. The cost of panels has decreased more than twenty-fold over the
past two decades. Present research focuses on further reducing costs to a
level that will enable widespread use. It is generally accepted that this
goal will be achieved through the introduction of solar panel technologies
involving a variety of new materials.

Scientists from the universities of Johannesburg, Port Elizabeth and
Pretoria are working in a consortium on this project. The successful
establishment of a solar panel industry, driven by local expertise, offers
tremendous potential for addressing South Africa’s economic and social
challenges. Our department is contributing R13 million over the next three
years.

Electricity generation through solar panels is not the only way to capture
the free energy from sunlight. Commercial solar hot water systems can be
bought on the market and, in fact, it makes economic sense for all of us to
convert to solar geysers. The problem, though, is that they are still far
too expensive for poor people, many of whom do not have the luxury of hot
water in their homes.

Our department is piloting a very low-cost solution to address this problem
through the design of a simple hot water heating system. The parts needed
for this newly designed system cost only about R350 and are readily
available at any local hardware store. It can be put together quite simply
using normal household tools. We have a pilot that is based in Kimberley. A
working prototype that heats the water to 50 degrees Celsius has already
been manufactured and is being tested. When the design has been finalised
it will be installed in 100 households in the settlements around Kimberley.
If it proves to be successful it could conceivably be rolled out to
hundreds of thousands of households around the country and really make a
difference to the lives of many of our poorest people. [Applause.] What is
really special about this project is that the development of the technology
is not taking place in a university or a design office, but in fact on the
factory floor by the people who will use it – a great example of local
empowerment and science and technology at work for the people.

Our search for clean energy and reducing our reliance on fossil fuels has
led us in another very promising direction. One of the major hopes for
alternative energy lies in the development of the potential of hydrogen in
what has been termed the hydrogen economy. This is really a hypothetical
future economy in which the primary form of stored energy is hydrogen,
where we would effectively run our vehicles on hydrogen rather than petrol
and diesel. Hydrogen is abundantly available and does not pollute.

Platinum is the key catalytic material used in hydrogen fuel cells and with
80% of the world’s known platinum deposits, it is clear that this could
open up exciting new opportunities for South Africa. As we speak, the focus
is on developing a research and development strategy for hydrogen and fuel
cell technologies. The draft strategy will in fact be finalised next month
and it has been allocated an initial budget of R10 million.

Biofuels represent another potential source, as hon member Gore said, of
clean and renewable energy, and excellent work is being done in partnership
with the Department of Minerals and Energy. The principle is simply that
organic matter can be converted directly into liquid fuels. The two most
common biofuels are ethanol and biodiesel. Work has been completed on the
technical standards for biodiesel and tests have been conducted on six
candidate crops. The biofuels industry initiative, apart from reducing our
reliance on fossil fuels, promises substantial job creation and new
business development opportunities.

So far I have been emphasising expanded access to energy and the need to
move towards clean, renewable sources of energy. But perhaps this is
putting the cart before the horse. We should probably first consider how we
can use less energy or use the energy we have more efficiently. I would
like to briefly tell you what our department is doing in that regard, and
that is to enhance energy efficiency in houses. Unfortunately, most of our
government-provided low-cost houses are so thermally inefficient that
people spend large amounts of money just to keep warm on these bitter
winter nights. Yet it is perfectly feasible to use energy more efficiently
in our housing design and construction.

There are many examples of good design around the country, and our
department, in conjunction with the Departments of Housing and Water
Affairs and Forestry, is seeking to demonstrate and integrate better design
into mainstream thinking. In Buffalo City, as mentioned by hon member
Ainslie, six demonstration houses have been built. These houses are
correctly orientated to benefit from the warming power of the sun and make
use of dry sanitation to reduce the energy required to treat and pump
potable water and sewerage, and these houses will also use insulated
concrete forms and ceilings that have better thermal properties than bricks
or concrete blocks.

Hon member, there is much more we could tell you about. The difficulty the
Department of Science and Technology has in all our budget debates is where
to start and where to end. Science is everywhere – there is science in
sport, science in cooking, science in music, and I guess there is also a
science in ending a speech! [Laughter.]

So, Chairperson, I’ll end by firstly thanking the portfolio committee for
the great support they have given us in our work - I agree there is
potentially a wonderful additional member sitting over there. Secondly, I
would like to extend my appreciation to the Minister for the solid
leadership he provides in the sector; and thirdly, I would like to thank
all members of the department who are sitting there in the gallery for the
passion and dedication with which they tackle their work.

And on that note we have to commend and say goodbye to that short fellow
sitting up there in the Gallery called Dr Rob Adam, who has had a huge hand
in bringing our system to where it is today. [Applause.] And then we
welcome Dr Phil Mjwara, our new Director-General, who we are confident will
take us to even greater heights.

And finally, a special word of thanks to all of the people doing quiet work
behind the scenes in the Minister’s office, in my office – the staff of the
Ministry. Thank you very much, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr B J MNYANDU: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister,
distinguished guests in the gallery, officials of the department and hon
members, the theme of my speech is science and education. It is often
difficult to determine where education ends and where science begins; as
the Deputy Minister has indicated, there is science everywhere. The line is
blurred, given the reciprocal relationship that these two should have, and
the fact that education is both the carrier of knowledge and science in its
own right.

At a systemic level, through schools, education should supply various
faculties of institutions of higher learning with students who should be in
a position to be turned into scientists. In short, schools should lay the
foundation for students to succeed at universities as they pursue their
scientific knowledge. Is this always the case? Do schools always fulfil
this mandate? That’s a question.

Unfortunately, this is not always the case. Education does not always
produce intended outcomes, partly because it is informed by paradigms,
which sometimes contradict one another, and partly because it can be a
useful tool in the hands of an ideologist, such as apartheid masters. For
instance, because of years of apartheid legacy, we have seen how Matric
results contradict university results and, concerning the Nelson Mandela
School of Medicine, the Sunday Times last year reported an 80% dropout rate
among African students. Similarly this year, two weeks ago the same Sunday
Times reported a dropout rate of about 50% among African students in
general at universities in this country.

This situation is in direct contradiction to passes with 75%, or 8 A’s and
7 A’s, etc, that schooling results show at the end of each year. Yes,
indeed, apartheid political philosophy and practice, especially in
education, is dead, but, unfortunately, its demons live on and keep on
raising their heads, as the cited statistics above reflect and as cited by
hon Anchen Dreyer here this morning.

Fixing the results of years of apartheid deschooling, miseducation,
misdirection and deprivation has never been easy. I agree with the Minister
in this regard. This trend is reflected directly by the number of African
students that pursue postgraduate studies. At the moment, one learns that
our system produces one PhD out of every cohort of 500 undergraduate
students.

Given the fact that 80% of the population in this country is African, a
situation like this cannot be allowed to continue, if the country is to
give expression to the new initiatives like Asgisa. That our system should
produce an adequate number of PhDs and other scientists is a must, if there
should be an articulation between schooling and higher education, science
and education. Educators need to be both practitioners and scientists of
their own profession.

Another area of concern, when it comes to schools preparing students for
the higher education world of scientific study, is the dichotomy that
apartheid education created between theory and practice – a notion that
said, “Do theory now and worry about practice later.” Apartheid schooling
became associated with consumption of theory, which would then be practised
- if you were lucky enough to be able to go to university.

In short, there was no simultaneous synergy between theory and practice.
Students studied, for instance, force of gravity without even the slightest
reference to and observation of how this applies to aeronautics. Similarly,
research literacy was a big word often associated with Masters and PhD
students or professors, somewhere at universities.

Today, as we struggle to correct this mess, we are confronted with the
situation where some fourth year students at universities write like Grade
5 learners. We are confronted with situations where most African students
at universities cannot write coherently and logically, which makes them
take longer to finish their research. This state of affairs has been
further complicated by language problems. It is therefore not uncommon for
students to say, for instance, during a lecture, “Can I say this in my own
language, Mr Mnyandu?”, and those kinds of things.

The dichotomy between schooling and university studies in the apartheid
system created a situation where universities were the only custodians of
knowledge production. School children and teachers were viewed as consumers
of knowledge. It’s only the new curriculum that addresses this. Everybody
can now be both constructors and consumers of knowledge.

It was these challenges that brought the departments of science and
education ... [Interjections.] Shut up! It was these challenges that
brought the departments of science and education together to collaborate
with each other to revamp ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member Mnyandu, I found that an
unacceptable way of dealing with other members.

Mr B J MNYANDU: Chairperson, I withdraw. It was these challenges that
brought the departments of science and education together to collaborate
with each other to revamp apartheid education and replace ...
[Interjections.] If only they could keep quiet, hon Chairperson, and keep
their mouths closed, unless their consciences are troubling them.
[Interjections.] They were here – grandmasters designing the apartheid
period. We will keep on referring to it.

The collaboration agreement that was signed in 2004 by the Director-General
of Education and the Director-General of Science and Technology was a
milestone in this regard. This agreement set out eight objectives around
which education and science would collaborate. These are: setting
performance targets for all mathematics, science and technology schools,
especially African and female learners; placing in every mathematics,
science and technology classroom a qualified and competent teacher;
improving the language of teaching and learning mathematics, science and
technology; identifying and nurturing talent and potential in mathematics,
science and technology; making interactive digital content on mathematics,
science and technology available via satellite, television, Internet,
multimedia and education portals; and, most important of all, strengthening
co-operation between the Department of Science and Technology and the
Department of Education in delivering the above objectives.

These initiatives could not have come at a better time. Indeed, as
Shakespeare would say in Julius Caesar, and we say, Minister: “Only Cassius
in bondage can deliver Cassius from bondage.” This budget and that of
Education are committed to the above objectives.

With such collaboration, we can now hope to have a tracking system that
will ensure that the Department of Science and Technology is able to track
students it is investing in, and check if it is getting value for money.
These are the measurables that will tell us if we are winning the war of
producing scientists in this country and whether the spirit of Asgisa will
finally be realised.

There are some areas of concern, though. The logistics put forward are very
exciting. Indeed, we look forward to the age of hope. Some areas of concern
are the following. The mother tongue instruction study conducted in 2002
suggested that African learners from low-income groups, whose language of
instruction is not their mother tongue, continue to obtain lower scores. It
also suggested that, since the curriculum demanded of them to be active
participants, such learners experienced disempowerment, as they could not
express themselves adequately. This is something that will require that a
radical political decision be taken.

As far as self-discipline and motivation are concerned, there is a saying
that says, “a self-disciplined learner is also a motivated learner.” There
is also another one by Foucault that says, “the more disciplined the
individual is, the more one cares for oneself, the more free one will be
and the better one will govern others.” Paradoxically, it continues and
says, “the less disciplined one is, the less free one will be and the worse
one will govern others”. I am glad that even the education budget speech
acknowledged that there is a challenge of discipline in schools. It’s a
challenge that not a single political party should glorify.

Regarding the study leave with pay or stipend, I am one of those who
benefited, some years ago, when teachers enjoyed study leave with pay.
Without benefit and privilege, I do not see how I could have advanced my
studies. I know that there are many challenges, Minister, but I also know
that furthering one’s study, especially for previously marginalised people
at the postgraduate level, advances our country as it increases the number
of researchers.

I think we should aim at making sure that all our educators reach the level
of a Masters degree, so that that can create synergy between research and
literacy at lower and advanced levels of education.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, your time has expired.
Mr B J MNYANDU: The ANC supports the budget, Mr Minister. Thank you very
much. [Applause.] [Time expired.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, Minister, Deputy Minister, science and
technology are the forerunners in our development as global competitors and
in the advancement of modernising and constructing the new-age South
Africa. Science and technology influences in the various departments of
government – be it in health, education or transport - are vital in
bringing South Africa in line with global trends and development. Science
and technology also serves greatly in developing solutions for our many
challenges as there are many projects working on finding a cure for
HIV/Aids.

The MF realises the benefits our scientific and technological sector holds
for our nation. We further commend the hon Minister and our Department of
Science and Technology for steering us in terms of development, discovery
and growth. Crucial in this development are the relations we forge abroad,
lending our ideas and sharing our advances that serve progress and findings
and introduce new methods and machinery for various faculties.

We have much to learn from places like India, where science and mathematics
geniuses are many. The MF feels that strong relationship-building and
visiting places abroad will enable us to get the tools to make progress in
our own development.

The MF notes the Department of Science and Technology’s endeavours to
promote greater growth in gender equality in this sector. The science award
is a great motivation and encouragement, but the MF feels that persons in
the medical and other science fields, such as microbiology and our doctors
and nurses, need also to be commended in the light of awards for their
great work and contribution.

The MF calls for an intense recruitment initiative to influence female
learners to pursue engineering among other fields of science in order to
have a balance in gender equity. In terms of the budget, we see the
department has experienced a strong increase, which we welcome. We also see
that much of the budget is aimed at developing science and technology
infrastructure. The MF supports the Budget. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Prof I J MOHAMED: Hon Chair, it is an honour for me to participate in the
Budget Vote of the Department of Science and Technology, and I support this
Vote on behalf of the ANC.

Hon Minister Mangena, hon Deputy Minister Hanekom and Director-General
Mjwara, it a pleasure for me to support the Budget Vote of your department.
We are confident that the Budget Vote will drive the department to meet
several of the challenges of science and technology, and help to create an
advanced technological base for the development of industry and the
economy. We are sure that this will help to meet the social challenges of
job creation, unemployment and poverty.

I shall briefly outline the programmes of the department and their
dedicated allocations to meet the targets set. I shall also discuss in more
detail Programme 4: Frontier Science and Technology. The five programmes
dedicated to serving departmental objectives and meeting the required
targets are as follows: Programme 1: Administration, which provides core
support services including finance, human resources, legal services and IT;
Programme 2: Science and Technology Expert Services, which provides the
line programmes, the executive committee and the national system of
innovation with expert content-based services; Programme 3: International
Co-operation and Resources - this programme develops bilateral and
multilateral co-operation in science and technology to strengthen the
national system of innovation. It also establishes capacity to monitor and
evaluate international science and technology trends; Programme 4: Frontier
Science and Technology - provides leadership for long-term and cross-
cutting research development, innovation and human capital development; and
Programme 5: Government Sectoral Programmes and Co-ordination, which
provides leadership and support to other government departments for sector-
specific research, development and technology.

The total budget allocation is R2,614 billion and increases to
R3,25 billion over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework period, an
increase of 16,7%. Budget allocations by programme are as follows:
Administration has R211 million but will decrease to R87 million over the
MTEF period; Science and Technology Expert Services has R52 million and
will increase marginally to R58 million over the MTEF period; International
Co-operation and Resources has R132 million and increases to R177 million
over the MTEF period; Frontier Science and Technology has R1,4 billion and
increases to R1,6 billion over the MTEF period; and Government Sectoral
Programmes and Co-ordination has R0,4 million, which increases to R0,6
million over the MTEF period.

We note that the amount allocated to astronomy increases from the small
R8 million to R127,6 million over the MTEF period, an increase of 1 495%.
This increase will put South Africa on an equal footing with Chile, our
major competitor in astronomy, as a world-class observational facility of
astronomy.

This will strengthen the South African bid as a major contender for the
Square Kilometre Array project, which is of worldwide importance and will
attract researchers to the Southern African region if we win the bid. This
would be of tremendous importance for South Africa and the Southern African
region.

There are a large number of public organisations that undertake science and
technology research and activities, which are of fundamental importance to
our region and to science and technology. Some of the biggest ones crucial
to developing our national knowledge base are the Council for Scientific
and Industrial Research, the National Research Foundation, which is the
funder of the research, the Human Sciences Research Council, and the
Medical Research Council, to name a few.
The Frontier Science and Technology programme is by far the largest
programme of the Department of Science and Technology’s and is allocated
R1,633 billion, and some 62,5% of the DST’s Budget Vote. Of this,
R833 million is spent on Frontier Science, which is crosscutting research,
development and innovation for a world-class science and technology
resource-serving industry, academia and research institutions.

An amount of R750 million is spent on national programmes of knowledge and
human capital. Focus areas include astronomy, human palaeontology and
indigenous knowledge systems. In future, this programme will also fund
research chairs in South African universities in strategic areas.

The Frontier Science and Technology programme makes large transfers to
centres of excellence in the universities, the Biotechnology Strategy, the
National Laser Centre, the Square Kilometre Array telescope, and the
Southern African Large Telescope, all of which are of international
importance.

The department has made major efforts over a number of years to increase
our allocation of research and development, as a percentage of the gross
domestic product. It is well known that the expenditure on R&D as a
percentage of GDP is an important factor in improving our global
competitiveness. It enables us to be more effective players in the global
market and, thus, helps us reach leadership levels in that market.

The DST and the Department of Finance have set an intermediate goal of 1%
for the MTEF period. This is still far short of the levels of that of the
major technologically advanced countries, but it will give our country a
major boost. By comparison, some of the countries in 2003 had much higher
rates. Sweden, for example, had 4,27%; Finland had 3,49%; Japan had 3,15%;
Denmark had 2,62%; the USA had 2,59%; the UK had 1,89%; while in 2001
Australia reached 1,49%. At that time South Africa had 0,69%, which, of
course, subsequently increased. Malaysia had 0,4%; and South Korea had
2,47%.

This means that on the international market it is harder for us to compete,
unless we can provide real leadership in products or we have a geographic
or natural resource advantage for certain products, such as clear night
skies for astronomy, and, for example, gold and diamonds.

The budget allocations by the Department of Finance for 2006 have made
major concessions to increase the capacity in science and technology.
Research and development receives an additional grant of R285 million,
which will increase to R430 million in 2007-08 and to R600 million in 2008-
09, giving a total of R1,355 billion.

Minister Manuel also referred to the need to increase innovation and
investment in new technology capable of competing internationally. The
pebble bed modular reactor and the Nuclear Energy Corporation of SA - Necsa
- will receive an additional R600 million in 2006-07, and an extra amount
of R850 million over the MTEF period. The PBMR will help to cut down on
electricity outages when it comes into operation, as it will take a
considerable time for Eskom to build new power stations. This is important
so that industrial activity can go ahead uninterrupted.

All in all, additional expenditure allocated in the budget for industrial
development, science and technology over the MTEF period will be
R3,015 billion. The DST is taking the lead in a satellite development
project, part of a three-year integrated capacity-building initiative for
the aerospace industry. The intention is to increase satellite-engineering
capacity and launch South Africa’s second micro satellite.

Under policy priorities ...
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, your time has expired.

Prof I J MOHAMED: I would like to just say finally that the various
meetings of the Minister of Science and Technology with the Department of
Finance have paid off, and I particularly would like to acknowledge Dr Rob
Adam ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, you should have done that
in your allocated time. I regret your time has expired.

Prof I J MOHAMED: I particularly ... [Laughter.] ... acknowledge Dr Rob
Adam for the work he has done. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Madam Chairperson, Minister and Deputy Minister, one
of the paradoxes of science is the fact that whilst science has the
potential to change human life for the better, it also poses the potential
to destroy this very noble possibility. And the manner in which world
history has unfolded continues to prove that this paradoxical character of
science is not just imaginary but real.

We are all aware of the agonising paths that we travelled as a people and
the sacrifices we had to make when we had to free ourselves. During that
time, science had been turned against the people. That is why one of the
primary objects of AZAPO’s struggle is to develop a world-class education
system that will enable all our people to participate equally and
meaningfully in the pursuit of scientific knowledge.

However, this pursuit of scientific knowledge should not be for its own
sake. This pursuit must, amongst others, help our country and its people to
improve their quality of life. AZAPO is fully conscious of the fact that we
have not as yet reached this stage of our development.

AZAPO also wants to acknowledge the significant advances that the DST has
made in many crucial areas. AZAPO is particularly pleased by the DST’s
constant attempts to demystify the elitism in science through its programme
in science and youth. We however, wish to add that our only hope of
sustaining the possibility and multiplying these modest gains is by placing
greater emphasis on the programmes that focus on the young people of our
country. This we believe will help to maintain a healthy balance between
science and conscience. The director of the international ...
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: I thank you. AZAPO supports the Budget Vote.
[Applause.]

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: Voorsitter, alvorens ek my toespraak begin, wil ek graag
aanhaal uit verlede Sondag se Sake-Rapport:


  Die metaal- en ingenieursektor het in 1982 sowat 13 000 vakleerlinge in
  opleiding gehad. Vandag is daar skaars 3 100. Die mynbedryf se
  vakleerlinge het in 1975 sowat 33 000 getel en teen die jaar 2000 was net
  3 000 en vanjaar slegs 1 440.

Steve Collins van die McCarthy Motor Holdings groep sê:

  Die toelatingsvereistes is al jare dieselfde: graad 9 vir motorbakwerk en
  graad 10 vir vakmanne. Intussen het die tegnologie in die motorbedryf
  egter so vinnig ontwikkel, dat die toelatingsvereiste nie meer voldoende
  is nie. Die vakman het al die insig en begrip van ’n junior ingenieur
  nodig.

SIFSA sê:
  Die beperkte aantal vakleerlinge wat die afgelope jaar by maatskappye vir
  opleiding in diens geneem is, toon hoe die stadige toevloei tot ’n
  droogte van opgeleide mannekrag gaan lei. Daar is byvoorbeeld tans slegs
  sowat 444 passer en draaiers by Mersa se opleiding; 403 meulenaars; 400
  gereedskapmakers en net 70 sweisers.

En dan is die ander probleem dat die gekwalifiseerde Suid-Afrikaanse vakman
se gemiddelde ouderdom 54 jaar is. Dit beteken dat die land wanneer die
vakmanne oor tien jaar aftree, met ‘n groot droogte aan passers en
draaiers, ketelmakers en andere gaan sit. Dit is tegnologie. Die mense wat
sorg vir die tegnologiese ontwikkeling van hierdie land. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, before I start my speech I would like to quote from last
Sunday’s Sake-Rapport:

   Die metaal- en ingenieursektor het in 1982 sowat 13 000 vakleerlinge in
   opleiding gehad. Vandag is daar skaars 3 100. Die mynbedryf se
   vakleerlinge het in 1975 sowat 33 000 getel en teen die jaar 2000 was net
   3 000 en vanjaar slegs 1 440.


Steve Collins from the McCarthy Motor Holdings group says:

   Die toelatingsvereistes is al jare dieselfde: graad 9 vir motorbakwerk en
   graad 10 vir vakmanne. Intussen het die tegnologie in die motorbedryf
   egter so vinnig ontwikkel, dat die toelatingsvereiste nie meer voldoende
   is nie. Die vakman het al die insig en begrip van ‘n junior ingenieur
   nodig.


SIFSA says:

   Die beperkte aantal vakleerlinge wat die afgelope jaar by maatskappye vir
   opleiding in diens geneem is, toon hoe die stadige toevloei tot ‘n
   droogte van opgeleide mannekrag gaan lei. Daar is byvoorbeeld tans slegs
   sowat 444 passers en draaiers by Mersa se opleiding; 403 millers; 400
   gereedskapmakers en net 70 sweisers.


And then the other problem is that the average age of qualified South
African tradesmen is 54 years. This means that when these tradesmen retire
in 10 years’ time there will be a shortage of fitters and turners,
boilermakers and others in the country. That is technology. The people in
charge of the technological development of this country.]
I want to appeal to the Minister and the Deputy Minister to raise the
profile of the technology component of their department. Technology is what
drives successful economies around the globe. Mining, which can be regarded
as the pillar of South Africa’s economy, is doomed to a standstill if
miners are not trained to use modern mining technology.

This newspaper article shows how the skilling of tradesmen has gone down by
some 90% in recent years. Local government, we know, is in chaos because
they have lost, not scientists but technologists, those people who must
maintain the power supply, the fresh water supply, the roads, the traffic
lights and the equipment belonging to local government.

The productive rating of a nation does not depend on its medical, its
legal, or elite government officials. It depends on the technologists and
the skills to use the technology in their fields. Yes, these professionals
play an important role in the efficiency rating of a nation and their
skills are vitally important to ensure that productivity levels stay high.
But, from the farmer to the weather forecaster, technology and their skills
will determine the size of the harvest.

We all know that many local governments around the country are facing
bankruptcy because: (a) they fail to deliver the necessary services; (b)
they fail to collect the money for the services that they are rendering,
and they no longer have the skilled staff, the trained technologists, to
install, operate and maintain the equipment.

Every member here is familiar with the prepaid electricity meter, an
instrument that can save local government from bankruptcy; a technological
innovation that can create thousands of jobs. It is an instrument that can
be exported all over Africa, all over the world. It was designed and first
installed in South Africa. It is a South African technological piece of
equipment. If it is installed in every home in South Africa, it will create
thousands of sustainable jobs in every province.

The card that is used by the prepayment meter and the distributors will
create thousands of jobs at pay points, where these consumers will have to
reload the card, like the lotto card. Technology is extremely important in
creating sustainable jobs and growing our economy. Prepaid meters will,
from my point of view, create far more sustainable jobs in every town,
province and city.

If necessary, Madam Chair, the department should bring forth a report on
this matter, on technology and its development in our nation. Technology is
here to stay, it is the tool that will close the poverty gap. The Deputy
Minister has referred to this. This department must focus more on
technology than on space exploration. If a brand new motorcar’s
malfunctioning airbag cannot be repaired, this is of far greater
consequence for the lady behind the steering wheel than what is happening
in outer space.

If a traffic light fails to signal red, only the gravediggers stay employed
in our towns and cities. Only a small number of people in every nation are
scientists, whilst every individual meets up with technology, from the man
who paints the road markings to the pilot and the nurse, from the toddler
to his grandparent.

We talk of transformation. Nothing transforms at a faster rate than
technology and technology, never remains stagnant, it continues to change
and improve. And for that reason, if we wish to compete in the league of
developed nations we must concentrate more on technology and on how to
empower our workforce to stay abreast of technological developments. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Ms B T NGCOBO: Madam Chairperson, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, as we
celebrate the first decade of our Constitution, we have a major task to
transform the provisions of the Constitution into a living reality,
particularly in this age of hope.

This year we are also celebrating the 50th anniversary of the Women’s
March. Given the impressive progress and our achievements in the last
decade of the Constitution, our task is to consolidate this progress. In
the state of the nation address in February 2006, the President said:

  We have known that it would take considerable time before we could say we
  have eradicated the legacy of the past. We have expected that the
  circumstances handed down to us by our history would indeed condemn us to
  a petty pace of progress towards the achievement of the goal of a better
  life for all.

The Beijing +5 Report declared that a fundamental and necessary component
of development is to ensure that equal opportunity is afforded to women in
science and technology, in line with Asgisa. Access by women to science and
technology is necessary to transfer patterns of productivity, to contribute
to job creation and new ways of working, and in promoting the establishment
of a knowledge-based society, resulting in work creation.

Furthermore, there is a potential to positively contribute to the
improvement of quality of life for women in their households. Also critical
for development is the role of women in society. Women have the greatest
influence on the next generation. They set standards for health and
hygiene, and they form the majority of the agricultural labour force.

``When you educate a woman, you educate the next generation.’’ [Applause.]
Girls in Africa, generally, and South Africa in particular, should be
encouraged to take science subjects, and not only those who will pursue a
scientific and technological career but also those who would then be able
to apply science concepts in their daily lives. Science subjects should be
seen as a means to develop the scientific and technological culture
necessary for development.

The challenge faced by women in South Africa is that the role of women in
the development and sharing of knowledge that contributes to the
improvement of people’s economic status has been limited. The contribution
of outstanding women in scientific research has not been fully recognised.
The non-recognition has resulted in inequity of access by women to research
professions. The lack of prominent women scientists as role models has
hampered public understanding of science, engineering and technology, as
well as participation of women at all levels.

Why does South Africa need women in science and technology? Africa and
South Africa have a critical shortage of trained technological people. In
1980, North America had 2 679 scientists and engineers involved in research
and development per million of the population. Latin America had 250, while
Africa had only 49. In 1993, the US had 7 600, and Japan had 7 300. No
figures are available for Africa.

Increasing the number of trained people in technology is critical for
development for both men and women. Human resource disaggregated data in
science and technology in 1996 shows that 26,8% are women. More
disconcerting is the fact that in 1990, 15% of all scientific publications
were by women. This rate has decreased to 14% over the last decade.

We are thus failing to train our best and brightest, since women account
for 52% of our national population, but they are not proportionally
represented in academia or in industry. This lack of progress requires
strategic interventions. The reality in South Africa is that science,
engineering and technology are keys to economic growth, job creation and
social upliftment.

At the same time, South Africa is faced with an exodus of large numbers of
science, engineering and technological graduates and an ageing research
community, which is predominantly male-dominated. The country has not
actively and vigorously encouraged the largest pool of expertise of women
towards this. In science and technology, women are usually younger and less
qualified; they receive a significantly smaller slice of research inputs,
rewards and recognition. They are clustered in scientific or disciplinary
areas that have traditionally been considered women’s domains.

Regarding the solutions offered by the Department of Science and
Technology, it is with these challenges that the Department of Science and
Technology has created various types of recognition and awards to celebrate
women in science. In 2005, the awards included the following categories:
Distinguished Women Scientists, Distinguished Scientist for Contribution to
the Improvement of the Quality of Life of Women; Best Emerging Young Women,
two L’Oreal South Africa 2006 Fellowships for Women in Science, and three
scientists’ fellowships.

The winners of the awards will be announced at a function that will be held
in Johannesburg on 4 August, which is Women’s Month. The department has
also come up with gender mainstreaming in activities, programmes and
projects of government. The DST has established an African reference group
on science and technology with a vision of achieving gender equality. Women
in Research was established in 1996 to deal with issues that empower women
in all aspects of participating in research. Women in Science and
Engineering is a dynamic association for all who support the idea of
strengthening the role of women in science and engineering in the country.

The research foundation supports black women to develop and strengthen
their research capacity. Science and Technology was mandated by Cabinet to
play an integrating role with regard to health and technology in South
Africa.

It concentrates on developing new technologies and interventions as well as
advancing basic knowledge of biology and human behaviour. There are a
number of innovation projects that the DST has been involved in. The
malaria initiative was launched in March 2006 and it is implemented through
the Africa Centre for Gene Technology, housed at the University of Pretoria
for which the Department of Science and Technology, between 2006-08, will
be contributing    R11,95 million.

There is the tuberculosis research initiative, whose contribution is the
reduction of the burden related to tuberculosis, including multidrug
resistance nationally, continentally and globally. The microbicide research
intends developing a low-cost, safe, effective and acceptable microbicide
by 2012, to be generally available for distribution in South Africa and the
region.

This would be in line with the Millennium Development Goals, which are
intending to reverse the spread of HIV by 2014. In 2006, the DST funded the
International Microbicide Conference that was held in Cape Town by April
with an amount of R500 000. The initial amount was allocated for the 2004-
05 financial year. The concept of the Aids Vaccine Initiative was launched
between 1997-98. The Department of Science and Technology’s contribution of
R20 million between 2005-06 will be used for scientific and biotechnology
components and the development of human capital. Regarding the Telemedicine
Project 1 Workstation, an initial amount of R500 000 was allocated in 2004-
05.

There is co-operation between Brazil, India and South Africa, which is
looking into a number of areas. South Africa is looking at malaria and
tuberculosis. India is looking into HIV/Aids and malaria. So, this co-
operation between Brazil and South Africa will help in improving all these
schedules. The ANC approves the budget. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: [Inaudible.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Switch on the mike, please.

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Hon Chair. [Interjections.] Yes,
it’s not working in Parliament.

I wish to thank the hon members for their participation in the debate. All
the inputs have been very positive and encouraging indeed, not only for us,
the Deputy Minister and myself, but for officials in the department.

We will take all those inputs into consideration in our work as we go
forward. We think it is very important that we know what the hon members
think about our work.

There is only one regret I have, that members of this House did not
recognise the fact that the Deputy Minister and myself are very handsome
indeed, and no one commented. [Laughter.] [Applause.] Our officials in the
office thought we were so handsome that they put flowers on our lapels, and
nobody said anything about it.

Several members noted that we are a crosscutting department, and that’s
very important. We work with all departments of state, be it security, be
it policing, be it agriculture, etc. It is exciting and a boon, but it is
also a problem. Many times we don’t know, as we negotiate with our
counterparts, when is the right time to enter something and when is the
right time to leave a particular thing, that is, when is a project mature
to be handed over, if it has a technology element to it.

We are always negotiating and we are learning all the time, and I think in
time we will be able to get to a point where we are able to recognise our
limits and the limits of the other departments.

The hon Dreyer raised several points, some of which included the crisis in
energy, which is not only in our country, but the world over. I think that
the Deputy Minister, in his input, addressed some of those issues that hon
Dreyer raised. But, the important thing is that members of the portfolio
committee are waiting for you, girl, to go there. Is it parliamentary? Can
I call her a girl, if it’s in a nice way? [Interjections.] She is. Okay,
thank you very much.

On the freedom of scientists, our scientists are not any more restricted
than others the world over, even in the well-established systems of the
developed world. They are only limited by a number of factors, which are
common to all countries and all societies. Firstly, we don’t have all the
resources in the world to give them to do what they want.

Secondly, there are issues of safety. They are not free to dabble in issues
related to weapons of mass destruction, for example. They aren’t free to do
that.

Thirdly, they are embedded in this society and this society directs what is
acceptable and what is not; what it wants and what it doesn’t and what it
needs at a particular time.
Various members, including the hon Blanché, the hon Ainslie and others,
talked about the issues that confront our society at the moment relating to
poverty, unemployment, etc. Those issues need to be addressed by all of us,
including our scientists. That is why, in our input, we were saying that it
is terribly important that scientists recognise technologies that will be
useful to alleviate poverty in our society. Those are limiting aspects in
their work, but nobody is telling our scientists what to do.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Minister, could you please take
your seat.

Mr A MLANGENI: Madam Chair, through you to the Minister, I would like to
add one more factor that limits the scientists from doing as they wish, and
that is, the world is overpopulated and we don’t want any human cloning,
please.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, you are completely out of
order. [Laughter.] Please continue, hon Minister.

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: I think the problem, Madam Chair,
is that you didn’t allow him to speak here. May I please appeal to the ANC
to put him on the list of speakers? [Laughter.] And we did miss you, hon
member.

In South Africa, as I was just saying, we believe that we’ve got the
correct balance between blue sky research, directed research, applied
research, etc. We talk about it all the time. And in the universities and
elsewhere, we believe that our scientists, subject to all these things that
we have said, are really free to do as they please.

The hon Ainslie referred to issues of poverty, and I think there is a sense
in which the Deputy Minister addressed that issue, not only in the previous
budget speech, but even in his input. But, we agonise about these issues
that you have raised, relating to alleviation of poverty, all the time.

The hon Gore bemoaned the fact that we seem to be spending too much on
research, on the PBMR, on nuclear energy, and spending very little on solar
power energies or technologies, etc. We, as the Department of Science and
Technology, strictly speaking, enter that arena only from the point of view
of human resource development. We develop the skills of scientists, etc, to
engage in that debate or in that research or activity.

But, the Department of Minerals and Energy and the Department of Public
Enterprises are the core departments that drive that process, and we
support it 100%. If we want to be at the cutting edge of world science and
technology, we should engage in research, some of which is expensive and
risky; it might not succeed. However, you don’t win by not taking risks.

A few years back - I think two decades back - I went to India. The Tata was
an ugly little car running around and I think nobody wanted it. But, they
kept at it. I imagine that they invested billions and billions of rands.
Today the Tata is running on our highways. They have invested lots of
money.

So, we should identify areas of research and technology in which we can put
our resources, energies, expertise and the abilities of our people, stretch
their abilities and see whether we cannot produce products that will not
only put us at the cutting edge of world technology, but also benefit us
economically. As we know, energy is terribly important in our economic
development at the moment.
Hon Mahomed, thank you very much for your comments on astronomy, on the
Square Kilometre Array bid, etc. In fact, next week the Premier of the
Northern Cape and I will be going to inspect the site where we are
proposing the bid should be.

We are very optimistic, sanguine and upbeat that we are on the right track,
and that we will make a contribution towards, particularly in terms of
astronomy, the economy of the Northern Cape. We are getting there and we
are very upbeat, and we hope that in the near future we will be able to
announce to this House that we have landed the bid.

Concerning the point raised by the hon Nefolovhodwe, indeed, science has
some negative aspects. However, this depends on our ethics and orientation,
and on what we want to do with science. We have, as a department, a public
understanding of science, and we try and ensure that as many of our people
as possible understand what science and technology is about; that they are
able to embrace it; that we and our scientists are subjected to public
scrutiny.

The public knows what we are doing in biotechnology, in nuclear energy and
in all sorts of things. There is a need for interaction with our society so
that the society knows what we are doing. We shouldn’t just disappear in
our laboratories and the society that supports and funds us does not know
what we are about. However, society should also be able to feel safe and be
assured that its scientists are working in their interests, not against
them.

Finally, concerning the contribution of hon T Ngcobo, who talked so
passionately about the inclusion of women in science and technology, we
couldn’t have said it better. We believe that we have a sound science
system in this country. The fundamentals are correct. We have some
fantastic scientists. The only problem is that it is narrowly based.

The majorities, which are women and black people, are still
underrepresented in that system, and we think that in order to strengthen
it we must bring in these majorities, black people and women. As you
correctly pointed out, we will be able to bring more youngsters into the
science system if there are more women in the system, because they are
critical in bringing the young into the world and mentoring ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Minister, you have to conclude,
please.

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Thank you very much. I have indeed
concluded, but I wish to thank the hon members, once more, and the people
from the science system who are up there in the public gallery. Thank you
very much for a wonderful debate. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 11:57.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of the Assembly


    The following member will vacate his seat in the National Assembly with
    effect from 1 June 2006:

    Mngomezulu, G P.

2.    Appointment of Whips


    The following members have been appointed as whips in the National
    Assembly with effect from 28 March 2006:

    Ms D M Morobi (ANC)
    Mr B G Magwanishe (ANC)
    Ms N D Ngcengwane (ANC)

3.    Membership of Committees


    The following changes have been made to the membership of Portfolio
    Committees, viz:



    Labour

    Appointed: Weber, Ms H



    Justice and Constitutional Development

    Appointed: Smuts, Ms M

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Safety and Security


     a) Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD) for January
        2004 to December 2004, in terms of section 18(5)(c) of the Domestic
        Violence Act, 1998 (Act No 115 of 1998) [RP 209-2004]

2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism


       a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Environmental Affairs and
          Tourism for 1 April 2005 to 31 March 2010, 2006/07 Review.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly


                      PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION

                 CHAIRPERSON: PROF. SHEPERD MALUSI MAYATULA

                   ANNUAL REPORT: JANUARY to NOVEMBER 2005


1. Secretariat Support to the Committee

1.1   Committee Secretary         :  Mr Steve Morometsi
1.2   Committee Assistant               :  Ms Nthabiseng Mohlomi
1.3   Secretary to Chairperson          :  Ms Zuraynah Van der Meulen
 4. Control Committee Secretary   :     :  Mr Tenda Madima
 5. Researcher (Research Unit)    :      : Mr Wela Manona

2. Chairperson’s overview

Some of the milestones of the activities of this Committee were:
    • The passing of the Education Laws Amendment Bill, which among others
      was intended to introduce the “No-fee schools”, to allow for the
      poorest of the poor, free access to basic education. This was a great
      step towards meeting the international goal of Education for All
      (EFA).
    • The oversight visits to the Further Education and Training Colleges
      (FET) in KwaZulu-Natal, Eastern Cape, Gauteng and the Limpopo
      Provinces. The visit was an eye opener for the Committee. The
      Committee saw the importance of this phase in the skilling of the
      youth in our country and the need for them (FET Colleges) to be
      treated differently from the normal schooling system.
    • The international study tour to Mali and Ghana offered lessons to the
      Committee on how the sister countries in the continent address the
      educational issues.


   For the first time, since the democratic dispensation, towards the end of
   the year under review, the link between the Committee and the provincial
   Departments, through the sitting of the Chairperson in the Council of
   Education Ministers (CEM) was discontinued. This has created a big
   knowledge gap, as the Committee is not aware of developments in the
   provinces. The only source of information is the media.


3. Core Objectives


The objectives of the Portfolio Committee on Education are to:
    • Facilitate public participation,  monitoring  and  oversight  function
      over the legislative processes relating to education
    •  Confer  with  relevant  governmental  and  civil  society  organs  on
      educational matters
    • Enhance and develop the capacity of its Members to exercise  effective
      oversight over the Executive Authority in education
    • Monitor whether the Department of Education fulfil its mandate
    • Process  and  approve  legislation  and  international  protocols  and
      conventions relating to education
    • Participate in National and International educational conferences
    • Confer with the National Council of Provinces on education legislation
      affecting the Provincial Legislatures, and
    • Engage in any activities and programmes aimed at the  development  and
      delivery of quality public education to all South Africans.


   4. List of public entities over which the committee exercises oversight


   4.1 Council on Higher Education (CHE)
    This Council was established by the Higher Education Act (Act 101 of
    1997) and is responsible for advising the Minister on all aspects of
    Higher Education, including functioning arrangements, language policy
    and the appropriated shape and education systems. It also holds
    executive responsibility for quality assurance through its permanent sub-
    committee, the Higher Education Quality Committee (HEQC).


1 Higher Education Quality Committee (HEQC)


    This Sub-Committee of Council on Higher Education has the mandate to
    promote quality assurance in Higher Education, audit the quality
    assurance of Higher Education Institutions and accredit programmes of
    Higher Education.

   4.3      South African Council for Educators (SACE)



    This Council was established in terms of the South African Council for
    Educators Act, No. 31 of 2000. It is responsible for the registration,
    promotion and professional development of educators, and for setting,
    maintaining and protecting the ethical and professional standards of
    educators.

   4.4      Education, Labour Relations Council (ELRC)


    This Council is a bargaining council for education sector and it was
    established in terms of the Labour Relations Act, No. 66 of 1995 as
    amended by the Labour Relations Amendment Act, No. 42 of 1996. The
    Council consists of equal representation of the employer (National and
    Provincial Departments of Education) and the employees (Trade Unions
    representing educators). It aims to create effective and constructive
    labour relations in the education sector and to ensure the promotion and
    transformation of education at all levels of society.
   4.5      National Students Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS)


    The National Student Financial Aid Scheme was established in terms of
    the National Student Financial Aid Scheme Act, No. 56 of 1999. It is
    responsible for allocating loans and bursaries to eligible students,
    developing criteria and conditions for the granting of loans and
    bursaries to students in consultation with the Minister of Education,
    raising funds, recovering loans, maintaining and analysing a database
    and undertaking research for the better utilisation of financial
    resources. The main role is to provide access to Higher Education for
    economically needy but academically able South Africans.

        6. South African Qualifications Authority (SAQA)


    SAQA is a statutory body established in terms of the South African
    Qualifications Act, No. 58 of 1995. Its main functions are to oversee
    the development and implementation of the National Qualification
    Framework, by formulating and publishing policies and criteria for the
    registration of bodies responsible for establishing education and
    training standards or qualifications and for the accreditation of bodies
    for monitoring and auditing achievements in terms of such standards and
    qualifications. To oversee the implementation of the National
    Qualification Framework by ensuring registration, accreditation and
    assignment of functions to the bodies referred to above as well as the
    registration of national standards and qualifications on the framework.
    It must focus on ensuring access, quality, redress and development for
    all learners through an Integrated National Framework of learning
    achievements. It must also take steps to ensure that provisions for
    accreditation are complied with and where appropriate, that registered
    standards and qualifications are internationally comparable.


   4.7      National Board for Education and Training
   The National Board for Education and Training’s task  is  to  advise  the
   Minister of  Education  on  matters  related  to  Further  Education  and
   Training.


   4.8      UMALUSI (General and  Further  Education  and  Training  Quality
   Assurance Council)
   Umalusi, the  Council  for  Quality  Assurance  in  General  and  Further
   Education and Training was established  under  the  General  and  Further
   Education and Training Quality Assurance Act, No. 58 of 2001. It replaced
   the former South  African  Certification  Council  in  April  2002.  This
   Council is mandated  to  monitor  the  quality  assurance  of  providers,
   quality assurance of  qualifications  and  learning  programmes,  quality
   assurance of  assessment  and  reporting  on  quality  in  education  and
   training.


   5. Legislation, International Agreements and other Papers


   5.1      Legislation dealt with:

   The legislation on Education Laws Amendment Bill [B23-2005] was  referred
   to the Committee on 1 August 2005. The Committee received briefings  from
   the Department on the Bill on 5 August 2005.
   On 23 August 2005,  the  Committee  held  a  Joint  meeting  between  the
   Portfolio Committee on Education  and  Portfolio  Committee  on  Sport  &
   Recreation on the Memorandum of Understanding between the two departments
   on school sports. Invitations were extended to  Provincial  Chairperson’s
   of Sport, Arts and Culture. The Committee arranged for public hearings on
   30 August 2005 on the Education Laws Amendment Bill [B23-2005] that seeks
   to amend the South African Schools Act and the  Employment  of  Educators
   Act.  Invitations  were  extended  to  the  stakeholders  through   three
   newspapers namely, City  Press,  Sunday  Times  and  Rapport  to  solicit
   inputs.  On  6  September  2005,  the   Committee   considered   informal
   deliberations on the Education Laws Amendment  Bill  by  Parties.  Formal
   deliberations and inputs  were  considered  on  13  September  2005.  The
   Committee reported on the Bill on 13 September 2005, with amendments. The
   Bill was debated in the House on the 14 October 2005.
   Institutions that made presentations:
      • Federation of Governing Bodies of South African Schools
      • National Professional Teachers’ Organisation of South Africa
      • South African Democratic Teachers Union
      • Federasie van Afrikaanse Kultuurvereniging
      • Affinity Educational Consultants
      • Governing Body Foundation
      • Institution for Health and Development Communication (Soul City).
      • Principal of Silversands Primary School.
      • National Association of School Governing Bodies
      • Governor’s Alliance.
      • South African Foundation for Education and Training.
      • Dr. A Motsoaledi, MEC for Education, Limpopo Province.
   Number of submissions received: 12
   Received two written submissions: (organisations did  not  appear  before
   Committee)
  • Centre for Education Policy and Development
  • Human Rights Commission made written  submissions  but  did  not  appear
    before the Committee.


     2. Number of meetings held and those cancelled


   The Committee conducted 25 meetings varying from briefings  made  by  the
   Department and Public Entities. Hearings were conducted on the  Education
   Laws Amendment Bill.


   6. Oversights and Promotion of Public Participation


1. Oversight Visits:



   As part of the Committee’s oversight responsibility over the department
   and its institutions, the committee undertook the following visits:



   |Date         |Place visited   |Purpose                    |Date of Report |
|25 February  |University of   |To intervene in the        |Report not     |
|             |Free State      |concerns raised by former  |completed and  |
|             |                |Vista University           |was deferred to|
|             |                |incorporated into          |following year.|
|             |                |University of Free State   |               |
|             |                |and Management of the      |               |
|             |                |institution                |               |
|August       |Further         |To assess the readiness of |Reported not   |
|             |Education and   |Further Education &        |completed and  |
|             |Training        |Training Colleges looking  |was deferred to|
|             |Colleges of     |at; governance, access,    |following year.|
|             |Education       |bursaries, residences,     |               |
|             |FET Colleges)   |appointment of Chief       |               |
|             |                |Executive Officers etc.    |               |
|14 October   |JL Zwane Centre |Invitation JL Zwane Centre,|Report to be   |
|             |& Siyaya Musical|Guguletu, Cape Town.       |deferred to    |
|             |project,        |Siyaya HIV/AIDS Musical    |following year.|
|             |Guguletu, Cape  |Project                    |               |
|             |Town            |                           |               |
|15-23 October|Study tour to   |To consult with Ministers’ |Reported not   |
|             |Mali and Ghana  |of Education and Sports    |completed and  |
|             |                |around broad goals and     |was deferred to|
|             |                |education policies. Visit  |following year.|
|             |                |schools, and assessed, fee |               |
|             |                |structures, funding, access|               |
|             |                |to schools etc. Visit      |               |
|             |                |universities and assessed  |               |
|             |                |access to university,      |               |
|             |                |funding, bursaries, etc.   |               |
|             |                |To consult with Ministers’ |               |
|             |                |of Education and Sports    |               |
|             |                |around broad goals and     |               |
|             |                |education policies. Visit  |               |
|             |                |schools, and assessed, fee |               |
|             |                |structures, funding, access|               |
|             |                |to schools etc. Visit      |               |
|             |                |universities and assessed  |               |
|             |                |access to university,      |               |
|             |                |funding, bursaries, etc.   |               |


  6.1.1 Delegation to local visits:
      ❑ UFS: Prof SM Mayatula (ANC), Ms Lorna Maloney (ANC), Mr. B  Mthembu
        (ANC), Mr. GG Boinamo (ANC), Mr. AM Mpontshane (IFP) Mr. BG  Mosala
        (joined  the  delegation)  and  Mr.  Steve   Morometsi   (Committee
        Secretary).
      ❑ FET Colleges (1) Prof SM Mayatula (ANC), Ms PR  Mashangoane  (ANC),
        Ms DG Nhlengethwa (ANC),  Mr.  JJ  Maake  (ANC)  replacing  Mr.  LW
        Greyling  (ID),  Mr.  AM  Mpontshane  (IFP)  and  Steve   Morometsi
        (Committee Secretary).
      ❑ FET Colleges (2) Mr. B Mthembu (ANC), Ms NJ Ngele  (ANC),  Adv.  AH
        Gaum (then NNP), Mr. GG Boinamo  (DA)  and  Tenda  Madima  (Control
        Committee Secretary)
        Provinces visited: Limpopo, Gauteng, Eastern Cape and KwaZulu Natal
        FET Colleges.
    Report: report ready (Limpopo and Gauteng) report for EC and KZN not yet
     ready.
   ❑ JL Zwane Centre, Gugulethu: Prof. S.  M.  Mayatula  (ANC)  and  Ms.  J.
     Matsomela (ANC).

  6.1.2     Delegation to International visits
      ❑ Prof SM Mayatula (ANC), Ms PR  Mashangoane  (ANC),  Mr.  B  Mthembu
        (ANC), Mr. GG Boinamo (DA), Mr. AM Mpontshane (IFP) and  Mr.  Steve
        Morometsi (Committee Secretary).


2. Oversight Briefings:

The Committee called the following institutions  to  appear  before  it,  as
part of oversight over the institutions:
|          |         |                                                                   |
|Date      |Instituti|Purpose of Briefing/Presentation                                   |
|          |on       |                                                                   |
|08        |Departmen|On the Matric Results 2004 with special reference to Mpumalanga    |
|February  |t of     |Province.                                                          |
|          |Education|                                                                   |
|15        |Departmen|Briefing on the infrastructure development on learners learning    |
|February  |t of     |under trees, dangerous and dilapidated buildings.                  |
|          |Education|                                                                   |
|2 February|Departmen|Briefing by the Department on its Strategic Plan 2005-2009.        |
|          |t of     |                                                                   |
|          |Education|                                                                   |
|01 March  |Departmen|Briefing on National School Nutrition programme and Draft Policy on|
|          |t of     |School Uniform.                                                    |
|          |Education|                                                                   |
|08 March  |National |Briefing on the NSFAS Scheme Review.                               |
|          |Student  |                                                                   |
|          |Financial|                                                                   |
|          |Aid      |                                                                   |
|15 March  |Departmen|On Estimates of National Expenditure, Vote, 15, 2005/06            |
|          |t of     |                                                                   |
|          |Education|                                                                   |
|05 April  |Departmen|Briefing on the National Guidelines on School Uniform.             |
|          |t of     |                                                                   |
|          |Education|                                                                   |
|12 April  |Mr       |Briefing on the use of Java Applets and Flash Programmes in        |
|          |Cassiem  |teaching Mathematics, Science and other subjects.                  |
|          |Farouk, a|                                                                   |
|          |former MP|                                                                   |
|31 May    |Nelson   |Briefinn a Report on Education in S.A. Rural Communities focusing  |
|          |Mandela  |on research conducted by HSRC in Kwazulu Natal, Eastern Cape and   |
|          |Foundatio|Limpopo Provinces.                                                 |
|          |n        |                                                                   |
|07 June   |CHE and  |On recent National Review and re-accreditation of MBA programmes   |
|          |HEQC     |and its forthcoming review and re-accreditation of Select Teacher  |
|          |         |Education programmes.                                              |
|14 June   |Departmen|On a report by the Ministerial Committee on Rural Education.       |
|          |t of     |                                                                   |
|          |Education|                                                                   |
|21 June   |Departmen|On the re-vitalization of Further Education and Training Colleges. |
|          |t of     |                                                                   |
|          |Education|                                                                   |
|11 October|Umalusi, |Hearings on Annual Reports 2004/05 (Reports adopted on 8 November) |
|          |CHE and  |                                                                   |
|          |SAQA     |                                                                   |
|12 October|SACE,    |Hearings on Annual Reports 2004/05(Reports adopted on 8 November)  |
|          |NSFAS &  |                                                                   |
|          |ELRC     |                                                                   |
|25 October|Departmen|Hearings on Annual Report 2004/05 (Report adopted on 15 November)  |
|          |t of     |                                                                   |
|          |Education|                                                                   |
|1 November|Departmen|On the Norms and Standards for public school funding.              |
|          |t of     |                                                                   |
|          |Education|                                                                   |

   7. Papers (International Agreements, Protocols, Reports etc) referred  to
      the Committee: indicate the following:
Papers referred: (Check content of referrals with Steve)
|Name                    |Date referred|ATC  |Action by committee          |
|                        |             |page |                             |
|Report and Financial    |4 August     |     |Presentation made by NQF on  |
|Statements of the       |             |     |11 October.                  |
|National Qualifications |             |     |                             |
|Framework (NQF) for     |             |     |                             |
|2004-2005, including the|             |     |                             |
|Report of the           |             |     |                             |
|Auditor-General on the  |             |     |                             |
|Financial Statements for|             |     |                             |
|2004-2005               |             |     |                             |
|Report and Financial    |26 August    |     |Considered by the Committee  |
|Statements of Umalusi   |             |     |on 11 October. Resolved that |
|for 2004-2005, including|             |     |the report will not be       |
|the Report of the       |             |     |debated in the House.        |
|Auditor-General on the  |             |     |                             |
|Financial Statements for|             |     |                             |
|2004-2005               |             |     |                             |
|Report and Financial    |05 September |     |Considered by the Committee  |
|Statements of the South |             |     |on 12 October. Resolved that |
|African Qualifications  |             |     |the report will not be       |
|Authority (SAQA) for    |             |     |debated in the House.        |
|2004-2005, including the|             |     |                             |
|Report of the           |             |     |                             |
|Auditor-General on the  |             |     |                             |
|Financial Statements for|             |     |                             |
|2004-2005               |             |     |                             |
|Report and Financial    |07 September |     |Considered by the Committee  |
|Statements of the       |             |     |on 12 October. Resolved that |
|Council for Higher      |             |     |the report will not be       |
|Education (CHE) for     |             |     |debated in the House.        |
|2004-2005, including the|             |     |                             |
|Report of the           |             |     |                             |
|Auditor-General on the  |             |     |                             |
|Financial Statements for|             |     |                             |
|2004-2005               |             |     |                             |
|Report and Financial    |22 September |     |Considered by the Committee  |
|Statements of the South |             |     |on 11 October. Resolved that |
|African Council of      |             |     |the report will not be       |
|Educators (SACE) for    |             |     |debated in the House.        |
|2004-2005, including the|             |     |                             |
|Report of the           |             |     |                             |
|Auditor-General on the  |             |     |                             |
|Financial Statements for|             |     |                             |
|2004-2005               |             |     |                             |
|Report and Financial    |22 September |     |Considered by the Committee  |
|Statements of the Local |             |     |on 12 October. Resolved that |
|Government, Water and   |             |     |the report will not be       |
|Related Sector Education|             |     |debated in the House.        |
|and Training Authority  |             |     |                             |
|(NSFAS) for 2004-2005,  |             |     |                             |
|including the Report of |             |     |                             |
|the Auditor-General on  |             |     |                             |
|the Financial Statements|             |     |                             |
|for 2004-2005 Annual    |             |     |                             |
|report 2004/05 of NSFAS |             |     |                             |
|Report and Financial    |25 October   |     |Considered by the Committee  |
|Statements of the       |             |     |on 15 November.              |
|Department of Education |             |     |                             |
|(DoE) for 2004-2005,    |             |     |                             |
|including the Report of |             |     |                             |
|the Auditor-General on  |             |     |                             |
|the Financial Statements|             |     |                             |
|for 2004-2005           |             |     |                             |


The Annual report of ELRC was tabled late on 11 November 2005.

 8. Budget Vote
   The budget vote 17 was referred to the Committee on 22 October 2005.  The
   Committee arranged for briefings by the  Department  on  15  March  2005.
   There were no public hearings arranged and the no report was published.


 9. Other committee activities:


9.1 Workshops
    On 10 October 2005, the Chairperson attended a workshop on how  to  use
    annual reports as a monitoring tool.


9.2 Other Committee activities
   On 23 June 2005, the Portfolio Committee met  held  an  informal  meeting
   with the Youth, Pioneers of the Vietnamese National Assembly, at the  New
   Wing Restaurant. The purpose was to share knowledge  and  experiences  on
   the role of the Committee in conducting oversight and monitoring over the
   Executive.


   On 1 November 2005, the Committee hosted 6 UK  Parliamentarians,  namely,
   Ms Ann Keen, MP (LP) leader of delegation, Mr. Jeffrey Donaldson, MP, MPL
   (DUP), Mr. Tobias Ellwood, MP, (CP), Lord Hughes of Woodside,  MP,  (LP),
   Ms Helen Southworth, MP (LP), Ms A Watkinson, MP (CP).

 3. Council on Education Ministers attendance by the Committee Chairperson:


   In February 2005, Prof  S  M  Mayatula  attended  a  special  Council  on
   Education Ministers meeting in Cape Town.
   On 22 March 2005, Prof  S  M  Mayatula  attended  a  special  Council  on
   Education Ministers meeting in Pretoria.
   On 23 March 2005,Prof S  M  Mayatula  was  invited  by  the  Minister  of
   Education Hon. Mrs Naledi Pandor, to  the  most  improved  school  awards
   2004, at the Presidential Guesthouse, in Pretoria
   On 18 April 2005, Prof S M Mayatula attended a  special  meeting  of  the
   Council on Education Ministers (CEM) in Pretoria.
   On 5 June 2005, The Chairperson attended a special Council  on  Education
   Ministers meeting. In addition on the same day, he  was  invited  by  the
   Minister of Education Hon. Mrs Naledi Pandor to attend the Grand  Opening
   of the Education Nutrition Centre at 14:30 at Bonareng Primary School  in
   Attridgeville, Pretoria.
   On 1 August 2005, Prof Mayatula attended a Council on Education Ministers
   meeting in Pretoria.
   On 19 September 2005, the Minister of Education invited the  Chairperson,
   Hon. Mrs Naledi Pandor to accompany the Minister to Robben Island.


   10.Local Conferences
   On 30-31 May, a Multi-party Delegation of five Members of  the  Committee
   attended a National Consultative Conference on Education.  The  focus  of
   the conference was on “Deepening the Education Policy Dialogue”.  Various
   stakeholders presented it. There were no resolutions taken.
   Delegates: Prof SM  Mayatula  (ANC),  Ms  PR  Mashangoane  (ANC),  Ms  DG
   Nhlengethwa (ANC), Mr. GG Boinamo (DA) and
   Mr. AM Mpontshane (IFP)


   10.1 Conferences:  SADC Sub-Region (FAPED)
   Two Members of the Committee, Messrs, B Mthembu (ANC) and GG Boinamo (DA)
   attended a follow-up Forum  of  African  Parliamentarians  for  Education
   (FAPED) in Livingstone, Zambia on the 29-30 August 2005.
   Agenda: Taking stock of the progress made  towards  “Education  for  All”
   goals after a third of mileage to 2015.
   SADC  Countries  present  at  the  conference  Angola,  Malawi,   Zambia,
   Swaziland, South Africa and Zimbabwe.
   Resolutions: The conference observed that South Africa had made  progress
   in the area of Early Childhood Development.
   Date of the adoption of the report: to be adopted next in 2006.


   11. Financial Statements
      • Budget Allocated to Committee:             R730, 556.00
      Expenditure
      Catering:                         R 2,242.30
      Provincial Visits:                      R 58,099.00
      Overseas Trips:                   R358, 067.50
      Conferences Seminars, Workshops
      Public Hearings:                  R 37,483.20
• Credit to Consolidated Fund:    R181, 559.10
• Transfers to Staff Travel       R 27,535.00

        Balance (Funds Available)            R 65,569.90


   12. Outstanding Matters:
      12.1 Annual Report of the Committee
      12.2 Minutes 1, 8, 15 November 2005
   12.3 Report on the visit to SADC Sub-Region of Forum on  Parliamentarians
        on Education.
   12.4 Oversight visit to University of Free State, February 2005
   12.4 Oversight visit to FET Colleges, August 2005
   12.5 Study Tour to Ghana and Mali, October 2005


   13. Attach the following documents
              i. Master attendance list
             ii. Copies of minutes of all meetings
            iii. Copies of the reports of all oversight\international visits
                 (outstanding)
             iv. Copy of Budget statement
       14. Chairperson’s Remarks on the Level of  Support  Received  during
           the Session

    1. Support from the Secretary to Chairperson:



    2. Support from the Committee Secretary:

    The lack of performance and inability to produce committee reports on
    time made it impossible for the Committee to finalise and publish its
    reports referred in point 12 above.

    3. Support from the Committee Assistant:
       ___________________________________________________


            ………………………………………                                        …………………

COMMITTEE SECRETARY                          DATE


                                                             ………………………………………
   …………………..

CONTROL COMMITTEE SECRETARY             DATE



………………………………………………………                                   …………………..

COMMITTEE CHAIRPERSON                              DATE





