---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 19 May 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2006-05-19
---

FRIDAY, 19 MAY 2006
                                    ____




              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 09:39.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Debate on Vote No 25 – Agriculture; and

Vote No 29 – Land Affairs:

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Ngizothatha leli thuba lokubiza umhlonishwa
owengamele ezokulima nezomhlabathi, uNkk T Didiza, azokwethula inkulumo
yakhe. Sinephodiyamu ngapha Ngqongqoshe, uma uthanda ukuyisebenzisa.
Ngibona sengathi kungcono khona. [Ihlombe.] [I will take this opportunity
to call upon the hon Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs, Miss T
Didiza, to deliver her speech. We have a podium on this side, Minister, if
you would like to use it. I think it is better to use the podium.
[Applause.]]

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Ngiyabonga mphathisihlalo,
mangisho ukuthi kufuneka ngilokhu ngiza kule Ndlu ngoba sengathi
ngizolahleka. Ngagcina sikhuluma sihlale ezihlalweni, sekujikile namhlanje
sesima epulpithi kuhle okwabefundisi. [Thank you, Chairperson. Let me say
that I have to come to this House more often, because it seemed as if I
might get lost. We used to speak sitting on chairs. Today, things have
changed. We stand in pulpits like pastors.]

Hon members of the NCOP and delegates from the provinces, members of the
executive council responsible for agriculture from the different provinces,
honourable guests, ladies and gentlemen, on 8 May 2006 this Parliament
celebrated the 10th anniversary of our democratic institution.
Interestingly, this event took place within a period that we have defined
as the age of hope. Indeed, the functioning of the different spheres of
government and the state as a whole will prove and confirm the correctness
of the fundamentals we have inserted in this most important document, which
is the foundation of our democracy.

Our Constitution, among other things, has created a framework around which
we as government have to redress the imbalances of our past, while at the
same time giving us a framework for what we have to do to build a
functioning state. Land reform is one of those elements about which the
Constitution asks of us to make good to those who were dispossessed as a
result of our previous legislative framework as a country.

It is with interest that this difficult and emotional area of our work has
been handled in a way that has sought to bring justice, equity,
sustainability and reconciliation in our rural landscape. When one travels
in the various regions of our country it is gratifying that there are many
South Africans with goodwill who have extended a hand of friendship and
support to the newly established farmers. I am reminded, amongst others, of
Mr Motlock, who works with the women in the Goxe Cut Flower Project in
Kokstad in the Alfred Nzo region in the Eastern Cape. There are many others
like Mr Motlock in all the provinces.

We have sought to acknowledge the need for redress and the need for
sustainability at the same time without standing on the fence like
proselytes, as Dr Mgojo said at the funeral of the late Minister Stella
Sigcau. There are those who do not want to take up the difficult task and
would rather remain on the fence. But there are many like Mr Motlock, who
decided that the future of South Africa lies in our diversity and,
therefore, took the responsibility to ensure that they would work with
those newly established farmers in their neighbourhood.

The women of Goxe Cut Flowers are an example of Zenzele at best. These were
the women who used to work on the farms and when they lost their jobs they
did not sit down and said what next or what grant would come from
government? They decided to approach our land reform office in the Eastern
Cape and indicated that there was a farm they were interested in and that
there were 41 women and men willing to put in their sweat equity to ensure
that they turn that landscape around and that rural village into a
productive one.

Convinced that indeed these were entrepreneurs at best, we provided funding
through our land reform programme for agricultural development and,
supported by the local economic development of the Alfred Nzo District
Municipality together with the provincial department of agriculture in the
Eastern Cape, we supported those women in acquiring about 600 farms. Today
they are producing proteas in Goxe, Kokstad.

It is an age of hope indeed, because who would have thought that in those
hills and valleys, in those most rural areas of our country, you would find
such entrepreneurs who would before long enter the market? But it is
because of the goodwill of people such as Mr Motlock, who decided to
contribute through his own set equity to ensure that he gave his time as
well as knowledge to those women in support of their success.

I said there are many Motlocks in our country. Working with some Afrikaner
communities in the Free State region, we have recently launched a
programme. After being challenged by our President to ensure that they
themselves plough back into our communities, these Afrikaner communities
have worked with our Department of Land Affairs and come up with a support
programme to ensure that the land reform beneficiaries, who otherwise would
have had to wait for a long period of time to get support, get it as soon
as possible, even if in the beginning it would be training and capacity-
building.

I raise these things because they are very important to all of us in this
debate. As we grapple with the challenges of redress as enshrined in our
Constitution, it is important that we are not scared to dirty our hands.

Last year on 12 April in this very august Chamber, I pointed out that as we
make increased progress with the implementation of both agricultural and
land reform programmes, it has become clear that the success of the said
implementation depends largely on intergovernmental relations, that is, co-
operation between the three spheres of government as well as across
government departments.

Still on that occasion, I lamented the fact that this much-needed co-
ordination is sometimes extremely lacking. In the same breath I also
commended the proposed legislation that was piloted at the time by the
provincial and local government on intergovernmental relations. Such
legislation has been passed to become an Act. I am happy to report to this
House that our last Minmec formally set up in terms of that law an
agricultural national forum which will include the local government as one
of our structures that would help co-ordination and improve
intergovernmental relations.

This phenomenon will ensure that collectively, as the MECs, the Minister
and the Deputy Minister responsible, we can take our responsibility fully,
knowing that what we agreed upon is not for the paper, but is what ought to
be done. It also gives us the responsibility that even we as national
government need to go beyond norms and setting of standards, but give
effective support in ensuring that delivery does take place at our
provincial and local government levels.

I think this is one of the areas that will create clarity on how we could
work best with our municipalities. We all know that for the majority of
municipalities, particularly in the rural landscape of our country, one of
the economic stimuli that can assist them to reach better economic growth
where they are would be through agricultural development. Therefore, local
government for us has become a very important sphere of our government, in
which we have to work together with the provinces. I must say that I am
confident that the leadership that we have in these nine provinces
governing the sector is capable and will be able to do so.

This Act will help us enhance our capacity to deliver on our mandate as
government. In my view it will also help in alleviating some of the
challenges we have already identified, particularly in spending resources
allocated to our many programmes. This very House last year raised certain
questions about the spending pattern on comprehensive agricultural support
programmes together with the land-care programme, acknowledging that these
are important programmes because indeed their delivery has a capacity and a
possibility to change the quality of life of our people. We agree and
concur with hon members that this is so.

I think it is also important to indicate to this House that our own
reflection on this programme enabled us to identify some of the challenges
that we had to deal with. One of those challenges has been the very
capacity of the arms of government at provincial level.

I must say that it has also raised the challenge of the capacity of
national government to give that effective support, apart from monitoring
and setting standards. One of the things we are trying to do is also to
assist one another to improve the capacity for planning. It is also to take
a new look at our procurement procedures so that we can shorten the
turnaround time that sometimes bedevils the process of delivery.

We have also acknowledged that it is important that we align some of the
work that we want to do through these programmes with some of the
provincial growth and development strategies, as well as local economic
development so that indeed we do not work in a disjointed manner but rather
in a coherent manner.

It is also clear that at national level, while we might have tried to
assist by sitting down with our provincial counterparts, what is needed
even more is the bodies of people who can sometimes go and spend time in
the various provinces to work with their counterparts to unblock
challenges. I must say that this has indeed raised the issue of capacity
within the state.

I am confident that the work that our heads of department, together with
the directors-general at national level, and their senior management team,
are doing will enable us to come back to this House to indicate what plans
we have to turn around this unpleasant situation. I am sure all of you, as
you enter this debate, will raise some concerns around the spending
patterns.

It is true that one of the important factors for agricultural development
is agricultural credit. We would all appreciate that last year we started
with the launch of the micro-agricultural finance scheme. We decided in
consultation with our Cabinet that instead of rolling it out in all the
provinces, we will start in the three districts, particularly those that
were part of the rural development nodes in the three provinces: Limpopo in
Ga-Sekhukhune, Eastern Cape in the O R Tambo region, and the Umkhanyakude
district in KwaZulu-Natal.

I must say that presently we have started spending in those three areas. We
have allocated 236 loans through our various financial institutions. In
Limpopo it was about R34 million, which was disbursed to about 236 loans.
In the Eastern Cape R2,1 million, which was disbursed to 51 loan
applicants. In KwaZulu-Natal we have received 1 000 applications, which
cost us about R8 million. These are at final consideration stage.

However, it is important for me to raise some of the challenges that have
faced us as we implemented these projects. One of the problems has been the
quality of project proposals that have been received for funding. Secondly,
it is these very applicants’ capacity to pay it back. It has also raised
the need for quality support once people apply for such loans so that they
could have the ability to pay it back.

Therefore, one of the things we have had to do was to ensure that we do
some kind of social mobilisation, educate our people to build their
consciousness and awareness about the importance of saving. One of the
requirements that we had to do was to build in, at the expanding of our
loans, factors to mobilise people to save so that we would be able to
assure ourselves that these people can take the responsibility of the
funding. It might be one of the frustrating areas of work but in my view it
is the necessary foundation. It sets our people free from continuous
indebtedness and inability to service their loans.

I must say that through this programme we have also linked the work that we
are doing with Mr Percy Barnevik and the Tamil Nadu Self-help Group of
India, where we work together in trying to improve co-operative
mobilisation of women into business enterprises in rural areas where they
can pool their resources. I must say that such work has given clarity to
the state on a level that we sometimes missed with our programmes,
particularly the level of the poorest of the poor, who are among us.

We are working with the Departments of Trade and Industry; Environmental
Affairs and Tourism; Arts and Culture, particularly with regard to the
cultural industries; as well as the Department of Water Affairs, because
there are critical stakeholders ensuring that those who require water for
production are not actually frustrated or stranded.

It has also improved our capacity to work with Post Bank, Khula and other
financial institutions that are very critical in terms of microfinance. In
my view, this will enable us to pull our people out of poverty and the
mentality of dependency.

Through this co-operative development, which is partly linked to
agricultural development, we will be able to create many producers who can
become enterprises in their own right. We would also be able to link them
to the markets and in the chain be able to bring other small people into
the process.

Last year, in the same debate, one of the issues that Rev Moatshe, who is
the chairperson of the select committee, has consistently raised with us
has been the lack of policy on aquaculture. I want to assure you, hon
Chair, and hon members that ...[Laughter.] [Applause.] ... that finally we
have worked and finalised the policy arrangement. That gives dual
responsibility to both the Department of Agriculture and the Department of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism, while the focus of environmental affairs
would be largely on marine culture, as you know that farming continues to
remain an agricultural activity.

However, the take-up on implementation is not quite as fast as we would
have liked. What is good is that we now have a framework within which we
can work. I am sure the chairperson will be the happiest person today.

I also want to say that we have developed - and it is ready for publication
- the ranch, forage as well as game farming policy. As you know, one of the
challenges that we have been facing is that game farming in our country has
continued to be unregulated, and also sometimes used as a way of evicting
people by introducing wildlife.

What we have sought to do is to work out an arrangement because we think
that this is an important sector of our economy that does need development
and must work in a structured way. So, soon we will be publishing a
document for public comments on that policy to allow more participation
from the various stakeholders so that we can finally bring it to Cabinet
and then to implementation.

With regard to the AgriBEE process, I must record that indeed in December
we had an Agricultural BEE indaba where we were able to narrow the gaps in
terms of what we are expected to do. This took into consideration the codes
of good practice that have already been published by the Department of
Trade and Industry. And I am hopeful that before the end of this year we
will be able to finally sign on the AgriBEE Charter to allow for
implementation and openness in our agricultural economy.

Chairperson, you know that one of the issues that have always been a matter
of concern between the provinces and at national level is the management of
veterinary services. In this area we have improved and, it is important for
me to convey thanks for the collaboration that has always been expressed
through action by our various provinces. When we have a problem in one
province we have been able to add capacity by taking veterinary specialists
from other provinces to focus on that area.

To this end, I want to thank all the provinces for supporting us on the
work we had to do in the Eastern Cape on classical swine fever, as well as
in the Western Cape. We know that it had had an impact on you, but we know
that you did it because you understood the importance of co-operative
governance and managing this sector as one rather than as different
entities.

My colleagues, the members of the executive council, will deal with the
other matters of detail on the implementation of our programmes. I would
hate to steal their thunder, because it is one of the areas where they
would need to share with you as NCOP what they are doing with the resources
that the legislature has given them.

Lastly, as I conclude, I want to say thank you to this House for having
invited us as the key department in participating in your Taking Parliament
to the People campaign. That has been one of the ways in which we have been
brought closer to the challenges that face our communities with regard to
our policies.

It is sometimes difficult to be able to attend all the programmes that you
have set up. But we have tried to ensure that we do have either the Deputy
Minister, or the Minister when necessary, the senior officials and the MECs
to be able promptly to answer the questions that people may raise as their
concerns. I would like to congratulate this House on that work. [Applause.]
It has brought us much more closely to what we have envisaged as a
Parliament of the people. I thank you. [Applause.]

Moruti P MOATSHE: Modulasetulo, Tona le maloko a lefapha, Ditona tse di
tswang mabatoeng a Aforika Borwa, baemedi, maloko a Khansele ya Bosetšhaba
ya Diporofense, bana ba etsho le dikgaetsedi, ke ema fa ke le motlotlo e
bile ke itumetse. Ke rata gore Tekanyetsokabo e e leng fa pele ga Ntlo e,
ke kgwetlho e e re gopotsang kwa re tswang teng. Re lemoga gore lefatshe le
botlhokwa tota. Kwa ntle ga lefatshe, isagwe ya rona e tla bo e le letobo.
Ka baka leo, taba ya lefatshe e tshwanetswe go lebelelwa ka leitlho le le
ntšhotšho.

Fa ke lebelela kwa morago, pele ga 1652, Shaka, kgosi ya mazulu ...
(Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson, the Minister and members of her department,
Ministers from other departments, delegates, members, brothers and sisters,
I am very proud and happy to be here.

The Budget Vote being discussed today is a challenging reminder of where we
come from. We notice the importance of land and the fact that without land
our future is bleak, therefore the land issue must be given every
consideration.

When I look back, to before 1652, Shaka, King of the Zulus ...]

... ilembe elehlula amanye amalembe, unodumehlezi kaMenzi, wathi, “Ngibona
izinyoni ezimhlophe zidlula olwandle ziza eNingizimu Afrika.” [... the hero
of heroes, said: “I see white birds flying over the sea coming towards
South Africa.”] [Interjections.]

The white birds that crossed the sea to South Africa and to the continent
of Africa – that was the beginning of the threat to land. That is where it
started. These are facts that cannot be disputed by anybody. The question
of land has become imperative and that is why we are debating this Budget
Vote today, which is an endeavour to address this legacy of 1652.

It is therefore very important that those who have the land and those who
do not have the land must reach a point of agreement that those who occupy
it shall share the land. These imbalances cannot be allowed to continue
forever and ever and ever, hon Minister, when the indigenous people of
Africa and South Africa were dispossessed of their own land, dispossessed
of the soil, dispossessed of the mother and dispossessed of the father.
That is why the ANC came to the fore.

They had foresight and a vision to address the legacy of 1652, not 1913.
That is why they came up with the Freedom Charter. Indeed, in the Freedom
Charter, we can see that those men and women had the vision and foresight
to address this legacy. That is why this budget tries to address that, as a
drop in the ocean, and attempts to address this serious legacy that has
affected the people of this country.

The land shall be shared among those who use it. There are still great
imbalances 12 years down the line. Where do we stand on the question of
land? Are we really moving at a speed that will satisfy the masses of this
country? Are we not going to be caught up between those who have the land
and those who are thirsty for land? We have to speed up this process.

But, again, when you read Leviticus, Chapter 25, it talks about the jubilee
year – that the land shall go back to the rightful owners. The Bible came
with the white birds from overseas. The very Bible they used to dispossess
people of their land says in Leviticus, Chapter 25, that jubilee is every
50 years. The land must go back to the rightful owners. That is what the
Bible says.

We have had more than 100 years of dispossession and we have had
approximately seven jubilee years after dispossession. Therefore the
question of land is long overdue, Kgoshi Mokoena. The land must go back to
the rightful owners. This government is negotiating with those who have
land but those who have land are unwilling to comply with the echoes and
sentiments of the Freedom Charter that go: “We shall share this land.”
The Freedom Charter does not say that those who came must go but it says
white and black in this country must share the land. The land belongs to
the people of this country. Therefore we extend this challenge to those who
have the land that they should make up their minds; otherwise it will be
too late. The people who are yearning for land are running out of patience,
unless we are blind not to read between the lines that pressure is coming.
The people of this country are becoming much more politicised regarding the
land question. Therefore the land must go back to the rightful owners, in
the spirit of Leviticus, Chapter 25. The jubilee is now and is long
overdue.

If our government seeks to achieve 30% redistribution of land by 2015 to
the previously disadvantaged people, the pace of land reform must be
accelerated considerably. The Commission on Restitution of Land Rights
plans to settle a total of 8 651 land claims during the current financial
year ending 31 March 2007. Although the process of settling rural claims is
fraught with innumerable difficulties, the challenge is the provision of
adequate support to beneficiaries of the land restitution programme. The
commission will try to ensure that developmental plans are in place within
six months of approval of claims by the Minister.

It is 86,2% of the total of 79 696 claims lodged that had been settled by
December 2005. The total number of outstanding claims is 10 977. Out of the
outstanding claims, 8 055 are in the rural areas. These are scheduled to be
settled by 2008. It is planned that all urban claims, totalling 2 922, will
be settled by the end of the current financial year ending 31 March 2007.

The President, in his 2006 state of the nation address, indicated that the
Cabinet intends to review the following during the 2006-07 financial year:
the willing buyer-willing seller policy, land acquisition models, suspected
manipulation of land prices, and the regulations governing the sale of land
to foreigners. I am emphasising the question of land because without land
we cannot talk about agriculture. How do we talk agriculture ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon member, your speaking time has expired.
[Interjections.] [Applause.] Order! Hon Tau, when the Chair says, “Order”,
you don’t continue laughing.

It has been brought to my attention that the interpreting service keeps
breaking down. Could we please look into that because people want to
understand what other people are saying? I would want to encourage people
to speak their languages as it’s the policy of Parliament. We did not put
them here not to be spoken. If you speak your language, I am very much
happy.

Mr J W LE ROUX: Thank you, Chairperson. Mr Watson asked me to thank you and
all the colleagues who conveyed messages of good wishes to him. He is
feeling much better and he says he will try and come back as soon as he
possibly can.

As most farmers are Afrikaans speaking, I will address you in Afrikaans.

Agb Voorsitter, agb Minister en kollegas, gebeure in die landbou ontketen
altyd ernstige debat en is gewoonlik gelaai met emosie, soos ons nou net
gesien het hoe dit geartikuleer is in die toespraak van die voorsitter van
die komitee.

Dit is nie net in Suid-Afrika die geval nie, maar ook elders in die wêreld,
dat boere nog altyd ’n belangrike groep was en daarom word boere in die
meeste lande baie versigtig behandel. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and colleagues, events in agriculture always
unleash serious debate and is normally very emotive, as we have just seen,
as articulated in the speech of the chairperson of the committee.

It is not only the case in South Africa, but also elsewhere in the world,
that farmers have always been a very important group and that is why
farmers are handled very carefully in most countries.]

I would like to remind the Chairperson of a very clever man who once said
that if you are confronted with a very difficult problem that has to be
solved urgently, and he said this in Afrikaans, he said: “Haas jou
langsaam.” [Make haste slowly.] I think we must really take that into
consideration because we are dealing with a very emotive issue.

Vandaar dan ook die groot subsidies in ander lande wat deur die politici
aan boere gegee word. In Suid-Afrika is dit nog nie die geval nie, maar
namate die bemagtigingsproses vorder, sal dit sekerlik hier ook gebeur. Dit
is baie kortsigtig van die regering dat ons landbouers nie beskerm word
wanneer ons meeding teen gesubsidieerde goedere van ander lande nie. ’n
Goeie voorbeeld hiervan is die kommissie in die Departement van Handel en
Nywerheid wat tariewe bepaal en wat vir die tweede jaar geen verhoogte
tarief vir koring wil toestaan nie. Dit is ondanks die feit dat koringboere
moet kompeteer met goedkoop koring uit Argentinië, wat feitlik op storting
neerkom. Wat die bemagtiging van nuwe boere betref en die regverdige
verdeling van grond, is die oorweldigende meerderheid van die boere
gemotiveerd om die proses te laat slaag. Die oorweldigende meerderheid
boere is positief oor grondhervorming.

Wat die bemagtiging van nuwe boere betref, is dit duidelik dat daar
aanvanklik baie meer mislukkings as suksesse was. Net soos die kafee op die
hoek, die vulstasie of die drankwinkel, moet die nuwe eienaar kennis en
ondervinding van sy beroep hê, anders is daar geen hoop op sukses nie. Wat
in die landbou gebeur het, is dat boere sonder die nodige ondervinding en
sonder die nodige kennis plase bekom het en net eenvoudig nie kon slaag
nie.

’n Tweede belangrike faktor is natuurlik die verkryging van kapitaal en die
nodige landboutegniese dienste. Sonder hierdie twee faktore is dit feitlik
onmoontlik om ’n sukses in die landbou te maak. Wat landboutegniese dienste
betref, is ek bevrees dat die standaard van hierdie bystand ’n gevaarlike
laagtepunt bereik het.

In die vorige bedeling kon enige boer enige plek in Suid-Afrika net die
telefoon optel en dan was daar hulp en tegniese bystand wat onmiddellik
beskikbaar was. Die vraag is: waarom dan nie meer nie? Daar is hopeloos te
veel kundigheid buite die Staatsdiens. Die regering sal dwaas wees as
hierdie kundige persone nie weer teruggebring word nie.

Wat die koste van grond betref, word bestaande boere verkwalik dat hulle
astronomiese pryse vir hulle plase vra en sodoende die
grondhervormingsproses dwarsboom en vertraag. In ’n demokratiese stelsel is
dit so dat elke persoon wat ’n bate besit die hoogste prys vir sy bate wil
kry. Dit geld nie net vir landbouers nie, maar vir elke persoon wat iets
besit; hetsy ’n motor, ’n huis of wat ookal. Die markprys van enige artikel
moet bepaal word deur vraag en aanbod. Waar vraag en aanbod ontmoet,
ontstaan wat bekend is as die “normale prys”. As ons torring aan hierdie
beginsel, tas ons die fondament van die vrye ekonomie aan. In die geval van
landbougrond, soos met alle ander bates, kan markwaarde redelik akkuraat
bepaal word. Die gebruik van geakkrediteerde waardeerders om waardes te
bepaal, is standaard praktyk en hoef nie bevraagteken te word nie. Wat
bevraagteken kan word, is die rompslomp binne die departement. Daar is
genoeg bewyse dat die probleem nie primêr by die boere lê nie, maar eerder
by die departement self. Die oomblik toe daar bespiegel word rondom die
konsep van gewillige koper- gewillige verkoper was daar groot spanning en
onsekerheid in die landbou. Sulke spanning ontmoedig beleggings en
werkskepping.

Die Transkei-gebied in die Oos-Kaap het enorme landboupotensiaal en die
ontwikkeling van hierdie gebied moet deel word van die gronddebat. In
Transkei het ons uitstekende grond, genoeg water en ’n oorvloed arbeid. Dit
is verstommend dat meer aandag nie aan hierdie gebied gegee word nie.

Daar is uitstekende voorbeelde - en die Minister het daarna verwys - van
boere en groot sakemanne wat in vennootskap met nuwe toetreders groot
suksesse behaal het. Dit lyk na die regte pad en ons moet voortbou op
hierdie wenresep. Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Hence the major subsidies that farmers are allocated by politicians in
other countries. In South Africa this is not yet the case, but as the
empowerment process advances, it will certainly also happen here. It is
very short-sighted of the government that our farmers are not protected
when we are competing against subsidised goods from other countries. A good
example of this is the commission in the Department of Trade and Industry
that determines tariffs and for the second year running refuses to
introduce an increased wheat tariff. This is despite the fact that wheat
farmers must compete with the cheaper wheat from Argentina, which almost
boils down to dumping. With regard to the empowerment of new farmers and
equitable land distribution, the overwhelming majority of farmers are
motivated to making the process a success. The overwhelming majority of
farmers are positive about land reform.

Regarding the empowerment of new farmers, it is evident that initially
there were many more failures than successes. Just as in the case of the
corner café, the petrol station or the liquor store, the new owner should
have knowledge of and experience in his profession, or there is no hope of
success. What happened in agriculture is that farmers without the necessary
experience and without the required knowledge acquired farms and simply
could not succeed.

A second important factor is obviously securing capital and the necessary
agrotechnical services. Without these two factors it is virtually
impossible to succeed in the area of agriculture. As far as agrotechnical
services are concerned, I am afraid that the standard of this support has
reached a dangerously low level.
In the previous dispensation any farmer, anywhere in South Africa, could
just pick up the telephone and assistance and technical support would be
available immediately. The question is: Why is this no longer the case?
There is hopelessly too much expertise outside the Public Service. The
government would be foolish not to bring these knowledgeable people back.

As far as the cost of land is concerned, existing farmers are resented
because they want astronomical amounts for their farms and in so doing
thwart and delay the land reform process. In a democratic dispensation it
is simply that each person who owns an asset would want to gain the highest
price for his asset. This does not only apply to farmers, but also to
anyone who owns something; whether that is a motor vehicle, a house or
whatever. The market price of any article should be determined by supply
and demand. Where supply and demand meet, what is known as the “normal
price” starts. If we tamper with this principle, then we are interfering
with the foundation of the free economy. In the case of agricultural land,
as with all other assets, market value can be determined fairly accurately.
The use of accredited valuators to determine value is standard practice and
need not be questioned. What could be questioned is the red tape in the
department. There is enough evidence that the problem does not lay
primarily with farmers, but rather with the department as such. The moment
speculation arose concerning the concept of willing-buyer, willing-seller,
there was great tension and uncertainty in agriculture. Such tension
discourages investment and job creation.

The Transkei area in the Eastern Cape has enormous agricultural potential
and the development of this area should become part of the land debate. In
the Transkei we have excellent soil, sufficient water and an abundance of
labour. It is astounding that no attention is given to this area.

There are excellent examples – and the Minister referred to them – of
farmers and big businessmen who, in partnership with new entrants, achieved
huge successes. It appears to be the correct route to take and we must
continue to build on this winning recipe. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Chairperson, Comrade Minister, comrades and hon members,
in the past our people owned the land communally. A person’s wealth was
determined not by money and immovable property, as it is today, but by how
much one contributed to solving social problems.

This principle can easily be seen to be testimony to the philosophical
belief of our forbears when they drew up the Freedom Charter. The provision
of the Freedom Charter I am referring to above is the clause which says,
and I quote: “The land shall be shared amongst those who work it.”

True to the spirit of this clause, our government, since 1994, has been
doing everything in its power to realise its content. To start with the
supreme law of our land, the Constitution, in section 25, protects property
rights while placing an obligation on the state to implement land reforms.

In pursuance of the obligation, the Land Restitution Act was passed in 1994
and subsequently amended, so as to enable the government to put programmes
and strategies in place to get back the land that had been unlawfully taken
from them by colonialists.

The Act, in principle, accorded our people land rights, which then meant
that that the government had to return the confiscated land to its rightful
owners. Having rights to land, our people can, firstly, produce food of
their own in the form of crop and livestock individually or collectively.
They are able to improve household food security and permanent settlement.
On the part of land redistribution, agriculture is the main priority. The
government, for its part, acquires arable land and then distributes it
among the people for agricultural purposes.

The aim of the Department of Agriculture and Land Affairs is to create an
equitable and sustainable land dispensation that promotes social and
economic development. Therefore, the department has the responsibility of
providing access to land and extend rights, with particular emphasis on the
previously disadvantaged communities.

The budget of the department has been increased to reflect, to a greater
extent, the willingness of the ANC-led government speedily to address the
issue of land reform and redistribution, especially restitution. Policy
directive, as stated in the state of the nation address in February this
year, commits the government to do the following: Review the willing-
seller, willing-buyer policy; review land acquisition models and possible
manipulation of land prices, Mr Le Roux, and regulate conditions under
which foreigners buy land; ensure that the land distribution programme is
aligned to provincial growth and development strategies, as well as the
integrated development plans of municipalities; and attend to the proper
use of the funds that have been available for the productive utilisation of
the land.

This directive has a significant impact on the budget of the department.
More resources must be made available to attain given targets and have an
impact on the pace of the land redistribution programme. The possibility of
introducing land tax to discourage the holding of large tracks of
unproductive land, setting land ceilings or maximum farm sizes to promote
the subdivision of land and a moratorium on the sale of state land is
envisaged.

As the Minister has said, land reform is to address the imbalances of the
past, and we are talking about this year today, more especially in trying
to encourage and in celebration of the biggest anniversary in June, which
is a challenge to the department because there are youth who are interested
in becoming farmers, but who do not, in the rural areas of Limpopo, know
exactly where to go.

They are using the constituency offices, but the most important thing is
that it takes a long time, like in Eldorado, where my constituency is, hon
Minister. While we are celebrating the 50th
anniversary of the women’s march, in Eldorado, hon Minister, I have women
who are able to plant tomatoes and spinach, which are even sold on the
markets, but the unfortunate situation is that they need training and they
need to access the departments, more especially the provincial departments.
We are in the process of assisting them to do that at the present moment,
so that they would be able to get the market and sell their crops and
survive and put food on their tables.

What the colonial land grabs did was this. Firstly, in the past our
national groups were living in peace with one another and there were rarely
wars between them. But the colonialists attacked them one by one and took
over their land and ruled them. In the end they created the so-called
homelands, and these are the wrongs for the Land Restitution Act to
correct.

As we celebrate these anniversaries, I ask the Minister to say that we need
these women to be assisted. They acknowledge that the government has done a
lot, but they are in the remote areas of Limpopo and they need to be
attended to.

Mr M B MASUKU (Mpumalanga): Hon Chairperson of the NCOP, Minister,
permanent delegates of the NCOP, my colleagues, members of the executive
council, indeed, hon Moatshe, the Minister’s budget reflects that the
journey to the promised land, as charted by our forebears in the struggle,
as adopted at the Congress of the People in 1955, goes on unabated. It
shows that we are firmly on course and committed and determined to achieve
the goals and visions in this document. Your commitment, Minister, to the
fast-tracking of the land reform through expediting the recommendations of
the Land Summit, that you indeed convened, is appreciated. I must point out
that up till today I have met in my province with 225 new farmers, new
owners of land and this really shows that the programme is actually moving
forward.

When I met with them they reflected on their successes and part of the
challenges that they have, but, however, to the contrary, hon Le Roux, they
are looking forward to their success. Almost 5 000 title deeds in my
province have been made available to the people who didn’t enjoy tenure
before, and not long ago I chatted to members of the traditional leadership
and they expressed that they were working on the meeting that you had with
them. We appreciate it that you met with the traditional leaders to chat
about a way forward in terms of how we can deal with issues of land use.

Despite all these benefits that I spoke about, I am told that there are
still many more to come. I believe so, because you have demonstrated this
through the course of this year when you appointed the able commissioner
Mangwane, who shocked me by setting out a programme and asking for an
appointment to celebrate the last land to be given out in Mpumalanga in
2008.

It is living proof that 30% shall indeed be achieved and that one day this
land shall indeed belong to those who live in it. I want to reiterate that
it is a true and honest fact that without land there is no food; and
without land there is no shelter. Without land there is no sustainable
development and livelihood. I hope that in my province we won’t have those
who are going to dig in their heels when we are dealing with the issue of
prices.

Hon Le Roux, ek weet nie wat is ... [Hon le Roux, I don't know what it is
that is ...]

... known as a “normal price” on the market. We all said that the prices
must be set at the market level. However, if you set them at market level,
I believe that one of the players in the market is the government. In a
situation where there is a distortion, then government must come and say:
hang on, we cannot stagnate like this forever.

In the case of land, I think it’s appropriate that we review the procedures
we use when we deal with willing-buyer, willing-seller. I haven’t heard the
Minister or the President say that they were going to scrap willing-buyer,
willing-seller, but what I have read is that those who are willing and
those that have been doing so will continue to enjoy market principles. But
those who dig in their heels and make their prices high will require the
government to come in to say: “This is enough, and we will determine the
price for you, because you cannot do it.”

I spent three quarters of yesterday in Coromandel in Thaba Chweu. Contrary
to what we always hear and what the hon Le Roux said, that the land is
given to people who are inexperienced, I was shocked when I saw what it was
those farmers wanted to do from now until they reach their breakthrough: a
turnover of R12 million per year. They were very clear in terms of their
product. They have a good tourism product; they are breeding cattle; they
have crops. They are very clear about what it is they are supposed to do,
and they are even clear in terms of the sort of help they require from
government.

They expressed their deep disappointment anyhow in that in the past years
they had been having, again contrary to what has been said, continual
assistance from government in terms of productive loans and productive
grants - they even showed me the kind of capital investments they had made
through those loans – but they were so disappointed that the banks were not
of assistance.

I think the issue of the micro loan, that the Minister referred to, is very
critical in this case. On our part, as Mpumalanga, the Mpumalanga
Agricultural Development Corporation is ready to roll out Mafisa – the
Micro-Agricultural Financial Institutions of SA. It was interesting that
when I delivered my budget speech last week, the hon Watson and all other
members at the legislature were really united. It was the first time that I
saw unity around the particular fact that we really needed to jack up micro
loans on the side of the MADC.

Minister, the intergovernmental relations that you have started are highly
commended. Your joint reflection, integrated planning and co-ordination
with us as provinces have begun to yield results. We agree with the point
that you made in your budget speech - that through co-operation and
partnerships we can realise our dream. Through intergovernmental
interaction we have managed to enrich our thinking - from our side, and I
think my colleagues agree with me - and our plans in terms of a better and
prosperous agricultural sector.

Our visit to India - and when I accompanied you to Mali - and also the
views that have been shared by my colleagues arising from all the other
visits when they accompanied you and those trips that you delegated to
them, really have shed light on how we can confront the challenges of the
first and the second economies within this sector.

To enhance this as a province, we are exploring the idea of what we call
“munimecs” in which we are going to meet with our counterparts that are
responsible for agriculture, because you will find this very interesting.
Further than that, Minister, I have indicated that once, when I visited my
colleague in the Eastern Cape, I found something very interesting there. I
think I’m going to borrow from that. I’ve started rolling that out in that
all assistants and our extension officers be deployed to municipalities to
work with municipalities in order to make sure that their LEDs include
agriculture.

I think that that is also going to address the issue of land usage in
different areas. I was surprised to hear that the Eastern Cape is not aware
of things that are supposed to be done, because when I went there they made
me aware of the land, where it was, how much it was, where they had
problems and where they had potential. So sometimes when some members raise
issues, I get scared because they don’t reflect exactly what we are going
to do.

On the issue of Casp, the Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme, and
land care, this is a programme that has helped us a great deal, because for
the past few years we had a problem in terms of how to intervene to assist
farmers. I think Mpumalanga has made a major contribution.

In the past financial year, for example, 63 Casp projects were funded. This
year we learned some lessons. We have consolidated them into 23 projects,
because through the implementation of this programme we realised that we
had a problem in terms of the funding model we had, as it wasn’t
sustainable. It was leaving people out.

Isibonelo ukuthi uze uzofakela umuntu amahhoko kodwa engenazo izinkukhu
noma ngesinye isikhathi umakhele amadele ezinkukhu kodwa engenawo amahhoko
endaweni yakhe. [An example is where someone comes to put up chicken coops
for someone, while s/he does not have chickens, or sometimes like building
an abattoir, while s/he does not have his/her own chickens.]

So we have actually consolidated, and are dealing with our projects in a
way that is sustainable and allows municipalities to benefit from them.
Thank you very much. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M A MZIZI: Sihlalo, uNgqongqoshe nePhini likaNgqongqoshe, ozakwethu,
ngithi okumhlophe kodwa. [Chairperson, Minister and Deputy Minister,
colleagues, I greet you all.]
Vote No 25 – Agriculture - is something that we see as the backbone of our
lives. It is essential that we look at the budget with a critical eye.
Agriculture received R1,9 billion for 2006-07. This is about R40 million
less than last year. The Livelihoods, Economics and Business Development
subprogramme receives the biggest slice of the budget, some R750 million.
The Sector Services and Partnerships subprogramme receives the second
biggest part of the department’s budget, which is about R477 million.

We know that we have come a long way in addressing the problems experienced
during the dark days of apartheid. However, this is the 12th year of our
democracy and we should, therefore, be in a position to pinpoint some of
the things we have achieved.

In the agriculture budget we can focus on genetically modified organisms,
but we have to ask some tough questions. Did this exercise bear fruit? Is
it sustainable? Which parts of the provinces can we cite as examples. How
much has been set aside for this project? Is there any danger we can see or
experience in terms of these imported commodities? How often has this GMO
exercise been subject to review and monitoring?

Another matter that also needs review is promoting the sustainable use of
our natural agricultural resources. We know that an area of approximately
5 000 hectares has been reclaimed from soil erosion. What we should ask is
whether the previously marginalised are also sharing in the benefits of
this project.

Sihlalo, ngenxa yesikhathi esingekho ngizothi nje ukuthinta kancane
laphayana kwezomhlaba. [Chairperson, because of time constrains, I will
speak only briefly about land.]

May I also add my voice in commenting about the Land Affairs budget.

Agb Voorsitter, ons weet dat grond iets is wat so skaars soos hoendertande
is. Daarom moet ons dit met die grootste sorg hanteer wanneer ons dit
bekom. [Hon Chairman, we know that land is something that is not to be had
for love nor money. That is why we have to look after it with the greatest
care when we obtain it.]

The Land Affairs budget for this year amounts to R4,8 billion, a sum of
R900 million more than last year. The Restitution and Land Reform
subprogrammes consume 88% of the total budget. In looking at this budget,
we can say that the project of land reform can easily be achieved within
the stated timeframe. What about productive land owned by the state? Should
this land not be released and equitably shared to assist the people? If
this is done, land reform could be fast-tracked.

Another question relates to what happens to the land owned by the Ingonyama
Trust. If this trust is to be placed under the communal land rights
programme, who will then own the land in question?

Ngiyabonga Sihlalo ngoba uzakwethu uMoatshe uke wathinta ilembe eleqa
amanye amalembe ngokukhalipha.

USIHLALO WE NCOP: Lunga elihloniphekile, isikhathi sakho siphelile.

Mnu M A MZIZI: Hhayi kahle bo! Awu! Bengizokuhasha mfana.
[Ihlombe.][Uhleko.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[I am glad, Chairperson, that my colleague Moatshe spoke about His Majesty,
Shaka, the axe that surpasses all other axes in sharpness.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr M A MZIZI: Wow! I was still going to praise you. [Laughter.]
[Applause.]]

Ms N NKOMO-RALEHOKO (Gauteng): Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, Chairperson
of the NCOP, Mr Johannes Mahlangu, in absentia, Minister for Land Affairs
and Agriculture, Madam Thoko Didiza, MECs from the provinces, hon members,
ladies and gentlemen, in welcoming and endorsing the Budget Vote of the
Department of Agriculture, I first want to confirm that urban agriculture
is not a myth, especially in Gauteng, to be more specific.

Gauteng is the smallest province in our country, covering 1,7 million
hectares or 1,4% of the total area. Of this, 438 623 hectares are
potentially arable and 293 571 hectares of this area are utilised, leaving
145 052 hectares not utilised. There clearly is spare agricultural
potential that can and should be utilised, not only to extricate our people
from the clutches of poverty.

According to Statistics SA, during 2005 Gauteng contributed 7% to the gross
farming income of the country. The dominant farming practice, according to
the same statistics, is animal farming at 45%, followed by animal products
at 23%, horticulture at 20% and with field crops standing at 20%.

The total area planted with maize in the province amounts to 105 000
hectares, of which 60 000 hectares under white maize and 45 000 hectares
under yellow maize. Grain sorghum is planted on about 3 500 hectares;
sunflower seeds on 15 000 hectares; soya beans on 5 000 hectares; and dry
beans on 4 000 hectares. These are relatively low-value crops.

The largest contribution to livestock sales was made by beef cattle,
followed by pigs. However, I acknowledge that Gauteng absorbs livestock and
other products from other provinces. Be this as it may, the contribution
from our urban agriculture is certainly not insignificant.

Friends and colleagues, for us the more pertinent issue to discuss in
relation to the Budget Vote is collectivity. What more should we be doing,
all of us, in the agricultural sector to ensure that the Accelerated and
Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa bears fruit? What else should we
be doing swiftly to extricate more of our people from the clutches of
poverty and general destitution, which is one of the chief features that
characterise the lives of ordinary people trapped in the reality and
totality of the second economy.

In the current Budget Vote speech, Minister Didiza talks about the
implementation of sectoral strategies to increase productivity, employment,
competitiveness, sustainability and the fight against poverty. In
confirming the accuracy of her analysis, I wish to point out that on 23
February we launched our Gauteng Agricultural Development Strategy. Through
this strategy we intend to significantly better our output in a number of
areas. We should be able to use biotechnology, maximise agricultural
productivity through agroprocessing, to create more agroprocessing sectors,
and also contribute to job creation and further economic development.

As a matter of common cause, the fundamental principles enshrined in the
broad-based black economic empowerment policy guidelines shall also not be
forsaken in the implementation of this strategy. In this regard, we shall
focus on, among other things, promoting equitable access and the
participation of historically disadvantaged individuals in the entire
agricultural value chain, and on further deracialising land and enterprise
ownership skills and management in existing and new agricultural
enterprises.

Earlier I indicated that Gauteng has 145 052 hectares of unutilised,
potentially rich agricultural land. Part of this land is in smallholdings.
We conducted an audit of the 21 000 smallholdings in the province. The
audit shows that only a few of the smallholdings rely solely on the income
derived from agriculture.

Most of the occupants have another source of income. It is quite important
not only for the province but for the country as a whole to bring this land
back into productive agriculture, also especially given that Gauteng has a
disproportionally high percentage of high-potential agricultural land.

Given this situation and as a matter of principle, we have decided that we
will not allow absentee landlords and the “unattainable, unwilling seller”
concept to hold back our accelerated and shared development objectives.
Constitutional provisions exist and allow us to effectively deprive people
who hold land unproductively or against the public interest.

Informed by the imperatives I mentioned earlier - the importance of
ensuring that the democratic dispensation we enjoy is also quickly
translated into material benefits for all of our people - we are finalising
a process that will enable the unutilised land to be gainfully used. This
entails, among other things, mapping and appropriately zoning available
land within the province.

Lastly, I wish to support the current Budget Vote speech, understanding
that it certainly will contribute immensely to the broad strategic
objective of our government - the objective of making the lives of all our
people better than they were yesterday. In supporting the Budget Vote, I
certainly believe that it has all the elements of further contributing to
the nation-building project, and the leading party in government is
pursuing that.

In conclusion, I wish to leave you with the words of Franz Fanon, who
observed in The Wretched of the Earth that:

  This cult of local products and this incapability to seek out new systems
  of management will be equally manifested by the bogging down of the
  national middle class in the methods of agricultural production which
  were characteristic of the colonial period.


  The national economy of the period of independence is not set on a new
  footing. It is still concerned with the ground-nut harvest, with the
  cocoa crop and the olive yield. In the same way there is no change in the
  marketing of basic products, and not a single industry is set up in the
  country. We go on sending out raw materials; we go on being Europe’s
  small farmers who specialise in unfinished products.

The Budget Vote under discussion clearly departs from the unrevolutionary
development trajectory observed by Fanon. I thank you, Madam Chair.
[Applause.]

Mr G NKWINTI (Eastern Cape): Thank you, hon Deputy Chairperson. Hon
Minister, colleagues ... oozakwethu abasuk’ emaphondweni [our colleagues
from the provinces]

... hon members of the House, thank you very much for the opportunity. The
Minister said, when we had a special Minmec meeting: “I am not going to
speak for provinces. They are going to have to speak for themselves.” I
thought she was joking, but was listening to the speech. She went on and on
and really kept away from provinces as much as possible.

I will only provide a few highlights and low points of agriculture in the
Eastern Cape. The key programmes are programmes concerning massive food
production, Siyakhula and Siyazondla, and then the normal programmes in the
Department of Agriculture that cut across all provinces in the country.

With regard to the 2005-06 financial year, we produced 50 000 tons of
maize. As a result, this year we decided to project delivery of 80 000
tons. We are doing that also because we are in the process of reviving some
of the maize mill plants in the province. There is the New Amalfi Mill
operating in Kokstad, so most of our farmers are taking their maize there
for milling. We also have portable maize mill plants that are very useful,
especially for communal farmers.

The Siyazondla programme is really a very effective programme for cutting
down on hunger in villages. In the last financial year we provided R13
million, but because it is so good and effective, we have increased that to
R31 million for this financial year, particularly because it focuses on at
household level. Women are running the project in the main.

In this regard we have established a pilot site in Mbashe local
municipality, using 12 wards, where right now we have more than 300
households running this project, and there are a number of households,
about 15, in a group, whom we are providing with implements. We have upped
that support now to include a 2 500ℓ water tank, because in some areas it
is dry, but during rainy seasons there is a lot of rain. So we are also in
the process of constructing stock water dams in the area, like other areas,
which we will do soon.

In these areas we are focusing a pilot project that we think is actually
working very well. Because of the level of production that has been
increased as a result of the support that has been given there, we have
also given each ward a tractor and now we are busy arranging training and
capacity development in terms of managing, handling, servicing and
maintenance of tractors by the community.

With regard to Casp, the Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme, we
are doing a lot of projects here. One of the significant things we have
found about it is the importance of sorting out sheep’s wool. Because we
are beginning to be more market oriented, with the support of the National
Wool Growers Association, we budgeted R4 million for them in terms of that
support, and in terms of marketing for improving the quality of our rams,
particularly in the area of Transkei. That is where we have a preponderance
of this and we are building a lot of shearing sheds, because we have found
out from them that, in fact, the quality of the wool is the same across the
province, whether it is commercial or communal. The difference is in the
sorting capacity of the rural areas; that is where the quality of the wool
goes down. That is why we are focusing a great deal on building these
shearing sheds.

We are challenged. Hon members may say that we haven’t spent R6,2 million
of Casp’s money. I must take full responsibility for this, because we
allocated that money to the Tyefu Irrigation Scheme in Peddie. We allocated
that money, we made arrangements with the Skye Development Corporation, but
we then found out that there was conflict in the community. There were two
groups: one group had appointed its own consultants from Johannesburg and
the other group, which was in collaboration with the department, appointed
another.  I think we are going to court in that regard. The Minister is
aware of that. So I said we are not sending money there and that money was
not sent there. Everything had been done, the plans were there and the
appointments made, but, because of the conflict, we realised that money
would be locked into that conflict. So we pulled it out. We did not use
that money. I take responsibility for that money, but we are working very
hard.

Yesterday, 18 May, our team was there. We were working with the community.
We have come to realise the conflict is about one group preferring a
developer and the other preferring an investor. With the investor saying:
We are going to invest, we are going to take 70% and leave you with 30% of
the products. And the community saying No. So these are very practical and
real challenges. That is why we withheld that money. It’s not because we
couldn’t spend it.

About land care; land care is a wonderful project and, Minister, we in the
province were very pleased when you were appalled at the state of the
erosion in the province and said “we are going to make sure there is a
programme dealing with this”. We are very pleased with that. Thanks,
Minister, for visiting and seeing that area.

The challenge then is that, when it comes to land care, this one area again
provides an opportunity for the Expanded Public Works Programme. It takes a
bit of time to get people to come in and you either want to do it fast,
when you have to get a ready-made company to do it for you, and then you
forfeit the opportunity of getting people to be involved, or you follow the
Expanded Public Works Programme, in which case you are talking about a
slightly slower process, but a more empowering one in terms of our
communities. Really, when we say not all of the money has been spent, it is
not because the money is not committed on the ground. The Minister and the
director-general have advisors, and say that some of the accounting
processes are not very good in the province; we do not commit ourselves and
we shouldn’t be doing so, because the work is going on anyway. So these are
some of the practical things being assisted by the Minister and the
department nationally. We appreciate that.

Finally, we have some low points, as I was saying. I have already mentioned
some of them, but there is a point that the Minister made about our
capacity to contain and even obviate the onset of animal disease. And
indeed, I must echo the Minister’s words in thanking our colleagues in
other provinces, including Gauteng, who really threw their weight behind us
and some of the provinces here. [Interjections.] And supported us very
strongly when we had the outbreak - it is still continuing – of swine
fever. We appreciate that support from the national Minister as well. So,
we have a shortage of that in the province. We are looking forward to the
opportunity, which will probably be created under the leadership of the
Minister. There will be an upgrading of the conditions of work of these
professionals.

The classical swine fever really dealt us a huge economic blow, because we
had to cull more than 300 000 pigs during the period and this means a lot
to the communal economy in rural villages, particularly of the Transkei.
That is where we were hardest hit by classical swine fever.

Now we have . . . of course I am not trying to respond to the hon member,
but I must say that in the Eastern Cape, 80% of our development budget in
agriculture is going to villages; it’s going to the Transkei, it’s going to
the former Ciskei area. That is 80% of our development budget.

If you go to Nqobo, there is a co-operative there. You’ll be surprised by
the way. I must just say because you find a whole range of agricultural
businesses there – beekeeping, hydroponics, massive food production – also
Four-H Clubs, children’s schools . . . there is so much activity, because
it has been created by what we popularly refer to ... [Time expired.]

Mr N D HENDRICKE: Hon Deputy Chair, Madam Minister, hon members, I would
like to raise some pertinent issues relating to this department, some of
which may or may not have budgetary implications.

The slow pace of land claims settlements has left applicants frustrated.
This, understandably, could be linked to the willing-buyer, willing-seller
argument and the limited funds the state has to purchase land from sellers.
What exactly is the current policy around this issue, given that there were
indications that if this concept impeded settlement, then expropriations
could be made? The second question is whether market value is taken into
account when expropriating land, or is there a discount element involved?

Perhaps I should just respond to hon Le Roux’s point here, having been a
victim of the Group Areas Act myself. Perhaps the Minister could take a
leaf out of the previous government’s book, where government people came
and valued your land - not at the market value - or they simply
expropriated it. If you were allowed to sell it, 50% of the amount they
paid you went into government coffers. So, Madam Minister, you’ve actually
been very soft on this matter so far, and I think we make no excuse for
expropriating land; it’s overdue and land must now go to the people.
On the question of land being given to people to farm on, who then fail in
their endeavours, yes, perhaps we haven’t given them all the technical
expertise they need and we haven’t been able to give them all the money.
Madam Minister, we would have liked to see your budget doubled, so that
farmers can get the kind of subsidies that they previously enjoyed. In the
past, even when their farms were going down, farmers were still driving
Mercedes Benz.

An HON MEMBER: BMWs! [Laughter.]

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Related to the above is security of tenure, especially
on farms where it seems that farmers continue to evict workers from farms
despite protective legislation preventing this practice. Government needs
now to take a firmer position on evictions and convict guilty farmers where
this is taking place.

The implementation of the Communal Land Rights Act could prove
controversial, and we envisage that much consultation is needed with the
National House of Traditional Leaders.

Intergovernmental relations have proved challenging in the areas of land
redistribution. The time it takes to apply for, purchase and develop land
for residential purposes is lengthy, and often there is little
communication between provinces and city metros on the demarcation of this
activity. Rezoning takes far too long and people are waiting for land. We
agree with your budget, Madam. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms T JOEMAT-PATTERSON (Northern Cape): Hon Deputy Chairperson, we got to
know you like this in the Northern Cape. So we know that when you say the
time is up, you mean that the time is up.

Hon Minister, hon MECs for agriculture and land reform, Chairperson of the
Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, colleagues, it is with
great excitement and humility that I wish to congratulate and support the
Minister for once again prioritising the realisation of a people-centred
developmental agenda that revolves around basic human needs.

We have certainly been granted a beacon of hope in an age of hope, which
reinforces agriculture as one of the most critical vehicles for the
eradication of poverty and underdevelopment. We once more got to grips with
the fact that a developmental paradigm can never be separated from the
prerequisite of the expansion of the agricultural economy, which involves
increased investment and skills development.

I can proclaim without any doubt that the economic and moral vision that
has been put before us is the only path to be pursued in order to extricate
millions of South Africans from the vestiges of colonialism, which are laid
in our agricultural landscape.
The visit by the hon members of the NCOP to the Kgalagadi region of the
Northern Cape last month reminded us that although we have challenges,
there are opportunities aplenty. And to this effect, the community of
Kgalagadi was tremendously grateful for your visit, hon members. One
community member, after your departure, commented in isiXhosa “silufezile
ugqatso” [mission accomplished], and since you left, “die rottang is nou
geknak” [the rod has snapped]. I thought the rottang [rod] was only used in
education. They saw your visit as a beacon of hope, breaking the vestiges
of colonialism in this age of hope.

The Northern Cape, like many other provinces, has been experiencing
dramatic climate changes. The continuous dry spells in most parts of the
province, particularly in the Namaqua district, and the recent floods in
parts of Hartswater in Taung, further testify to the characteristics of a
province of extremes.

The challenge, therefore, is how to sustain the current and future
agricultural production under these circumstances. We support the
Minister’s call during the Budget Vote debate: “. . . to galvanise
resources to combat the effects of climate change on agricultural
production”, since this is a matter that will impact tremendously on
agriculture in the Northern Cape.

Our strategy for the implementation of the Land Summit recommendations
includes a proactive land acquisition programme. The department of
agriculture and land reform is working with the Northern Cape provincial
land reform office and the regional Land Claims Commission on a plan to
make this happen.

Collectively we are working towards meeting the Northern Cape’s
redistribution target of 625 000 hectares per annum. Now if this was not
done over the past 10 years, we would have to expropriate land.

The Northern Cape had a total of 2 905 claims. Of these, 2 101 have been
settled, and we commend our commissioner for the sterling work done in this
area. However, 760 claims still remain outstanding. We will, through the
land reform co-ordinating committee, ensure that the necessary post-
settlement support is provided, as well as that the settlement of
outstanding claims takes place in order to meet our December 2008 deadline.

Post-settlement support is still a matter of priority and difficulty for
us. During the NCOP’s visit to Kgalagadi post-settlement support
requirements and critical matters centred mainly around land, water and
agricultural support. Hon members should remember that in Kgalagadi we
still have humans and animals drinking from the same water resources.

Linked to the issue of accelerating land and agrarian transformation, we
have driven our core objectives as a provincial government and set
ourselves a target in line with that of national government, to halve
poverty and unemployment by 2014.
In this regard, our department has identified with the national
department’s programmes and projects, and further explored the aspect of
agricultural corridors and hubs. The Orange River Emerging Farmer
Settlement Programme, the Vaalharts Irrigation Scheme and, more
importantly, the commercialisation of our goat industry, with 76 successful
co-operatives, are giving our emerging farmers, particularly the poorest of
the poor, our rural women, an opportunity to enter the mainstream economy.

Regarding AgriBEE interventions, while noting that market mechanisms alone
will not achieve the kind of fundamental structural changes required, we
agree that access to the market needs major state intervention.

The Northern Cape has received R15 million for cash payments and
R5 million for land care respectively. A number of people are grateful that
they will benefit from these initiatives. However, we learnt very harsh
lessons last year, and we do need to intervene in our departmental
spending.

In conclusion, hon Deputy Chair, we are committed to supporting the
Minister through important intergovernmental relations, as set out in the
Intergovernmental Relations Framework Act. However, we cannot emphasise
enough the fact that without growing the economy of the Northern Cape there
will be no developmental growth for the poorest of the poor. Thank you.
[Applause.]
Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Thank you, Chairperson. Ja, ek sal ook in Afrikaans
praat. [Yes, I shall also speak Afrikaans.]

Voorsitter, ek het slegs drie minute en ek wil my kortliks vereenselwig met
die gedagtes wat agb kollega Le Roux uitgespreek het ten opsigte van vraag
en aanbod en waardeerders. Ek ondersteun dit volmondig.

Die grondhervorming is ŉ vaste gegewe. Ter wille van regsekerheid word
aanvaar dat dit in alle opsigte noodsaaklik is dat die departement en die
ministerie en alle ander belanghebbendes die aangeleentheid rasioneel moet
benader. Wat word met rasioneel benader bedoel? Die verwagtinge en emosies
rondom grondhervorming moet op ŉ verantwoordelike manier getemper word.
Produksie moet voortgaan en bestaande boere moet sekerheid hê oor wat aan
die gang is.

Ek wys die agb Minister en die Raad ook daarop dat die NP-regering veral in
die tagtigerjare – die laat tagtigs, die middel tagtigerjare - spesifiek in
Qwaqwa groot grondgebiede onteien en swart boere daar gevestig het. Dit was
een groot mislukking, omdat daar nie infrastruktuur was om hierdie mense
behoorlik te vestig en aan die gang te kry nie. Gevolglik het produksie tot
niet gegaan en die spilpunte, windpompe en heinings is alles vernietig. Dit
was ŉ vrugtelose uitgawe. Die realiteite van produksie en die verwagtinge
van bepaalde opkomende boere moet verreken word.
Daar ís suksesverhale en dit word verwelkom, want die voorspoed of die
teenspoed van my buurman het inderdaad ook ŉ invloed op my. As dit met my
buurman goed of sleg gaan, gaan dit met my ook goed of sleg. Dis baie
belangrik.

ŉ Mens vind dat grondeise soms toegelaat en ingedien word sonder dat daar
werklik enige substansie is. Dit frustreer bestaande boere en maak dit
moeilik vir hulle. In hierdie geval wil ek – na aanleiding van hierdie
onbevestigde eise – my by die radikale toespraak aansluit, ek kan dit nie
anders opper as die radikale toespraak van die voorsitter van die komitee,
agb Moatshe, nie. Ek weet nie wat sy doel met die toespraak was nie. Die
toespraak behoort eerder in Zimbabwe gelewer te word.

Die agb Moatshe het verwys en gesê:  (Translation  of  Afrikaans  paragraphs
follows.)

[Chairperson, I only have three minutes and I just briefly want to
associate myself with the ideas that hon colleague Le Roux raised with
regard to demand and supply and valuators. I wholeheartedly support it.

Land reform is a fixed given. For  the  sake  of  legal  certainty  one  may
assume that in every respect it is important that  the  department  and  the
Ministry and all other interested parties must  approach  this  matter  very
rationally. What is meant with approached rationally? The  expectations  and
emotions around land reform  must  be  tempered  in  a  responsible  manner.
Production must continue and existing  farmers  must  have  certainty  about
what is happening.

I also wish to point out to the hon Minister and the  Council  that  the  NP
government, especially in the eighties  –  the  late  eighties,  the  middle
eighties - specifically in Qwaqwa expropriated  large  tracts  of  land  and
settled  black  farmers  there.  This  was  one  big  failure,  because  the
infrastructure properly to settle and get these people going did not  exist.
Consequently production stopped and the centre pivots, windmills and  fences
were  all  destroyed.  It  was  fruitless  expenditure.  The  realities   of
production and the expectations of certain emerging farmers must  be  offset
against one another.

There  are  success  stories  and  they  should  be  welcomed,  because  the
prosperity or adversity of my neighbour certainly also has an effect on  me.
If my neighbour is experiencing good or ill fortune, I will also  experience
good or ill fortune. It is very important.

One finds that land claims are sometimes allowed and submitted that have  no
real substance. It frustrates existing farmers  and  it  makes  things  very
difficult for them. In this case I want to – arising from these  unconfirmed
claims – associate myself with the radical speech, and I cannot but call  it
the radical speech of the chairperson of this committee, hon Moatshe.  I  do
not know what his objective was with this speech. This speech should  rather
be delivered in Zimbabwe.

The hon Moatshe made a reference and said:]

“Those who have the land must make up their minds, or otherwise it’s too
late.” Read between the lines. Those were his words and those are
threatening words. It’s an injustice and an embarrassment to the level of
this debate and I strongly object. And I think that the hon member is doing
an injustice to the position that he holds in that particular committee. I
thank you.

Mr M C MOKITLANE (Free State): Hon Chair, hon Minister, my colleagues from
the provinces, hon members, I think we are only 12 years into our own
democracy as against their 40 years ... it is a long period. So, we can’t
expect the Rip van Winkels to have awoken by this time. There is still 28
years to go. So, that is what we have to expect from the FF Plus; they
still have 28 years to go.

But, let me simply say that we are not only bound by the dictates of the
Constitution and other pieces of legislation concerning agrarian reform and
agricultural development. Rather, the historic and socioeconomic conditions
peculiar to our country require us to do more to ultimately usher in the
best agricultural industry to our own benefit.

Although the income bracket is very low in this sector, agriculture is one
of the main job creators, especially in the province of the Free State. The
summit of African leaders held nearly two years ago is a pertinent reminder
of the importance of agriculture, as in that meeting it was agreed to help
create jobs and to promote agriculture. The Nigerian finance minister Ngozi
Okonjo-Iweala is quoted recently as saying, and I quote:

   Though there may be economic growth occurring in sectors that are more
   capital intensive, what we need is more growth in the agricultural
   sector, which is becoming a big job creator.


The statement could not be truer and more relevant to us. It should also
serve as a motivating call that will carry us beyond; to a united and
prosperous agricultural sector.

We are building self-reliance and resourcefulness in the developing farmers
to prepare them to contribute meaningfully to a sustainable and vibrant
economy. We are further continuing to build developmental communication
between farmers at their respective levels and in organisations and between
government and the business sector to increase capacity so as to build
mutual understanding among all stakeholders for maintained growth. We have
just over the past two weeks, as part of our regular meetings, met with one
of our important stakeholders with a view to strengthen communication ties
and planning together within the framework of agricultural development.

Communication has been identified as one of the most important factors in a
developing environment. A systematic programme of communication that is
interwoven in specific strategic plans and the growth and development
strategies should be mounted, if we require changes that significantly
raise the profile of agriculture so that it is able to increase its
economic output. Our communication must be overarching and all-
encompassing, from extension services to the highly sophisticated and
competitive marketing arena.

The Free State province has distributed 22 720 hectares of land, benefiting
556 farmers in 49 projects in the province. In 2005-06 the province was
allocated a budget of R45 million. This is for land affairs to enable those
people who aspire to become farmers to access land and we are grateful that
the amount has actually been increased to R74 million. This time it will
indeed assist greatly.

We have invariably embraced the mentorship programme to support and develop
those farmers who want to get into the mainstream agricultural business.
The programme will hopefully help acquire the required skills to enable
developing farmers to graduate into commercial farmers. We have as late as
last week met with the private sector. This is the meeting that we held
with the Deputy Minister. We held this meeting at a farm and jointly put up
a flagship project that will form part of an accelerated movement to assist
black farmers to develop even faster. This project is more research-based
and we hope that it will determine accurate directions for development.

We have made some perceptible inroads in our policy domain towards farmer
support, and transforming the agricultural sector and building it into a
sustainable and prosperous industry. Infrastructural development is one
important element within our broader vision of democratising agriculture
and empowering people. Our understanding of infrastructure includes a whole
range of issues, not limited to agriculture alone, but also including those
that relate to the broader development spectrum in other areas as well, for
example Public Works, Local Government, Housing, DWAF, etc.

The province has invested in infrastructure support to emerging farmers
through initiatives such as the Comprehensive Agricultural Support
Programme, Casp, Land Care and the provincial infrastructure grant, PIG.
Unfortunately we don’t have this for this financial year, which highlights
the problems that the department would be facing in terms of creating the
right infrastructure for emerging farmers.

Casp and Land Care allocations for 2005/06 in fact had a cap of R36,463
million. We used all the amounts budgeted and we used the R3,5 million
which was also budgeted for Land Care. We were also able to use all our PIG
of R24,305 million. The Casp and Land Care allocations were spent on
infrastructure such as animal-handling facilities, water reticulation and
fencing.

To speed up Casp and Land Care spending for this year, we have actually put
in place a monitoring mechanism that will ensure that those who are
responsible for decision-making are consistently privy to the developments
with regard to spending in that particular arena.

A substantial number of farmers in the province benefited from the
Production Inputs Project, where the province provided farmers with
vouchers to purchase production inputs like diesel, seed and fertilisers.
The province has implemented this project in collaboration with some of its
strategic partners to support farmers with production inputs to the value
of R3,9 million.

The province supported 114 farmers in the area of Maluti-a-Phofung with dry
beans input and further supported other farmers in this district with wheat
production. In the Motheo district we assisted Thaba Nchu farmers with the
improvement of wool production. The province also donated high-quality
animals to emerging farmers to improve livestock production through the
Livestock Improvement Project. We have established a relationship with
financial institutions with the purpose of creating a conducive market
environment for these developing farmers.

In pursuance of commonage development we have, for example, built fattening
and holding kraals to assist developing farmers in the Xhariep district. We
hope to extend this infrastructure to other areas where the need arises. We
have also provided developing farmers with agricultural mechanisation in
the form of tractors and implements.

Our Food Security Programme enjoyed significant progress and managed to
provide 1 300 households with chicken layers in the last financial year and
chicken feed worth R1,4 million. A total of 1 929 households were provided
with agricultural starter packages, such as garden tools, seeds and
fertilisers, to the value of about R1,2 million.

We are in partnership with the Department of Education to provide 50
schools with garden essentials as a pilot project in the province. Infield
water harvesting projects, participants received agricultural starter packs
to improve on what they are presently doing. This was done in partnership
with Agricultural Research Council, ARC. The World Food Day was
successfully celebrated in Qwaqwa.

Then, we actually managed to spend R16,9 million for the purposes of the
areas that were experiencing disaster as a result of drought. And then in
actual fact 3 960 emerging farmers and 34 000 of their livestock benefited
from this, and 2 615 commercial farmers benefited and about 39 000 of their
livestock were supported.

In addition to that R16,9 million we spent, we also received a further R16
million at a particular time in November. We have been able to spend R10
million of that and we hope that the rest of the money which is left, R6
million, will be further used for the purpose it was intended for.

We have also participated, as the Minister and colleagues have alluded, in
the issue of animal disease control, and as a province I think we further
commit ourselves. It is imperative for us to do that. I think with these
few words I would like to stop. Thank you, hon Chair.

Mr J P GELDERBLOM (Western Cape): Hon Chair, hon Minister Didiza and
members of the House, at the opening of Parliament this year the President
placed emphasis on the season of hope that we are entering at the start of
the second decade of our new democracy.

At the same time we are mindful of the words of the late Inkosi Albert
Luthuli who said:

  The task is not finished. South Africa is not yet a home for all her sons
  and daughters. Such a home we wish to ensure. From the beginning our
  history has been one of ascending unities, the breaking of tribal, racial
  and creedal barriers. The past cannot hope to have a life sustained by
  itself, wrenched from the whole. There remains before us the building of
  a new land, a home for men who are black, white, brown, from the ruins of
  the old narrow groups, a synthesis of the rich cultural strains which we
  have inherited.


  Our integration with the rest of our continent remains to be achieved.
  Somewhere ahead there beckons a civilisation, a culture, which will take
  its place in the parade of God’s history beside other great human
  syntheses, Chinese, Egyptian, Jewish, European. It will not necessarily
  be all black; but it will be African.

In the Western Cape we are deeply aware of our responsibility to provide
the basis for that hope, which our people need to build on in order to
fight joblessness, hunger and poverty.

It is clear that the agricultural sector in the Western Cape is a major
contributor in our fight against poverty. In this regard, I think it is
important that I indicate to you what the current performance of
agriculture is within the economy in the Western Cape, and why we need to
find workable solutions to the challenges that lie ahead.
It is acknowledged that agriculture is one of the primary pillars of the
Western Cape economy. Although the province contributes some 14% to the
country’s gross domestic product, it generates about 23% of the total value
added to the agricultural sector in South Africa, which was R25 billion in
2001.

Agriculture accounted for 5,2% of the Western Cape’s gross regional product
in 2001. As many as 11 commodities contribute significantly to agriculture
production, with fruit, winter grains, viticulture and vegetables together
comprising more than 75% of total output.

I don’t want to go into the detail of the statistics of the various
industries in agriculture. I would, however, by way of example, like to
stress the importance of the role of one of these industries in the total
performance of the economy in the Western Cape. South Africa is home to 70%
of the world’s 495 000 commercial ostriches.

In Julie 2004 het voëlgriep op twee volstruisplase in die Oos-Kaap
voorgekom en dit het tot ’n vyftien-maande-lange verbod op uitvoer gelei.
Hierdie verbod het ’n verlies van R700 miljoen tot gevolg gehad. Sowat
4 000 werkgeleenthede is ook in die proses verloor.

Die Wes-Kaap is die hartland van die Suid-Afrikaanse volstruisbedryf, met
sowat 70% van die totale produksie wat hier plaasvind. Die Suid-Afrikaanse
volstruisbedryf verskaf werk aan sowat 16 000 mense en verdien R1,2 miljard
per jaar aan buitelandse valuta vir die land. Dit is ’n bedryf wat 90%
uitvoergerig is. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[In July 2004 bird flu occurred on two ostrich farms in the Eastern Cape
and this led to a fifteen-month embargo on imports. This embargo resulted
in a loss of R700 million. Approximately 4 000 job opportunities were also
lost in the process.

The Western Cape is the core of the South African ostrich industry, where
approximately 70% of total production takes place. The South African
ostrich industry provides jobs to about 16 000 people and earns the country
R1,2 billion per year in foreign currency. It is an industry that is 90%
directed at export.]

The ostrich industry, however, grasped the challenge and embarked on an
intensive awareness and marketing campaign within South Africa that also
led to a five-fold increase in the local consumption of ostrich meat.

When exports resumed in October 2005, the ostrich industry gave local
consumers the assurance that the industry would continue to serve the
growing South African market. The industry is still in the process of
regaining the shelf space and the market share that were lost in Europe
and, as that materialises, some of the job losses may also be mitigated.
The challenge was ours to give hope to the industry and the thousands of
workers who stood to lose their jobs. Together we worked and won the
battle.

The prosperity of the agriculture sector is linked to the extent to which
primary production is aligned to the needs of the economy, both in terms of
direct consumption of primary commodities and the demand for agriculture
and raw materials at the manufacturing level. It is important, therefore,
that the vision for agriculture is a broader view of the larger economy,
rather than a narrow focus on primary agricultural production.

Tydens die Nepad-vergadering van staatshoofde in Julie 2002 is landbou- en
marktoegang deur Nepad as een van ses prioriteitsareas bevestig. Daarom is
daar reeds ’n projek van stapel gestuur om te fokus op landbounavorsing en
- ondersteuning. Ek glo dat ons ’n betekenisvolle bydrae hier kan lewer.
Die ontwikkeling van landbou moet aktief ondersteun word. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[During the Nepad meeting of heads of state in July 2002 access to
agriculture and markets through Nepad was confirmed as one of six priority
areas. That is why a project has already been launched to focus on
agricultural research and support. I believe that we can make a valuable
contribution here. The development of agriculture must be actively
supported.]

The G8 heads of state at their summit in Canada subsequently endorsed
Nepad. Importantly, for this purpose the G8 heads of state pledged an
increase in their overseas development assistance of $12 billion per year
by 2006. Owing to the unique income demand in developing countries this, in
turn, will again lead to increased demand for agricultural products and
therefore to the start of a new cycle or, in other words, to an upwards
spiral in economic growth. It is therefore clear that productivity in the
agricultural sector can play an important role.

The agricultural development of Africa is also, in the long term, to the
advantage of South Africa and the Western Cape. However, given the nature
and the extent of the natural resources in the rest of Africa, it is
evident that this agricultural development will eventually lead to pressure
on the local agricultural production base, specifically table grapes,
grains, vegetables and animal products.

Dis tyd – en ek sê dit vandag as Christen, wit, Afrikaanssprekende Suid-
Afrikaner – dat ons mense op landbougebied ook besef dat om met ons
medelandgenote te deel baie meer inhou as om vir onsself op te eis.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Dis tyd dat ons in Suid-Afrika vrede maak met die
veranderde omstandighede. Dis tyd dat ons besef dat ons as Christen-
Afrikaners ’n bydrae moet lewer om ons medelandgenote aan die hand te vat.
Die beloning vir ons mag tydelik miskien nie so groot wees nie, maar in die
finale instansie en wanneer die finale oordeel kom, sal die beloning groter
wees en sal ons saam bou aan ’n vredeliewende Suid-Afrika.

Goddank vir ’n minister Thoko Didiza, wat ek vir baie jare ken, en vir die
sensitiewe wyse waarop sy die landbousituasie in Suid-Afrika hanteer. Ons
sê vir haar baie dankie en mag God haar seën om landbou nog baie jare lank
te dien. Baie dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[It is time - and I say this today as Christian, white, Afrikaans-speaking
South African - that our people in the agriculture industry should also
realise that to share with our fellow-countrymen entails much more than
claiming for ourselves. [Interjections.]  It is time that we in South
Africa accept the changed circumstances. It is time that we realise that we
as Christian Afrikaners must make a contribution by taking our fellow-
countrymen by the hand.  Our reward might not be so big in the short term,
but in the final instance and when the last judgment takes place, the
reward will be greater and will we build a peace-loving South Africa
together.

Thank God for a Minister Thoko Didiza, whom I have known for many years,
and for the sensitive way in which she handles the agricultural situation
in South Africa. We want to thank her and may God bless her with serving
agriculture for many years to come. Thank you very much. [Applause.]]

Mr R J TAU: Chairperson, hon Minister, MECs present and comrades, I find
this debate to be quite interesting precisely because to me it is not just
another policy debate. It is a pity that some people at times miss such
opportunities to make a real and meaningful contribution in transforming
the lives of our people. As a way of reminding ourselves, in the manifesto
that ensured that the ANC is overwhelmingly supported by our people, we
made the following commitments: To complete the restitution programme and
speed up land reform with 30% of agricultural land redistributed by 2014,
combined with comprehensive assistance to emerging farmers, to ensure
involvement of communities in local economic development initiatives and to
provide work, build community infrastructure and secure access to local
opportunities and encourage the emergence of cooperatives.

I think that is the context in which the chairperson of our committee was
in actual fact putting across that, together with our people, we, as the
ANC, have committed ourselves to speeding up the process of land
redistribution in our country, and ensuring that together with our
communities we have buy-in in programmes that will satisfy each and every
one who is involved in that particular process, rather than being quoted
out of context.

Chair, having said that, the mighty movement of our people ensured that
these commitments find expression in the policy of government. Such
expression manifests itself through the characterisation of our
developmental state, a state that does not do things for the people of
course, but rather ensure that the people are the centres of their own
developments. Therefore, by so doing we do not lose the thematic expression
of our manifesto, which says that it adheres to a people’s contract to
create work and fight poverty.

Together with the poor and the workers, our government has put in place
programmes that seek to respond to all these challenges such as Casp and
Land Care grants, etc. For this year we shall see a restructuring and
clustering of some programmes for better co-ordination and improved service
delivery. Because the key problem facing us today is poverty and food
insecurity, let me take the opportunity to highlight some of the key areas
that seek to address this challenge, which in terms of the sub-programmes
is the livelihood development support.

Chair, of particular interest in this sub-programme is the focus on
eliminating the skewed participation in the agricultural sector by reducing
the inequality in land and enterprise ownership as outlined in the
strategic plan for South Africa, hon Le Roux. In the adequate co-ordination
and integration of efforts of different institutions of service delivery
there is a clear commitment to move away from the perpetual
characterisation of the previously disadvantaged and subjecting our people
to emerging and emerging and never having emerged, by so doing increasing
the number of viable commercial farmers and ensuring sustainability of the
land and agrarian reform projects through devoting extra resources and
human capacity, of course.

The department notes that the development of a three-tier financial
services sector, inter alia, a focus on the unbanked is a major objective
of the financial services and cooperatives development programme. And
consistent with our manifesto, the department notes that agricultural
production at household level needs promotion in the South African context,
where more than 2 million households are food insecure. In this respect the
development of food insecurity and vulnerability information mapping
systems will assist in the design of well-targeted interventions. A key
intervention on the food security front will be the provision of
agricultural starter packs to support agricultural production as part of
the integrated food security and nutrition programme.

Hon Minister, I stand to be corrected and I know you will definitely
correct me in that with all these challenges and the good programmes that
the department has in place, particularly with regard to emerging farmers,
we always find it quite interesting that whenever emerging farmers are
developed or capacitated, when we put to them where their market is, the
first thing that they say is the export and international market. But the
key question is why is there all this interest international markets, when
we are noting that there is the problem of a lack of food in South Africa?
There is so much hunger in South Africa but immediately when you get into
the production of food, you think of your international market first. I
think there is something wrong there.

We are proposing that perhaps it is important that the department work out
a mechanism of ensuring that there is a paradigm shift. This mentality of
our people needs to be changed so that they look at how best we can produce
in order to survive and make the poor of South Africa capable of surviving
under the circumstances that we find ourselves in. I think I would also be
failing in my responsibility, in the limited time that I have, if I do no
reflect on some of the challenges faced by the department. It is a well-
known fact that our programme of Taking Parliament to the People has
assisted us in identifying some bottlenecks in the process of fighting
poverty and building a better life for our people. We have noted with
concern the unevenness when it comes to the capacity of our provinces to
deliver. In some provinces we have picked up that there is no capacity and
if there is any, it is very little. Of course provinces have moved with
great speed in securing the tenure rights of our people, monitoring the
abuse of children, particularly child labour and other abuse-related
matters. However, their capacity to spend their conditional grants is a
worrying factor. And I think it is important that provinces must take note
of that.

Recently we noticed an improvement of course in their ability to spend, but
there are still some areas that need to be addressed in order to ensure
that there is great improvement. One of the other areas that we have also
identified during our process of Taking Parliament to the People is the
understanding or commitment of our provinces to building co-operatives, but
as we go and visit these projects, we find that not to be in line with what
we think cooperatives are supposed to be. I think it is quite important
that some capacity is built within the departments to ensure that when our
people enter into these ventures they have a clear understanding of what
they are, because most of these projects start well, the intention is good,
but they collapse within two or three months because of in-fighting and so
forth amongst the members themselves.

The level of co-ordination between the provinces nationally and local
government needs to be improved. I must thank you, Minister, for the way
you really put it, and therefore I would not deal much with that because it
was a worrying factor within the committee that there is no co-ordination,
and especially so at the level of local municipalities.

Hon Minister, we also noted that there is a need for the department to
increase its efforts with regard to the capacitation of CPAs. A lot of work
needs to be done in this particular area. Our people are receiving their
rightful land but the vultures, big capital, come in with a speed that
cannot be calculated and divide our people and our CPAs, and our people’s
land is divided along the lines of who comes in and who has the resources?
And these CPAs therefore cannot move. Who is then disadvantaged in the
process? It is our communities. Therefore it is important that there must a
clear programme by the department to capacitate these CPAs and to show them
some of these things. There are instances where people received land
through the Land Restitution programme, but would be bored by big capital
that creates a lot of confusion and division amongst the people. So I think
it is important that these kinds of things be looked at.

Let me join the priest at the funeral service of the late Minister Sigcawu
when he said, and I quote: “Thina amaMpondo sinawo umhlaba. Siyalima.
Asibulawa yindlala. Limani ma-Afrika ninawo umhlaba niza kuhlutha.
Ndiyabulela.” [The people of Pondoland possess land. They cultivate it. We
do not go hungry. Cultivate the land, fellow Africans, and you shall never
go hungry. Thank you.] [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you very much, hon
Chairperson and hon members, for participating in this debate. I must say
that I took to heart some of the instructions, that I need to be a bit
tougher on certain things. [Interjections.] I have heard you, hon member.
[Laughter.]

Before responding to the debate, it would be important for me to thank our
commissioners who have requested to be relieved from the service to go and
give some of the time that they still have left in their careers to other
institutions. They are our former Land Claims Commissioner for KwaZulu-
Natal, Ms Thabi Shange, and Mr Blessing Mphela, who will be joining the
Western Cape province. We would like to say thank you to them for the work
that they have done. Indeed, it is not an easy task. The tempo at which the
commissioners for restitution have had to work actually cannot be
underestimated.

In the same regard, I would like to thank the commissioners who are still
with us. The majority of them are there. I can see Mashile Mokono, the
tough, short man from Limpopo. Who else is there? Beverley Janssen from the
Western Cape.

I want to say to hon members that considering the pressures under which the
commissioners have had to work, with the timeframes that we as legislatures
have set for settling the claims, the enormity of the challenge has not
made it easy. I must say I am surprised that none of them have collapsed
and gone to hospital because of stress. They work 24 hours a day. Sometimes
they have to contend with the tensions between landowners and claimants.
They bear the brunt of the impatience that we as legislators sometimes
reflect but, to them, it occupies every hour, every minute. For that I
would like to say thank you, and that they are still with us. [Applause.]

I would also like to welcome June Ngubane, who has now joined us to take up
the responsibility of the regional commissioner of KwaZulu-Natal. She has
been the non-executive chair of one of the utilities of water affairs in
Gauteng. With the work that she has done in that institution and others
before, we trust that she will be one of our cadres who will ensure that we
complete our restitution process in 2008.

To all the teams, both in Land and Agriculture, I want to say that
sometimes we speak here because we are impatient and we would like to see
delivery happen quicker and faster, but it is not because we underestimate
the role that you play. To all of you, I would like to say thank you, even
to the members of staff who are not here. Indeed, we wouldn’t have
travelled the miles that we have travelled in 12 years. [Applause.]

Bab uMokitlane said that the damage to rectify 40 years and beyond couldn’t
be underestimated. I think the reason all of us are impatient is because we
have seen what our own capacity is in this short space of time. That we owe
to our civil service cadres who, through thick and thin, tried to excel,
even with our impossible deadlines.

I would like to thank member Gelderblom because it is true that the success
of South Africa lies in our hands. I think it is about acknowledging that
change has happened, that we must embrace it, and we must ensure that we
build this united, nonracial, non-sexist society, not through lip service,
but by actual deed through what we do and how we do it.

I think it is important to respond to a few issues that have been raised by
hon members, and to thank the members of the executive council for having
elaborated on and shared with this House the many activities that they are
involved in, in trying to ensure that our policies and legislation lands
where it matters.

Bab uMoatshe and others asked where we were with land delivery, and whether
it was moving apace. Are the things that came out of the National Land
Summit being implemented? I would like to say, Bab uMoatshe, my own view,
and I am sure this is the view you will share with me, is that, given the
limited time we have had as a country, land delivery has gone further than
we would have expected.

If you look at the restitution process in particular, out of 79 000 claims,
71 645 have been settled. It is not something that has to happen; they have
already been settled.

Yes, we are grappling with post-settlement issues, but in terms of having
resolved the question of those 71 000 claims, we have actually done it. So,
regarding the few that remain, we are confident that, with the cadre that
we have, we will resolve them in time.

I want to say that the resources that the South African government and its
taxpayers have expended on just this programme amount to R6,1 billion. This
does not include donor funds, but comes from the South African fiscus only.
That is no small amount considering the competing needs that we have as a
country. [Applause.]

I also want to say that, if one was to look at the decision that we had to
take two years ago – I want to remind hon members of this, because
sometimes we forget – it was to shift resources to restitution so that we
could speed up that process, and that we would take those resources and
frontload them after 2008 towards land redistribution. So, when we look at
the redistribution figures as being low, we must understand that it was the
choices that we had to make. The budget is about choices. We had to choose,
within the milieu of land reform, this one to be fast-tracked.

I hope that, in our communication, we do not express it as a negative so
that we create panic that there are no resources to support these
programmes. There are. That’s why we had to give ourselves a timeframe,
that in 2008 we will be finished with land reform. From 2008 to 2014, we
will focus on redistribution. I am confident we will be able to do so.

With regard to the outcomes of the National Land Summit, we have undertaken
a process. It was first consultation. Secondly, we had to set up committees
that are reviewing some of those principles such as the willing-buyer,
willing-seller one. I want to assure hon members that one of those that we
will have to review is within the context of market-based land reform. What
are the price mechanisms that have been used? Have they been consistent
with the productive value of the land or not, so that we ensure that,
whatever margin we reach, it is reflective of the value of the land rather
than using other mechanisms that have disadvantaged us.

With regard to tariff setting, I want to assure the House that we are
working with the Department of Trade and Industry, particularly with the
Intergovernmental Trade and Economic Committee, to ensure that the tariff
structures that are set take into consideration the challenge that our
industry is facing.

Support for new farmers is one of the issues on which we agree with you. We
will continue to undertake it.

With regard to the quality of wheat - as has been raised by members - we
will follow up that matter if we can get the relevant information. There
are various types of wheat that we receive, part for animal feed and part
for human consumption. Quality control is done by one of our institutions,
the PPECP.

On the issues that have been raised by Mr Le Roux with regard to Transkei
and what is not done there, I think, hon Nkwinti has responded to that, and
I don’t need to respond to that.
Hon member Matlanyane, with regard to foreign land ownership, we will bring
this report for discussion, because I think it raises very fundamental
questions that we have to face as a country. I must say that one thing that
surprised me as a South African is that when that report was released, it
was South Africans first who were talking on behalf of foreigners, even
before the foreigners spoke up. Till today, I have not heard any interested
foreign individual complaining about the fact that government wants to set
up a policy on managing foreign landownership in the country, because they
know that in their own economies, they have limitations around ownership
patterns. South Africans were the ones who started jumping and saying that
this will move away investment and, I said, I think we are indeed
international but, somehow, we must think nationally as well. I am sure we
will be able to do that. [Applause.]

With regard to the issue of training, I agree strongly that this is one of
the important elements that we have to undertake to support those who have
been settled. Training is continuous, because even farmers that are in
existence and have been there, depending on the change in the environment,
may require certain skills, which we will have to take into consideration.

What we are doing in Limpopo – I would like to say to the hon Matlanyane –
is that the people can go to our land office in the province, and the land
reform office in the province is working together with the provincial
department. What we are trying to do is review some of those settlement
land acquisition grant projects to ensure that we do not penalise people
who otherwise might have been assisted by the state, but actually were not
interested in farming, but wanted a piece of land for space. We can then
sort out those problems.

Yes, it was the first phase. There have been some failures. We have not
denied them, but what we are saying is that it is our responsibility as the
state to assist those communities to settle some of those issues that have
created tensions and enmity, which is not one of the outcomes of the land
reform process that we would like.

I would like to indicate, Bab uMzizi, that we will still come and debate
the Genetically Modified Organisms Act. I said that yesterday, the whole
day, I thought I myself had turned into a genetically modified organism. In
the ANC caucus, we were debating GMOs. Everywhere else in Parliament, we
had to amend and approve the legislation, which has now been referred to
this House.

I must say that there are concerns that you raised in the debate, issues of
safety, both for humans and the environment. In our own legislation, but
also in practice, we have ensured that we have taken into consideration the
safety of the genetic materials that are introduced to our environment. The
approval system is very rigorous to ensure that we ourselves can be
convinced that what we are doing will not have an adverse impact on human
health and on our environment.

That is why we are even expanding the council in the new Act to allow for
the Department of Arts and Culture, so that we can continuously look at the
social impact. The Department of Water Affairs is included so that we can
look at whether or not there are consequences for our water resources.

The Department of Environmental Affairs, in our committee on science,
technology and health, is included to ensure that, on a continuous basis,
we manage the safety of the environment and human beings.

The Department of Health amended its regulations last year to specifically
put mandatory requirements for the labelling of GMO foodstuffs so that
consumers can have a choice on the shelves and in the shops whether they
want to buy it or not.

Also, in the new Act, we have inserted a clause on liability to ensure that
those producers of GMOs, together with the users, if they are careless in
their handling, could actually be held liable, and there will be penalties.
I am convinced that we have taken into consideration those matters.

Regarding soil erosion, the Land Care programme in part addresses those
questions. I must say that the beneficiaries have largely been our
historically disadvantaged farmers.

The KwaZulu-Natal Ingonyama Trust Land Act, as we have said, will be dealt
with in relation to what we have said in the Communal Land Rights Act. One
of the things that we have done is actually to consult after the
legislation was passed. We have gone to the various Houses of Traditional
Leaders. So far we have gone to the Eastern Cape and Mpumalanga. We will be
going to all the provinces further to discuss with inkosi how this
legislation will affect them, how it will be implemented, what their
communities are supposed to expect and, furthermore, have workshops with
the regional houses so that by the time we start implementation, we are all
at one.

I would like to appeal particularly to the Legal Resources Centre.  I don’t
think it is in keeping with the spirit of ensuring that we improve our
democracy that we take one another to court even before the legislation is
implemented, so that we can learn whether or not some of the clauses that
we have put up are working or not working. I hope they will reconsider the
stand that they have taken in this regard.

I would again like to say that I agree with Mrs Nkomo that urban
agriculture is a critical element in the broad agricultural development
arena. We are happy about the strategy that Gauteng has produced. We
specifically looked at what it is that we can do in that urban hub, taking
into consideration the arable land that is concentrated throughout Gauteng.
I agree that the challenges of evictions, as raised by hon Hendrickse, is a
matter that we must continuously engage in. We will be, this year, if
possible, bringing back that legislation – the Extension of Security of
Tenure Act – actually to look at how firm we can make it to ensure that we
protect the security of tenure of our farmworkers. [Applause.]

Regarding issues of climate change, I agree that it is important for us, as
the sector, to look at how we are going to continue to produce, given such
challenges in our climate. I am sure some of us have seen a new phenomenon,
this year in particular, where the rains have gone from being summer
rainfall to falling in the winter season, something that is unheard of.

But what it requires us to do, particularly in the agricultural sector, is
continuously to look for answers. That is why biotechnology cannot be ruled
out of the equation of finding solutions for dealing with our problems.

Hon Van Heerden, I must say that I was very encouraged that at least there
was one person who served in the former regime, maybe not yourself but some
members of your constituency, who had the guts to accept that the South
African Development Trust or aid projects that were started in the former
homelands were fruitless expenditure. For the first time such an
acknowledgement has been made. I am sure you will work with us in ensuring
that we turn around some of those schemes that were fruitless expenditure
to become facilities that can be used as we go forward.

I want to say to hon Van Heerden, though, that I don’t think we can stand
here and say there are claims that are not claims. Our legislation allows
us to go to court if we want to dispute and not continuously to make
statements about something that we cannot prove. When we undertake to
investigate a claim, apart from registration, it goes through a whole lot
of rigorous research. We look at historical data, we go into the archives
and even do a deeds search. We also look at the proclamations that were
signed by the Minister and Prime Minister or even provincial administrators
at the time. We indeed have to prove that people were forcibly removed, in
relation to these proclamations.

If somebody wants to dispute something, the court is there. But I don’t
think it will be worthwhile continuously to say some of the claims are not
valid when we cannot prove the contrary. I would like, therefore, to say I
indeed agree, regarding the issues of capacity-building for communal
property associations.

One of the things we are also trying to do is to review the time at which,
as the state, we can transfer the asset to ensure that we can build the
capacity of those who will take over before we transfer so that we can even
reduce these issues of litigation between the new holders of the land and
the state when we want to intervene where there are problems.

In closing, this second term is for youth development, as we, as the ruling
party, the leader in government, termed it in our January 8 statement. I
hope that, as the agricultural sector, we will look at what it is that we
can do to strengthen our engagement with the young people of our country,
who will be our future producers.

I also want us to look at what the possibilities of national youth service
are, particularly with regard to building a core of environmentalists or
conservationists who will actually work as cadres to ensure that we can
reclaim our soil that has been eroded. It could be one of the ways in which
we can engage some of the young people who are unemployed and out of
school.

I hope that during this period we can really focus on practical programmes
around how we could engage some of these young people. But, also, the
learnership programmes should continue to strengthen the capacity of those
unemployed graduates in agriculture in order for them to be able to come
into our government departments and into the agri-business entities, so
that they can get experience and have the possibility of being self-
employed, or employable.

I therefore trust that, as hon members here, we would do everything that is
possible towards contributing to youth development, particularly because
this year marks the 30th celebration of 1976. Regarding women, we will
indeed, through our Women in Agriculture programme, continue to sharpen our
engagement with the women of our country, particularly to make gains
concerning some of the things they fought for in 1956, as we celebrate the
50th anniversary of the women’s march this year.

We trust that collectively we, as this legislature, will not only engage
when it is this period of the budget but will continuously engage even on
some of the other important matters. I would like to put it to you,
Chairperson, that it would be good if at some time this House discusses the
Comprehensive Agricultural Development Programme of Nepad, so that we can
actually express our views as legislature in which direction we see this
programme going and what it is that we as parliamentarians can do to
support the executive. I thank you. [Applause.]

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Kgoshi M L Mokoena): Thank you very much, hon
Minister, for your progressive intervention in our debate and for always
being available to interact with this House.

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 12:09.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)


     (1)    The JTM on 18 May 2006 in terms of Joint Rule 160(3) classified
         the following Bill, introduced in the National Assembly, as a
         section 75 Bill and as a Bill falling within the ambit of section
         18(1)(a) of the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework
         Act, 2003 (Act No. 41 of 2003):

         (i)     Deeds Registries Amendment Bill [B 5 – 2006].


     (2)    The JTM on 18 May 2006 in terms of Joint Rule 160(3) classified
         the following Bill, introduced in the National Assembly, as a
         section 75 Bills.

         (i)     Corporate Laws Amendment Bill [B 6 – 2006].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on
  the Annual Report and Financial Statements for 2004/2005 of the
  Department of Land Affairs, dated 5 May 2006:

      The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having been
      briefed by the Department of Land Affairs on its Annual Report and
      Financial Statements of Vote 30 for 2004-2005, including the Report of
      the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 30 for 2004-
      2005 [RP 132-2005], referred to it, reports that it has concluded its
      deliberations thereon.

2.  Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on the
   Annual Report and Financial Statements for 2004/2005 of the South African
   Veterinary Council, dated 5 May 2006:

      The Select Committee on Land and Environmental  Affairs,  having  been
      briefed by the South African Veterinary Council on its  Annual  Report
      and Financial Statements for 2004-2005, including the  Report  of  the
      Independent  Auditors  on  the  Financial  Statements  for  2004-2005,
      referred to it,  reports  that  it  has  concluded  its  deliberations
      thereon.


