---
title: 'National Assembly - 18 May 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-05-18
---

THURSDAY, 18 MAY 2006
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC


        South Africa’s contribution to eradication of global poverty


7.    Mrs T J Tshivhase (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:


      In light of the fact that the United Nations declared the period 1997
      to 2006 as the Decade for the Eradication of Poverty, what
      contribution has been made by South Africa to the effort to eradicate
      global poverty?                         N420E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: First of all, Madam Speaker, let me thank
the hon Tshivhase for posing this question, which draws our attention to
this important challenge of the eradication of poverty globally. Indeed, as
the question indicates, the United Nations had declared the period 1997-
2006 as the Decade for the Eradication of Poverty. You would be aware that
since that resolution of the General Assembly of the UN, there have at
least three important conferences of the UN that have also focused on this
matter, and would therefore have had an impact on the decisions that were
taken at that time by the General Assembly. I am referring here to the
World Summit on Sustainable Development in Johannesburg, the Millennium
Conference Summit of the UN in 2000 and the Monterey Conference on
Financing for Development, all of which also addressed this particular
matter.

The hon member wants to know what contribution has been made by South
Africa to the effort to eradicate global poverty. To that extent she is not
asking that we address matters that are domestic. I must say that our own
efforts to address the matter of poverty have to start at home. Our first
response to that Decade for the Eradication of Poverty has got to be about
what we are doing domestically. With regard to that, I would like to say
that ever since a democratic government was constituted, our programmes
have focused precisely on this issue and it would be quite possible,
relatively quite easy, to give a comprehensive account to the NA as to what
has been done with regard to this, whether it relates to the management of
the public finances, measures that have been introduced in order to achieve
redistribution of wealth and income, matters that relate to interventions
in the economy to make it grow, so that we have greater volumes of wealth
with which to address this matter and various other matters.

That would be our first response as South Africa’s contribution to the
efforts to eradicate global poverty. That would have to be the domestic
effort to address what is indeed a very important matter in our country.
Centrally, what we have done in the last 12 years has indeed been to focus
on this issue.

The second element of that response has been on the continent and therefore
more relevant on the continent of Africa and to the question that the hon
member posed. I will say something about that. The third element of that
response is the more global participation of our country in processes that
have sought to address this matter.

The resolution of the General Assembly in December 1996, which declared
this first Decade for the Eradication of Poverty, said that eradicating
poverty is an ethical, social, political and economic imperative of
humankind. The main objective of the Decade was the eradication of absolute
poverty and the substantial reduction of overall poverty in the world. It
constituted a commitment by the developing countries to direct resources
freed through debt relief, debt reduction and debt cancellation, to an
integrated poverty eradication strategy and national plans towards poverty
eradicating activities, sustainable economic growth and development, social
protection for the poorest and the most vulnerable, including women and
children, priority areas of the social sector spending, including provision
of basic services, primary education and health care, good governance,
including the economic and political empowerment of citizens, efficient,
transparent and accountable institutions and internationally agreed
Millennium Development Goals, which came later.

Further, it also constituted a commitment by the developed countries to
promote capacity-building and facilitate access to and transfer of
technologies and corresponding knowledge on favourable terms, ensuring a
more open and equitable system of international finance, facilitating
access by the poor in the developing countries to microfinance, increasing
development assistance to 0,7% of the gross national product of the
wealthier countries, with greater co-ordination of that assistance, and
opening the markets of the developed countries to the exports of the
developing countries.

We had to respond to those goals as set by that resolution of the General
Assembly, which declared the Decade. Last year’s UN Summit on the
Millennium Development Goals came to the conclusion, clearly, that
insufficient progress has been made towards the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals decided in 2000. It drew particular attention
to the fact that our continent was falling behind with regard to this. The
commitment by the developed countries to increase their development
assistance to that 0,7% of GNP had not been met by most countries, except
the Nordic countries and the Netherlands. It said, nevertheless, that
absolute poverty in most parts of the world had declined, but had increased
in Africa by 100 million people since 1990. However, the trend of economic
growth in Africa has shown an upswing of 1,2% per year since 2000.

I think members are familiar with what we have been doing with regard to
what I said was a second response to the challenge that was posed by the
UN. That second response concentrated on the African continent. There is
general agreement – and I know there is general agreement – that what is
fundamentally important on the African continent in order to achieve this
objective of the eradication of poverty and achieving the necessary rates
of growth, is the matter of achieving peace and stability, security,
freedom and democracy on our continent, so that we do indeed create the
conditions that would enable us to address the development challenges which
the Decade sought to address.

In that regard, I think the House is familiar with the work that we have
been doing as a country to assist in the resolution of a whole variety of
problems and challenges on the continent that have to do with peace and
stability and democracy, including the interventions that we have made with
regard to the DRC, Rwanda, Burundi, Somalia, the Darfur region, Côte
d’Ivoire and the Comores, and that is a very important part of the response
that we have made as a country to the call by the UN that we should indeed
eradicate global poverty. I am happy to say that with regard to all of
these matters, where we have intervened, there is progress. It does not
mean that there are no problems that persist.

Recently, the Cabinet made a decision that we should contribute to a
multilateral debt-relief initiative and commit to once-off payments to the
World Bank’s International Development Association or IDA, and to the
African Development Bank. The objective of this intervention is to deepen
debt relief to the highly indebted poor countries, in order to help them to
reach their Millennium Development Goals.

Globally we actively participate in all manner of initiatives, including
the negotiations at the WTO, to build a global trading system focused on
what was agreed on at Doha, which was correctly characterised as a Doha
development round. I think, again, globally there is acceptance that the
world trading system needs to be changed in a manner that would impact
positively on this matter of addressing global poverty. I better stop,
Madam Speaker.

The SPEAKER: I have allowed the President to continue to respond on this
very, very crucial matter because unless the world solves the problem of
poverty, we are not doing anything as leaders. I was also praying that
President would look to his left – and indeed he saw it.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Your prayer has been answered, Madam
Speaker. [Laughter.]

Muf T J TSHIVHASE: Ndi a livhuwa Mulangadzulo. Ndi na inwe mbudziso hafhu
ine nda khou i livhisa kha Mailausumbwa. Ro lavhelesa vhukondi he ha vha
hone kha luta lwa u fhedzisela lwa nyambedzano dza WTO, ndi afhio maga a u
dzhenelela ane Afurika Tshipembe la tea u a tevhela? [Zwiseo.] (Translation
of Tshivenda paragraph follows.)

[Mrs T J TSHIVHASE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a follow-up question
that I wish to direct to the President. Given the impasse that occurred in
the last round of the WTO negotiations, what steps of intervention must be
followed by South Africa? [Applause.]]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, may I ask Minister Mufamadi
to translate please? [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Yes, unfortunately the President does not have the equipment
to be able to hear the interpreting services.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: What I know is how to do the tshikona, Madam
Speaker. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Speaking one of the
eleven languages that are recognised in the country, the hon Tshivhase
wants to know, in view of the difficulties that were experienced during the
WTO negotiations, especially during the last round of the WTO negotiations,
which steps does the President think South Africa needs to follow in order
to ensure that, notwithstanding those difficulties, progress can be
realised?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: I do trust that the hon Minister translated
that correctly. [Laughter.] The issue of the WTO negotiations is a matter
of concern for everybody around the world. As I had indicated, all of us
accepted, and all of us said that this was the Doha development round.
Central to the outcome of the Doha WTO process was this matter of
development and therefore the fundamental outcome of this process of
negotiations at the WTO would indeed have to address the issue of
development and therefore the matter of the reduction of poverty globally,
as was indicated during this Decade for the Eradication of Poverty.

There is indeed a serious problem and part of it relates to agreement with
regard to agricultural support provided to farmers, both within the
European Union and the United States, which creates these difficult
problems of access by agricultural products from the developing countries.

We still hope that in the ongoing negotiations, both the EU and the United
States in particular would be able to change their positions – and I say,
we hope, since none of us can make any commitment that they will do so – so
that the issues about market access and the possibility for agricultural
products from the developing countries to enter these markets on a just
basis, without having to confront the subsidies provided to the farmers in
these areas, would indeed be able to change their positions with regard to
this.

South Africa belongs to the important group engaged in the negotiations,
the G20 – developing countries - and South Africa continues to engage with
that group to try and persuade the developed world to make the necessary
changes. We interact with these processes in all other forums in order to
achieve this objective. The answer to the question is that we shall
continue to do what we did in the past to engage as vigorously as we can,
to negotiate and produce a successful and acceptable outcome with regard to
this issue of market access for agricultural products, and therefore the
related issues of subsidies paid by the developed countries to their
farmers.

The SPEAKER: We now pass on to question 8 posed by the hon Gomomo. I don’t
see any supplementary questions on my screen. I am very glad to see them
now.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, certainly it must mean again that the process
is not working. I don’t want to ask a question, but certainly Mr Boinamo
does.

Mr G G BOINAMO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon President, as part of the
global community, South Africa is also concerned with the eradication of
poverty within its own borders. In September 2005 the UN released its
annual human development report. The HDI focuses on three measurable
dimensions of human development: leading a long and healthy life, being
educated and having a decent standard of living. South Africa ranked 120th
out of 177 countries and has fallen 35 places since 1990. How does the
President explain this dramatic drop in the standard of living in our
country under this government, and what steps is he taking to reverse the
situation?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, the report to which the hon
member refers is not prepared by us. It is prepared by the UNDP and maybe
they are the ones who should explain how they have come to this conclusion.
[Applause.] The conclusion is wrong. The conclusion is patently wrong. The
Minister of Finance, hon Trevor Manuel, has indeed been engaging the UN
Development Programme on this report to ask them very specific questions
about the actual information on which they base these conclusions. I would
imagine that the UNDP would in time provide us with that information. We
are quite convinced that information is wrong; the information on which
they based this determination to which the hon member has referred. They
made the determination but quite how they did it, is exactly the same
explanation that we are seeking. The hon member says I must explain it but
we did not draw up the report. It is not our report. The UNDP must explain
and that is why the Minister of Finance is engaging them to get that
explanation. I am quite sure that should the UNDP point us to certain
realities of South Africa, which had resulted in us falling 35 places on
the list, they should point us to those factors, which resulted in that,
factually. We would address them. I am quite convinced that the report is
wrong and I would be very interested to hear how the UNDP explains itself.

Ms S C VOS: Mr President, as you have indicated, in global terms the
continent of Africa must be seen as the most in need in terms of poverty
eradication. Now regional economic integration and political co-operation
have been agreed by African leadership as vital to achieve this and it has
been envisaged, in a multi-phased approach, first of all, to dismantle
tariff barriers and customs duties among African countries, moving finally
to an African common market. How confident are you that this can be
achieved in the short term? There were documents that I have looked at and
this would hopefully be done by 2007. This does not seem to be the case.
Would you give us some idea of your views in terms of how we can reach
these goals in terms of regional integration and what the problems are?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I suppose it does depend on
how short the short term is. If the short term ends in 2007, then it is too
short. In the course of the implementation of the Nepad programmes, one of
the matters that has become very clear is that a lot of work needs to be
done to strengthen the regional economic communities, SADC, Ecowas and so
on. These are central instruments in terms of achieving the economic
integration of the continent that we aspire to, to which the hon member
refers. This includes the matter of creating free trade areas on the
continent, regionally, and then building up to cover the continent as a
whole.

One of the serious problems that has surfaced has been that our regional
economic communities are not strong enough, don’t have sufficient capacity,
haven’t had the capacity to do the things that needed to be done in order
to achieve the objectives to which the hon member correctly refers. As a
consequence of that, there has been a very regular interaction between the
Nepad Steering Committee, the Nepad Secretariat and the regional economic
communities to address this matter.

We have set up, with the co-operation of our development partners, a
specific fund based at the African Development Bank to assist precisely
with regard to this, to ensure that we are able to beef up the capacity,
improve the effectiveness of the regional economic communities, so that
they can discharge their responsibilities with regard to this integration.
It is necessary and it has to be done.
If our short term were 2007, we would have to extend it a bit beyond that.
It is not possible that we would achieve this African common market within
a short timeframe.

Mr L M GREEN: Hon President, there seems to be two schools of thought in
this debate on the eradication of poverty. On the one hand you have the
school of thought, and they often say this, that since the coming to power
of our new government in 1994 up till now poverty has doubled. Amongst
those people is the South African Institute of Race Relations with its
recent 700-page report, indicating that this has in fact happened.

On the other hand, there is the school of thought – and maybe this seems to
be the stronger of the two – which says that poverty has in fact been
reduced in South Africa, given the government social spending, the amount
that has gone into grants, electrification ...

The SPEAKER: Your minute is finishing in two seconds.

Mr L M GREEN: Mr President, could you tell us, as the leader of our nation,
whether you believe that poverty has significantly been reduced by the
present government?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: The hon member is quite correct about the
serious challenges you mentioned a bit earlier on. The serious challenge of
poverty in our country has to be at the centre of everything that we do.
Therefore we shouldn’t respond to it, whether this school of thought is
right and that one is wrong, as a matter of belief. The hon member asked
whether I believe it. It should not be a matter of belief. It ought to be a
matter of the actuality, the facts about what is actually happening. I am
quite certain that there would be no logical reason why, with everything
that has happened in the country, people are poorer now than they were in
1994. It is an illogical proposition.

I do not know if you saw an article written by Dr Gumede in our media
responding to the report of the Institute of Race Relations to which you
referred. I read the article because Dr Gumede said I must read it. He
didn’t express beliefs. He presented facts in that report. He cited studies
by other academics in the country, which said precisely the opposite of
what the Institute of Race Relations had said. I can explain clearly why it
is the case and on what facts I would base my own conclusions, that a
school of thought which says that there has been an increase in poverty in
the country, would obviously be wrong. It relates to the matter that was
raised earlier concerning the human development report of the UNDP. Even
they can’t adduce these facts, which would result in a conclusion that the
situation has become worse in the country since 1994. So, beyond belief,
basing our conclusions on facts, I am quite sure that the Institute of Race
Relations was quite wrong.


           Shortage of suitably skilled persons in Public Service


8.    Mr P J Gomomo (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:

      Whether, with reference to the shortage of suitably skilled persons in
      the Public Service which has given rise to weaknesses in service
      delivery, a lack of sound financial administration and management and
      under-spending, including on capital projects, the Government is
      considering any interventions to address this challenge; if not, why
      not; if so, what interventions?
      N421E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, yes, there is a shortage of
suitably skilled persons in the Public Service, which has given rise to the
weakness in service delivery.

In 2004, an audit was conducted across the 284 municipalities to assess the
challenges they faced with regard to delivery of services. The number one
challenge that emerged was one of the lack of skills, especially management
and “hard skills” in welding, engineering, mechanical engineering and so
on. That audit gave rise to Project Consolidate, which is aimed at
providing hands-on support and capacity-building at local government level.

Last year the Cabinet requested the Forum of SA Directors-General to assess
capacity and organisation of the government to perform and deliver
socioeconomic programmes. Again, the number one challenge in the findings
was identified as shortage of skills.

Following the discussions on capacity and the incapacity and organisation
of the state, focus capacity assessments were conducted by the Department
of Public Service and Administration on selected departments to determine
the gaps and present corrective recommendations to the Cabinet. The
departments that were assessed were Health, Education, Justice and
Constitutional Development, Housing and Trade and Industry.

In addition to that, of course, there have been assessments made in the
various sectors within the Public Service to identify precisely the
shortages that we need to address. As a consequence of this, for instance,
a plan of action has been developed for the health and education sectors
for the development of targeted training programmes for hospital CEOs and
the reopening of nursing training colleges, norms for principals and
district staffing procedures, all of which have been completed. A skills
database has been developed and piloted in the Departments of Trade and
Industry and Justice, and the Department of Public Service and
Administration to focus on the levels of skills shortages across the
government.

The same matter, as hon members know, is being addressed in the context of
the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative. There are a number of
initiatives currently being undertaken by government to address these
challenges. Five priority skills have been identified as critical spheres
for that intervention.

The technical working group of the Joint Initiative for Priority Skills
Acquisition, Jipsa, is currently involved in the process of developing
concrete plans for the implementation of interventions to address the
following: the high level, world-class engineering and planning skills for
the network industries, that is, transport, communications and energy;
city, urban and regional planning and engineering skills addressing gaps at
the municipal levels; artisanal and technical skills, with priority
attention to infrastructure development, housing and energy and in other
areas of further education and training provision, identified as being in
strong demand in the labour market. The other area is management and
planning skills in education and health, mathematics, science, ICT and
language competence in the public schooling system.

Among other things, as an example of what is being done, the Old Mutual
Business School, in conjunction with the Office of the Deputy President,
will launch its foundational project management training to 100 employees
within local government in support of Asgisa and Jipsa in particular.

The Infrastructure Delivery Improvement Programme, targeted at provinces,
has already been initiated by the National Treasury. It comprises a
comprehensive project management and infrastructure programme, management
guidelines and computer spreadsheet tools to provincial governments for
departments to use.

In addition, consultants have been sent to provinces to train people in the
use of the infrastructure delivery improvement programme toolkit and
assisting in the analysis of provincial constraints with regard to
infrastructure delivery. As we have already mentioned, work is continuing
in the context of Project Consolidate, as well as an intervention that has
been made via the Development Bank of Southern Africa – an initiative
called Siyenzamanje.

The clock says I must stop, Madam Speaker.

Mr P J GOMOMO: Madam Speaker, ... ndicinga ukuba uMongameli uwuphendule
ncakasana nangobuchwepheshe umbuzo. Kambe ke ndifuna ukulandelisa ngelithi
... [... I think the President replied to the question vividly and with
expertise. Nevertheless, I want to follow up by saying ...]

... that we recognise the importance to create an enabling environment for
a single Public Service. How far have we got to ensure a more harmonious
Public Service across the three spheres of government? How far has the
government come with the establishment of multipurpose community service
centres in rural development nodes from where all our people can access a
basket of basic services from government?
The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, the hon member is aware that,
of course, we have taken the necessary decisions with regard to the steps
that need to be taken towards the creation of that single Public Service.
Like him, we do indeed believe that this is an important part of the
process of dealing with the challenge that he posed – the capacity
challenge and the possibility to speed-up service delivery and development.
That process requires a lot of negotiation with all of these stakeholders,
including the trade unions. That process is on course, and I think that we
just have to await its outcome, but certainly it is proceeding apace.

With regard to the multipurpose community centres, again, we have set
necessary targets to ensure that they are available and accessible to our
communities. The hon member will be aware that there are some timeframes
that have been set with regard to that. I cannot, on my feet, now remember
exactly what dates we have set. Certainly, we have said we need to have
these multipurpose community centres everywhere in our country. But we have
gone beyond that to say that we would make sure that they are available in
all of these areas by particular dates.

I am sure that if the hon member checks the government website as to the
implementation of that programme, he will see regular reports with regard
to that to indicate what sort of progress we are making. It is an important
initiative which is now being backed by the introduction of e-government
activists that we are deploying among the people to assist people to be
able to understand accessing the computer technology that will be at these
centres, because one of the lessons has been that the mere fact that you
have that infrastructure there doesn’t answer all your questions. You have
to address the matter of the ability of the population to access that
infrastructure to be able to reach government.

But certainly, as I was saying, the hon member would be able to see on the
government website reports on the programme of action of the government,
the timeframes we have set and what we are doing with regard to this
matter.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Hon President, whilst the ACDP appreciates that Jipsa has
an initial timetable of approximately 18 months, what progress has been
made with the programme, particularly relating to special training
programmes and bringing back professionals and engineers that are retired
abroad and also South Africans who are working outside of the country, who
can help us with economy?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Well, as I have indicated, Madam Speaker,
the technical working group of Jipsa is indeed currently in the process of
developing concrete plans for the implementation of the interventions that
are required. So, it’s working. But there have been other interventions
with regard to this. I do not know if Minister Erwin would allow me to say
this. Alec, do you allow me?

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Yes.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you. You see, for instance, with
regard to the state-owned enterprises you are perfectly familiar with the
very big infrastructure programmes that we have put in place as part of the
Asgisa programme. They also have to address this matter of skills
shortages. One of the things we have done is to reach out to the South
Africans who left the country in the various skills that are required –
engineering skills and so on – and have really combed through that,
contacted people directly to say: “Are you ready to come home?”

There’s extensive work in all countries in the world to identify these
people to address them directly, each one of them individually, and to ask
them to come back and all of that. So, it’s not just plans that are in the
making, it’s work that is actually being done. I think hon Meshoe referred
correctly to this 18-month timeframe. I would say let’s give it a little
bit more time, we will get these priority skills addressed.

Cabinet last week discussed and reviewed again the issue of immigration
regulations to see whether the regulations themselves or the implementation
of the regulations serve as an obstacle with regard to acquiring those
skills outside of the country as work that is therefore going on Home
Affairs, and as a result of that to make sure that we remove obstacles of
that kind. So, I am making an appeal that we give the project a few more
days. I am sure it will be able to produce the results that we need. Thank
you, Madam Speaker.

Mr K J MINNIE: Mr President, does the government agree with the judgment of
the Cape Arbitration Court that black candidates should get preference over
coloured candidates and members of other disadvantaged groups for
employment in the public sector? Mr President, if government does agree
with this judgment, what are the reasons? If government does not agree with
the judgment, will the government support amending legislation to allow for
the equal treatment of all previously disadvantaged groups?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, it is the first time I hear
about this decision of any arbitration process. Most certainly the
government would not agree to this. Our Constitution and legislation that
derives from that addresses in part the issue of sections of our population
that were previously disadvantaged. The coloured community belongs among
those sections of our population that were previously disadvantaged, and
therefore it would never be possible for the government to say that the
coloured people should be excluded with regard to those processes and
therefore it would indeed argue for the equal treatment to which you refer.
[Applause.]
I do not believe, Madam Speaker, that there is any need for any changes in
legislation with regard to that. What might be necessary is that we pay a
little closer attention to what actually is being done which might be at
variance with policy and the law. But I do not believe that there would be
need to change the law. I think we must respect what all of us agreed that
one of the critical matters with regard to the transformation of the
country is indeed to ensure that these previously disadvantaged millions in
our country catch up with the previously advantaged in our society.
[Applause.]

Mr W D SPIES: Hon President, regarding the bringing back of skilled people
into the Public Service, we have found with the private database that we
had launched last year that we have received quite a number of queries from
people who used to work for the Public Service, especially teachers who
accepted severance packages, that they are not being readmitted into the
Public Service because of the severance packages that were granted to them
in the past.

Now, certain Ministers have announced that these measures will be looked
at. What is the actual position, because people still complain that they
are being referred away and told that severance packages were paid out to
them? Will this barrier of entry be removed or should we give other plans
to these people?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, let me suggest that the hon
member discuss this matter with the Minister of Education. I am sure that
it will be possible to find some solution. I know that this matter relates
also to people in the health sector who also once took severance packages
and now want to come back to the Public Service. I would suggest, in the
event that there are people of this kind on that list, that you engage the
relevant Ministers. I am sure they’ll be able to find solutions to that
problem. Thank you, Madam Speaker.


            Government’s intentions with regard to floor-crossing


9.    The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION asked the President of the Republic:

   Whether, in light of a Washington Post/Kaiser Foundation survey which
   found that nearly two-thirds of South Africans disapprove of floor-
   crossing, the Government will (a) abolish or (b) amend the legislation
   which enables floor-crossing; if not, why not; if so, what steps will the
   Government take in this regard?                 N396E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, the government hasn’t
discussed this particular matter of crossing of the floor, and what we
might want to do about it, but I will express a view about it, since the
question was whether the government would abolish or amend legislation
affecting this matter.

The hon member is perfectly familiar with how this matter has evolved over
the years: The discussions that took place as we negotiated the interim
constitution; as we negotiated the Constitution we adopted in 1996, and the
decisions that were taken then, amongst which was to set up a committee,
which was chaired by the hon Yunus Carrim.

The legislation that was finally adopted was based essentially on the
matters that came out of the work that had been done by that ad-hoc
committee headed by the hon Yunus Carrim. That committee said, among other
things, that the basic argument for this approach to do with floor-crossing
is that, during the term of the legislature, there can be significant
shifts in public opinion, which do not warrant fresh elections, but which
have to be represented in the legislature.

It said that by allowing groups of Members of Parliament to cross the
floor, these shifts of opinion may be reflected in the legislature. Also,
genuine differences of interpretation on what mandate the electorate gave a
party and how to implement it can lead to splits in a party, and this
should be allowed expression by way of crossing the floor. The ability to
cross the floor also curtails the power of the party bosses, and makes for
a more vibrant political atmosphere. In short, greater democracy and
representivity is made possible through a qualified freedom to cross the
floor.

That was one of the arguments of the multiparty parliamentary committee
that had been set up to look at this matter. That was one of its
conclusions. It discussed other things like how to structure the whole
thing, and I think one of the things we would take note of in that regard
is that it took very seriously proposals that had been made by Prof
Steytler, who was then at the University of the Western Cape - I don’t know
if he is still there – and Prof Schrire at the University of Cape Town.

I think, in that context, we should take into account and pay some
attention to the judgment of the Constitutional Court with regard to this
matter, when it considered the issue that had been brought to it by the
UDM. It makes some important observations, which I think would be relevant
to a discussion on this matter.

A large majority of members of this House voted for that legislation. I
think it was 84% who voted for it. [Interjections.] Yes, I am quite sure
the FF was against it. [Laughter.]

At that time, there were some parties that even argued for complete freedom
to cross the floor, with no restrictions. That included, I think, the then
Democratic Party, the New National Party, the PAC, the ACDP, and the ANC
and IFP seemed to be the only parties in favour of restrictions on
defections. [Interjections.][Laughter.]

I think that Members of Parliament should discuss this matter. I think that
the process that was instituted after the adoption of the 1996 Constitution
would be a perfectly legitimate way of approaching this matter again. It is
an eminently political matter, and I think the political parties
represented in this House have every right and duty to discuss this issue
and say whether the conditions which necessitated the institution of this
legislation then, as agreed by the overwhelming majority of the members of
the House and the overwhelming number of parties of the House, have changed
such that we then need to change the legislation.

I do not believe that we should defer this matter to the executive. I
believe that the political parties should engage this matter. There is a
process that is agreed for an annual review of the Constitution by
Parliament, and maybe you might want to take advantage of that to look at
this.

I am told that during last year’s review no member of the public made any
submission on the matter of floor-crossing. But, anyway, it may very well
be that, now, for whatever reason, there is sufficient passion about this
matter to subject it to that particular process. I think this should be
done by Parliament rather than the executive. Thank you, Madam Speaker.
[Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I agree with the President.
Perhaps we should all take a leaf from the Jacob Zuma book, and apologise,
those of us who supported the legislation. Not that the legislation was
wrong, in principle, but the practice of it, Mr President, has become a
perversion of the very necessary democratic reforms, which a lot of the
proponents of the legislation were in favour of.

I think you would agree with me, Mr President, that the views of the
legislators are important. But when the electorate has an opportunity to
express itself, as the electorate did recently on the subject of floor-
crossing, which it can do at a municipal level, but cannot do because of
our closed list PR system at a national level, it was noteworthy that, in
the cities of Cape Town and Pretoria, not a single floor-crosser who
offered himself or herself for re-election was endorsed by the voters.

In other words, this opinion poll - which suggests that two-thirds of all
voters in South Africa, out of a representative sample, are now against it
- seemed to have been endorsed as recently as 1 March on the ground, in the
local government elections, in respect of floor-crossers.

I would ask you, sir, because unfortunately the majority party in the
legislature is excessively deferential to the executive of the legislature,
to encourage the legislators in the majority party to do exactly what you
said, and to look at this afresh. Thank you. [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I can only repeat what I have
just said – that I believe that the parties in Parliament really should
discuss this. They decide amongst themselves how to do it, and look at
everything, and look at whatever conclusions might be arising out of the
recent local government elections and everything else. I think it is
necessary to do that.

This poll that the hon Tony Leon refers to, I am told, is two-and-a-half-
years old? [Interjections.] I wouldn’t describe it as “current”.
[Laughter.] I wouldn’t describe it as “current”, in the way that you
described it. Let’s discuss the matter. It is important.

Part of the reason I referred to the judgment of the Constitutional Court
is that it is a very interesting judgment, because it assesses the question
whether floor-crossing, however organised, undermines democracy. It says it
doesn’t. It doesn’t matter whatever form it takes, so it may very well be
that political opinion in the country is that there should be changes with
regard to this matter.

I don’t think we should present any suggestion that, in itself, the floor-
crossing is illegal, is a subversion of democracy, compromises multiparty
democracy or any of these things.
I think the comments made by the Constitutional Court are very instructive
in this regard. Thank you, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Chairperson, Mr President, we certainly welcome
your giving the green light for a discussion on the subject. I have
listened carefully to you, Mr President, but to us the critical issue
remains very simple: Whom did the voters vote for? Did they vote for a
political party, or did they vote for individuals?

You merely have to look at the ballot paper, and the hon Minister in the
Presidency can look at the ballot paper and he will see that we voted for a
political party, and not for an individual. That means that the seat, in
fact, belongs to the party, and not to individuals.

Accordingly, Mr President, the seat does not belong to an individual. The
act in our opinion is therefore inherently undemocratic and wrong, because
it allows an individual to, in fact, steal the seat of a party and give it
to another party.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): The question, hon Van der Merwe?

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: The question?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON  (Ms C-S Botha): Yes. [Laughter.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: The question is ... [Laughter.]

Madam Chairperson, the question is whether the President agrees with the
Latin maxim, which says, nemo plus iuris ad alium transferre potest quam
ipse habaret. [Laughter.] And that means ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Van der Merwe, your time has long
since expired!

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: But, Madam Chairperson, can I remind you that when we
were young, we sang a song “Can I have another minute, please?” [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON  (Ms C-S Botha): No, hon Van der Merwe!

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Chairperson, perhaps Minister
Mufamadi will translate that too! [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon President, would you care for a
translation?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Chairperson, no. Hon member, you say,
again, that this process is fundamentally undemocratic. Again, I am saying
that is one of the reasons I said I thought members should look at what the
Constitutional Court was saying about this. This is not unique to South
Africa, and is done all around the world. There is nothing undemocratic
about it and, indeed, the judges said it might very well be that the
process would favour a particular party, and that in itself was not
unnecessarily undemocratic either.

I will speak to the hon Inkosi Buthelezi to suggest that the hon Koos van
der Merwe should serve as the IFP representative in the parliamentary
processes discussing this matter. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Madam Chair, hon President, firstly, the ACDP clearly opposed
the floor-crossing, and joined the hon General Bantu Holomisa in the
Constitutional Court challenge. That is just as a matter of record.

As far as the Constitutional Court is concerned, albeit prior to the
amendment of the Constitution, hon President, you might recall that in a
certification judgment the Constitutional Court made it very clear that an
antidefection clause, which disallows floor-crossing, would be supportive
of multiparty democracy, and said that it also “prevents parties in power
from enticing members of small parties to defect from the party upon whose
list they were elected to join the governing party”. But, admittedly, that
was prior to the later Constitutional Court hearing.

Hon President, we as the ACDP welcome the openness and the opportunity to
discuss this issue anew, and believe that at the very least the 10%
threshold should be reconsidered. So, hon President, we just request that
you also consider the first Constitutional Court judgment, and the issue of
the 10% threshold. Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Indeed, the hon member is quite correct to
refer to the earlier views of the Constitutional Court during the
certification process. That is correct. But one also needs to say what the
ACDP said - they did indeed join the UDM in this action. That is correct.

But, in the period before that, as the matter was discussed, the position,
I think, of the ACDP was somewhat different. [Interjections.] So, by all
means, hon member, let Parliament, the NA and NCOP discuss this matter, and
get it sorted out. Thank you, Madam Chair.

Ms F I CHOHAN-KHOTA: Mr President, clearly, from our side, on this side of
the House, we’d be very happy to engage on this matter, which we think is
fundamental to our democratic design.

Of course, we have no reason to believe that in two years’ time we will be
asked to look at the issue yet again, and we simply just don’t know where
the opposition stands on the matter at any given point.

Many who have joined the ANC, Mr President, have been vilified by
particularly the DA, which has claimed that they sold their seats for money
and positions. I don’t know if you have any thoughts on the matter of why
it is that people join the ANC. [Interjections.] I wonder if part of the
answer to this very perplexing question could be found in the fact that our
opposition as a whole has great difficulty sticking to its guns on matters
of import to the development of our democracy and the country as a whole.
[Interjections.][Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Well, Chairperson, the best I can do is to
tell the hon member why I joined the ANC. [Laughter.][Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: You were born into the ANC.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: No. The hon Leon says that I was born into
the ANC. I joined the ANC Youth League when I was about 13 years old.
[Applause.] When I was 13 days old, I had no possibility of joining the
Youth League. [Laughter.][Interjections.] Yes, sure! If the ANC asks me to
rejoin today, I would rejoin. [Applause.]

You see, in the broader context of the discussion of this matter, one of
the issues that I remember being raised then was the same point that was
made by the ad hoc committee – that we have to visualise a society in the
process of change, that there necessarily was a certain dynamism, and there
had to be a certain dynamism, in the evolution of our society, part of
which would reflect itself in changing attitudes. For instance, on the
issue of stereotypes, whereas I originally thought that Tony Leon was a
racist to the bone, in the practice, I would discover that he is a democrat
to the bone. [Interjections.]

But we would inherit a lot of the stereotypes and prejudices from the past,
and therefore there was a need to allow for, as the situation evolved and
as people got to understand better the truth rather than the stereotypes –
the ANC is communist and terrorist and all that – you must allow for it.
You can’t have a system that freezes that. Whereas the public mind is
changing, you have structures that freeze everything.

So, in that context, there may be people who are members of the DA today,
because they are fearful of this terrible ANC, but in practice, they see
that their fear was based on false propaganda of the past. [Applause.]

It may also be true ... [Interjections.] Indeed, vice versa also. It may
very well be true that these members of the ANC who have a particular view
of the DA get to know that it actually isn’t as bad as we thought it was
... [Laughter.] ... and defect to the DA. That was part of the reason of
the argumentation for allowing for this process.

But it may very well be that, by now, the population and electorate all
know one another very well. It may very well be. Thank you. [Applause.]


         Elections and peace process in Democratic Republic of Congo


10.   Ms K R Magau (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:


      In view of the upcoming elections in the Democratic Republic of Congo
      (DRC), (a) what progress has been made to achieve lasting peace in the
      DRC and (b) what is the relevance of this process to South Africa and
      the rest of the continent?              N422E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Chairperson, since late 2002
considerable progress has been made to obtain lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic of Congo. Our own constructive engagement as a country
culminated in the landmark signing in Pretoria of the global and all-
inclusive agreement between the belligerents in the Congolese conflict on
16 December 2002. This agreement was then endorsed in the final session of
the Inter-Congolese dialogue at Sun City in April 2003.

This paved the way for the setting up in June 2003 of the current
transitional government of national unity, which drew in the various
warring factions in the DRC. A government was established, a two-chamber
parliament was established, an interim constitution was negotiated and
promulgated and various other institutions were established. I believe that
all of this represents enormous strides forward that the DRC took.

On 18 December 2005 the Congolese voted in a referendum to approve the
constitution that is currently in force; a constitution that had been
negotiated by the institutions established as a result of the interim
constitution. What was very encouraging, of course, about it was, first of
all, the high level of registration of voters for the referendum and the
high level of participation, as well as the fact that 84% of the electorate
voted in support of that constitution.

That, I think, clearly demonstrated the commitment and the desire of the
people of the Congo to move to the democratic elections that, for a number
of decades, they had been waiting for. That constitution, of course, was
promulgated on 18 February 2006 in a ceremony that we were privileged to
attend.

Subsequent to that the electoral law was approved and promulgated in March
2006, which then paved the way for the holding of the elections later this
year. Originally the elections were intended to be held before 30 June
2006, but for various technical reasons it became impossible to do that.
Therefore a new date for the parliamentary elections and the first round of
the presidential elections has been set as 30 July this year. And I think
that one of the things that is very interesting in this regard, again
reflecting the enthusiasm of the people for this electoral democratic
process, is the number of candidates. For instance, you have 33
presidential candidates and about 280 political parties. But, again, it’s a
reflection, I believe, of that enthusiasm.

So I would say that progress has been made towards achieving lasting peace
in the DRC. Of course, there are other challenges with regard to this, not
just the political challenges and the establishment of a democratic system.
These are matters that relate to addressing the socioeconomic challenges in
the country.

In that context the government has adopted an economic programme that seeks
to rebuild the economy’s infrastructure and institutions to stabilise the
microeconomic situation, to revive growth and investment in the social
sectors, to reduce widespread poverty and to combat corruption, both in the
government and in the handling of the natural resources.

There may be other campaigns that have been launched in the country, for
instance the anticorruption Operation Clean Hands that was launched in
October 2005, which resulted in the arrest of a number of high-ranking
government officials, some of whom were involved in the mismanagement of
tax revenues between 2001 and 2005.

We are very deeply involved in these processes in the Congo. Our Department
of Defence, the National Defence Force, the Police Service, Home Affairs,
Public Service and Administration, the Independent Electoral Commission,
all of them are involved in assisting the DRC to progress towards the
elections and that country’s reconstruction in the future.

Clearly, the DRC is a critically important part of what has to happen on
our continent as we talk about the process of the renewal of Africa,
because of its size, its location and its capacities. Therefore we do
believe that it is critically important for the future of the continent and
not just of the Congo that these Congolese processes succeed. Thanks, Madam
Chairperson.

Ms K R MAGAU: Madam Chair, I thank the hon President for the reply. I must
say that as South Africans we welcome and appreciate the work that we are
doing in stabilising Africa through peaceful negotiations. May I just ask
the President whether, apart from our initiatives in the DRC and elsewhere
in Africa where we are charged with facilitating peace processes, there are
any other interventions by other governments of the world, through the UN,
aimed at promoting democracy, be it in the DRC or anywhere in Africa, and
ensuring that we create a peaceful world? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Yes, of course, Madam Chairperson. In the
DRC we work very closely with the UN. As you know, the UN has  very big
deployment of peacekeepers and other interventions that it is making. It is
also very deeply involved with regard to assisting in terms of organising
the forthcoming elections. We also work very closely with Monuc and other
structures of the UN in that regard.

Belgium has also been keenly interested in supporting these processes of
change in the DRC. Therefore we work closely with them as well.

As I’ve mentioned, the National Defence Force is involved in training
various armed groups in the Congo and participating in the process of the
formation of integrated brigades. In that regard we work, again, closely
both with the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, which are supporting us
with regard to that. There are also the United States, France and others.
So yes, indeed, there are many players in this process and we try to co-
operate as much as we can with all of them because all of us are pursuing
these common objectives.

I think that would also be true of other interventions that we have to
make, whether it’s in Côte d’Ivoire, Sudan, the Comores or elsewhere. So
yes, indeed, there are others that help in this process. We do hope that
the rest of the world will continue to remain engaged in this challenge to
ensure that there is peace, stability and democracy on our continent.
Thanks, Madam Chairperson.

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Madam Chairperson, hon President, the role of
countries neighbouring the DRC to the east, particularly Rwanda and Uganda,
merit a much closer and critical look. Both these countries were directly
involved in the DRC and still continue to exert significant influence over
the evolving situation there. They were and still are supporting various
factions and political parties even in the DRC in an effort to maintain
influence in the country and to continue to benefit from its natural
resources. This clearly undermines the peace process and all our efforts
there. This important factor must be recognised and subsequently addressed.

Mr President, my question is: What plans do you have in place to get the
international community and all member states to address the situation in a
firm and forthright manner?

Secondly, what corrective or even punitive measures are put in place to
deal with defaulters or intransigent role-players who are signatories to
the relevant AU protocols and peace treaties, and who continue to undermine
the peace process? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Well, Madam Chairperson, I think the hon
member knows things about the current activities in Rwanda and Uganda with
regard to the DRC that I don’t know. [Laughter.]

We’ve been working with Rwanda, Uganda and the Congo for very many years
now, even before the old man Kabila, who was unfortunately assassinated,
reached Kinshasa during that particular military offensive. So we’ve been
working with Rwanda and Uganda for a very long time and continue to do so
now.

The original agreement was negotiated and signed in Lusaka, arising out of
the conflict that had taken place when both Uganda and Rwanda had indeed
gone into the Congo. We had to do a lot of shuttling among all of these
countries, including Rwanda and Uganda, to persuade them to come to an
agreement, which fortunately they did, and we’ve been working with them
ever since.

The hon member may be aware that I was in Uganda last week, and one of the
things we discussed was a request from the government of Uganda for South
Africa to join a number of countries to handle a new problem that has
arisen, which is the movement of units of the Lord’s Resistance Army of
Uganda, the LRA, from Sudan into the Congo. This is something that needs to
be dealt with. Indeed, certainly the Ugandan government took the view that,
though you now have these units of the LRA that are attacking Uganda from
the Congo, it would be incorrect for Uganda to then invade the Congo to
deal with that matter, but that the matter had to be dealt with
differently. That is the reason they asked us to join this group of
countries in order to be able to manage this situation between them and the
Democratic Republic of Congo.

We maintain similar relationships with the DRC and Rwanda, and I’d like to
assure the hon member that there is nothing that Rwanda and Uganda are
doing now that is intended or actually results in subverting or
compromising the transitional process in the DRC. And, certainly, in all of
the regular contacts I’ve had with President Joseph Kabila of the DRC, he
hasn’t given me a report about these two countries that the hon member has
just given. I think the situation is a bit different from what the hon
member must have read in some newspaper. Thanks, Madam Chairperson.

Mr S N SWART: Hon President, we can be truly very proud of the involvement
of our Defence Force and other state institutions in the DRC. Yesterday we
received a full briefing, however, by the electoral commission, which is
tasked with assisting in the DRC elections, as you pointed out. I
understand that the ballot papers are also being printed in South Africa
for the DRC.

However, an issue was raised in relation to the electoral commission being
asked to assist in the DRC and the continent, and the strain that this
places upon their budgetary resources. Would you agree, hon President, that
whilst we welcome and are proud of the electoral commission assisting in
the DRC and other African states, we need to be mindful of the strain this
places upon it and ensure that donor organisations make timeous payments,
according to their pledges, to prevent budgetary and capacity problems?
Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Chairperson, this is a very important
matter. Indeed our electoral commission here has been working with the
Congolese electoral commission for some time now, and there are people from
the IEC who have been working in the Congo for some time now.

The Congolese IEC has requested of our IEC – they made this request two or
three months back - to deploy an additional 300 people there. So we have
agreed to that, because of the critical importance of these elections and
the need to make sure that the Congo does move to re-establish democracy in
the country. Yes, the IEC has indeed discussed the budget implications of
that kind of deployment with government, and I’m quite certain that
government will do whatever is necessary to make sure that the IEC is able
to discharge its responsibilities.

You were correct about the printing of the ballot papers. We have the
necessary understanding with the UN with regard to the financing, and so
on, in support of the elections in the Congo. I would imagine that there is
nobody who would contribute to a failure of the democratic process in the
Congo simply because they didn’t provide the necessary resources.
Certainly, from the point of view of the South African government, we will
do what is necessary to make sure that our IEC discharges its
responsibilities properly. Thanks, Chairperson.

   Progress under Nepad programme with regard to Africa’s development and
                        integration in world economy
11.   Mr S J Njikelana (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:

      Whether, with reference to the Nepad programme, any progress has been
      made in the effort to (a) place Africa on the path of sustainable
      growth and development and (b) achieve its integration in the world
      economy and body politic; if not, why not; if so, what progress?
                                   N423E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Chairperson, yes, indeed, we are
making steady progress in ensuring that Africa is on a path of sustainable
growth and development, and the hon member may have noticed recent news
reports that the overall economy of the continent grew by 5,8% last year
and that an almost similar growth rate is expected this year.

The recording of this moderate but encouraging growth rate is attributable,
in large measure, to the adoption by the African countries of policies and
programmes that are informed by and are reliant on the vision and
priorities of Nepad. As professor Wiseman Nkuhlu, former head of the Nepad
Steering Committee and Secretariat, observed last year in his article
entitled, The journey so far, leaders of the continent have not only taken
charge of the programme of the continent’s socioeconomic development, but
have also made certain that Nepad policies and objectives become the
internationally approved framework for Africa’s development.

The latest report tabled by the chief executive officer of the Nepad
Secretariat at the 14th summit of the Nepad Heads of State and Government
Implementation Committee held in Khartoum in January said that through the
efforts of African countries a solid foundation has been built for the
successful implementation of Nepad, particularly in creating an environment
conducive to sustained development. The report goes on to highlight some of
the achievements made thus far and it mentions, among others, but by no
means limited to that, the financing by the African Development Bank of
some 16 projects to the tune of US$630 million under the short-term action
plan on the infrastructure. Furthermore, an additional 13 other projects,
involving an estimated total cost of US$523 million, are in the 2006
lending programme.

The conclusion of a memorandum of understanding by telecommunications
entities of about 19 African countries for collaboration in planning and
implementing the Eastern Africa Submarine Cable System represents another
milestone in the pilgrimage towards the goal of Africa’s socioeconomic
development.

A further indicator of the progress being made to ensure growth and
development of the continent has been in the realm of development of
Africa’s human and institutional capacities. In this connection, the
African Capacity Building Foundation, an independent institution funded by,
among others, the African Development Bank, the World Bank and African
governments, has recently made available an amount of US$6,5 million to
bolster requisite capacities in the areas of banking and financing in West
Africa, poverty eradication programmes in Burundi, Mozambique, Mali and
Sierra Leone, as well as a programme relating to women and development on
the continent.

Regarding the latter part of the hon member’s question, we have already
alluded to the considered view of Prof Nkuhlu that Nepad’s policies and
programmes have become the internationally approved framework for Africa’s
development. This is indeed shown by the engagement by Africa’s leaders
with the G8 countries, as well as the OECD countries, whose aim has been
the forging of partnerships between Africa and the developed states to
ensure the actualisation of Nepad and its programmes.

That collaboration has resulted in both African and developed countries
pledging themselves to deliver on their undertakings to guarantee
socioeconomic development. And the hon members will recall the commitments
made by the G8 at Gleneagles last July to cancel the debt of some 16
African countries, as well as to double aid to Africa to the amount of
US$25 billion, and the speeding up of efforts to bring about a fair,
transparent and equitable global trading system.

The draft communiqué of the African Partnership for a meeting convened in
Maputo, Mozambique, on 4 and 5 May 2006, says that attention was paid in
that meeting to agriculture and food security, infrastructure development
and HIV and Aids. The participants agreed that efforts should aim toward
joint actions, using the African action plan as a base, and that the
principle of ownership and partnership must guide the work of the Nepad
Secretariat and the African Partnership Forum Support Unit in the task of
putting the joint plan of action into operation at a sectoral level.

It has become critical to create the climate necessary for attracting
investments to the continent. In this regard, an important vehicle – as was
decided at Glen Eagles – has been established to address this challenge,
and that is the investment climate facility for Africa, which is targeted
at further improving conditions on our continent to facilitate higher rates
of investment by both domestic and foreign investors. The president of the
African Development Bank yesterday announced the support of the Development
Bank for this facility and its decision to put money into that facility.

In regard to all of this I must say, that because of the climate created by
Nepad, and the resultant engagements with the developed world, there has
been an increase in overseas development assistance to and improved foreign
direct investment in Africa, reversing the decline the continent
experienced during the 1990s into the beginning of the new millennium.
Thank you.

Mr S J NJIKELANA: Thank you, Mr President, for the illustrative answer. My
follow-up question refers to the various international institutions that
one assumes are also interested in the advancement of Nepad. My question is
as follows: To what extent has the South African government ensured the
integration of programmes and resolutions of the specific institutions, the
Africa Commission, the UN, and the Inter-Parliamentary Union? To what has
extent has the government ensured that the programmes and resolutions of
these institutions are in line with the advancement of Nepad?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Well, as the hon member knows, we are
members of the implementation committee – the Heads of State and Government
Implementation Committee of Nepad – and it is really in that context,
rather than as South Africa, that we would engage the rest of the world,
including the institutions that the hon member mentions, with regard to the
Nepad programmes.

Currently, there is a meeting that is taking place in Bamako, Mali ... not
in Bamako, in Burkina Faso in Ouagadougou. It is a meeting of the Economic
Commission for Africa and the African Development Bank, which do indeed
have on their agenda how to implement and ensure the promotion of the Nepad
programmes. It’s in that context that I mentioned that the African
Development Bank president yesterday announced the decision of the African
Development Bank to support the investment climate facility, which is part
of those Nepad programmes.
So, indeed, the Nepad Steering Committee and the Nepad Secretariat have
sought to interact as closely as they can with all of these bodies to make
sure that they come on board.

I’ll mention just one last thing in this regard: For a long time the World
Bank programmes on the African continent have been based on bilateral
agreements between the World Bank and individual countries. The Nepad
Steering Committee has engaged the World Bank with regard to this to say
that we are also looking ... we’re not saying those programmes should stop,
but we’re also looking at the matter of African integration - the matter
that was raised by the hon Suzanne Vos. Therefore it is important that the
World Bank must also change its procedures to be able to handle regional
projects rather than just mere country projects. As a consequence of this,
in the end, the World Bank agreed and in our region, here, their very first
project was to provide something over US$400 million to build an integrated
electrical system connecting the DRC, Zambia, Malawi and Tanzania – that’s
one of those Nepad regional projects.

I’m saying that certainly the Nepad Steering Committee seeks to engage all
of these bodies to make sure that, in terms of their own interventions in
Africa, they do so within that Nepad framework. Thank you.

Mr I O DAVIDSON: I would like to ask the hon President whether he agrees
with me that in order to place Africa on a path of sustainable growth and
development, and indeed to integrate it into the body politic of the world,
one of the central issues – one, because he referred to others – is the
issue referred to by our own Auditor-General Fakie at the international
conference on economic crime, yesterday, where he referred to, and I quote,
“... the rampant increase in economic crime and corruption in both Africa
and South Africa”.

Indeed he observed that in respect of South Africa the global economic
crime survey registered a 12% increase in both public and private sectors.
But also, I’m sure he is aware of Transparency International’s Corruption
Perception Index where, if one looks at the past five years, there has been
a dramatic slide away as far as perception of corruption in Africa is
concerned.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Yes, it is one of these critically important
matters that the whole continent has recognised that we have to respond
properly to these issues of corruption, good economic governance and good
corporate governance.

You would recall that I referred for instance to a campaign that, even
during its transition, the interim government of the Democratic Republic of
Congo launched, in order to deal with this problem - and I’m sure that
you’ll find that in many countries on the continent – an intervention to
deal with this problem of economic crimes.

I’m sure you would have seen in the media, a few months back, actions for
instance taken by the law-enforcement authorities here to deal with
properties and things that have come to this country from some individuals
in Nigeria. That came out as a result of a system of co-operation that
exists between our law-enforcement authorities here, and the law-
enforcement authorities in Nigeria to deal with this particular issue.

So, yes, it is important, but I think that there are many interventions
that are taking place in many countries on the continent to deal with this.
I would imagine that, as happens here, the more you expose corruption and
this kind of misbehaviour the more the perception grows that countries are
corrupt. It’s a perverse outcome because it suggests that if you don’t talk
about corruption and don’t fight it then the perception would be that there
is no corruption.

I wouldn’t, again, come to these negative views based on the perception
that there is an increase in the incidence of this kind of crime. It is
there, it’s prevalent, it’s serious and it must be dealt with, is being
dealt with, but I do not believe that it is necessarily correct that the
continent is focused in the wrong direction with regard to this, because I
think the interventions that are being made, in many countries, focus on
changing the course of our continent with regard to this issue of economic
crimes and corruption.
And I’m sure all of us are looking forward to listening to the outcome of
the Enron case in the United States. I don’t believe that the fact that
Enron was caught necessarily means that the United States is becoming more
corrupt, but it is highlighted when you see a big case like that and you
come to the conclusion that, oh, there’s a major disaster. But it is an
advance if, indeed, those people are found guilty. Thank you.

Adv Z L MADASA: Hon President, there’s a Maputo resolution calling for the
integration of the Nepad programme into the AU processes. I understand the
matter will arise at the Gambia summit. My question is whether precautions
will be taken when this is done to ensure that it is not done in a way that
will impede the progress that has been made, and the prospective progress?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: It is an important question. The hon member
is correct. Nepad is of course an AU programme, originally decided at the
last summit of the OAU in Lusaka. It is an AU programme, but what has
happened is that the view was that we were then in the process of
establishing the new AU, that its institutions would not be strong enough
at that point to move the headquarters of Nepad from here to Addis Ababa,
the headquarters of the AU. Time needed to be given for those institutions
of the AU, the AU Commission and all of its elements to really become
properly established, and then of course to inherit these particular
structures.
So, the matter has been discussed in that way within that context and,
indeed, may very well be on the agenda of the AU summit in Gambia in July,
but I’m quite certain that in the consideration of this matter, and
certainly this has been the view of the chair of the AU Commission,
President Konare, who has been saying that it would be incorrect to merely
satisfy an organisational requirement that this institution of the AU must
be based at the AU headquarters, and to act on that in a manner that kills
Nepad.

So it has been very sensitive to this, and I’m quite certain that in
discussing the matter in Gambia this will be one of the matters that will
be taken into account as to whether the original concern, that the new
structures of the AU would not be able to house and manage an important
initiative like this, has in fact now developed to the point where it
could. I’m quite certain that that would be a central matter in deciding
what we do next.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Chair, is there now an opportunity for me to
translate my Latin message? [Laughter.]


            Recent actions of striking security industry workers


12.   Mr C M Lowe (DA) asked the President of the Republic:

      (1)   Whether he has taken note of the recent actions of striking
           security industry workers, the damage and destruction caused by
           them to private and state property and their alleged involvement
           in causing severe injury and even death to some individuals; if
           not, why not; if so,

      (2)   whether Cabinet will discuss steps to ensure that unions are
           held accountable for those members who commit criminal acts
           while on strike; if not, why not; if so, what steps?
                                                        N397E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thanks, Chairperson. The hon member indeed
raises a very important issue. Yes indeed, hon member, we have taken note
of the recent actions of some of the striking security-industry workers,
including what took place here in Cape Town on Tuesday.

I would like to say, hon member, with regard to this that we lost many,
many lives in the struggle to bring about democracy in this country. And
I’m quite certain that all of us remember very clearly and very vividly the
great numbers of people who were killed every day during the 1980s into the
beginning of the 1990s. Even as we sat here to adopt the 1996 Constitution,
those killings were still taking place – on the trains and everywhere else.
People will remember names like Shobashobane they will remember names like
Boipatong and so on.

All of us together as a country had said that we must establish this
democracy in our country, which, among other things, then creates all of
the space that anyone would need in order to address whatever their
concerns are peacefully.

So this has, indeed, been a matter of great concern that in this instance
you see people who are on strike with absolutely every right to go on
strike - that is a right that we must defend – but then doing things that
are quite wrong, things that are criminal. You cannot go around breaking
windows, breaking up cars, looting. And very, very worrying too are these
reports – I do not know if they are correct – of people being thrown out of
trains. This takes us back to things that happened in the late 1980s and in
the beginning of the 1990s. This can’t be right; it just cannot be correct.

So this is a matter of grave concern that, given all of the democratic
space that everyone has and the possibility to advance one’s purposes and
win one’s battles by peaceful means, that we have violence of this kind
taking place. It can’t be right.

I do hope that our people as a whole take this matter up. Here are
commuters – thousands of commuters – who want to go to work, and somebody
goes and torches a commuter train. This impacts on these thousands of
workers who want to go to work. Now they have to scramble to find places in
taxis and have all sorts of problems.
So I am saying that I believe that our country really needs to stand up and
say: Enough is enough. [Applause.] And, most certainly, the law-enforcement
authorities have to act with the greatest vigour on this matter. There
isn’t a single person in this country – nobody – whose cause is so just
that they are allowed to kill other people. No such person exists.
[Applause.] Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

Mr C M LOWE: Hon Mr President, thank you very much indeed for your answer.
Could I immediately just endorse everything that you have said on behalf of
the DA and strongly support the views that you have expressed this
afternoon?

Now, Mr President, I actually asked this question a couple of weeks ago
after the Durban violence situation. And, as you have already pointed out,
in the two or three weeks since then we have seen some more unfortunate
deaths. We have seen wanton destruction just a few metres away from this
very building 48 hours ago.

There is a constitutional guarantee for everybody to strike peacefully, and
we certainly would endorse that. It is something that people have fought
and died for in this country. But, sir, next week on behalf of the DA, I
will introduce into this Parliament private member’s legislation, making
trade unions responsible civilly and criminally for the actions taken and
the destruction caused by their members.

I’d like to ask you whether you would endorse that legislation.
[Interjections.] Whether you will or will not, sir, could I ask whether you
would consider asking your government to declare a state of emergency
within the CBD of Cape Town to ensure, Mr President, that the innocent
people ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member ...

Mr C M LOUW: ... who were injured and attacked and the shop owners, in
terms of the damage that was caused, will be compensated through that Act.
Thank you very much, Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): May I remind you that questions are
there to get information, not opinions. Thank you very much. Hon Mr
President?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thanks, Chairperson. No. I really do believe
that in the end the entrenchment of our democratic system - its vitality,
its vibrancy - really does depend on the commitment of all of us to make
sure that that democratic system that is entrenched is vibrant. This is
because you can pass any number of laws, but if these values and so on of
democracy are not in the mind - are part of the things that we own – the
laws will be disobeyed.

So, I think, the critical matter that we face now is to make sure that this
message goes out to all our people in order to activate our people really
to stand up for the defence of all of these rights - the right to strike
must be defended; the right to peaceful demonstration must be defended;
there is the right of choice and for people to say: “I decide to do this,
which may differ from what you are doing” – to get all of us to understand
all of this.

You’ve seen during the course of the local government elections some other
people getting killed – municipal councillors, even councillors who got
elected, others even before the elections took place. What does that say?
That says that there are still some people who entertain these wrong ideas
that they can impose their will on society by force of arms. I am also
saying that you have a situation in which we can’t sit paralysed as a
population and not defend these rights for which, indeed, so many people
sacrificed their lives. That is the route I would go.

I’m quite sure that when the private member’s Bill is presented, the House
will discuss that. It’s perfectly legitimate to do that. But I’d look in a
different direction to deal with this problem that has faced us in a number
of instances – the burning of mayors’ houses and councillors’ houses and
all sorts of things that are quite, quite wrong and really ought not to be
allowed. Thanks, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr G G OLIPHANT: Hon President, I think the matter is adequately put, and
the trade unions do agree themselves that there is no place for
intimidation and violence in our labour relations discourse and that
strikes and demonstrations must be peaceful.

They have also said that it is very regrettable that some people – workers
- have engaged in these criminal activities and that those who engaged in
those activities must face the consequences of their actions. That has also
been said by the trade unions themselves.

What I want to point out is that there are two parties to this dispute:
employers and workers, for that matter. The employers - in this instance we
are referring to the security sector - have refused, are refusing and
continue to refuse to go to the negotiating table.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Oliphant, your time is expiring.

Mr G G OLIPHANT: Shall we encourage both parties to go to the table and
sort out this matter?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: As the hon member is aware, the Minister of
Labour, the hon Membathisi Mdladlana, has indeed been urging this a number
of times – that the employers and workers ought to engage one another in
negotiations and solve this problem. It’s important. It has to happen, and
the Minister was quite correct. Indeed, there has been pressure on him to
intervene, and he has explained very clearly what the law says and that the
government is not about to undermine the collective bargaining system in
the country. So, yes indeed, hon member, you are quite right.

But we have to insist on this matter. Sure, those negotiations between
employers and workers must proceed. But there is absolutely nothing that
entitles anybody, whatever the circumstances, to engage in the violence
that we have seen. [Applause.] If we allow it to continue, we will have
anarchy in the country. The next time somebody disagrees with the hon
Oliphant, refuses to sit with him when they should sit and bashes him on
the head, we can’t say that is right – that Oliphant should have sat with
that person.

We cannot have buts about this thing. It’s wrong, it’s wrong, it’s wrong.
It’s undermining our democratic system. [Applause.]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Hon President, in the light of the damage to property,
vandalism, violence and suspected murders committed on the East Rand
trains, I would like to know from you whether the government wouldn’t
consider appointing a committee from the Cabinet security cluster, with the
Department of Labour, to look into developing peaceful march regulations
which would, among other things, ban the carrying of any weapons, be they
traditional or otherwise, during marches, as well as ban intimidation of
non-striking workers and employers. This matter must be looked at from a
Constitutional perspective and the wide variety of human rights that
violent strikers have trampled upon.

Okokugqibela, masibulele nangokuba uthi masiphengulule le nto  yokuwelela
ngaphesheya ngoba ukuba akuyenzanga, Mhlekazi ... Umvile uBlade ngale
ntsasa xa ebesithi uza kubhalisa umbutho omtsha yaye uza kuthatha amalungu
akhe. [Uwelewele.] Ufike nini na ngoku, Mhlekazi? [Kwahlekwa.] (Translation
of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Lastly, we welcome your suggestion that discussions about floor-crossing
should be re-opened, sir. You must have heard Blade this morning when he
said that he was considering becoming a political party and taking all his
members. [Interjections.] When did you get back, sir? [Laughter.]]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: I would say, hon Holomisa, that the justice
cluster has met to discuss this issue, not only about the strike but
generally where you’ve had instances of this kind. Perhaps they might want
to look at the law and the regulations, as the hon member has said, which
affect these public demonstrations to see whether there is anything we need
to do in that regard. But I am sure that we will raise that with them and
follow up on it. Thanks, Chairperson.

Mrs P DE LILLE: I want to agree with the President that we must condemn
violence in whatever form and that there is absolutely no justification for
violence. Last week I intervened and spoke to both the employers’
association and to the unions in trying to find an amicable solution.

But I want to share this with you, Comrade President. While talking to some
of the workers I came across a company in Johannesburg called Max Security.
This company is receiving a government grant for training security guards
but, in fact, it deploys them to work for something like R45 for a 12-hour
shift. So this strike has raised many other problems that we need to look
into.

I think the time has arrived that we must now begin to look at a bargaining
council for security workers and also that we must appeal to the Minister
of Labour to set a minimum wage for the industry in order to avoid the kind
of exploitation that is taking place. Thank you. [Time expired.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: I know, hon member, that the Minister of
Labour has indeed been concerned about a whole variety of matters with
regard to the workers in the security industry that have to do with wage
levels, protection of jobs, health, social pensions, working hours and a
whole range of matters like that. I know that he is concerned about even
this question that has been discussed about a bargaining chamber and so on.

But let’s get through this particular matter and, as the hon Oliphant said,
let the employers and the workers get together and resolve this thing. It
is not as though anybody is insensitive to the real issues that confront
the workers in this sector. But they are not going to resolve them by
acting in the way that they are acting. Indeed, I’m quite certain that the
Minister of Labour would be quite happy even to engage you, hon De Lille,
to look precisely at these questions, including the matter of this Seta if
it is not, in fact, doing training and doing other things instead. Thanks,
Chairperson. [Applause.]

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                GENETICALLY MODIFIED ORGANISMS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

Mrs G D HLENGETHWA: Thank you, Chairperson.

HON MEMBERS: Malibongwe! [Praise!]

Mrs G D HLENGETHWA: Igama lamakhosikazi! [The name of women!]

The amending Bill we are debating before the House today is to amend the
Genetically Modified Organisms Act, which was passed by this very House in
1997 and came into effect in 1999. The purpose of the principal Act is to
address the potential risk associated with the introduction of GMOs. The
Act provides the application of the GMOs, including import, production,
release and distribution, which will be carried out in a way to limit
possible harmful consequences for the environment.

South Africa and the continent as a whole are faced with challenges of
attaining food security. Biotechnology has been proven by many researchers
as an alternative that could help to enhance food production. Researchers
also argue that biotechnology has the potential to increase food production
and yields and thereby address food insecurity. This Act was passed because
we understand the benefits that could be enjoyed through using
biotechnology. However, at the same time, government is mindful of the
risks associated with GMOs and the need therefore to regulate the use of
biotechnology. In addition, the National Biotechnology Strategy was
developed in 2001 to manage the application of biotechnology. This implies
that the SA government embraced biotechnology within the provision that the
application of biotechnology is properly managed.

Let me emphasise the point that we are not debating the principal Act
today, but we are debating the Genetically Modified Organisms Amendment
Bill that amends the Act of 1997. The main objective for amending the Act
is to ensure that South Africa’s biosafety frameworks comply with the
provision of the Constitution and the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, of
which South Africa is a signatory.

I am happy to announce that, in this Bill, the portfolio committee has
taken up some of the concerns raised during the public hearings and
therefore the department managed to address some of those concerns.
However, it should be noted that some of the concerns that relate to the
safe use of GMOs in South Africa would be incorporated in the regulations.

As portfolio committee we want to be involved also in the process of
drafting the regulations so that we can have some inputs taken from the
concerns raised in the public hearings we had. Allow me to deal with the
main amendments. Firstly, the definition of a “user” is changed to cover
all persons conducting activities with GMOs, including manufacturers. The
new definition is: “A user means a person who conducts an activity with
GMOs”. This change came as a response to the concerns raised during public
hearings that manufacturers are excluded from the definition and therefore
they are also excluded from liabilities.

Secondly, the amendments propose the increase of the executive council from
eight to 10. This has been done to include an official from the Department
of Arts and Culture and an official from the Department of Water Affairs
and Forestry. The representative from the Department of Arts and Culture is
important in the light of Article 26 of the Cartagena Protocol, which
requires the council to take into account the socioeconomic considerations
arising from the impact of GMOs that may have particular value for the
indigenous and local communities, and also when looking at applications of
GMOs, liabilities and redress.

The third amendment deals with liabilities and redress. The main purpose of
the amendment is for the Bill to conform to Article 27 of the protocol. At
the moment this article in the protocol is still being debated, so it has
been agreed that it is premature to have it in the clause on its own in the
Bill, and also the principal Act on liabilities is with the Department of
Trade and Industry.

In the Bill the issues of liabilities and redress are covered by proposing
that a user should ensure that appropriate measures are taken to avoid an
adverse impact on the environment, human and animal health, which may arise
from the use of GMOs in the amendments. Also proposed is that the users
shall remedy the effect of the damage caused by the activity.

Other concerns that were raised during the public hearings and in the
portfolio committee were the labelling of GMOs. We have also noted that
providing consumers with the ability to exercise their right to choose what
they want to consume, the portfolio committee discussed the issue of
whether food can be labelled, and yes, we agree, this must be so, but
further noted that this matter is covered by the regulations under the
Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Act, Act 54 of 1972, which came
into effect in January 2004 and is the responsibility of the Department of
Health.

In the main, concerns raised in the public hearings with this clause were
liabilities for damage on the user, which includes farmers as an end user,
who are the consumers of GMO products, and leave out the multinational
industries and manufacturers that are making big profits from the GM
products. However, with the new definition of a “user”, this includes the
manufacturers as well, and these concerns have been addressed.

In conclusion, let me say that, categorically, the main purpose of the Bill
is to give effect to the provision of the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety
and thus represents South Africa’s continued commitment to ensure the safe
and responsible use of the GM technologies in support of the national
priorities. The application of GMOs can contribute towards a globally
competitive, profitable and sustainable agricultural sector and thus
enhance food production.

Let me take this opportunity to also thank the portfolio committee members
who actively participated in the process of amending the Bill and other
portfolio committee members who were concerned with the Bill that managed
to send their members to be part of the whole process and also, not
forgetting the people and organisations that came before the committee
during the public hearings to raise their concerns regarding the Bill. The
portfolio committee has taken all those concerns into consideration.

Let me not forget the hon Minister and her team who were always there for
us, day and night, ready to respond to any clarity-seeking questions in
processing the amending Bill. We value your support and your political
guidance very much ... [Time expired.][Applause.]

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Hon Chair, I think that these amendments have gone
through the scrutiny of the committee and it has been done very well. I
will make some general comments in this regard.

You know, science and biotechnology contributes increasingly to solve the
many problems in the industrial and agricultural fields. The fact is that
products derived from GMOs and this technology are part of everyday life in
the forms of vaccines, hormones, enzymes and in food processing, as well as
foods derived from GM crops that are already on all our tables.

In 2005 some 90 million hectares of GM crops were grown worldwide to supply
food and textiles. In South Africa about 28% of our crops come from GM
seeds. Food from these crops has been consumed by citizens on all
continents. These foods are vigorously tested before being made available
to the public. In fact, GMO foods have undergone very stringent scientific
and medical tests throughout the world before they were sold on the market
to the public. Scientists in the Americas and Europe scrutinised these
crops and products as to their safety and concluded that biotech crops may
even be safer than regular food. These conclusions were supported by the
Royal Society of London, as well as nine other international academies of
science in the world.

Even on the question of allergies, the Royal Society of London found no
evidence that GM foods cause allergic conditions and stated that the risk
posed by GM plants are no greater than those of conventional crops. Despite
these and numerous other scientific assessments and assurances regarding
the safety of GM foods, there are still activists making unsubstantiated
claims and casting doubt over the safety of the use of this modern-day
technology that has revolutionised agriculture and industry in the world.

Biotegnologie en GMO-gewasse stel die mensdom in staat om genoeg voedsel te
produseer. Dit help ons om op verskeie gebiede te bespaar. Op landbougebied
bied GMO-gewasse voordele vir alle boere, veral kleinboere. Een voorbeeld
is in die Oos-Kaap waar, deur die gebruik van stamboorderweerstandbiedende
saad, die produksie van mielies van 1,5 ton per hektaar toegeneem het tot
3,5 ton per hektaar en sodoende die voortbestaan van kleinboere gehelp wat
andersins geen oes sou gehad het nie.
Ook op industriële gebied word mikro-organismes ingespan om polimere,
vitamines, ensieme en selfs brandstof te vervaardig wat noodsaaklik is vir
die mensdom. Boonop stel die GMO-organismes die industrie in staat om
toenemend fossielbrandstof te vervang en so aardverwarming teë te werk.
Interessante statistiek: drie kilogram mielies kan nou deur mikro-
organismes omskep word in ’n politipe materiaal waarvan jy ’n t-hempie kan
maak.

Elke GMO-projek moet geregistreer word en moet aan streng vereistes
voldoen, en al die departemente is betrokke hierby – Landbou, Omgewingsake,
Gesondheid, Handel, Nywerheid, Wetenskap, Tegnologie, Waterwese en Kultuur.
Dit is dus nie net ’n kwessie van ’n klein groepie mense wat hierna kyk
nie; dit word omvattend ondersoek. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Biotechnology and GM crops enable humanity to produce enough food. This
results in savings in various fields. In the field of agriculture GM crops
offer advantages to all farmers, especially small farmers. One example is
in the Eastern Cape where, by the use of termite-resistant seeds, the
production of maize has increased from 1,5 tonnes per hectare to 3,5 tonnes
per hectare, thereby promoting the continued existence of small farmers who
would otherwise have had no crops.

Micro-organisms are also harnessed in the industrial field to manufacture
polymeres, vitamins, enzymes and even fuel, which are necessary for
humanity. In addition, the GM organisms are enabling industry to replace
fossil fuel to an increasing extent and thus to counteract global warming.
Interesting statistics: Three kilograms of maize can now be converted by
micro-organisms into a polytypic material from which one can make a t-
shirt.

Every GM project must be registered and must comply with strict
requirements, and all the departments are involved in this – Agriculture,
Environmental Affairs, Health, Trade, Industry, Science, Technology, Water
Affairs and Culture. Thus it is not only a question of a small group of
people who are looking at this; it is being scrutinised comprehensively.]

The GMO Act of South Africa is internationally considered as one of the
best of its kind in the world. It has a balanced approach, using
precautionary measures regarding biosafety, while allowing for the
responsible application of technology.
These amendments to the GMO Act are strengthening the objectives of the
Act, namely to promote responsible development, to regulate the production
and the use GMOs, and to limit possible harmful consequences for the
environment.

There have been no accidents, no damage to the environment and no adverse
effects in the 16-year track record of this Act. [Time expired.][Applause.]

Mr E J LUCAS: Mr Chairperson, the aim of the amending Bill is to amend the
Genetically Modified Organisms Act, 1997, so as to, amongst other things,
give effect to the international agreements pertaining to genetically
modified organisms, to which South Africa is a party. This also amends
certain definitions and sections, as well as adds new definitions.

The principal Act aims to provide for measures to promote the responsible
development, production, use and application of genetically modified
organisms. We in South Africa are only one of the few developing countries
worldwide that grows GMO crops for commercial purposes.

Famine and food security are just a few of the many problems that
contribute to extreme poverty and to the low living standards experienced
by millions of people in Africa and most of the developing world. Whether
GMOs are the answer to the world’s poverty, as suggested by some, is very
debatable.

On the other hand, there are parties that think GMOs will contribute
towards eradication of poverty and famine in Africa. While there are also
those opposed to GMOs, we cannot ignore the suffering and pain that famine
and starvation are inflicting on our many brothers and sisters in Africa,
as well as the rest of the world. We also cannot simply say that GMO crops
are the answer to all Africa’s food problems without considering the risks
involved.
The controversy around GMOs is still raging. A lot of debating will take
place about the benefits or risks surrounding GMOs and the implications
that they will have on poverty and famine in Africa and the rest of the
developing world. We in Africa should also actively participate and
contribute to this very important and relevant issue. We must, however,
stress that during all these discussions and debates, the needs and safety
of people whom GM crops are meant to help, must be at the forefront of our
minds. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L W GREYLING: Hon Chairperson, the ID has long been advocating and
amendment to the Genetically Modified Organisms Act, as we have been
concerned that it does not provide an adequate level of protection against
any potential negative effects of this experimental technology.
Unfortunately, however, the ID believes that this amending Bill still does
not address the very real concerns that the public has over this
technology.

In particular, the Bill emphasises a scientific approach to risk assessment
and decision-making at the expense of an approach that incorporates
environmental, social and economic factors. This reduces the likelihood
that the interests of the poor and the marginalised will be taken into
account when decisions are made about the use of GMOs.

The Bill also entrenches the self-regulatory approach adopted by the Act,
where applicants submit risk assessments without independent review and are
given the responsibility for monitoring their own compliance with permit
conditions. Given the substantial economic interests at stake in the
industry, the ID believes that this self-regulatory approach is highly
inappropriate. The absence of a mandatory labelling regime undermines
consumer choice, prevents users from protecting themselves against
liability and impedes the monitoring of human health impacts associated
with the use of GMOs.

On the international level, the ID is concerned that there are substantial
areas in which the Bill fails to provide for the incorporation of the
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety into our domestic regulatory system. This
includes the failure to impose the precautionary approach in decision-
making and the absence of any provisions incorporating the obligations
imposed by the advanced, informed agreement procedure in the protocol. For
this and many other reasons, the ID can therefore not support this Bill. I
thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, the ACDP, while not able to participate in the
committee’s process, has followed this debate for several years, calling
for a more cautionary approach in line with the SA Faith Communities’
Environment Institute’s position.

Genetically modified crops have been in South Africa since 1997 and the
country is one of only eight countries worldwide which grow GM crops
commercially. Tests in South Africa last year showed that 90% of soy
products and 61% of maize products tested contained traces of GMOs.
Increasingly GM products are sneaking into the food chain. In the absence
of compulsory separation and labelling of GM products, South African
consumers have been deprived of their right to choose whether or not to eat
GM food. In addition, farmers who choose to be GM-free are being
prejudiced. This legislation was an opportunity for government to ensure
stricter regulations, but in reality not much has improved.

The ACDP is not convinced by arguments that GMOs are critical in addressing
food shortages in Africa where a complex interplay of factors, including
drought, poverty, political instability and lack of transport and storage
infrastructure, play a role. Instead, the ACDP is of the opinion that
genetic engineering has serious implications for sustainable agriculture
and food security.

Potential health and environmental hazards posed by genetically engineered
seeds, lack of genetic diversity, increasing vulnerability to pests and
disease, monopoly control of seeds resulting in fewer types of seeds being
available, and gene transfer to domestic relatives and wild plants
producing super weeds, are major concerns.

For centuries farmers have followed a tradition of saving, adapting and
exchanging seed, which has promoted biodiversity and food security. If a
farmer loses the ability to save seed, he or she cannot continue to select
plants best adapted to local conditions and needs. Seeds evolve with
communities and if farmers loose control over them, they lose control over
their farming system, and become dependent ... [Interjections.]

It doesn’t mean that one doesn’t adequately address concerns and the ACDP
will not be voting for it. Thank you. [Time Expired.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chair, the MF welcomes this Bill that shall now govern the
development, production, use and application of genetically modified
organisms. Acknowledging the possible danger of GMOs, we are pleased that
this Bill shall now seek to limit possible harmful effects GMOs may have on
the environment, human and animal health. However, we are concerned as to
how safety measures are calculated to ensure that GMOs do not cause any
harm.

Further, it is supported that the Bill serves to bring our management of
GMOs in line with the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety. Provisions regarding
exportation, as well as the involvement of the necessary departments, are
found appropriate. It is encouraging that the provisions of this Bill has
been closely devised with that of the protocol, and that other legislation
has also been consulted.

The MF supports the Bill. I thank you.

Mr B A RADEBE: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members of this august
House, today we are presenting one of the most researched and most
controversial topics in modern science. The sciences of biotechnology
solicit strong emotions from both the pro- and antilobby groups. As members
of this House we must strive to remove the emotions and confront reality so
that we can create a better South Africa and a better world.

The process leading to today’s debate started as far back as 2003, when
this Parliament acceded to the Cartagena Protocol. This protocol demands
that we must be compliant with its articles. Article 8 of the protocol, for
example, deals with a notification of transboundary movement of the living
GMOs. This article obliges the Minister and Parliament to come up with the
legal framework to ensure that all the activities concerning the GMOs are
properly recorded and easily available to competent authorities. The
protocol also provides for information sharing, and the creation of a
biosafety clearinghouse. The biosafety clearinghouse will facilitate the
exchange of scientific, technical and environmental and legal information
on, and experience with, living GMOs.

Articles 15 and 16 of the protocol deal with risk assessment and risk
management. This obliges the parties involved in the creation of the GMOs
to co-operate with a view to identify GMOs or its specific traces that may
have adverse effects on the conservation and sustainable use of biological
diversity, taking into account risk to human health.

These articles are in line with section 24 of our Constitution, which
guarantees the right to a safe environment. Since this protocol is
compliant with our Constitution, it is then necessary to bring the
principles of the protocol to our legislation; hence today we are
presenting the GMO amending Bill. This Bill will create an environment in
which the GMOs will be monitored.

During the public hearings, strong positions were advanced, like the
scrapping of the GMOs alltogether, because of the environmental and human
health concerns. This position assumes that there must be no risk incurred
in any research. There is no science that does not have any risk. This
position will not be sustainable because South Africa is an open country,
and it interacts with the world, which is producing the GMOs.

The economists of 6 to 12 May 2006 indicate that more than a billion
hectares in the world are planted with GMO crops and Monsanto is dominating
the agricultural biotechnology company with a large market share of US$5,6
billion. In order for our country to protect itself, the biotechnological
science must be developed, so that we can be able influence the debate and
the research taking place in the world.
  Since the multinational companies are strong in the biotechnology sector,
  the Parliament of the Republic must come with laws and regulations, which
  will protect farmers operating in the second economy. For example, Mr
  Bhekokwakhe Mkhonto of the Vuvuzela Farmers Association made a simple
  request to the government during the public hearings, that it must ensure
  five things:

Firstly, the GMO amending Bill must protect the small farmers like him from
big companies which sell seeds and fertilisers and have farmers taking all
the risks; secondly, it must ensure that the household food security is not
jeopardised; thirdly, the Bill must protect our indigenous seeds and
vegetation; fourthly, the government must provide education to farmers on
the impacts of the GMOs; and fifthly, the GMO companies must give assurance
that there will be markets for GMO crops.

Mr Bhekokwakhe’s requests indicate the importance of this Bill, which must
ensure that the GMOs are monitored and used responsibly. This will demand
that the inspectors and the extension officers of the Department of
Agriculture must work closely with the small-scale farmers, so that they
are not left to the dictates of the big companies. It was claimed that the
seed company representatives forced small-scale farmers to buy GMO seeds
because the government has approved them. It was also noted that the small-
scale farmers could not retain the seed for planting in the following
season and this creates dependency upon the seed companies.
This claim begs the question as to what is the role of the extension
officers of the Department of Agriculture? We know that the government will
never desert emerging farmers. This will demand that the Ministry ensures
that information is shared with stakeholders of the department, and that
the farmers must be informed that it is their voluntary choice to use GMO
seeds.

Since Mr Bhekokwakhe Mkhonto has requested the government to ensure
household food security, the government has identified biotechnology as a
tool to attain more rapid and efficient means to diversify and improve food
production in South Africa. This technology is also used to create gene
banks so that the indigenous seed and vegetation are preserved. Although Mr
Mkhonto thought that this amending Bill would fulfil his request, it is a
principal Act and the biotechnology strategy of the country, which will
bring possibilities of fulfilling it.

The other side of the lobby group – the free market foundation -maintains
that the growth of the economy of the country depended upon the free flow
of research, which will help farmers to improve their production capacity.
The foundation felt that the Bill was too stringent and costly to the
researchers, and this will stifle the scientific research. The consequence
will be the drop in investment in research and development, and highly
skilled South African scientists may choose to leave the country. In simple
terms, the foundation suggests that we do away with environmental impact
assessment studies.

This position will not help if the consequences of the damaged environment
are faced by future generations. South Africa can easily become a dumping
ground of untested GMOs and that is why the GMO Act provides a country with
a decision-making tool. This functional tool enables the authorities in
South Africa to conduct scientifically based case-by-case assessment of the
potential risk that may arise from the creation of a particular GMO.

Decisions made through the Genetically Modified Organisms Act allow for the
approval, amendment, conditional approval and the rejection of the
application. An appeal process along with reviews of decisions is
accommodated in the Act. The primary objective of this Bill is therefore to
align the principal Act with the provisions of the protocol.

The presentation by the microbiology professor of the University of Cape
Town welcomes the GMO amending Act, as the necessary intervention in
adapting South African law regarding the work with recombination DNA
technology to the commitments taken by South Africa under the Cartagena
Protocol. The professor applauds the fact that this amending Bill is only
bringing limited number of changes compared to the 1997 Act. This reflects
positively on the quality of the existing legal and regulatory framework of
the GMOs in South Africa.

The international dimension of the Bill requires that South African
research institutions create the capacity to work effectively under the
conditions to which the state has committed itself, in particular with
regard to the research, which crosses national boundaries.

The professor states that there has been significant reduction in
international movements of experimental materials resulting from
biotechnology since the enforcement of the protocol. This proves the
effectiveness of the biosafety clearinghouses internationally. That is why
this Parliament must rest assured that proper mechanisms are in place in
South Africa to deal with GMO accidents.

The consensus decision-making process of the GMO council will ensure that
every GMO product is properly scrutinised. The GMO registrar will ensure
that all the permits that are issued are in compliance with the law; the
inspectors will be able visit the facilities and trial release sites where
there’s contained use of GMOs; and that names and addresses of persons
involved will be kept in the register. The transparency of the process
involved in the Genetically Modified Organisms Act will help to minimise
the risk of unintended consequences in the application of the Act.

The process of adopting this Bill has gone through a long process. The
Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs held a biotechnology
conference in Stellenbosch in 2003. Various stakeholders attended this
conference and made positive contributions. [Time expired.]

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairperson, hon members,
firstly I would like to thank the chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on
Agriculture and her team. I must say that ever since I have been in
Parliament and in this sector, this is one of the Bills that have taken
more than three years to debate, not just in the House but also in the
broader public. I must say that one of the interesting things is that this
Bill has helped all of us to have an interest in this important matter in
our society and in the world.

Secondly, I would like to say thank you to the ANC caucus. I must share
with hon members in the opposition that this matter was so topical and so
serious that the ANC caucus spent lots of time discussing it because they
wanted to be convinced that, indeed, we had reflected on some of the issues
that were topical. Therefore I must say I am happy that I don’t only stand
here representing government, which is led by the ANC, but I also represent
my party, which understands the need for this legislation.

I must say that the view we have taken as government, which I think is
correct, is not to be dogmatic, not to be for and against but rather to
look at what is in the interest of our country in ensuring that we can
manage this technology for the benefit of our society; and also to look at
how we can manage the risks so that we can protect our environment and our
citizens.

It’s also important for me to indicate that, actually, issues of
biotechnology have social, economic and political consequences. So
sometimes when we enter the debate it’s not about the efficacy of science,
it’s more about politics and how the constituencies that we represent view
the matters, and you must, therefore, give political direction. Sometimes
it’s about economic interests and the consequences that arise. That’s why
there is concern about the role of multinationals and the impact thereof on
your local producers and local seed-producing companies. However, it’s also
about trade within the economic context.

I would like to share the following with hon members and I am sure you will
read the report. There has been a long case between the European Union and
the United States. Goods from the US were blocked by the EU on the basis
that they were GMO, and the EU was not convinced about the safety mechanism
and so on. Last week, the World Trade Organisation ruled against the EU
because, on a scientific basis, when they had to prove it they could not
say: “Indeed it is not safe.”
I think what the hon Kraai van Niekerk raised concerns the rigour around
which this technology has been tested and has had to undergo at any given
time. Surely, we can’t be God and we may not know everything but, from what
we know now, it is safe.

I also want to say that the social impact includes the environment. This is
included in order to ensure that, indeed, through the manner in which this
science is applied, our environment cannot be affected adversely. We have
taken consideration of all those matters in the Act. But, I want to say
briefly that what we are dealing with now is actually the second generation
of GMOs, if I may say so, because your first generation of GMOs has been
there. Maybe it’s important to borrow the scientists’ definition of what
genetic modification refers to. It’s about the transfer of genetic material
from one living organism to another, not through natural processes.

Let’s look back: How many times have human beings – not even scientists per
se – manipulated the environment? The answer is, many times. I would use
grafting as an example. All of us eat nectarines and tangerines. A
tangerine is actually a combination of your classic orange, as we all know
it, and a naartjie. What you do is to cut the stem of one, take the stem of
another and put it on top. You then wrap it up, put it in the soil and a
new hybrid comes out. That is your first-generation GMO. Similarly, with
the nectarine you combine a peach and a plum.

And it’s not only in agriculture. To move umhlonyane [artemisia afra],
which is a herb, towards being a cough mixture or tablet is a modification
from one to another. This is not a natural process because there is no
natural process that can produce a cough mixture. So I am just saying that
this application has been there.

But what is the debate, because it’s important to locate the debate? The
challenge that all of us are faced with is that, as scientists understand
the technology better, having applied and seen new opportunities, what we
are dealing with now - which I think causes fear from the majority of
people - is about genetic engineering which allows for the transfer of
genetic material within the same species and across species. I think this
is what people were saying. They wanted to know: Are we going to produce
Frankenstein tomatoes using some mouse genes? Surely that can’t be true.
There is no way a gene of a mouse can produce a tomato.

I think this is the fear. Anecdotally, you hear people saying, “Ubaba
uMlangeni wathi: ‘Hhayi, mina angikafuni ukufa mntanami. [“Mr Mlangeni
said: “No, I don’t want to die yet, my child.”] I don’t want to die because
of these things that I don’t know.” Surely, that raises the issue of
safety, which we have adequately provided for.

The regulations that deal with the Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants
Act of the Department of Health deal with the issue of labelling that has
been raised by the majority of members. I want to read the amendment that
was made on 16 January 2004. If we don’t go back to that, we may think
there is no adequate framework. It reads thus, and the section that I am
going to read is mandatory:


  Genetically modified food must be labelled as such if it differs
  significantly in composition, nutritional value or mode of storage,
  preparation or cooking from that of the corresponding existing foodstuff.

Secondly:


  The label of the genetically modified food must indicate the likelihood
  of allergenicity if the novel gene is derived from any of the following
  donor organisms: crustacean, eggs, fish, groundnuts, milk, molluscs,
  soybeans, tree nuts or wheat.

Thirdly:


  The food must be labelled as such if a plant-derived food contains
  genetic material derived from a human or from an animal, or if animal-
  derived food contains genetic material derived from a human or from an
  existing taxonomic animal family.

My own view is that if you look at this requirement, which is mandatory and
is not voluntary, it covers the safety concerns that all of us have.
With regard to the environmental questions, which indeed are a concern to
all of us, one of the things we had to do was to ensure, in terms of the
approval system, that where a company would like to introduce a genetically
modified organism they would have to advertise. I am sure a lot of us have
seen advertisements in the paper.

Those advertisements allow for even me or you to say: “I am not convinced,
tell me more.” So, even before the committee has looked at the application,
it allows a process for people to express their view, to object and to give
relevant evidence that is contrary. But even at that level, one of the
things we have decided is that even where approval has been given, you
cannot introduce a genetically modified organism in an environment where
you have relative species.

Ngakho-ke awukwazi ukufaka le nto lapho kusuke kukhona izihlahla ezicishe
zifane nayo, ezingomzala, ukuze kungabi khona into ezoshintsha lezi ezinye
izihlahla zibe yile nto ezingeyona. [Therefore, you cannot introduce
genetically modified organisms where there are relative species. This would
change other plants.]

So I am saying, even from that perspective, we have ensured that we protect
our environment.

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr A Mlangeni): Order! Hon Minister, I will give
you an extra minute so that you can try to convince us all, as you have
managed to convince me. However, your time is up.

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you very much. I hope
even members of the ID and hon Dudley will support the Bill after the
extensive explanation. [Applause.]

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr A Mlangeni): Thank you, hon Minister.

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time. (African Christian Democratic Party and
Independent Democrats dissenting.)

           FOODSTUFFS, COSMETICS AND DISINFECTANTS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

    CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF INTERNATIONAL
 CONVENTION ON MUTUAL ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANCE IN CUSTOMS MATTERS, IN TERMS
                    OF SECTION 231(2) OF THE CONSTITUTION

Mr N M NENE: Chairperson, the Convention on Mutual Administrative
Assistance in Customs Matters, which is referred to here as the
Johannesburg convention, was adopted by the council of the World Customs
Organisation, WCO, on 27 June 2003 in Brussels, Belgium. It’s one of the
main international agreements of the WCO aimed at providing a legal and
binding framework for reciprocal co-operation between customs
administrations. Due to the increasingly complex, fluid and expanding
global trade landscape, these conventions are an important instrument to
provide stability.

Without going into the provisions of the convention, let me outline the
benefits of ascending to this convention. Ascension to this convention will
enable customs administrations to legally exchange information, including
personal data, and provide assistance directly to each other, which is not
possible under the current Nairobi convention. This will provide a legal
base for a central automated information system and provide an instrument
to supplement bilateral agreements dealing with topical issues relating to
the protection of society, administration of trade and the collection of
revenue.

Secondly, it will also enable South Africa to form part of an enhanced
global network of international customs administrations and will strengthen
South Africa’s ability to clamp down on economic security fraud. It will
also enhance our reputation as a trusted and respected trading partner.

In terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, I present this convention
to this House for approval. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

International Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Customs
Matters approved.

The House adjourned at 16:53.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Safety and Security

     a) Strategic Plan of the South African Police Service (SAPS) for 2006
        to 2007 [RP 42-2006].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly
1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services on its
    Visit to Prisons in the Northern Cape, dated 24 March 2006:

    The Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services, having undertaken an
    oversight visit to the Northern Cape from 10 to 15 October 2005, reports
    as follows:



    Introduction:



        The Portfolio Committee undertook an oversight visit to prisons in
        the Northern Cape.


    Delegation



        The following members of the Portfolio  Committee  on  Correctional
        Services visited prisons in the Northern Cape.


         • Mr DV Bloem (Chairperson)
         • Ms LS Chikunga
         • Mr NB Fihla
         • Mr LP Khoarai
         • Ms MW Makgate
         • Mr MS Moatshe
         • Mr MJ Phala
         • Mr LJ Tolo
         • Mr ET Xolo


    Objectives



        The objectives of the visit were:

         • To raise community awareness around community corrections, the
           parole boards, special remissions, social cohesion and social
           justice.
         • To identify blockages in the system, which prevent release while
           awaiting trial.
         • To interact with members of the Integrated Justice Cluster and
           discuss possible solutions to overcrowding.
         • To identify concerns around juveniles in prisons in the region.
         • To interact with the Independent Prison Visitors and the Legal
           Aid Board.
         • To address staff and discuss grievances and concerns.

        The Committee visited the following prisons in the region:
         • Kimberley Correctional Centre
         • Douglas Correctional Centre (Kimberley Management Area)
         • Barkly West Correctional Centre (Kimberley Management Area)
         • Kuruman Correctional Centre (Upington Management Area)
         • Upington Correctional Centre (Upington Management Area)


    Findings and recommendations





        The following are the findings and recommendations of the Portfolio
        Committee on Correctional Services:



1 Overview of the Region


        The Northern Cape and Free State provinces are combined into one
        Correctional Services region. The region receives a budget of R754
        million of which the Northern Cape gets R197 million.


        The region is struggling to retain occupational staff such as
        social workers, psychologists and nurses.


        Upington and Kimberley have high levels of alcohol abuse, therefore
        the murder and rape offences are very common.


        Four offenders who have benefited from the Special Remission
        process reoffended in Upington. There is also a gang called the
        “Oceans Eleven” in Kimberley who caused a lot of uproar. The
        community suspected that these gang members benefited from the
        Special Remission process, but there is no proof of this.
        The region had no escapes during 2005, partly attributable to the
        security session the region held to tighten security.


        The building of the New Generation Facility has not yet started in
        Kimberley. This prison will accommodate 3000 offenders and will
        assist in relieving overcrowding in the region. The first phase of
        the building site was complete, but the building works have been
        postponed due to financial constraints.


        It was mentioned that the management was divided at the Kuruman
        Correctional Centre, but all efforts are made to strengthen
        management. The centre provides actions of Restorative Justice
        Activities to try and create or build a better relationship between
        offender and the aggrieved party. A highlight of the centre was the
        handing over of a house that was built by inmates to a victim of
        crime in the area. Three offenders at the centre who have benefited
        from the Special remission process have reoffended. The centre has
        five disciplinary cases pending. These cases include, inter alia,
        absenteeism at work and alleged smuggling of money.


     1. Offender Population

 Kimberley Management Area

|Management    |Sentenced Inmates                                   |
|Area          |                                                    |
|              |Adults        |Youth: 4-17 years |Youth: 18-20 years|
|              |Med    |Max   |Med     |Max     |Med     |Max     |
|Kimberley Male|535    |49    |18      |0       |122     |0       |
|Kimberley     |44     |0     |0       |0       |3       |0       |
|Female        |       |      |        |        |        |        |
|Barkly West   |57     |0     |0       |0       |0       |0       |
|Douglas       |216    |0     |10      |0       |33      |0       |



|Management    |Unsentenced Inmates                                 |
|Area          |                                                    |
|              |Adults   |Infants  |Youth                            |
|              |         |         |Under 14  |14-17     |18-20     |
|Kimberley Male|355      |0        |0         |13        |122       |
|Kimberley     |8        |0        |0         |1         |3         |
|Female        |         |         |          |          |          |
|Barkly West   |4        |0        |0         |0         |0         |
|Douglas       |39       |0        |0         |0         |13        |


|Management    |Approved           |Total     |% Occupation          |
|Area          |Accommodation      |          |                      |
|Kimberley Male|801                |1214      |152%                  |
|Kimberley     |61                 |59        |97%                   |
|Female        |                   |          |                      |
|Barkley West  |74                 |61        |82.4%                 |
|Douglas       |297                |311       |104%                  |
|Total Male    |1172               |1586      |135%                  |
|Total Female  |61                 |59        |97%                   |
|Grand Total   |1233               |1645      |133%                  |

 Upington Management Area
 Kuruman

|                |Sentenced       |Unsentenced     |Total              |
|Adult Males     |280             |136             |416                |
|Adult Females   |6               |2               |8                  |
|Juvenile Male   |59              |                |59                 |
|(under 17)      |                |                |                   |
|Juveniles       |3               |29              |32                 |
|Females (under  |                |                |                   |
|17)             |                |                |                   |

Upington

|Approved             |Total                |% Occupation            |
|Accommodation        |                     |                        |
|800                  |1380                 |173%                    |


     1. Offender Programmes

        (i)      Agricultural produce
           The area produces a lot of agricultural products. Kimberley
           produces ± 13 tons per month, Douglas produces ± 8 tons per
           month and Barkly West produces ± 450 kg per month.


        (ii)      Production workshops (Kimberley)
           The offenders at Kimberley Correctional Centre are also making
           offender uniforms and plastic aprons, prisoner rain coats,
           shirts and trousers which are manufactured and distributed
           nationally in DCS.

        (iii)     Education and Training
           Many inmates receive technical education to equip themselves
           with skills which will enable them to find employment or be self
           employed upon release. The Department of Labour (DoL) funded
           courses in Computer training and Curtain making. Inmates also
           attend welding and plumbing courses. Formal education include
           ABET level 1-4 and mainstream education.

                 iv) Other programmes
           Inmates also attend courses in life skills, placement
           preparation, conflict management, HIV/AIDS programmes,
           aggression, sexual offences, mosaic course, art classes, social
           work services, psychological services, spiritual care,
           bricklaying, upholstery and painting.


              v) Achievements
           One (1) offender at the Kimberley Correctional Centre won 1st
           prize in the Nicro Arts competition. Fifteen (15) female
           offenders won 1st position in embroidery for Gun Free South
           Africa, which is displayed in the Constitutional Court. An
           amount of R20 000 was donated by the Rotary Club for purchasing
           of cupboards, tables and material for embroidery work. Staff of
           William Humphrey’s Art Gallery helps with training of juveniles
           and female offenders in mosaic and embroidery courses. The choir
           at the Kimberley Correctional Centre participated in a show and
           obtained double gold. Inmates at the Kuruman Correctional Centre
           also participate in the Presidents Awards Programme


     4.     Interaction with Offenders.

        The following are some of the concerns raised by inmates, as well
        as comments of the Committee.


        (a)      Many inmates have complained about insufficient
             availability of the Legal Aid Board lawyers. They often see
             their lawyers on the day of their court appearance and many of
             the lawyers have a “don’t care” attitude towards the inmates.
        (b)      Many of the juveniles the Committee interacted with had
             committed serious crimes such as murder and rape.
        (c)      A worrying factor to the Committee is that most of the
             inmates, especially juveniles, have tattoos. The Committee has
             explained the danger and consequences of these kinds of
             tattoos to the inmates. Tattoos can result in stigmatization
             from society and can hamper an inmate’s chances of finding
             employment.
        (d)      The Committee identified a female at the Kimberley
             Correctional Centre who was sentenced to ten months, but was
             in the centre for more than a year. The Committee was later
             informed that the inmate had to complete release programmes
             before she could be released. Another inmate (65 years of age)
             at the centre who has benefited from the Special Remission
             process was also still incarcerated.
        (e)      Many of the females at the Kimberley Correctional Centre
             complained about the availability of medicine as some are
             using chronic medication.
        (f)      Gangsterism does exist in the region, but is not as rife
             as in other parts of Correctional Services.
        (g)      Complaints were also received that inmates do not receive
             enough assistance from DCS in respect of study or reading
             material.
        (h)      The Independent Prison Visitors (IPVs) also offer little
             assistance to inmates and many complaints are not registered
             with the office of the Inspecting Judge as is the case at the
             Douglas Correctional Centre.

        Comments and Recommendations

        The Committee is aware of the challenges the DCS is facing, but
        recommends the following:


        (a)      The Committee stated that no person should be kept in
             prison longer than the time allocated in his or her sentence.
             The Committee urges that all Heads of Prisons should ensure
             that all inmates whose date of release is near should go
             through release programmes timeously.
        (b)      Where there is a lack of medication, the Area
             Commissioners should register this with the Regional office as
             soon as possible.
        (c)      The Committee urges the DCS to ensure that all juveniles
             of school going age attend school, as per the requirement of
             the Correctional Services Act, Act 111 of 1998, and the South
             African Schools Act, Act 84 of 1996.
        (d)      The Committee recommends that the Office of the Inspecting
             Judge takes strong action against those employees who do not
             perform and that all regional coordinators of the IPVs submit
             regular reports to the Inspecting Judge.

     5.     Community Imbizo (Kimberley and Upington)

        The Committee was impressed with the attendance of the members of
        the community and thanked them. There were also many ex-offenders
        present in the meeting.


        The biggest focus of the oversight visit was to interact with the
        community as the role of the community is imperative in
        Correctional Services. The challenge that faces the Department is
        to enhance rehabilitation, correction and development aspects of
        correctional supervision. The community can play a meaningful role
        with the release of inmates in accepting inmates back into society,
        as well as assisting offenders in finding employment.


        The community was urged not to stigmatise offenders when they are
        released. Emphasis was placed on overcrowding and its consequences,
        and that prison is not a place for young people. The committee
        commended those learners present in the meeting and appreciates the
        fact that they do not condone crime. It was also stated that
        poverty should not drive people to commit crime as crime does not
        pay.


        The Committee mentioned that the government celebrated its
        achievements recently through the Special Remission process. This
        process requires the support of the community as the DCS must work
        in partnership with the community.


     6.     Key Concerns raised by the Community


        (a)      The community placed emphasis on the fact that
             rehabilitation comes from oneself and people can forgive, but
             not forget. Many of the inmates are not rehabilitated upon
             release and still continue with their criminal activities.
        (b)      Concern was also raised around the building of the new
             prisons. The community is of the opinion that more schools
             rather than prisons should be built
        (c)      The ex-offenders complained that upon release, many
             systems are not in place and offenders are left to manage on
             their own.
        (d)      Complaints were also raised with regard to the private
             sector. Many companies/ institutions are not willing to employ
             ex-offenders. This makes it extremely difficult to secure
             employment.
        (e)      Many complaints were raised with regard to the so called
             “Oceans Eleven” gang. People do not feel safe in their own
             homes and areas and have to be indoors very early. Despite the
             complaints raised about this gang, there is no evidence that
             these gang members are ex offenders.
        (f)      Another issue raised was that communities should become
             more involved in the programmes offered to inmates at
             Correctional Centres.
        (g)      It was also stated that communities must take into
             consideration the seriousness of an offence committed and
             learn to forgive those who have offended.
        (h)      Ex-offenders also complained that the release procedures
             in the Northern Cape are not the same as in the Free State,
             and since these provinces fall under one Correctional
             Services’ region, it should be the same.
        (i)      The community is concerned about the dignity of
             Correctional officials. It was stated that many of the
             officials go to work under the influence of alcohol and that
             they, as rehabilitators should be an example to the inmates.
        (j)      Another concern raised was that certain inmates were
             treated more favourably than others.  This included cases of
             food parcels, the attendance of funerals outside and the
             receipt of tool kits upon release.
        (k)      The community felt that the DCS should have regular
             community izimbizo to bring society on board and discuss
             challenges faced.
        (l)      Sodomy remained a matter of grave concern and the
             community said that those who sodomise others should be
             exposed. Sodomy breaks down the self-esteem of men and many of
             them upon release, are more violent than before.
        (m)      The community complained that the After Care programme of
             DCS does little to assist those released. Community
             corrections officers often stand outside the homes of ex-
             offenders, hoot and then leave again. It was stated that these
             officials should be of more assistance to those ex-offenders
             and assist with problems they might experience.
         (n)     Some ex-offenders stated that they were supposed to get
             certificates for courses attended whilst incarcerated, but
             never got those certificates. This makes it difficult for them
             to find employment.
         (o)     The community also reported instances where inmates were
             assaulted by warders or that warders instruct other inmates to
             assault certain inmates.

     1. Staff

        Post Establishment of the Kimberley Management Area


        |           |Area          |Kimberley    |Douglas|Barkly |Total     |
|           |Commissioner  |Correctional |       |West   |          |
|           |(AC) including|Centre       |       |       |          |
|           |Community     |             |       |       |          |
|           |Corrections in|             |       |       |          |
|           |Kimberley     |             |       |       |          |
|Approved   |92            |327          |118    |45     |582       |
|posts      |              |             |       |       |          |
|Posts      |81            |291          |100    |36     |508       |
|financed   |              |             |       |       |          |
|Posts      |76            |276          |95     |36     |483       |
|filled     |              |             |       |       |          |
|Posts      |5             |15           |5      |0      |25        |
|vacant     |              |             |       |       |          |

  Equity
|Centre   |African     |Coloured    |Asian       |White       |Total      |Tota|
|         |            |            |            |            |           |l   |
|         |Female       |Male                 |Female   |Male     |
|         |             |Sentenced|Unsentence|         |         |
|         |             |         |d         |         |         |
|A        |2308         |130      |3812      |3942     |170.80%  |
|B        |1766         |4037     |-         |4037     |228.59%  |
|C        |671          |1087     |-         |1087     |161.99%  |
|Youth    |629          |563      |262       |825      |131.60%  |
|Female   |244          |271      |131       |402      |164.75%  |
|Umzinto  |445          |522      |205       |727      |163.37%  |
|Total    |6063         |6610     |4410      |11020    |181.75%  |

 Youth Correctional Centre

|Age           |Sentenced       |Unsentenced     |Total           |
|13 years      |0               |0               |0               |
|14 years      |2               |24              |26              |
|15 years      |10              |60              |70              |
|16 years      |28              |84              |112             |
|17 years      |43              |87              |130             |
|18 years      |100             |7               |107             |
|19 years      |155             |-               |155             |
|20 years      |153             |-               |153             |
|21 years      |72              |-               |72              |
|TOTAL         |563             |262             |825             |

 Medium A Correctional Centre:
 There are 1 163 unsentenced juveniles between the ages of 18 -21 years at
 Medium A.


 Medium B Correctional Centre
 There are 397 sentenced juveniles between the ages of 16 -21 years at
 Medium B.

 Female Correctional Centre
|Age           |Sentenced       |Unsentenced     |Total           |
|13 years      |0               |0               |0               |
|14 years      |0               |0               |0               |
|15 years      |0               |1               |1               |
|16 years      |0               |1               |1               |
|17 years      |3               |1               |4               |
|18 years      |6               |6               |12              |
|19 years      |6               |8               |14              |
|20 years      |1               |6               |7               |
|21 years      |2               |0               |2               |
|TOTAL         |18              |23              |41              |

 Babies: There are four (4) boys and four (4) girls


 Awaiting-trial Adult Offenders versus Awaiting-trial Juveniles

|Correctional      |Awaiting Trial      |Awaiting Trial|
|Centre            |Adults              |Juveniles     |
|Medium A          |2649                |1163          |
|Youth             |0                   |262           |
|Female            |108                 |262           |
|Umzinto           |155                 |50            |
|Total Awaiting Trial Population = 4649                |

 Period of Awaiting Trial Offenders


|        |3-6    |6-9    |9-12   |12-15  |15-18  |18-24  |24     |
|        |months |months |months |months |months |months |months |
|        |       |       |       |       |       |       |+      |
|Juvenile|40     |21     |16     |6      |9      |4      |2      |
|s       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
|Medium A|186    |312    |342    |1863   |723    |403    |55     |
|Female  |21     |13     |2      |4      |2      |0      |1      |
|Umzinto |35     |36     |33     |7      |3      |15     |12     |
|Total   |282    |382    |393    |1880   |737    |422    |70     |


     2. The Westville Youth Centre

        The Department of Social Welfare is responsible for the rendering
        of services to children awaiting trial in KwaZulu Natal. A vast
        majority is accommodated at the Westville Youth Centre. The Welfare
        component operates as a satellite office of Excelsior Secure
        Centre, in conjunction with the Department of Correctional Services
        (DCS). Whilst the needs of the children, comprising food,
        accommodation, health, hygiene and security are catered for by the
        DCS, the Department of Social Welfare renders a variety of Welfare
        Services to address social, emotional and development needs of the
        youth. Holistic and integrated care and support are provided by
        three (3) social workers, six (6) Child and Youth Care workers. The
        centre functions as an Assessment and Referral Centre.

     a) Programmes
        Life skills, education, diversion, sports and recreation, court
        readiness, sexual offences programme, aggressive offences
        programmes, drug and alcohol abuse and pre-release programmes.  A
        mobile library and television sets are also available for youths.


     b) Education and Training
        210 learners at the centre are attending education programmes
        offered at the centre such as ABET levels 1-4 and Further Education
        and Training. The Youth school has been registered as a full time
        centre. Many of the boys at the center are eager to go to school,
        but not all can attend, because of challenges such as lack of
        educationists and not enough floor space to have classrooms. Those
        children who attend school are accommodated in one section, i.e.
        cells are on one level and the school is on the next level. This
        was done to avoid disturbances.


     (c)    Shortage of Professional Staff
        The centre is supposed to have five (5) social workers, but only
        has two (2) of which one (1) social worker was to be transferred at
        the end of October. The ratio of social worker to inmates is 1:260.
        Social workers deal with as many as 12 inmates per group depending
        on the nature of the crime. The shortages of social workers put a
        lot of strain on those currently employed. The physical structure
        is also not conducive to the programmes. Social workers are often
        not escorted in the section, because of the shortage of manpower in
        DCS. The shortage of staff also has a negative effect on the parole
        hearings of inmates as inmates must have a sentence plan when
        appearing before the parole board.


        The centre has only two nurses. There is no ratio of nurses to
        inmates and nurses work with ± 1 000 inmates. Nurses attend to more
        or less 70 to 100 inmates per day. The centre has a high number of
        tuberculosis cases and this poses a health risk to the two nurses
        at the centre. Nurses at the centre are not prescribing medication,
        but are only administering.


     (d)    Other challenges
        Many of the youths are being abused when they are transported to
        court and at the SAPS holding cells. There is no separation between
        adults and youth offenders.
        Youths awaiting trail at the centre is another huge challenge as
        many of the youth are street children. Youths need to be released
        in the care of their parents or guardian, but these family
        structures are often non-existent.


        Serious offences such as murder, kidnapping and gang rape cases are
        being heard by the High Court. These cases can take up to 18 months
        to be finalised.
        Inaccurate age assessments can result in youths being incarcerated
        at the youth centre.
        Reoffending is also common amongst youth.


        There is often no space for youths at Places of Safety and
        Reformatory schools, which is problematic as youths often wait very
        long to be placed in these facilities.



Comments and Recommendations



        The Portfolio Committee makes the following recommendations.


        The issue of shortage of professional staff has  been  raised  with
        the Committee on many prison visits  throughout  the  country.  The
        employment of professional staff is essential as it plays a serious
        and  important   role   in   the   rehabilitation   of   offenders.
        Implementation of the White Paper, which outlines  this  focus,  is
        impossible without the support of a range of professionals.


        The Portfolio Committee requires a report by DCS, within  3  months
        after adoption of this report, on:

        (a)      Review of  salary  packages  for  all  professional  staff
              employed by  DCS  to  ensure  that  they  are  recruited  and
              retained by the Department.
        (b)      Measures  which  have  been  initiated  to  speed  up  the
              recruitment process for professional staff.
        (c)       The  Portfolio  Committee  will  engage   the   Portfolio
              Committees on Social Development and Education in  Parliament
              to discuss the problems around Reformatory schools and Places
              of Safety.
        (d)       The  Department  of  Justice  (courts)  should  be   more
              prescriptive  in  obtaining  birth  documents,   immunisation
              cards, maternity  certificates  or  letter  from  schools  to
              administer the age assessment of youths.
        (e) The DCS must look into the possibility of designing a  programme
              to address the specific needs of youths in  order  to  reduce
              reoffending. This should be  done  in  conjunction  with  the
              Department of Social Development.
        (f) The Committee recommends that the programme of  court  readiness
              be rolled out to all centres in Correctional Services.



     4.     Durban Female Centre


        Workshops
        The Committee visited the workshops at the female section and was
        very impressed with the programmes run and the production of
        materials. The females deployed to work in the workshops serve
        sentences of two (2) years and more. This allows them to go through
        training programmes.


        The females produce inmate garments as well as belts and collars
        for officials. These products are distributed to all 241 prisons in
        the country.


        The centre also has a laundry service and officials are allowed to
        bring their laundry to the centre at a cost of R2,10c for ironing
        and R6,30c for washing and ironing per kilogram. The inmates also
        do the laundry of the entire Durban Westville Centre.


        The females also receive a gratuity for their services at the
        laundry, which are added and then received upon release.

       Durban Adult Female



        Eight inmate teachers under the supervision of the DCS teach some
        of the education programmes as well as computer courses. Courses
        include ABET levels 1-4, Mainstream education, business skills,
        Grades 11 & 12. Computer courses include typing, Windows `98 and
        Excel `98. The computer courses are not accredited. The computers
        at the centre were donated by NICRO (National Institute for Crime
        Prevention and Reintegration of Offenders). It was stated that not
        many of the female inmates attend the educational courses, but
        rather the workshops, because of the gratuity. The inmates have
        worked out a programme where females attend the ABET levels from
        07h00 to 09h00; thereafter they go to the workshops. Inmate
        teachers are being paid a gratuity of R19,00 to R99,00, depending
        on how long they are teaching at the facility.



       Durban Juvenile Female



        Many of the juvenile females have high bail amounts and have
        charges of robbery and theft.
        There were also girls who were incarcerated for loitering. The SAPS
        arrests these girls on charges of prostitution. It was stated that
        the community courts should hear such cases.


        The following are concerns raised regarding inmates of the Female
        Centre;


            a) It was stated that the sentencing framework for female
               crimes must be reviewed as many households collapsed when
               females are sent to prison. Often children are left in the
               care of parents, many of whom are pensioners, and this
               causes various problems.
          (b)    It was also suggested that the DCS appoints a panel to
               evaluate prisoners and the level of rehabilitation. Many
               inmates serve long sentences and can only appear before the
               parole board after serving ¾ of their sentence.
          (c)    It was stated that the systems of Correctional Supervision
               and parole boards are not in place. Many inmates have to be
               educated around these issues, but without proper systems in
               place, efforts are fruitless.
           (d)   Many of the inmates reoffend, because of lack of post-
               release programmes. It was suggested that the DCS employ ex-
               offenders after release in its workshops etc.

        Comments and Recommendations

        The Committee is aware of the challenges the DCS is facing, but
        recommends the following;

        (a)      The DCS should have all courses accredited. This will
                 surely assist inmates upon their release.
        (b)      The DCS must assist those inmates, especially the
                 juveniles, with low bail amounts in ensuring that they are
                 released.
        (c)      The Committee urges the DCS to ensure that all female
                 juveniles of school-going age attends school, as per the
                 requirement of the Correctional Services Act, Act 111 of
                 1998 and the South African Schools Act, Act 84 of 1996.

     5.     Inmate Tracking System (ITS) at Durban Westville Centre.

        The Inmate Tracking System solution entails a Personal Tracking
        Device (PTD) being physically attached to the detainees wrist.


        The ITS is a pilot project, which will be evaluated in terms of
        strategic, operational, functional and economic viabilities. The
        Johannesburg Medium A and the Durban Medium A were identified to
        pilot this project.


        The system aims to (i) assist in decreasing the detention
        population by assisting in decreasing the awaiting-trial detainee
        cycle, (ii) optimise the management of facilities and population,
        thereby improving the accuracy of information, (iii) increase
        security within detention facilities.


        The objectives of the system are to:
        (i)      track and visually depict the physical location of
             detainees,
        (ii)     enable the electronic verification of detainee identity,
        (iii)    support processes of admission, roll-calls, bail and
             visitations,
        (iv)     support movements and scheduling processes,
        (v)      give notification of PTD/ Transceiver Unit tampering and
             or failure.


        Transceiver Units within and around the holding facility
        continually receive the data being transmitted by any number of
        PTDs within reception. The collected information is continually
        being communicated to the computer system installed within the
        identified control area, which processes and displays all relevant
        information, sends messages, and notifies officials of any
        extraordinary events such as tampering.


        The system has the capability of tracking the detainees’
        whereabouts within the facility at all times. The system allows an
        official to immediately identify the position of any detainee
        within the facility and to have that detainee’s position tracked
        and reported on a computer.


        Mobile hand-held computers or Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs)
        are provided within the sections, allowing the officials to
        interact with the system and through which all messages and alarms
        are received and lock-up (roll calls) are conducted.


        The standard process is for all detainee identifications to be
        verified through fingerprint and verification. Fingerprint
        capturing devices (biometric readers) and digital cameras are
        connected to the ITS, which allows for the electronic capturing of
        fingerprint and photo images, and which are then electronically
        attached to the computerised file of the detainee, stored within
        the Inmate Tracking database. This information is gathered through
        an interface with the current correctional centre management
        system, the Admissions, Detention and Release System (A&R).


        The official functionality acceptance of the ITS at Durban Medium A
        Correctional Centre took place on 4 November 2004 and accepted by
        centre management and the Head of the Centre. During October 2003,
        93 centre members were identified and nominated as change agents.
        Training took place during February 2004, encompassing 61
        correctional centre members. The network implementation began
        during September 2003.


        Tagging and tracking did commence at the centre on 08 March 2004
        but has as yet, still not been finalised. Members of the Medium A
        centre would have been responsible for the backlog capturing
        activities, but in reality only two members were made available to
        complete this mammoth task. Two employees from the Area
        Commissioners office were then deployed to assist, as well as a
        further five employees from the Regional Commissioners office. Due
        to lack of resources, the reception functionality of the system
        never took place and sabotage was suspected specifically to the ITS
        equipment installed.


        The Change Agents and members who attended the training were never
        available at all to assist with the implementation, and some of
        them even expressed their non-interest in the system.


        A company by the name of Exponent Consortium was awarded the tender
        for the ITS. Two site engineers from the company are at the centre
        to manage the system. The electronic components of the ITS are
        being ordered from manufactures in the USA, and the straps are
        being ordered from Canada. Exponent is seeking local companies to
        manufacture these straps.


        The cost of the tender awarded to Exponent amounts to R28 million
        (this is total value of the contract, VAT inclusive). The monthly
        supervisional costs of the system amount to R 52 000.00. The
        Department of Correctional Services will spend R88 million on the
        ITS for all 36 Centres of Excellence.


        A total of 8 292 tags were lost during the implementation phase of
        this process and this amounted to R7 million.


        Comments and Recommendations


        The Committee is extremely dissatisfied with the implementation of
        the ITS, specifically at the Durban Westville Correctional Centre.
        At Durban Westville, it is merely used for identification purposes,
        i.e. fingerprints and photos.


        Of grave concern to the Committee is the lost equipment (8 292
        tags) that amounted to R7 million, and the fact that the problem
        had not been addressed, as this loss was reported in February this
        year. Lightning often damages the readers placed on the outside
        walls of the facility and these readers are not insured, whilst the
        total cost of this contract amounts to R28 million.


        The Committee was informed that the straps are being cut off and
        replaced when detainees go to court and return to facilities. The
        cost per strap amounts to ± R3,50 and can escalate to R700,00 per
        day for 200 offenders attending court daily. Even though the
        Committee was informed that all Inmate Tracking databases
        (computerised files of inmates) was functional, this was not the
        case when the Committee inspected the database room at the centre.
        This is not a very viable exercise.


        The Committee recommends the following;


        (a)      The Committee is aware that an Evaluation Committee has
              been established to evaluate the system and expects the
              report of the Evaluation Committee immediately it has been
              completed or within one month after the tabling of this
              report.
        (b)      The DCS should take strong action against those officials
              who deliberately sabotaged the ITS and report back to the
              Committee on this matter.
        (c)      The Committee recommends that the DCS table all projects
              such as Inmate Tracking and Electronic monitoring before the
              Committee for its comments and recommendation.

     6. Durban Westville Correctional Centre Court
        Because of the high numbers of awaiting trial detainees at the
        centre, a court was established which the Committee visited at the
        Medium A Centre. Detainees can, via video conferencing and cctv
        cameras, interact with the prosecutors, witnesses and the
        magistrates of the courts in the area. Four accused can be together
        during this process. This video conferencing will assist a lot
        especially in terms of high profile inmates who must be transported
        to court. The exercise started on 07 October 2005 and will be
        tested for a period of eight (8) months. The DCS will have a full
        report on the functioning and effectiveness of this system by May
        2006. Officials from the DCS monitor this process.


        Comments and Recommendation
        a) The Committee request the DCS to furnish it with the report on
           the effectiveness of this system.
        b) The Committee recommends that if this is a feasible and operable
           exercise, it be rolled out to other bigger centres within DCS,
           such as Pollsmoor.

     7. Staff


    Total Number of Correctional Officials at the Durban Management Area

|Durban Management Area Offices            |175               |
|Correctional Centre A                     |248               |
|Correctional Centre B                     |333               |
|Correctional Centre C                     |162               |
|Youth Correctional Centre                 |119               |
|Female Correctional Centre                |128               |
|Umzinto Correctional Centre               |154               |
|Community Corrections                     |69                |
|Total                                     |1 388             |


    7.1     Staff concerns

        The Portfolio Committee met with both management and staff of
        Medium A, Medium B, Durban Females and staff at Durban Westville
        Youth Centre. This exercise was to discuss key concerns and
        problems which hamper the ability to carry out their duties
        effectively. Many of the concerns and grievances raised were common
        to all of the centres as well as other Correctional Services
        regions. Managers and staff highlighted concerns and also
        identified solutions to these problems. The following are some of
        the key concerns highlighted by managers and staff:

    7.2     Vacant positions

        The Durban Westville Centre is extremely  overcrowded  and  has  an
        inmate population of 14 000. This causes a lot of strain on members
        of the DCS. Not only is it dangerous to work  in  such  conditions,
        but it also poses a health  risk  to  officials.  This  lowers  the
        morale of staff.
        Comments and Recommendations


        The high number of vacant positions in the DCS is  unacceptable  to
        the Portfolio Committee. The  Committee  is  aware  that  with  the
        movement to a 7-day establishment the DCS  aims  to  employ  8  300
        officials over the next three years.


        a) The Portfolio Committee request that the DCS prioritise  centres
           such as Durban Westville when recruiting officials.
        b) The Portfolio Committee also request  that  the  appointment  of
           females in senior positions be prioritised in this region.


    7.3     Professional Staff


        The shortage of professional staff within  prisons  remains  a  big
        concern for the Committee. The Committee is aware that  the  salary
        packages for social workers have  been  reviewed,  but  all  salary
        packages for professional staff should be adjusted.


        Poor salaries and difficult working  conditions  for  professionals
        have been identified as key reasons for the  inability  of  DCS  to
        attract and retain professional staff.  The need to offer  improved
        salaries for professionals was identified as a priority by staff.


        The Management Area is supposed to have 54  nurses,  but  currently
        only 23 are employed in this area. Many professional  staff  leaves
        the employ of the DCS  in  search  of  better  work  opportunities.
        Shortage of especially social workers in the DCS delays the  parole
        hearings of inmates, as inmates must be assessed by social  workers
        before appearing before the parole board. A lot of complaints  were
        received about the working conditions of  professional  staff.  For
        example, at  the  clinic  at  the  Durban  Westville  Centre  (male
        section), staff often deals with 50 to 150  inmates  per  day.  The
        physical structure makes it difficult to attend to all sick inmates
        in the facility and nurses  basically  deal  with  emergency  cases
        mostly.


      Comments and Recommendations


        It is essential that there is sufficient professional staff  within
        DCS in order to effectively implement the rehabilitation  approach.
        Implementation of the White Paper, which outlines  this  focus,  is
        impossible without the support of a range of professionals.


        The Portfolio Committee requires a report by DCS  within  3  months
        after adoption of this report, on:


        (a)      Review of  salary  packages  for  all  professional  staff
              employed by  DCS  to  ensure  that  they  are  recruited  and
              retained by the Department.
        (b)      Measures  which  have  been  initiated  to  speed  up  the
              recruitment
              process for professional staff.
        (c)      Strategies to improve the  recruitment  and  retention  of
       professional.
             staff, including scarce resources  such  as  psychologists  as
             well as social workers, nurses and teachers.


     4. Health Care

           HIV/AIDS is prevalent amongst the majority of the inmates.  Many
           of the females  admitted,  even  those  who  are  pregnant,  are
           diagnosed with HIV/AIDS.


           The shortage of nurses is exacerbated by the perception that the
           workload of nurses has increased with the  advent  of  HIV/AIDS.
           The shortage of nurses means that in cases where there  is  only
           one nurse for the facility and  when  the  nurse  is  on  leave,
           correctional officials are tasked  with  distributing  medicines
           and providing care to the patients.


           The growing number of inmates affected by HIV/AIDS in prison was
           identified  as  a  key  concern.   Access   to   anti-retroviral
           treatment remains a problem  in  DCS.  Many  inmates  enter  the
           system under false names. To receive ARV  treatment,  an  inmate
           must have an ID and a confirmable  address.  Another  matter  of
           grave concern is that many inmates are from  other  regions,  as
           persons are incarcerated in the area where the  crime  has  been
           committed and  not  where  people  are  from.  This  is  also  a
           stumbling block in  receiving ARV treatment as many need  to  be
           transferred to their areas.


           Comments and Recommendations


           The Portfolio Committee is concerned about the  high  number  of
           seriously ill inmates with HIV/AIDS seen in the prisons on  this
           visit.


           The Committee recommends the following:


           a) The Portfolio Committee requests that the DCS  have  frequent
              interaction with the Department of Health to ensure the roll-
              out of antiretroviral treatment to inmates. Barriers  to  the
              acquisition of ARV treatment must be identified and solutions
              to this problem addressed, in conjunction with the Department
              of Health.  The DCS must submit a report identifying barriers
              to access to treatment and solutions to the  problem  to  the
              Portfolio Committee  within  3  months  of  tabling  of  this
              report.

           b) The Committee requests quarterly reports  from  the  HIV/AIDS
              coordinator of the region on specific problems  that  inmates
              have.


        5. Promotion


           This concern was raised in all the  centres  at  the  Management
           area. A moratorium was placed on promotions  on  01  July  2001.
           During the visit, staff identified the lack of  upward  mobility
           as a key factor in demotivating members. Many staff members have
           furthered their education, yet there is no incentive for them as
           there is no link between further studies and promotion.


           Many staff members, especially those with  long  service  (“blou
           baadtjies”) are of the opinion that they are not appreciated and
           acknowledged. Staff is aware that policies have changed and that
           they must contribute to their  subsidised  benefits,  but  since
           staff stay  on  the  same  level  for  years,  it  becomes  very
           difficult and places a lot of financial strain on them.


           Comments and Recommendations


           The Portfolio Committee  recognises  that  the  DCS  is  in  the
           process of creating Career  advancement  opportunities  for  all
           staff, especially those on the lower levels. This process is  to
           be completed during February 2006.

           (i)         The Portfolio Committee will call the DCS in to give
               feedback on the outcome  of  this  exercise  within  a  month
               after tabling of this report.
           (ii)  The DCS should furnish the Portfolio Committee with a list
               of all positions advertised in all the regions.


       7.6  Incentives and Recognition

           Staff complained about lack of incentives for staff to embark on
           post-qualification studies while employed by DCS,  the  lack  of
           recognition for completed studies,  for  long  service,  and  on
           retirement.


           In addition staff stated that merit awards were often  given  to
           the same individuals. Staff felt that the assessment process was
           not objective as it relies on the ability of staff to write  and
           communicate effectively, rather than on an objective  assessment
           of how well they perform their  duties.   Staff  requested  that
           management explain clearly the criteria on which assessments are
           based.

           Comments and Recommendations


           The low morale of staff was a feature  of  all  the  centres  at
           Durban Westville. While many of the problems faced by staff  are
           more difficult to rectify, the problem of lack of incentives and
           recognition for ongoing good work or past service is not.


           The  provision  of  incentives  for  post-basic   qualifications
           acquired by staff while employed by DCS is important in order to
           motivate  staff  to  continually  improve  themselves  and  thus
           provide a better quality service. In  addition,  recognition  of
           long service and acknowledgement and thanks on the retirement of
           staff are important rewards for service. It is only courteous to
           thank staff on retirement after long periods of service. The DCS
           should explore innovative and creative  ways  of  rewarding  and
           acknowledging staff. If financial  constraints  are  a  problem,
           then rewards may even be non-monetary, outside funding could  be
           found to fund tokens of appreciation, or the skills of prisoners
           within workshops could be harnessed in this regard.
           The Committee recommends the following:
              a) The DCS should consider rewarding staff for  long  service,
                 as this will definitely boost the morale of staff.
              b) The Portfolio Committee requests a report from DCS within 3
                 months after tabling this report, on  steps  that  it  will
                 take  to  ensure  that  staff  are  motivated  to   perform
                 effectively,  including  measures  that  it  will  take  to
                 improve the assessment process and to reward staff for long
                 service or ongoing good work.

       7.7  Overtime

           The DCS has phased out the 7-day establishment, where previously
           the DCS functioned as a 5-day establishment,  which  means  that
           work during the  weekend  is  paid  out  as  overtime.   Due  to
           financial concerns with overtime payments (and a decision by the
           National Treasury  to  cut  the  overtime  budget)  as  well  as
           additional benefits that will result, it was necessary  for  the
           DCS to move to a 7-day establishment.
           Staff complained that this process has  placed  major  financial
           constraints on them, as they now  also  have  to  contribute  to
           medical aid and other benefits in the DCS. Staff  is  only  paid
           for 3 out of 4 days of overtime taken.  The fourth day can  only
           be compensated for by a leave day. Many Heads of Prisons find it
           difficult to relieve staff during the  week,  because  of  staff
           shortages. In addition, they raised concerns that  the  shortage
           of staff means that other staff members suffer when staff  takes
           leave that is owed to them in lieu of overtime pay.


           Comments and Recommendations


           The Portfolio Committee supports the decision to move from a  5-
           day to a 7-day establishment.  However, at the same time  it  is
           clear that the concerns of staff around a decrease in take  home
           pay that will result from this change  need  to  be  taken  very
           seriously by DCS management.


           The Committee recommends the following:


           (a)   That all Heads of Prison should ensure that  action  plans
                 are completed  to  ensure  the  correct  staff  complement,
                 especially over weekends.

       7.8  Communication

           It was evident throughout the region that the DCS’ staff is  not
           adequately informed on key issues and  developments  within  the
           Department.  It  was  clear  that  problems,  which  should   be
           communicated and resolved at local, area and regional level, are
           not  effectively  addressed.  Staff  feels  that  they  are  not
           timeously informed by management on key issues that affect their
           work, such as developments with regard to promotions, vacancies,
           assessments and medical aid and that they thus need to  rely  on
           the unions for this information.


           Comments and Recommendations


           The reliance by DCS on communication in written  form  does  not
           seem  to  be  effective,  especially  when  staff  have  serious
           problems with the changes that are  occurring  around  them  and
           that impact on their work and their lives.
           The Committee recommends the following:


              a) The Committee recommends that  monthly  staff  meetings  be
                 scheduled and that monthly reports be sent to the  regional
                 office, and that these reports be  sent  to  the  Committee
                 quarterly.
              b) The Committee requests that interaction  and  communication
                 with the National Office should be brought down  to  grass-
                 roots level rather than written communication. In addition,
                 staff must be given the opportunity to identify and discuss
                 their  concerns  in  a  non-threatening   environment   and
                 management,  in  particular  area  managers  and  Heads  of
                 Prisons, need to take these concerns seriously and identify
                 constructive ways of addressing them.
                 The DCS must report to the Committee within 3 months of the
                 tabling of this report, on problems that they have
                 identified with regard to communication with staff on the
                 ground and steps that they have taken or will be taking to
                 address this problem.


       7.9  Medical Aid

           In the past, medical aid for staff was fully subsidised.  Due to
           a number of financial concerns, including the fact that staff
           was abusing the scheme, a decision was made to change the
           medical aid to a partially subsidised scheme. This has meant
           that all staff now has to pay a proportion of the medical aid
           monthly payments. Staff has identified concerns, including that
           they had not budgeted for medical aid payments and that the
           premiums have resulted in their taking less money home than
           previously. In addition, staff feels that while they are now
           paying for this service they are not receiving sufficient
           benefits in return and that, in many cases, the scheme has very
           limited allocations for various health areas.



      Comments and Recommendations

              a) The DCS must identify  problems  with  regard  to  the  new
                 medical aid scheme and report to  the  Committee  within  3
                 months after tabling of this report on steps that have been
                 or will be taken to address these problems.
              b)  In  addition,   the   DCS   top   management   must   take
                 responsibility for effective communication  on  this  issue
                 and for ensuring that staff on the ground is aware  of  DCS
                 initiatives to improve the medical aid provision.


       7.10 Staff Accommodation & Housing Subsidy

           Staff members complained about the state  of  the  accommodation
           facilities at the Centre.  As  many  as  thirty  (30)  officials
           occupy a floor with only one bathroom and one toilet  that  must
           be utilised by both males and females. There is often  no  water
           or electricity in these quarters.


           Many staff members are forced to leave  their  children  in  the
           care of family members, as they are not allowed  to  accommodate
           their children in single quarters. There is also a long  waiting
           list for staff to be accommodated at the staff facilities.


           Staff complained that the housing subsidy of  R300,00  does  not
           enable them to purchase their own property. This subsidy used to
           be R1 000, but has been revised.
           Comments and Recommendations
           Many of the DCS facilities are old and  do  not  cater  for  the
           current needs of staff  or  inmates.  It  is  the  view  of  the
           Committee that it is unacceptable that  female  and  male  staff
           members share facilities.


           The Committee recommends the following:

           (a)   That the DCS review the current  structure  of  facilities
                 and try improving the living conditions for staff members.
           (b)   That  the  DCS  should  also  use  its  own  labour  force
                 (inmates) to  do  minor  maintenance  and  repair  work  at
                 facilities. This should be discussed with the Department of
                 Public Works


       7.11 Transport

           Staff complained about the provision of transport  to  and  from
           funerals of colleagues of the  DCS.  The  policy  requires  that
           transport to and from funerals not exceed 400 km. This proves to
           be problematic as many members are from all over the country.

       7.12 Danger Allowance

           Members complained that according to policy,  danger  allowances
           are paid for staff working with maximum sentenced offenders, but
           staff working with ATDs do not  get  paid  this  allowance  even
           though the ATDs with whom they work may be extremely  dangerous.
           In addition, some staff suggested that the danger  allowance  be
           increased as staff has a lot of physical contact with  dangerous
           inmates.
           Because of the overcrowded conditions at the Centre, staff feels
           that all employees should receive a danger allowance.


           Comments and recommendations

              a) The DCS must review the policy  on  danger  allowances  and
                 report back to the Committee on this issue.

       7.13 Inmate Privileges

           A concern was raised that  inmates  have  more  privileges  than
           staff.  Members  are  not  allowed  to  use  telephones  in  the
           institution,  but  inmates  are  allowed.  This  seems   to   be
           problematic at times.


           Comments and recommendations
           The Area Commissioner stated that a telephone system  for  staff
           is being revisited. This system will  function  with  pin  codes
           issued to staff.


       7.14 Transfer of inmates

           The institution houses a lot of maximum inmates and it was  said
           that it is a mammoth task to transfer  inmates  to  the  Kokstad
           Maximum Security prison  in  Kwa  Zulu  Natal  or  to  the  Cmax
           facility in Pretoria. Factors contributing to this are that  the
           Kokstad facility is not  staffed;  therefore  inmates  can’t  be
           transferred to the facility.


           Comments and recommendations


           It is worrying for the Committee that Government has to spend  a
           lot of money on facilities and then these are  utilised  by  the
           DCS. Many other  Correctional  Facilities  in  the  country  are
           overcrowded, whilst some facilities are not in use.
           The Committee recommends the following:
              a) That the Portfolio Committee request a report on the status
                 of the Kokstad facility from the DCS. The  Committee  would
                 like to be kept abreast on the issue of sufficient manpower
                 to run the facility and why, at this  stage,  there  is  no
                 manpower at the facility.
              b) That the Committee request a detailed  report  on  all  the
                 facilities of the DCS, those in use, those not in  use  and
                 those being upgraded. The information should entail details
                 of maintenance projects and when it will be completed. This
                 report should be tabled before the Committee within two (2)
                 months after the adoption of this report.

       7.15 Resources

           Staff complained that many of the resources  they  must  use  to
           fulfill their daily tasks are old, especially the  computers  at
           the  visitors  centre.  These  computers  are  used  to   obtain
           information on specific inmates the public would like to  visit.
           Officials deal with as many as 500 visitors daily. The computers
           are also not enough to deal with the daily influx of visitors to
           the centre.


           Comments and Recommendation
              a) That the  Committee  recommend  that  the  Management  area
                 provide enough resources such as computers to officials. If
                 resources are old and in a  poor  working  condition,  they
                 should be either upgraded or replaced.


       7.16 Favouritism and Discrimination
           The Committee was informed of a specific official who  is  being
           discriminated against because  the  official  is  not  from  the
           area/province. At the time of the visit, the  staff  member  was
           extremely traumatised by these instances of discrimination.


           It was also stated that  there  is  a  lot  of  favouritism  and
           exploitation with the overtime schedule in terms  of  who  works
           overtime and who don’t. This is problematic to staff members.


           Comments and Recommendations


           The Committee is dissatisfied  that  some  officials  are  being
           discriminated against because of  different  ethnic  groups  and
           provinces. The Department is a department for all South Africans
           employed by it  and  instances  of  discrimination  are  totally
           unacceptable.


              a) The Committee recommends that the Management of the  center
                 draw up monthly  action  plans  and  distribute  the  staff
                 complement equally to deal with overtime.

8.    Intersectoral Communication

     It was mentioned that more  sensitivity  around  issues  of  diversion,
     restorative justice and correctional supervision needs to be raised. It
     was mentioned that prosecutors are judged based on  their  performance.
     The SAPS also has an approach of  zero  tolerance  against  crime,  but
     this, in some cases, tends to the problematic.


     Recently more judges in the Durban area opt  to  divert  children  away
     from the correctional system. With diversion,  all  offenders  must  be
     screened and must admit guilt  before  diversion  can  be  implemented.
     Diversion can at times be problematic as there is no database  to  pick
     up previous offences and some offenders can be diverted more than once.
     Many workshops have been organised in the  region  on  Victim  Offender
     Mediation to advocate  awareness  amongst  judges.  Despite  all  these
     efforts, more  intervention  and  interaction  is  needed  amongst  the
     officials  monitoring  correctional  supervision,  the  Department   of
     Justice, the Department of Social Development and the SAPS.


     Section 276A (3) (a) of the Criminal Procedure Act provides that in the
     case of a prisoner who has been sentenced to less than 5 years (or his
     or her release date is less than 5 years in the future) the
     Commissioner may, if he is of the opinion that such a person is fit to
     be subjected to correctional supervision, apply to the clerk or
     registrar of the court, as the case may be, to have that person appear
     before the court a quo in order to reconsider the said sentence. The
     court has an option to convert the sentence into correctional
     supervision on the conditions it may deem fit. Section 287 (4) (b) of
     the Criminal Procedure Act deals with a situation where a person has
     been sentenced to pay a fine with an alternative of imprisonment not
     exceeding 5 years, and such person is unable to pay the fine. The
     matter may be referred back to the court to set a new sentence of
     correctional supervision.
     The magistrates in the Durban area informed the Committee that they
     have never received such applications.


     Comments and Recommendations


     The Portfolio Committee understands that it is only possible to resolve
     the problem  of  overcrowding  in  prisons  by  ensuring  intersectoral
     solutions to the problem. Communication  between  the  various  sectors
     including the DCS, the SAPS and  the  Department  of  Justice  is  thus
     essential. The DCS must take responsibility for ensuring the  effective
     functioning of cluster committees at all levels.


     The Committee recommends the following  in  order  to  ensure  adequate
     intersectoral communication:


      (a)         The Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services will meet
          with the Portfolio Committee on Justice to also discuss  possible
          solutions to the blockages in the system.
      (b)         Magistrates and judges should  be  sensitised  around  the
          options of diversion and community supervision.
      (c)         The Committee recommends that  the  Department  of  Social
          Development ensure that measures be are in  place  at  Places  of
          Safety to prevent children from absconding.
      (d)         IPVs and the  Legal  Aid  Board  representatives  must  be
          included in cluster  committee  meetings  at  regional  and  area
          levels.
      (e)          In  addition,  the  Judicial   Inspectorate   must   take
          responsibility for ensuring that the  IPV  and  Legal  Aid  Board
          representatives at each prison meet regularly  to  discuss  cases
          and problems.
      (f)         The cluster committees should investigate whether all ATDs
          in police cells need to be there or whether they can be  released
          using  the  available  mechanisms.   Those   ATDS   who   require
          incarceration in prison should be shifted from the  police  cells
          to the prisons by moving prisoners  within  the  management  area
          from overcrowded to less overcrowded prisons.
      (g)   The Committee supports intersectoral priorities  to  reduce  the
          caseloads of court officials and to improve police investigations
          to ensure more speedy resolution of cases which will shorten  the
          length of time that Awaiting  Trial  Detainees  (ATDs)  spend  in
          prison.
      (h)   All ATDs who are accused of non-violent offences  and  who  have
          been granted bail of R1  000  or  less  by  the  courts  and  not
          considered by the courts to be  a  danger  to  society,  but  are
          unable to afford the stipulated bail amounts, should be released.



E.    Conclusion


    In conclusion, the Portfolio Committee would like to commend all staff
    at the extremely overcrowded Durban Westville Correctional Centre for a
    task excellently delivered. The Committee undertakes to address the
    grievances and problems raised by staff, not only at the Durban
    Westville Centre, but at all other centres the Committee visited. The
    Committee gained more appreciation and insight into the difficult
    conditions under which DCS staff work, exacerbated by overcrowding and
    the lack of adequate resources.  The issue of career advancement
    opportunities should be communicated to all staff throughout the
    country.  More interaction and intervention from the Integrated Justice
    Cluster is needed in this region. However, the Committee is extremely
    dissatisfied with the haphazard implementation of the Inmate Tracking
    System at the center and will keep a vigorous eye on the effective
    completion of this system and expects the DCS to provide the Committee
    with a full report on the matter. The Portfolio Committee on
    Correctional Services will monitor measures to implement the
    recommendations outlined in this report and will meet with the Regional
    Commissioner responsible for the Durban Westville Correctional Centre
    within 6 months of tabling this report, to discuss progress on
    implementation of the recommendations.
    Report to be considered.

3.    Annual Report of the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services
      January – December 2005

      ANNUAL REPORT OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON CORRECTIONAL SERVICES

                           JANUARY – DECEMBER 2005


1. Name of the Committee:


      Chairperson: Mr D V Bloem


      Committee Secretary: Imogen Davids


2. Chairperson’s overview


      The Committee had an extremely busy year. The briefings by the
      Department on progress made in terms of the recommendations of the
      Committee’s oversight visits reports was a very useful tool/mechanism
      to hold the Department of Correctional Services responsible for its
      actions. More stringent measures will have to be implemented to ensure
      that policy is implemented. The briefing by the Department on Special
      Remissions provided the Committee with a more comprehensive
      understanding about the implementation, lessons learnt and processes
      of this initiative. The Committee will hold continuous discussions
      with the DCS on its activities. A concern was raised at the briefings
      by the National Council on Correctional Services and the Judicial
      Inspectorate about the Correctional Services Act. Certain amendments
      have been effected to the Act of which the Committee was not aware.
      The Committee had requested that the amendments be forwarded to it.
      Another issue of serious concern was the timeous receival of
      documentation. This hampers the work of the Committee, as it does not
      have sufficient time to interrogate the documents.
      The oversight visits were also very successful. The Committee
      concentrated specifically on the awaiting-trial population in an
      attempt to identify blockages in the judicial system. Meetings with
      Magistrates, Prosecutors and the Police were held in order to have an
      integrated approach to the problems and plights of the awaiting-trial
      population. Another area of focus was that of building strong
      relations with the community. Awareness around the reintegration of
      offenders upon their release is very essential. The Committee also had
      detailed discussions and inspections at the Private Prisons. The DCS
      can learn from the Private Prisons, especially in terms of security.
      The Committee wishes to build stronger partnerships with the DCS and
      the Ministry in order to have a common understanding on challenges
      faced.

3. Vision and mission of the committee

      To assist in building a strong Department that will contribute towards
      maintaining and protecting a just, peaceful and safe society by
      enforcing court-imposed sentences and detaining prisoners in safe
      custody.

4. List of public entities over which the committee exercise oversight


      The Department of Correctional Services
      The Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons
      The National Council of Corrections

5. Number of meetings held and those cancelled


      31 Meetings from January till November 2005
      Only two meetings were cancelled, because of Plenary sessions, but the
      Agenda items were incorporated into the Committee programmes.


6. Legislation referred to the committee (Finalised and not finalised)
   indicate the following:


                • The Committee had no legislation before it.


7. Papers (International Agreements, Protocols, Reports etc) referred to
   the Committee indicate the following:


      Draft directives in terms of section 299 A of the Criminal Procedure
      Act, Act 51 of 1977; Right of complainant to make representations in
      certain matters with regard to placement on parole, on day parole or
      under correctional supervision.
                • Referral date: 05 October 2005
                • Consideration date by the committee: Friday, 28 October
                  2005
                • Report publication (ATC date): No report in the ATC
                • Debate in the House: No debate in the House


8. Oversight (Local) visits


        8.1 Oversight Visit to the North West and Mpumalanga provinces
                • Objectives of the trip
                  Visit to the North West and Mpumalanga region to identify
                  the impact of overcrowding on conditions of prisons. Meet
                  with staff at all levels to discuss issues of
                  communication, corruption and other staff grievances.
                  Identify concerns around juveniles in prison. Interact
                  with the Legal Aid Board and the Independent Prison
                  Visitor.

                • Dates
                  26 January till 04 February 2005


                • Delegation
                  Mr D V Bloem
                  Ms. L S Chikunga
                  Ms. M W Makgate
                  Mr M S Moatshe
                  Mr S Mahote
                  Mr L J Tolo


                • Provinces/ places visited
                  Potchefstroom Correctional Centre (North West Province)
                  Mogwase Correctional Centre (North West Province)
                  Losperfontein Correctional Centre (North West Province)
                  Rustenburg Correctional Centre (North West Province)
                  Wtibank Correctional Centre (Mpumalanga Province)
                  Barberton Correctional Centre (Mpumalanga Province)
                  Nelspruit Correctional Centre  (Mpumalanga Province)
                  Ermelo Correctional Centre  (Mpumalanga Province)
                  Bethal Correctional Centre(Mpumalanga Province)


                • Report
                  Adopted on Tuesday 15 March 2005.


                • Report publication (ATC date)
                  Thursday, 19 May 2005


                • Debate in the House
                  Tuesday, 07 June 2005

      8.2 Oversight Visit to the Limpopo Province


                • Objectives of the trip
                  Visit to the Limpopo Province and the Private Prison,
                  Kutama Sinthumule, to identify the impact of overcrowding
                  on conditions of prisons. Meet with staff at all levels to
                  discuss issues of communication, corruption and other
                  staff grievances. Identify concerns around juveniles in
                  prison. Interact with the Legal Aid Board and the
                  Independent Prison Visitor. Compliance with the
                  Correctional Services Act. Training programmes at PPP’s
                  and the standard of Security.



                • Dates
                  3 – 5 August 2005


                • Delegation
                  Mr D V Bloem
                  Ms. L S Chikunga
                  Mr N B Fihla
                  Ms. M W Makgate
                  Mr M S Moatshe
                  Mr M J Phala
                  Mr L J Tolo
                  Mr E T Xolo
                  Ms S Seaton


                • Province, places visited
                  Thohoyandou Correctional Centre
                  Kutama Sinthumule Private Prison
                  Polokwane Correctional Centre


                • Report
                  Adopted on 01 February 2006.


        8.3 Oversight Visit to the Training Colleges of DCS and the Private
            Prison


                • Objectives of the trip
                  To address the new recruits at the colleges, specifically
                  addressing the Code of Conduct, the Training Curriculum,
                  issues of Discipline and Respect, Compliance with the
                  Correctional Services Act, Training programmes at PPP’s
                  and the standard of Security of the PPP’s.


                • Dates
                  16 – 18 August 2005


                • Delegation
                  Mr D V Bloem
                  Ms. L S Chikunga
                  Mr N B Fihla
                  Mr M S Moatshe
                  Mr M J Phala
                  Mr L J Tolo
                  Mr E T Xolo
                  Mr J Selfe
                  Ms S Seaton


                • Province, places visited
                  Zonderwater Training College
                  Kroonstad Training College
                  Mangaung Private Prison
                • Report
                  Adopted on 01 February 2006.
        8.4 Oversight visit to the Northern Cape, KwaZulu Natal and the
             Training Colleges


                • Objectives of the trip
                  To inspect prisons, to address the high number of
                  awaiting trial detainees in Correctional centres by
                  having meetings with the Integrated Justice Cluster, to
                  gain first hand knowledge on the implementation of the
                  inmate tracking system at Durban Westville prison,
                  address the new recruits at the colleges by specifically
                  addressing the Code of Conduct, the Training Curriculum
                  as well as issues of Discipline and Respect within the
                  Department.


                • Dates
                  10 – 21 October 2005
                • Delegation
                  Mr DV Bloem
                  Ms. L S Chikunga
                  Mr N B Fihla
                  Mr L P Khoarai
                  Ms M W Makgate
                  Mr M S Moatshe
                  Mr M J Phala
                  Mr L J Tolo
                  Mr E T Xolo
                  Mr J Selfe
                  Ms S Seaton


                • Province, places visited
                  Kimberley Correctional Centre
                  Douglas Correctional Centre
                  Barkly West Correctional Centre
                  Kuruman Correctional Centre
                  Upington Correctional Centre
                  Durban- Westville Prison
                  Kroonstad Training College
                  Zonderwater Training College


                • Report
                  To be adopted on 24 March 2006.
9. International Visits:
      The Committee did not undertake any International Visits during 2005.


10. Budget Vote

                • Referral date
                  23 February 2005


                • Briefing by department
                  Tuesday, 08 March 2005


                • Public Hearings:
                  Tuesday, 04 April 2005
                • Report publication
                  Monday, 10 March 2005

11.  Annual reports of the Executive


                • Referral date
                  30 September 2005


                • Briefing by department
                  Friday, 28 October 2005
                • Public Hearings:
                  Friday, 28 October 2005


                • Report publication
                  Report published on 23 February 2006


  12. Other committee activities (briefings on other issues, workshops,
      conferences)


|DATE           |AGENDA              |PRESENTERS         |RESOLUTIONS       |
|01 March 2005  |Prison gangs and    |CSVR (Centre for   |The Department    |
|               |sexual violence in  |the Study of       |should develop an |
|               |prisons             |Violence and       |anti-gang         |
|               |                    |Reconciliation)    |strategy.         |
|04 April 2005  |Budget Hearings     |Public Servants    |The 7day          |
|               |                    |Association (PSA)  |establishment     |
|               |                    |                   |should be         |
|               |                    |Civil Society      |accompanied by a  |
|               |                    |Prison Reform      |salary            |
|               |                    |Initiative (CSPRI) |dispensation. The |
|               |                    |                   |DCS should set its|
|               |                    |National Institute |targets in terms  |
|               |                    |for Crime and      |of offender       |
|               |                    |Reintegration of   |numbers. It was   |
|               |                    |Offenders (NICRO)  |stated that more  |
|               |                    |                   |money should be   |
|               |                    |Judicial           |spent on the      |
|               |                    |Inspectorate of    |programmes of     |
|               |                    |Prisons (JIOP)     |Care, Development |
|               |                    |                   |and Aftercare.    |
|               |                    |South African      |Focus should be   |
|               |                    |Prisoners          |placed on         |
|               |                    |Organisation for   |mobilising the    |
|               |                    |Human Rights       |communities and   |
|               |                    |(SAPOHR)           |diversion of      |
|               |                    |                   |sentences.        |
|               |                    |Police and Prisons |                  |
|               |                    |Civil Rights Union |                  |
|               |                    |(POPCRU)           |                  |
|               |                    |                   |                  |
|               |                    |South African      |                  |
|               |                    |Catholic Bishops   |                  |
|               |                    |Conference (SACBC) |                  |
|               |                    |                   |                  |
|               |                    |Institute for      |                  |
|               |                    |Security Studies   |                  |
|               |                    |(ISS)              |                  |
|               |                    |                   |                  |
|               |                    |South African      |                  |
|               |                    |Council of Churches|                  |
|               |                    |(SACC)             |                  |
|Tuesday, 31 May|Briefing on status  |DCS                |The Committee will|
|2005           |of investigations   |                   |receive           |
|               |into                |                   |reportbacks on    |
|               |the rapes of two    |                   |these issues after|
|               |nurses and the      |                   |investigations    |
|               |ambushing of staff  |                   |have been         |
|               |and inmate at the   |                   |completed.        |
|               |Groote Schuur       |                   |                  |
|               |hospital.           |                   |                  |
|Friday, 03 June|Briefing on the     |Department of      |All officials in  |
|2005           |impact of the Child |Justice            |the sectors need  |
|               |Justice Bill and the|                   |to be orientated  |
|               |Criminal Law        |                   |in terms of       |
|               |Amendment Bill on   |                   |children in       |
|               |children and youth  |                   |conflict with the |
|               |in prison.          |                   |law. The Justice  |
|               |                    |                   |Department will   |
|               |                    |                   |ensure that       |
|               |                    |                   |prosecutors are   |
|               |                    |                   |appropriately     |
|               |                    |                   |trained to ensure |
|               |                    |                   |that children are |
|               |                    |                   |not sent to       |
|               |                    |                   |prison, but that  |
|               |                    |                   |accessible justice|
|               |                    |                   |is available.     |
|               |                    |                   |An analysis needs |
|               |                    |                   |to be done to     |
|               |                    |                   |ascertain how many|
|               |                    |                   |children of the   |
|               |                    |                   |different race    |
|               |                    |                   |groups face       |
|               |                    |                   |charges and are in|
|               |                    |                   |custody.          |
|               |                    |                   |Not everybody can |
|               |                    |                   |afford bail and   |
|               |                    |                   |judges and        |
|               |                    |                   |magistrates have  |
|               |                    |                   |the discretion of |
|               |                    |                   |applying diversion|
|               |                    |                   |programmes as a   |
|               |                    |                   |substitute for    |
|               |                    |                   |bail. It should   |
|               |                    |                   |also be noted that|
|               |                    |                   |parents often     |
|               |                    |                   |refuse to pay bail|
|               |                    |                   |amounts.          |
|               |                    |                   |Status of the     |
|               |                    |                   |Children’s Bill:  |
|               |                    |                   |The Bill is       |
|               |                    |                   |currently with the|
|               |                    |                   |Justice Committee.|
|               |                    |                   |The Bill is not a |
|               |                    |                   |clean-cut justice |
|               |                    |                   |matter and        |
|               |                    |                   |involves social   |
|               |                    |                   |development and   |
|               |                    |                   |correctional      |
|               |                    |                   |services. The Bill|
|               |                    |                   |would not serve a |
|               |                    |                   |useful purpose if |
|               |                    |                   |there was no      |
|               |                    |                   |underlying        |
|               |                    |                   |agreement from the|
|               |                    |                   |Department of     |
|               |                    |                   |Social Development|
|               |                    |                   |to provide enough |
|               |                    |                   |Places of Safety. |
|               |                    |                   |The Bill will     |
|               |                    |                   |return to         |
|               |                    |                   |Parliament during |
|               |                    |                   |July and August.  |
|               |                    |                   |There is no fixed |
|               |                    |                   |timeframe as to   |
|               |                    |                   |when the Bill will|
|               |                    |                   |be passed, but    |
|               |                    |                   |nevertheless the  |
|               |                    |                   |Bill will be      |
|               |                    |                   |implementable.    |
|               |                    |                   |Legal Aid Boards: |
|               |                    |                   |The DoJ will      |
|               |                    |                   |engage with the   |
|               |                    |                   |National          |
|               |                    |                   |Prosecuting       |
|               |                    |                   |Authority to make |
|               |                    |                   |sure that every   |
|               |                    |                   |child has legal   |
|               |                    |                   |representation.   |
|               |                    |                   |The heads of Legal|
|               |                    |                   |Aid Boards in all |
|               |                    |                   |provinces would be|
|               |                    |                   |consulted to make |
|               |                    |                   |resources         |
|               |                    |                   |available to all  |
|               |                    |                   |children.         |
|Tuesday, 07    |Briefing on the     |Special            |Targeting medical |
|June 2005      |Investigation into  |Investigating Unit |practitioners     |
|               |the Medical Aid     |(DoJ)              |resulted in       |
|               |Scheme of DCS       |                   |massive reduction |
|               |Briefing on the     |DCS                |of claims. More   |
|               |anti- corruption    |                   |officials need to |
|               |strategy of the DCS.|                   |be criminally     |
|               |                    |                   |prosecuted. There |
|               |                    |                   |is a need to build|
|               |                    |                   |DCS’ internal     |
|               |                    |                   |capacity to deal  |
|               |                    |                   |with less complex |
|               |                    |                   |issues. Scorpions |
|               |                    |                   |and SAPS can make |
|               |                    |                   |a greater impact. |
|               |                    |                   |The               |
|               |                    |                   |Anti-Corruption   |
|               |                    |                   |strategy is a     |
|               |                    |                   |programme with a  |
|               |                    |                   |three- pronged    |
|               |                    |                   |approach, namely  |
|               |                    |                   |prevention,       |
|               |                    |                   |investigation and |
|               |                    |                   |societal          |
|               |                    |                   |responsibility.   |
|               |                    |                   |The aim of the    |
|               |                    |                   |anti-corruption   |
|               |                    |                   |strategy is to    |
|               |                    |                   |close the gaps in |
|               |                    |                   |the system.       |
|               |                    |                   |                  |
|               |                    |                   |The DCS has       |
|               |                    |                   |established its   |
|               |                    |                   |own Fraud         |
|               |                    |                   |Detection Unit. A |
|               |                    |                   |culture of        |
|               |                    |                   |intimidation      |
|               |                    |                   |prevailed in the  |
|               |                    |                   |DCS that hampered |
|               |                    |                   |“whistle–blowing” |
|               |                    |                   |policies. Part of |
|               |                    |                   |DCS’ strategy is  |
|               |                    |                   |to make reporting |
|               |                    |                   |on corruption part|
|               |                    |                   |of the            |
|               |                    |                   |responsibility of |
|               |                    |                   |officials. Coupled|
|               |                    |                   |with this was the |
|               |                    |                   |need for ethics   |
|               |                    |                   |training for      |
|               |                    |                   |senior staff.     |
|Friday, 10 June|Briefing on         |Judicial           |This meeting was  |
|2005           |Report on Pollsmoor |Inspectorate of    |postponed to      |
|               |fires;              |Prisons            |Friday 24 June    |
|               |Report on consensual|                   |2005.             |
|               |sex in prison.      |                   |                  |
|Tuesday, 14    |Briefing on         |Khulisa (Crime     |The Committee was |
|June 2005      |Rehabilitation and  |prevention         |very impressed by |
|               |reintegration.      |organization)      |the work that     |
|               |                    |                   |Khulisa does in   |
|               |                    |                   |the prison        |
|               |                    |                   |environment and   |
|               |                    |                   |encourages them to|
|               |                    |                   |expand to other   |
|               |                    |                   |centres as well.  |
|Tuesday, 21    |Status reports on:  |DCS                |The DCS is        |
|June 2005      |1. Human resources  |                   |currently busy    |
|               |and personnel       |                   |with career       |
|               |development within  |                   |pathing.  Eight   |
|               |DCS.                |                   |thousand and      |
|               |2. The construction |                   |eleven (8 011)    |
|               |of New Generation   |                   |employees will be |
|               |Prisons.            |                   |recruited at entry|
|               |3. Parole Boards    |                   |level during      |
|               |                    |                   |2005/6 and with   |
|               |                    |                   |the full          |
|               |                    |                   |implementation of |
|               |                    |                   |the White Paper,  |
|               |                    |                   |the DCS will have |
|               |                    |                   |a staff turnover  |
|               |                    |                   |of 63 571 against |
|               |                    |                   |the affordable 36 |
|               |                    |                   |241. The DCS has  |
|               |                    |                   |also employed a   |
|               |                    |                   |Recruitment agency|
|               |                    |                   |to facilitate the |
|               |                    |                   |filling of posts  |
|               |                    |                   |from              |
|               |                    |                   |advertisements,   |
|               |                    |                   |gross listing and |
|               |                    |                   |pre- selection of |
|               |                    |                   |candidates. This  |
|               |                    |                   |has reduced       |
|               |                    |                   |delivery time     |
|               |                    |                   |significantly. The|
|               |                    |                   |Personnel         |
|               |                    |                   |Provisional Plan  |
|               |                    |                   |addresses the     |
|               |                    |                   |implementation of |
|               |                    |                   |the 7-day         |
|               |                    |                   |establishment. The|
|               |                    |                   |total requirement |
|               |                    |                   |for the seven day |
|               |                    |                   |establishment is 8|
|               |                    |                   |311, and for the  |
|               |                    |                   |new generation    |
|               |                    |                   |prisons, 2 624. By|
|               |                    |                   |the end of August |
|               |                    |                   |2005, the         |
|               |                    |                   |Department will   |
|               |                    |                   |have appointed    |
|               |                    |                   |more than 3 057   |
|               |                    |                   |candidates.       |
|               |                    |                   |The concepts      |
|               |                    |                   |utilised in the   |
|               |                    |                   |development of the|
|               |                    |                   |New Generation    |
|               |                    |                   |prototype         |
|               |                    |                   |correctional      |
|               |                    |                   |facility have     |
|               |                    |                   |included: Unit    |
|               |                    |                   |Management, Direct|
|               |                    |                   |Supervision and   |
|               |                    |                   |Communal Cells.   |
|               |                    |                   |The prototypes as |
|               |                    |                   |developed were    |
|               |                    |                   |guided by the need|
|               |                    |                   |to enhance the    |
|               |                    |                   |facility’s        |
|               |                    |                   |potential for     |
|               |                    |                   |rehabilitation.   |
|               |                    |                   |The concepts as   |
|               |                    |                   |developed         |
|               |                    |                   |incorporate all   |
|               |                    |                   |the recognised    |
|               |                    |                   |standards for     |
|               |                    |                   |humane            |
|               |                    |                   |incarceration. The|
|               |                    |                   |New Generations   |
|               |                    |                   |Prisons aimed to  |
|               |                    |                   |provide 3 000 beds|
|               |                    |                   |per prison. The   |
|               |                    |                   |design concepts   |
|               |                    |                   |have been         |
|               |                    |                   |developed to      |
|               |                    |                   |achieve low       |
|               |                    |                   |Life–cycle        |
|               |                    |                   |Costing; to permit|
|               |                    |                   |a variety of      |
|               |                    |                   |procurement       |
|               |                    |                   |methods; to permit|
|               |                    |                   |rapid and         |
|               |                    |                   |expeditious       |
|               |                    |                   |construction.     |
|               |                    |                   |Parole Boards were|
|               |                    |                   |being transformed |
|               |                    |                   |to be more        |
|               |                    |                   |transparent and to|
|               |                    |                   |involve more      |
|               |                    |                   |community members |
|               |                    |                   |as required by the|
|               |                    |                   |White Paper.      |
|               |                    |                   |Ideally, the plan |
|               |                    |                   |was to appoint a  |
|               |                    |                   |Chairperson and a |
|               |                    |                   |Vice-Chairperson  |
|               |                    |                   |from the          |
|               |                    |                   |community, but due|
|               |                    |                   |to financial      |
|               |                    |                   |constraints this  |
|               |                    |                   |was not possible. |
|               |                    |                   |Location of the   |
|               |                    |                   |Boards: There are |
|               |                    |                   |52 boards         |
|               |                    |                   |nationally, i.e.  |
|               |                    |                   |one board at each |
|               |                    |                   |Management Area.  |
|               |                    |                   |Nine additional   |
|               |                    |                   |Correctional      |
|               |                    |                   |Supervision Parole|
|               |                    |                   |Boards have been  |
|               |                    |                   |identified pending|
|               |                    |                   |the availability  |
|               |                    |                   |of funding within |
|               |                    |                   |the new MTEF.     |
|               |                    |                   |Composition:      |
|               |                    |                   |The Board will    |
|               |                    |                   |consist of a Chair|
|               |                    |                   |who will be a     |
|               |                    |                   |Community member, |
|               |                    |                   |a Vice-Chairperson|
|               |                    |                   |who will be a     |
|               |                    |                   |representative    |
|               |                    |                   |from DCS, a       |
|               |                    |                   |Secretary who will|
|               |                    |                   |be a              |
|               |                    |                   |representative    |
|               |                    |                   |from DCS, two     |
|               |                    |                   |additional        |
|               |                    |                   |community members,|
|               |                    |                   |one co-opted      |
|               |                    |                   |member from       |
|               |                    |                   |SAPS/Justice.     |
|               |                    |                   |Three (3) members |
|               |                    |                   |of the Board      |
|               |                    |                   |constitute a      |
|               |                    |                   |quorum, but the   |
|               |                    |                   |Chair or the      |
|               |                    |                   |Vice-Chair must be|
|               |                    |                   |present.          |
|Friday, 24 June|Briefing on         |Judicial           |In terms of the   |
|2005           |Report on Pollsmoor |Inspectorate of    |mandate of the    |
|               |fires               |Prisons            |Judicial          |
|               |Report on consensual|                   |Inspectorate and  |
|               |sex in prison.      |                   |the Correctional  |
|               |                    |                   |Services’ Act the |
|               |                    |                   |office of the     |
|               |                    |                   |Inspecting Judge  |
|               |                    |                   |should immediately|
|               |                    |                   |be informed of any|
|               |                    |                   |deaths in prisons.|
|               |                    |                   |The office will   |
|               |                    |                   |then decide       |
|               |                    |                   |whether the deaths|
|               |                    |                   |warranted an      |
|               |                    |                   |investigation. The|
|               |                    |                   |incidents at      |
|               |                    |                   |Pollsmoor had been|
|               |                    |                   |reported to the   |
|               |                    |                   |Inspecting Judge. |
|               |                    |                   |Because of the    |
|               |                    |                   |unnatural causes  |
|               |                    |                   |of the death, an  |
|               |                    |                   |investigation of  |
|               |                    |                   |culpable homicide |
|               |                    |                   |will be conducted |
|               |                    |                   |and it will start |
|               |                    |                   |with the          |
|               |                    |                   |prosecutors who   |
|               |                    |                   |will then decide  |
|               |                    |                   |whether to press  |
|               |                    |                   |charges or not.   |
|               |                    |                   |The Judicial      |
|               |                    |                   |Inspectorate will |
|               |                    |                   |not conduct an    |
|               |                    |                   |investigation into|
|               |                    |                   |the deaths, but   |
|               |                    |                   |will await the    |
|               |                    |                   |inquest.          |
|               |                    |                   |                  |
|               |                    |                   |The Judicial      |
|               |                    |                   |Inspectorate does |
|               |                    |                   |not have a view on|
|               |                    |                   |consensual sex in |
|               |                    |                   |prison.           |
|Wednesday, 10  |Discussion on       |DCS                |The DCS           |
|August 2005    |progress and        |                   |implemented most  |
|               |strategy on         |                   |of the            |
|               |implementation of   |                   |recommendations   |
|               |recommendations of  |                   |made by the       |
|               |Brandvlei &         |                   |Committee and in  |
|               |Drakenstein report, |                   |those instances   |
|               |Pollsmoor Juvenile  |                   |where             |
|               |Centre report,      |                   |recommendations   |
|               |Pollsmoor fires     |                   |have not been     |
|               |report, Groote      |                   |implemented,      |
|               |Schuur report       |                   |measures had been |
|               |                    |                   |put into place.   |
|Thursday, 11   |Discussion on       |DCS                |The DCS           |
|August 2005    |progress and        |                   |implemented most  |
|               |strategy on         |                   |of the            |
|               |implementation of   |                   |recommendations   |
|               |recommendations of  |                   |made by the       |
|               |Cmax report,        |                   |Committee and in  |
|               |Emthonjeni report.  |                   |those instances   |
|               |                    |                   |where             |
|               |                    |                   |recommendations   |
|               |                    |                   |have not been     |
|               |                    |                   |implemented,      |
|               |                    |                   |measures had been |
|               |                    |                   |put into place.   |
|Tuesday, 23    |Briefing Special    |Minister of        |A total of 33 972 |
|August 2005    |Remission of        |Correctional       |probationers and  |
|               |Sentence            |Services and DCS   |parolees benefited|
|               |                    |                   |from Special      |
|               |                    |                   |Remission.  A     |
|               |                    |                   |total of 31 865   |
|               |                    |                   |offenders was     |
|               |                    |                   |released from     |
|               |                    |                   |Correctional      |
|               |                    |                   |Centres by 10     |
|               |                    |                   |August 2005. A    |
|               |                    |                   |total of 65 837   |
|               |                    |                   |offenders         |
|               |                    |                   |benefited from the|
|               |                    |                   |Special Remission.|
|               |                    |                   |A total of 1 156  |
|               |                    |                   |children under the|
|               |                    |                   |age of 18 was     |
|               |                    |                   |released and 11   |
|               |                    |                   |411 youths between|
|               |                    |                   |the ages of 18 and|
|               |                    |                   |25 were released. |
|               |                    |                   |19 008 Adults     |
|               |                    |                   |between the ages  |
|               |                    |                   |of 26 and 65 were |
|               |                    |                   |released. 1 202   |
|               |                    |                   |Females and 34    |
|               |                    |                   |mothers with      |
|               |                    |                   |babies were       |
|               |                    |                   |released. As at 10|
|               |                    |                   |August 2005, 157  |
|               |                    |                   |(0.24%) of the 65 |
|               |                    |                   |837 offenders who |
|               |                    |                   |benefited from the|
|               |                    |                   |Special Remission |
|               |                    |                   |have been admitted|
|               |                    |                   |to Correctional   |
|               |                    |                   |Centres as        |
|               |                    |                   |Awaiting-trial    |
|               |                    |                   |Detainees. Of     |
|               |                    |                   |these, 6 females  |
|               |                    |                   |were arrested.    |
|               |                    |                   |Alleged crimes    |
|               |                    |                   |committed are     |
|               |                    |                   |mainly economical |
|               |                    |                   |e.g. 58 for       |
|               |                    |                   |housebreaking and |
|               |                    |                   |33 for  theft and |
|               |                    |                   |13 robberies, 8   |
|               |                    |                   |were for rape and |
|               |                    |                   |3 were arrested   |
|               |                    |                   |for murder.       |
|Tuesday, 30    |Briefing on the     |The Chairperson of |In 2005, a new    |
|August 2005    |Mandate of the      |the National       |Council has been  |
|               |National Council on |Council on         |appointed. The    |
|               |Corrections, the    |Corrections, Judge |Chairperson of the|
|               |composition of the  |Desai and other    |NCCS, Judge Desai,|
|               |Council, the        |members of the     |has been holding  |
|               |Portfolio           |NCCS.              |this position for |
|               |Committee’s role in |                   |the past five     |
|               |support of NCCS and |                   |years. The        |
|               |the work schedule of|                   |principle task of |
|               |NCCS and the impact |                   |the NCCS is to    |
|               |on DCS.             |                   |comment and advise|
|               |                    |                   |on draft          |
|               |                    |                   |legislation and   |
|               |                    |                   |policy matters.   |
|               |                    |                   |Previously, the   |
|               |                    |                   |Minister of       |
|               |                    |                   |Correctional      |
|               |                    |                   |Services could    |
|               |                    |                   |decide whether to |
|               |                    |                   |consult with the  |
|               |                    |                   |NCCS on policy    |
|               |                    |                   |matters, but      |
|               |                    |                   |according to the  |
|               |                    |                   |current           |
|               |                    |                   |Correctional      |
|               |                    |                   |Services Act every|
|               |                    |                   |policy matter must|
|               |                    |                   |be referred to the|
|               |                    |                   |NCCS for debate   |
|               |                    |                   |and advice. The   |
|               |                    |                   |Council’s function|
|               |                    |                   |was purely        |
|               |                    |                   |advisory and its  |
|               |                    |                   |decisions are not |
|               |                    |                   |binding. The NCCS |
|               |                    |                   |currently deals   |
|               |                    |                   |with the issue of |
|               |                    |                   |early release of  |
|               |                    |                   |prisoners         |
|               |                    |                   |sentenced to life |
|               |                    |                   |imprisonment. This|
|               |                    |                   |is a challenging  |
|               |                    |                   |task since these  |
|               |                    |                   |offenders have    |
|               |                    |                   |committed serious |
|               |                    |                   |crimes and there  |
|               |                    |                   |is always a chance|
|               |                    |                   |that they might   |
|               |                    |                   |re-offend.        |
|               |                    |                   |Appointment of new|
|               |                    |                   |members on the    |
|               |                    |                   |Council: According|
|               |                    |                   |to Section 76 (2) |
|               |                    |                   |(h) of the        |
|               |                    |                   |Correctional      |
|               |                    |                   |Services Act, the |
|               |                    |                   |Committee had to  |
|               |                    |                   |be consulted      |
|               |                    |                   |regarding the four|
|               |                    |                   |members serving on|
|               |                    |                   |the Council and   |
|               |                    |                   |who are not in the|
|               |                    |                   |fulltime employ of|
|               |                    |                   |the State. It was |
|               |                    |                   |mentioned that    |
|               |                    |                   |only two of these |
|               |                    |                   |positions were    |
|               |                    |                   |filled and        |
|               |                    |                   |arrangements will |
|               |                    |                   |be made with the  |
|               |                    |                   |Committee for     |
|               |                    |                   |nominations of the|
|               |                    |                   |other two members.|
|Tuesday, 06    |Briefing on DCS: The|DCS                |The Committee     |
|September 2005 |Security Plan of DCS|                   |supported the     |
|               |and Inmate Tracking |                   |implementation of |
|               |system of DCS and   |                   |the Security Plan,|
|               |HIV/AIDS Policy of  |                   |the HIV /AIDS     |
|               |DCS                 |                   |Policy and        |
|               |                    |                   |requests to be    |
|               |                    |                   |briefed on the    |
|               |                    |                   |investigation into|
|               |                    |                   |lost inmate       |
|               |                    |                   |tracking equipment|
|               |                    |                   |at the            |
|               |                    |                   |Durban-Westville  |
|               |                    |                   |Centre.           |
|Tuesday, 13    |Briefing by the     |Judicial           |The Committee     |
|September 2005 |Judicial            |Inspectorate       |stated that the   |
|               |Inspectorate on its |                   |Judicial          |
|               |2004/5 Annual report|                   |Inspectorate      |
|               |                    |                   |should involve    |
|               |                    |                   |NGOs & CBOs when  |
|               |                    |                   |recruiting IPVs   |
|               |                    |                   |and should also   |
|               |                    |                   |take into         |
|               |                    |                   |consideration     |
|               |                    |                   |people from rural |
|               |                    |                   |areas. The        |
|               |                    |                   |Committee         |
|               |                    |                   |recommended that  |
|               |                    |                   |more female prison|
|               |                    |                   |inspectors should |
|               |                    |                   |be appointed.     |
|Friday, 28     |Hearings on Annual  |DCS                |Many concerns were|
|October 2005   |report of DCS       |                   |raised iro        |
|               |                    |                   |corruption amongst|
|               |                    |                   |officials of DCS; |
|               |                    |                   |recruitment       |
|               |                    |                   |policy, the       |
|               |Promotion Policy of |DCS                |recruitment       |
|               |the DCS             |                   |agencies, the     |
|               |                    |                   |retention of      |
|               |                    |                   |professional      |
|               |                    |                   |staff, the        |
|               |                    |                   |management of the |
|               |                    |                   |7-day             |
|               |                    |                   |establishment, the|
|               |                    |                   |new generation    |
|               |                    |                   |prisons, the      |
|               |                    |                   |Inmate Tracking   |
|               |                    |                   |system.           |
|               |                    |                   |                  |
|               |                    |                   |The DCS intends   |
|               |                    |                   |promoting staff on|
|               |                    |                   |Correctional      |
|               |                    |                   |official levels 3 |
|               |                    |                   |to Correctional   |
|               |                    |                   |official levels 2 |
|               |                    |DCS                |and those on      |
|               |Draft directives    |                   |Correctional      |
|               |dealing Complainant |                   |official level 2  |
|               |Involvement in      |                   |to Correctional   |
|               |Parole Boards       |                   |official level 1. |
|               |                    |                   |9 733 Production  |
|               |                    |                   |levels staff will |
|               |                    |                   |benefit from the  |
|               |                    |                   |promotions. All   |
|               |                    |                   |promotions will be|
|               |                    |                   |announced by 1    |
|               |                    |                   |February 2006.    |
|               |                    |                   |Process of        |
|               |                    |                   |promotions will be|
|               |                    |                   |transparent and   |
|               |                    |                   |user-friendly.    |
|               |                    |                   |                  |
|               |                    |                   |The Committee,    |
|               |                    |                   |having considered |
|               |                    |                   |the draft         |
|               |                    |                   |directives as     |
|               |                    |                   |referred to the   |
|               |                    |                   |Committee on 5    |
|               |                    |                   |October 2005,     |
|               |                    |                   |adopted the       |
|               |                    |                   |directives.       |
|               |                    |                   |                  |
|Tuesday, 01    |Briefing by CSPRI on|CSPRI              |It was stated that|
|November 2005  |Alternative         |                   |the budget        |
|               |Sentencing.         |                   |allocation to the |
|               |                    |                   |programme         |
|               |                    |                   |After-Care in the |
|               |                    |                   |budget of the DCS |
|               |                    |                   |should be         |
|               |                    |                   |increased.        |
|               |                    |                   |Pressure needs to |
|               |                    |                   |be placed on the  |
|               |                    |                   |Judiciary to use  |
|               |                    |                   |non-custodial     |
|               |                    |                   |measures for      |
|               |                    |                   |short- term       |
|               |                    |                   |imprisonment      |
|               |                    |                   |(under 24 months).|
|               |                    |                   |This will prevent |
|               |                    |                   |unnecessary       |
|               |                    |                   |exposure to the   |
|               |                    |                   |prison            |
|               |                    |                   |environment,      |
|               |                    |                   |especially to     |
|               |                    |                   |youngsters.       |
|               |                    |                   |A more            |
|               |                    |                   |comprehensive     |
|               |                    |                   |sentencing        |
|               |                    |                   |approach is needed|
|               |                    |                   |in South Africa.  |
|Friday, 04     |Briefing on the     |DCS                |The impact of the |
|November 2005  |Recruitment Policy  |                   |restructuring of  |
|               |of DCS.             |                   |the DCS, the      |
|               |                    |                   |phasing in of the |
|               |                    |                   |7-day             |
|               |                    |                   |establishment and |
|               |                    |                   |the implications  |
|               |                    |                   |on the personnel  |
|               |                    |                   |turnover has been |
|               |                    |                   |absorbed well by  |
|               |                    |                   |the DCS. The      |
|               |                    |                   |appointment of    |
|               |                    |                   |three external    |
|               |                    |                   |recruitment       |
|               |                    |                   |agencies to deal  |
|               |                    |                   |with external     |
|               |                    |                   |advertisement     |
|               |                    |                   |processes from 1  |
|               |                    |                   |April 2005 to 31  |
|               |                    |                   |March 2005 needs  |
|               |                    |                   |more has been     |
|               |                    |                   |implemented.      |
|               |                    |                   |Issues currently  |
|               |                    |                   |being addressed   |
|               |                    |                   |are the           |
|               |                    |                   |recruitment and   |
|               |                    |                   |retention         |
|               |                    |                   |strategy,         |
|               |                    |                   |improvement of    |
|               |                    |                   |conditions of     |
|               |                    |                   |service and the   |
|               |                    |                   |improvement of the|
|               |                    |                   |turn – around time|
|               |                    |                   |on the filling of |
|               |                    |                   |vacancies.        |
|Tuesday, 08    |Briefing on the     |DCS                |This was a very   |
|November 2005  |Correctional        |                   |effective         |
|               |Services Act, Act   |                   |strengthening     |
|               |111 of 1998.        |                   |exercise for the  |
|               |                    |                   |Committee.        |


   1. Budget of the committee


              i. Budget Allocation for 2005/6
                  R 471 106,00

                      • Expenditure incurred as at end of September 2005:
                  R 140 442,20

               1. Credits to consolidated Fund:
                  R 105 318,90

               2. Balance as at end of September 2005:


                  R 225 344,90

                    3. Total cost of Oversight visit during October 2005:
                  R 196 221,00


                    4. Balance as at October 2005
                  R 29 123,90

      14.  OUTSTANDING MATTERS:

Reports on Oversight visits were adopted during January 2006.

  15. SUPPORT STAFF


Committee Secretary               Imogen Davids

Control Committee Secretary: Ben Kali

Committee Assistant:              Fungile Bulawa


Secretary to Chairperson:         Rene Lawrence

Researcher (Research Unit):       Nadia Dollie

…………………………………………

COMMITTEE SECRETARYDATE:                     DATE:




………..…………………………..……………

CONTROL COMMITTEE SECRETARY       DATE:




………..………………………….

COMMITTEE CHAIRPERSON        DATE







                                 APPENDIX II





        |REPORTS TABLED                 |DATE                                         |
|                               |ATC                   |DEBATE                 |
|Oversight visit to the North   |19/05/05.             | 07/06/05              |
|West and Mpumalanga            |                      |                       |
|                               |                      |                       |
|Oversight visit to Lindelani   |19/05/05              |No debate              |
|Place of Safety                |                      |                       |
|                               |                      |                       |
|Oversight visit to Bonnytoun   |9/05/05               |No debate              |
|Place of Safety                |                      |                       |
|                               |                      |                       |
|Oversight visit to Pollsmoor   |19/05/05              |No debate              |
|Juvenile Centre                |                      |                       |
|                               |                      |                       |
|Report on Solutions and        |20/05/05              |No debate              |
|Recommendations to Overcrowding|                      |                       |
|                               |                      |                       |
|                               |                      |                       |
|Report on two fire incidences  |20/05/05              |No debate              |
|at Pollsmoor Management Area.  |                      |                       |
|                               |                      |                       |
|Oversight report on the visit  |20/05/05              |No debate              |
|to Cmax after a breach.        |                      |                       |



