---
title: 'National Assembly - 28 March 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-03-28
---

TUESDAY, 28 MARCH 2006
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 10:02.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.




                              NOTICE OF MOTION


Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:

  That the House -

     Debates the impact of political party funding on multiparty democracy:
     If the playing field is not level, then smaller parties, that represent
     a percentage of the electorate, are put at a disadvantage in reaching
     their electorate by not having sufficient funds.

   SOUTH AFRICAN MEDAL WINNERS CONGRATULATED ON THEIR ACHIEVEMENTS AT THE
                       COMMONWEALTH GAMES IN MELBOURNE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam, I hereby move without notice:

  That the House -

  (1) Congratulates the South African medal winners on their achievements at
       the recent Melbourne Commonwealth Games;


  (2) recognises the honour and credit they brought to our country; and


  (3) thanks every member of Team South Africa for the way in which they
       competed and the example which they set for young South Africans, by
       providing them with a positive role model for the future.

Agreed to.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


Debate on Vote No 18 – Social Development:
The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy Ministers and
Ministers, hon members, MECs for social development, distinguished guests,
representatives of civil society in the public gallery, ladies and
gentlemen, it is my honour to present to you Budget Vote 18, which speaks
to the social development dimensions of the age of hope to which President
Mbeki referred in his state of the nation address earlier this year.

Most social indicators confirm that our people are firmly convinced that
our country has entered this age of hope. This Budget Vote complements our
people’s confidence in our government, and details actions that will
attempt to meet the expectations of those people in our society who
continue to live in extreme poverty and who are marginalised or face
particular vulnerabilities.

Over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) period, government has
set aside R265 billion to meet these expectations through social grant
transfers, integrated development programmes, the provision of
comprehensive social protection and developmental social welfare services.

In this year during which we celebrate the 10th anniversary of the
Constitution, it is appropriate that we remind ourselves that government’s
social development programmes are a response to the constitutional
imperatives to heal the divisions of the past, to restore the dignity of
our people, to free their potential to participate in the economy, and to
build a just society based on democratic values and fundamental human
rights. In line with these principles and the broad goal of social
transformation, we have finalised the Older Persons Bill and the Children’s
Bill.

Let me take this opportunity to thank Members of Parliament, the Law
Commission, various civil society organisations and the faith sector for
the assistance they have given and continue to give us in finalising these
two key pieces of legislation.

With respect to the Children’s Bill, the only work that is outstanding is
the finalisation of parts of section 76. We are well on our way towards
strengthening children’s rights and improving their access to quality
services. We will complete work on the estimate of the total cost of
implementation by the end of April this year. There are already indications
that R8,4 million has been set aside in the national Budget, as some of the
elements of implementation over the MTEF period may have to be increased.

To complement these efforts and ensure that the sector contributes
positively to growth and skills development, we have finalised the social
sector’s plan for the Expanded Public Works Programme.

Through the equitable share allocation, provinces will receive R4,2 billion
to utilise for early childhood development and for the upscaling of home
and community-based care and support for people living with HIV and Aids,
particularly children. Some of these children have already been identified
in the child protection register which is operational in all the provinces.

Strong and effective community childcare forums are a vital mechanism in
childcare and protection, and the department will be supporting the
establishment of these forums in many communities. These efforts will be
complemented by the policy framework on vulnerable children and orphans.

All this work is being undertaken as part and parcel of the government’s
scheme for comprehensive social security and protection. This scheme is an
important element of the social sector’s contribution to the Accelerated
and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa. The Deputy Minister, in her
presentation, will elaborate on the key pillars of the integration of
Gwebindlala and social security programmes, so as to promote targeted
economic growth.

I am pleased to inform this House that progress has been made with regard
to the implementation of the first pillar of our comprehensive social
security framework. In this regard, we now provide direct social assistance
transfers to more than 11 million South Africans, including the elderly,
people with disabilities and children who are vulnerable.

Three years ago we set a target of reaching 2,2 million children living in
poverty through the child support grant. We have exceeded this target, and
currently provide assistance to more than 7 million children through the
child support grant. Research studies have consistently confirmed that
these grants not only reduce the occurrence of hunger and extreme poverty,
but that they also facilitate household access to basic services and
economic opportunities.

In line with these positive social and economic impacts and projections on
the numbers of eligible beneficiaries, R201 billion will be spent over the
MTEF period on direct cash transfers and their administration. Government
has already announced, effective from 1 April this year, that the care
dependency, old age and disability grants will be increased by R40 to R820
a month, the foster care grant by R30 to R590, and the child support grant
by R10 to R190.

The first phase of the establishment of the national Social Security Agency
is on track for completion by 31 March 2006. As far as yesterday’s Minmec
meeting with the MECs for social development of the provinces is concerned,
the agency will initially take over social assistance payments in Gauteng,
the Western Cape and the Northern Cape, with the process being completed in
the other provinces by March 2007. We have already entered into contractual
agreements with provinces to ensure the seamless transfer of staff and the
uninterrupted provision of services.

Let me take this opportunity to express my appreciation to organised labour
and the staff of the department who have worked with us in ironing out
staff transfer and migration issues. We are confident that the Social
Security Agency will equitably enhance the quality of life of our people,
whilst attending to the issues of efficiency, system integrity and economy.

Although we are proud of our achievements with respect to noncontributory
social security schemes, we are committed to addressing the challenges
faced with respect to contributory social security schemes.

All of government’s work in this area and in the area of retirement reform
will be guided by social transformation and equity principles, which are
directed at protection against poverty in old age, during disability and
upon death of a wage earner; equitable access to retirement provision for
those gainfully employed; improved consumer protection for those benefiting
from any of the pillars of the social security system; equity between men
and women; the guaranteeing and provision of predictable minimal benefits;
the democratisation of the management structures of pension schemes; and
the realisation of the role of the state in ensuring the fulfilment of the
delivery of benefits.
I cannot overemphasise the importance government attaches to the issue of
the integrity of our social security system. In order to enhance the
integrity of our system, we are focusing our efforts on the establishment
of key oversight institutions, such as the Social Security Inspectorate,
and on the development of effective monitoring, evaluation and impact
assessment systems. We have set aside R25,5 million and R19,4 million
respectively for these purposes over the MTEF period.

Our successful antifraud campaign, which has saved the state about
R400 million over the past year, has laid a solid foundation for the work
of the Social Security Agency. The National Prosecuting Authority has
already prosecuted more than 500 people out of 12 000 civil servants who we
believe are either involved in or defrauding the social security system.

We have also identified a further 35 000 suspect cases, through our
antifraud hotline, for further investigation. In this year’s budget we have
set aside R47 million for the acceleration of our ground-breaking
collaboration with the Special Investigating Unit (SIU).

Lessons learnt from collaboration with the SIU have, in turn, improved our
review process of the recipients of disability grants. An additional
150 000 recipients of temporary disability grants have been reviewed,
therefore adhering to proper administrative procedures, and these reviews
have been conducted with very little disruption of disbursement processes.

In addition, a total saving of about R200 million has been achieved. In
order to consolidate the integrity of our social security system and
related processes, we are increasing the national budget allocation for
system integrity from R24 million in the current financial year to
R60 million for the next financial year.

Some of these funds are devoted to strengthening our management information
systems. We are committed to drastically reducing the turnaround times for
grant applications, to improving the effectiveness of our risk management
processes, and to standardising reporting procedures across provinces.

The agreements that have been reached with our partners in the banking
sector are most welcome, as we are committed to ensuring that no one has to
travel more than five kilometres to receive his or her grant, and we remain
committed to ensuring that the dignity is respected of our older persons
who receive social assistance.

With respect to the transformation and provision of social welfare
services, the year 2006 will be a watershed one. With the establishment of
the SA Social Security Agency (Sassa) the national and provincial
departments of social development can now focus more on social welfare
services, which were not previously given adequate attention and resources.

The integrated service delivery model, launched last year, defines the
nature, scope and level of service delivery, and defines the roles that are
to be played by all spheres of government and organisations of civil
society in social service delivery.

The model also provides a framework for service integration among the
components of social development in order to promote sustainable
livelihoods in communities. This integration will also be bettered with the
implementation of the policy on financial awards to welfare service
providers.

The extent to which we are able to provide social welfare services is also
fundamentally influenced by the critical shortages in the supply of social
workers and other social service professionals. The review of the salaries
of social workers has been completed, and the retention strategy for social
workers is being finalised. A national capacity-building programme for
social service professionals has also been conducted. We are looking
forward to working with the SA Council for Social Service Professions and
with both the Professional Board for Social Work and the Professional Board
for Child and Youth Care on all these matters.

It is our intention during this year to remember also that 2006 is a
watershed year for our youth development programmes. Thirty years ago the
youth of Soweto and of other townships in our country took to the
barricades and confronted the apartheid regime as part of the struggle for
a just and democratic dispensation.

Government’s youth development framework for the social sector is informed
by the 2005 Status of Youth Report by the Human Sciences Research Council
and by the 2005 Macro Social Study conducted by the Presidency. Both these
reports highlighted the structural challenges facing our young people in
our second decade of democracy.

The objectives of the framework are, firstly, to improve the material and
social conditions in which young people grow up, study and play; and,
secondly, to strengthen social cohesion and establish a social contract.
Over the MTEF period, Budget Vote 18 will devote substantial resources to
the developmental needs of young people and the implementation of the
programmes specified in the youth development framework.

A key part of the mandate of the department is to create an enabling
environment for sustainable social development, in partnership with all
sectors of society committed to building a caring society. It is therefore
our responsibility to work with our social partners - the business sector,
organised labour, the faith sector and academia - in following through on
the agreement reached at the Growth and Development Summit to provide
people-centred development. This requires that we establish partnerships
and build the capacity of nongovernmental organisations (NGO’s) and
community-based organisations working in the human and social development
arenas.

In this regard, we have considered the findings of the study of the impact
of the Nonprofit Organisations Act, and will this year be initiating the
process of putting in place an enabling legislative framework that is more
conducive to the functioning of these organisations.

Our ultimate goal is the eradication of poverty, as facilitated by
strengthened developmental institutions directed by our people. Therefore,
we will do all that is necessary and within our power to ensure that this
sector receives significant and predictable financing, so as to facilitate
its effective development.

We have set aside R14,4 million over the MTEF period for the creation of
this enabling legislative and regulatory environment for the NGO sector.
These funds will complement the R388 million we have set aside for the
National Development Agency over the MTEF period.

In building on our work in the area of social assistance, a key priority in
the medium term will be the design and implementation of policies and best
practice models for poverty eradication and community development. Over the
MTEF period we will, therefore, spend R56 million on the development of
sustainable livelihood strategies.

As with all other programmes, we will be establishing partnerships with
academic and research institutions that enable us to leverage our social
assistance programmes and link them to sustainable livelihood strategies.
By June this year we will be finalising a research and capacity-building
partnership agreement with the University of KwaZulu-Natal that focuses on
these linkages. It is through such partnerships that we will be able to
ensure better utilisation of the dedicated funds available from our Sector
Education and Training Authority.

These partnerships will be modelled on the Charlotte Maxeke Collaboration
in the Economics of Social Protection, that we have established at the
University of Pretoria and on the A B Xuma fellowship of social policy,
established by the University of Oxford in the United Kingdom.

The objectives in all these partnerships are to stimulate research that
informs evidence-based social policy and to provide training and mentorship
for young researchers. We are confident that in the medium to long term,
these partnerships will capacitate our implementation of the SADC’s
Regional Indicative Strategic Development Plan and the African Union
Commission’s Strategic Framework.
We see South Africa’s election to the chair of the Intergovernmental
Council of the Management of Social Transformations Programme at Unesco, as
an opportunity to consolidate all our partnerships and link them to the
regional networks of Ministers of social development in Southern Africa.

This particular engagement at a multilateral level is complemented by a
series of international initiatives. These include our trilateral programme
in the India, Brazil and South Africa collaboration, and the consolidation
of our partnerships with our regional neighbours, in particular Angola and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In the year in which our country celebrates the 10th anniversary of our
Constitution and marks the 50th anniversary of the Women’s March, I am
honoured to say that Budget Vote 18 is true to the imperatives to heal the
divisions of the past, restore the dignity of our people, free their
potential to participate in the economy and build a just society based on
democratic values and fundamental human freedoms.

In order to provide further programmatic expression on these core values,
the Deputy Minister will, in her presentation, pay attention to certain
areas I may have overlooked. These will include substance abuse and
disaster relief environments. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs T J TSHIVHASE: Mulangadzulo, Tshanda tsha Mailausumbwa ... [Speaker,
Deputy Speaker ...]

Deputy President, hon Ministers, hon Deputy Ministers, hon members, ladies
and gentlemen on the podium, I will be focusing on the overview and
establishment of the SA Social Security Agency (Sassa). The theme for the
Portfolio Committee on Social Development’s Budget Vote 18 is: “Today is
better than yesterday and tomorrow will be better than today.”

The ANC-led government ensures that all spheres perform optimally with
regard to all our socioeconomic programmes directed at the further
improvement of the quality of life for all our people - as in the January 8
statement of 2006 - through improved and accelerated service delivery, and,
reducing the level of poverty, hence the dream of a better life becoming a
reality to many more amongst our people.

During the state of the nation address, His Excellency the President stated
that seven million children were now receiving support grants. A total of
10 million of our citizens receive social grants. Real social expenditure
per person increased by 60% between 1983 and 2003. Detailed evidence from a
study conducted by H Borat and others indicated that there had been a
consistent shift in expenditure in favour of the poor.

To improve delivery in this area, we will continue to implement our
comprehensive antifraud strategy. Many of those who were stealing social
grants have already been brought to book. This work will improve with the
launch of the SA Social Security Agency (Sassa).

Meaningful implementation of the budget before this House today is, in
fact, being achieved. The ANC has, over the past 12 years, demonstrated
both the political commitment and the constitutional obligation to ensure
that there is universal access to social security. As the ANC, we can
proudly proclaim that our system will effectively and drastically reduce
poverty. The macroeconomic impact of our social security system is largely
positive.

The department also plays an important role in fighting poverty through
developmental interventions such as income–generating projects. In this
regard, the department is involved in developing a comprehensive poverty
alleviation policy that aims to ensure integrated responses to alleviating
poverty. In addition, its programme for the reduction of the impact of HIV
and Aids on poor communities, which is linked to the Expanded Public Works
Programme, provides skills and income generation.

Consolidated expenditure on social development – that is social assistance,
poverty alleviation and social services - for the 2006-07 financial year
amounts to just more than R80 billion. And this is expected to increase
over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) period to R96,8 billion.
This allocation is the second highest in the social cluster, second only to
education.
When the social assistance allocation is deducted from the consolidated
amount allocated to social development, the allocation to the national
department and the provincial equitable share amounts to approximately
R23 billion. This represents an increase of approximately 10%.

The Minister of Finance, in his Budget Speech in February this year,
indicated that there was an additional social assistance grant programme of
R2,7 billion. Income transfers to households, mainly through our social
grant assistance programmes, have been increased from R42,9 billion in 2002-
03 to R74,2 billion - an increase of 20% a year.

The 2006 budget provides for continuing growth regarding the number of
eligible beneficiaries, and social grants will increase in real terms on 1
April.

Minisita wa Muhasho wa Mveledziso ya Matshilisano, kha tshipitshi tshavho,
vho divhadza u gonya ha mindende ya vhaaluwa nga R40, lune wa vho do vha
R820 nga nwedzi. Hezwi ndi zwihulwane vhukuma. Zwenezwo zwi kwama na
vhaholefhali. Vhane vha tou undiwa, sa vhana, vhone vha do engedzwa nga R10
ya vho vha R190 nga nwedzi.

Mundende hoyu muswa u do thoma nwedzi wonoyu u daho nga dzi 1 Lambamai. Nga
hedzi dzi 1 Lambamai, hu do thomiwa tshiimiswa tshiswa tsha u thusa, na u
leludza kuholele kwa mindende. Zwenezwo zwi do thusa u tsireledza vhathu
kha u sokou fhuriwa. Tshenetsho tshiimiswa tshi do langa magavhelo tsha
fhedzisela nga u dzhia vhudifhinduleli nga u holela mindende. Dzikhamphani
dze dza vha dzo fara uyo mushumo dzi do tsirusiwa. Aya ndi maambiwa nga
Minisita wa Mveledziso ya Matshilisano nga dzi 12 Luhuhi 2006.

Tshiimiswa hetshi tsha Sassa, tshi do holela mundende wo teaho, muthu o
fanelaho. Tshi do dovha hafhu tsha sedza zwauri avho vho itaho khumbelo dza
u hola, vha tavhanyedzeliwe nahone vha songo lengiswa. Tshi do dovha hafhu
tsha sedza na zwa u fhungudzwa ha miduba milapfulapfu ngei mindendeni.
(Translation of Tshivenda paragraphs follows.)

[The Minister of Social Development in his speech announced that the old
age grant, the disability grant and the care dependency grant will increase
by R40 to R820 a month. The child support grant will increase by R10 to
R190 a month. This is excellent.

These changes will come into effect on 1 April. On the very same day a new
institution, which will simplify and provide assistance to social grant
payouts, will be introduced. This will prevent fraud amongst our people.
This institution will control and manage grants as well as carry the
responsibilities in the social grants payouts process. The companies, which
were rendering such services, will be relieved of their duties. This was
uttered by the Minister of Social Development on 12 February 2006.

This institution called Sassa will ensure that the grant is paid to the
rightful beneficiaries. It will also ensure that people who apply for a
social grant get into the system as soon as possible. It will also ensure
that long queues during grant payouts are reduced.]

Budget Vote 18 comprises the following programmes, focusing on
administration; comprehensive social protection; social security transfers
and administration; social welfare transfers; development and research;
strategy, regulatory and oversight management; fighting poverty and
building social cohesion. Respective speakers will deal with the above-
mentioned programmes.

In the 2006-07 and 2009-10 strategic plan, our hon Minister, Zola Skweyiya,
in his foreword, mentioned that we have reinstalled hope for millions of
families and over 7 million children. These families and children have a
yearning for - and shall receive over this MTEF period - comprehensive,
integrated, sustainable and quality services from our department. Such
services will strive to address the root causes of vulnerability and
poverty – which were caused by my left wing here – whilst creating an
enabling environment, sustainable development and the building of a caring
society.
The successful implementation of such policies and programmes will, no
doubt, also positively contribute to our aim of building a caring society
for all, including those that may be vulnerable and in need of care.

Ndi fhedza nga la uri kha Vho Minista: “A vha ri tshileli, nahone ndala yo
onesa kha vhaaluwa vhashu, vha holefhali, vhana vha si na vhaundi na
zwisiwana, zwo vhangwaho nga hei khakhathi ire nga hafha thungo. Afurika
Tshipembe li kha khalanwaha ya fulufhelo. ANC i tikedza Mugaganyagwama uyu.
Ndi a livhuwa Vho Minisita kha mushumo we vha u ita kha lushaka lwa Afurika
Tshipembe. [U vhanda zwanda.] (Translation of Tshivenda paragraph follows.)

[In conclusion I would like to dedicate my gratitude to the Minister.
Hunger – as caused by the left wing - is no more amongst our aged, the
disabled, abandoned children and orphans. South Africa is in the age of
hope. The ANC supports this Budget Vote. I thank the Minister for the
wonderful effort he made for South Africans. [Applause.]]

Mr M WATERS: Deputy Speaker, Deputy President, hon Minister, hon members,
while there has been some progress with regard to the investigation of
public servants receiving social grants fraudulently, the conviction of
these individuals is exceedingly slow. What is more, those who have been
found guilty are not, in some cases, paying back the full amount they stole
from the taxpayers.

The DA believes that the minimum punishment these common criminals should
receive, so that they could pay back what they stole, is that an additional
fine should be levied, or even a prison sentence in extreme cases. Their
employment records must reflect that they have been found guilty of
stealing from the state, and on a case-by-case basis the worst offenders
should be dismissed. These individuals must bear full responsibility for
their crimes.

If we fail to make the punishment greater than the crime, then all we are
doing is encouraging more fraud, as not only do you keep your job if you
are caught, you don’t even have to repay what you stole.

I am alarmed at the lack of proper oversight of the budget by the Social
Development Committee. When the department appeared before the committee
two weeks ago, they presented their strategic plan for next year. However,
they failed to present their budget. It was only after I raised this point
that global figures were presented to the committee. No detailed line-
function budgets were presented. How on earth can a strategic plan be
presented without a budget to go with it?

Furthermore, when I asked what the budget for the Central Drug Authority
(CDA) was, not one department official could tell me. I was told to refer
to Budget Vote No 18 from the National Treasury, but when I inspected this
there was no indication of what the budget for the CDA actually was. I
sincerely hope that other members of the committee were in the House last
week when the Minister of Finance stated that we, as MP’s have all the
necessary tools to conduct thorough oversight, and it is our own failing if
we allow departments to ride roughshod over us.

Department officials also told the committee recently that the poorest of
the poor, the most vulnerable people and those who are marginalised, are
the department’s top priority. The DA says “Amen” to that. But we are not
convinced that the government is doing enough in this regard.

For example, we were also told that the department provides a comprehensive
social security system, as proposed by the Taylor commission. However, if
you are an able-bodied male between the ages of 14 and 65, or female
between the ages of 14 and 60, there is very little provided by government
with regard to social grants.

The Taylor Commission clearly supported the introduction of the basic
income grant for the poorest of the poor, and so does the DA. The
introduction of such a grant cannot be in isolation from other measures. It
will only help to alleviate poverty and not eradicate it. The only way that
we, as a nation, will beat the curse of poverty is through job creation.
The DA, in its alternative budget, listed several steps it would take that
would kick-start economic growth and therefore job creation. However, the
reality of millions of unemployed adults will be with us for many years to
come. With up to eight million adults who cannot support themselves or
their families, South Africans cannot sit back and allow our fellow
citizens to starve.

Another point of grave concern for the DA is the chronic lack of social
workers, which, according to the department, is a problem that is virtually
getting worse by the day. Two important Bills were passed by Parliament
recently: The Children’s Bill and the Older Persons Bill. I was surprised
that the Minister mentioned that there are certain aspects of section 76 of
the Children’s Bill that still haven’t been approved. We certainly hope,
from the DA’s side, that this has nothing to do with disabled children
being allowed to gain access to courts.

Both these Bills depend heavily on social workers, and both will be
stillborn without the necessary number of social workers. In a reply to a
parliamentary question from me in 2004, you stated, Minister, that 2 326
social workers were employed, whilst there were 4 731 posts available. This
is a shortfall of 51% in terms of the requirements set by the department.

However, a representative of the department stated in the committee meeting
that at the very minimum there should be at least one social worker for
every 5 000 people in the country. This means that we should actually have
8 964 posts, which would make a shortfall of 74%. To make matters worse,
the international norm is one social worker for 1 500 people, which
translates into South Africa needing 29 879 positions. This would give us a
shortfall of 92%.

This chronic shortfall of social workers is getting worse and not better,
as the committee was informed two weeks ago, so the figures I have just
read out are on the optimistic side. This disgracefully heavy workload
placed on social workers by these shortages is compounded by the impact of
HIV/Aids, the ever-increasing child abuse statistics, and by the additional
responsibilities placed on them by the two Bills I have just mentioned.

It is clear that urgent action needs to be taken, and we are pleased to
hear that the Minister mentioned it in his speech, because at the end of
the day, hon Minister, the buck stops with you, as you are responsible for
this department. We are very pleased that you are taking steps in this
regard.

Another grave concern for the DA is that of the child protection register.
Here, I do differ with you. I do not believe that it is being properly
implemented. The Children’s Bill introduces Part B of the register for the
first time, in which the names of perpetrators and people found not
suitable to work with children must appear. However, Part A of the register
has been in existence for years, and is quite frankly not worth the paper
it is written on.

The aim of Part A of the register is to ensure that all children suffering
from abuse, neglect and nutritional diseases are registered, so that they
can be monitored. The main objectives of the register are to ensure that if
an abused child is moved from province to province, the authorities can
track that child to prevent the same abuse from recurring; to ensure that
children on the register receive proper services; and to create a picture
of child protection needs across the country in order to identify gaps.

However, a dismal 13 383 children’s names appear on the list. The Eastern
Cape list doesn’t have one single name on it. This is according to a
parliamentary reply from you, hon Minister. According to this register, in
the poorest province in the country, there is not one single child that is
suffering from a nutritional disease. I am sure that the rest of this House
will join me in being highly sceptical that this is the case.

Other provinces are not faring much better. KwaZulu-Natal has 36 names on
its list, Limpopo 29, and North West 18. What could and should be a
powerful tool in combating child abuse and neglect and ensuring that
children receive the necessary welfare services, is, quite frankly, a
farce. Last year alone, 85 808 crimes against children were reported to the
police. The names of all these children should have appeared on the child
protection list, but they do not.

Another issue is that last year the committee was outraged at the fact that
the (CDA) only had a budget of R400 000. This year we see that the budget
has increased to R600 000 - and it wasn’t easy getting this figure, hon
Minister; I had to do a lot of searching for it – which is still a far cry
from what is really needed.

To give this House an indication of how small R600 000 really is: Last year
the Department of Social Development spent R242 000 on a budget party - and
we are going to have one after this debate as well. That is how much the
Department of Social Development has spent on a budget party last year.
That is 40% of the (CDA’s) entire annual budget. I wonder what we are going
to be spending this year.

However, underbudgeting is not the only problem. Other departments treat
the CDA with contempt; several of which failed to submit their annual drug
plans, although they are compelled to do so by law. Given the dramatic
increase in young South Africans using and becoming addicted to drugs such
as tik and heroine, one would have thought that the Department of Education
would have been the first to submit its plan to the CDA, yet it still has
not done so.

I am also appalled at the lack of basic information available about
children in the criminal justice system. Last year I asked two
parliamentary questions. The first question pertained to court cases
involving child victims that was withdrawn, due to no assessment reports by
social workers and no DNA. The second question pertained to whether any of
the child offenders, who were awarded early parole by the President,
actually received any rehabilitation, and whether social workers compiled
the reports supporting their early releases.

In both cases the questions could not be answered, even though I posed them
to several Ministers, including you, Mr Minister, the Minister of
Correctional Services, the Minister of Safety and Security, and the
Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development. Not one Minister could
answer those questions.

What this highlights is that there is no central database or any system in
place for monitoring cases involving children, and tracking them through
the criminal justice system and beyond, to ensure that children receive the
necessary counselling, and that perpetrators are not released early when
they have not received rehabilitation and are still a threat to children.

I have outlined several issues, which are of grave concern, not only to the
DA, but to the Minister as well, I am sure. The DA is more than willing to
assist, when asked, in any way to improve the situation. I am pleased that
the Minister asked the hon Weber to help with regard to social workers last
week. Thank you very much. [Time expired.] [Applause.]
Mrs X C MAKASI: Madam Deputy Speaker, Minister, Deputy Ministers, hon
Members of Parliament ...

neendwendwe zethu, ndiyanibulisa namhlanje. Sekela-Mongameli, intetho yam
namhlanje iza kujolisa kumba we-social security transfer and
administration. Namhlanje kungcono kunayizolo; ngomso kuza kuba ngcono
kunanamhlanje. UMgaqo-siseko walapha eMzantsi Afrika ugxininisa ekubeni
wonke umntu unelungelo lokufumana uncedo ukuba ngaba akakwazi ukuzinceda,
kubandakanywa abantu abaxhomekeke kuye kunye neembedlenge. UMgaqo-siseko
uqhuba uthi, wonke umntu unelungelo lokuba nendawo yokuhlala, lokufumana
imfundo, ukutya, unyango kunye namanzi acocekileyo, nanjengoko sasitshilo
kuMqulu weNkululeko ngowe-1955. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[... and hon guests, today I would like to greet you. Hon Deputy President,
my speech today is going to focus mainly on security transfer and
administration. Today is better than yesterday; tomorrow will be better
than today. It is further emphasised in the Constitution that each and
every person has a right to receive help if the need arises, including
those who are dependent on him or her, as well as the disabled. Further
emphasised in the Constitution is that everybody has a right to
accommodation, education, food, health treatment and clean water, as it was
also declared in the Freedom Charter in 1955.]

The social security transfer will ensure the effective and efficient
administration management of the payment of social assistance. It provides
the funding to administer and make payments in terms of the Social
Assistance Act. This transfer will also focus on improving the integrity of
social grant administration and facilitate Sassa, the SA Social Security
Agency, in becoming fully operational.

In line with the President’s directive, it focuses on improving the
efficiency and effectiveness of social security transfers in grant spending
and reduces the risk of abuse of social grants. These measures include the
continued implementation of the comprehensive antifraud detection and
prevention plan, the application of a means test, as well as a review of
the eligibility of all beneficiaries as a result of changes in their
circumstances.

The social assistance components of provincial departments of social
development are implementing a separation of provincial welfare services,
and a staff migration strategy has been developed. Discussions are under
way with organised labour regarding the transfer of staff that is to be
undertaken while ensuring that service delivery continues.

There are three business units that will account to Sassa’s CEO. The CEO
will account to the director-general, whilst the director-general will
account to the Minister of Social Development. This will ensure that
everything is in order.
There were some achievements in 2005. I’d like to mention a few. The grant
now covers more than 11 million beneficiaries. The age-extension target of
2,3 million children was met and exceeded. Seven types of grants were paid
out at over 11 780 pension paypoints.

Memoranda of understanding were entered into with the provinces to
facilitate grant disbursements. Over 2 million people used financial sector
institutions, such as banks and post offices, to access their grants. An
amount of R3,2 billion was transferred to provinces as conditional grants
and was monitored periodically.

An agency blueprint and a high level of capacity was built, and the
blueprint development resulted in disasters being assessed within 48 hours,
with 70% of applications processed within three months.

Data interrogation was done in all provinces, which tracked fraudsters,
including some 41 000 public servants. A hotline was launched, which saw
some 15 000 cases being reported.

The indemnity offered by the Minister with respect to 86 000 cases saved
the state over R4 million. A review of disability grants progressed, with
18 000 completed. A total of 515 cases of social grant fraud were taken to
court and there were 128 convictions.

Sizimisele ukuqhubela phambili nala matyala orhwaphilizo. Kangangokuba
kunyaka wama-2007, ngoMatshi, siya kube sesichophele isiqingatha sawo,
ukuze ngowama-2008 sibe siyawagqibezela. [We are determined to continuously
deal with these cases against corruption. As a result, by March 2007 we
must have dealt with 50% of these cases, and by 2008 we should be
finalising them.]

I now come to the challenges. These include ensuring the transfer of
functions and entries appropriate for the transfer of assets and
liabilities, measures to evaluate the performance of the agency, effective
management, the transfer of staff, institutional reform and disaster
relief.

Our priorities for the future include improving coverage of grants,
ensuring that all beneficiaries get them on time and under humane
conditions; improving application verification and approval processes;
supporting the Minister in overseeing the agency and building middle
management and implementation capacity; deepening the antifraud campaign
and concluding all outstanding cases; and making sure that the draft Bill
on disaster relief is finalised.

Indeed today is better than yesterday. Tomorrow will be better than today.

Singulo rhulumente kaKhongolozi sizimisele ukwakha impilo engcono kubantu
bonke balapha eMzantsi Afrika. Ndiyabulela. [The ANC-led government is
determined to build a better life for all the people of South Africa.]
[Applause.]
Mrs I MARS: Chairperson, hon Deputy President, hon Minister, Deputy
Minister and colleagues, a huge number of marginalised citizens continue to
have to rely on social grants as a means of survival. There are nearly 11
million of them and that amounts to almost a quarter of our population. I
shudder to imagine what their lives would be like without the assistance of
our grant system.

We believe and, I think, everybody agrees with us that job creation should
be foremost on our nation’s agenda, to at least prioritise young people and
enable them to take charge of their lives. We support, as I think we all
do, the increases in grants, but we realise that we still have to continue
working with other departments, such as Home Affairs, to ensure that every
eligible person is correctly documented in order to access the grants to
which he or she is entitled.

We wish to applaud the action and initiatives taken by the hon Minister in
rooting out fraudulent access to grants. In fact, it is our duty as
parliamentarians to support all efforts to conserve the resources made
available for those who are genuinely in need. One wonders how it is
possible for public servants to access means-tested grants, and I believe
that those that have not availed themselves of the amnesty should be named
and blamed.

The Minister financially empowered the Special Investigating Unit (SIU) to
rid the system of corruption, and their efforts have been extremely
successful. We are, however, shocked to note that the initial fraud
estimate of 2,5% of the R23 billion social security budget allegedly
escalated to 6%. If this is correct, then I think we are in trouble.

Thanks to the success of the SIU, prosecution of corrupt officials has
commenced and monies are being recovered. It is estimated that over a 10-
year period, R4,5 billion could be saved and the IFP congratulates the SIU.

The IFP, as a federal party, is on record as having opposed the
establishment of the SA Social Security Agency (Sassa), because it removed
delegated powers from our provinces. However, we fully accept that the
(Sassa) is a fait accompli and is listed now as a schedule 36 public
entity, and we will certainly support it.

The presentation made by Sassa was very impressive, and we await with
interest the implementation of the programme. We shall follow this process,
and express the hope that the transfer of staff from provincial departments
to the agency goes smoothly and without further cost implications, and that
no beneficiaries will be adversely affected.

An amount of R135 million was allocated to the establishment of Sassa for
2006-07, with an increase to R167 million for 2008-09. One questions
whether further uptakes of grants will not require greater allocations than
anticipated. In a few days, three provinces, namely Gauteng, the Northern
Cape and the Western Cape, will commence with the new system. We wish them
well.

Social development has come a long way since we started out in 1994 as
welfare. We are now serving R10,8 million people in terms of grants alone.
We doubt that this number is likely to decrease, unless we can accelerate
income generation and labour-intensive projects as realistic poverty
alleviation interventions. Economic empowerment and emancipation has to be
our ultimate goal.

The Deputy President said in a recent address in Durban that the cycle of
dependency needs to be broken. We all agree with her. She asked faith-based
organisations, like Diakonia, to help break the cycle. We agree that a
nongovernmental organisation can be of great assistance, but unless all of
us pull together to free our marginalised people from the yoke of economic
disempowerment we will not succeed in breaking the cycle of dependency.
Financial assistance is required more and more to enable the
nongovernmental organisations to be even more effective.

On the issue of disability grants for victims of HIV/Aids, we would like to
suggest an ongoing dialogue with the Department of Health and other
shareholders to ensure acceptable standards, with particular emphasis on
the plight of rural people with HIV/Aids who lack easy access to facilities
for assessment and treatment.
HIV-orphans and vulnerable children remain a concern. The first question we
wish to raise is whether or not the policy framework with regard to them
has been completed. We express concern to hear that only 40 000 children
are being supported. Figures regarding HIV orphans and child-headed
families differ a great deal and are speculative. Has there ever been a
reliable audit of the true number of them?

Foster-care placement has been effected on behalf of nearly 3 000 children,
but there are the remaining 37 000. How have they been taken care of?
Adequate funding, surely, can only be allocated if we deal with realistic
figures? With the removal of grant administration from provinces, we would
like the social welfare sector strengthened.

Recently completed legislation on older people and children will make extra
demands on services. Isn’t now the time, given the shortage of
professionals in this sector, for the state or provinces to research medium
to long-term needs and to offer conditional bursaries, repayable by work
contracts for a number of years and an undertaking to work in rural areas?
An incentive like this may well be used to guarantee services when needed
most. The IFP supports Budget Vote 18. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms N C NKABINDE: Chairperson and hon members, the Department of Social
Development has a broad mandate and, understandably, the immense need out
there places strain on its budget.

The department has the lead responsibility for the realisation of a number
of key human rights issues. In addition, it has various other
responsibilities. For instance, we agree that legislative issues on
substance abuse and the social service professions require attention.
However, by far the most pressing need that the department is responsible
for is the alleviation of poverty. It is apt that we consider the massive
scale of this challenge.

The latest research indicates that 66% of children are living in income
poverty, that is in households that have less than R1 200 per month to
spend on the needs of all its members – two thirds of all the children in
this country.

In light of this massive poverty, the UDM has repeatedly called for the age
limit of the child support grant to be extended. Whilst we welcome the fact
that it has been extended to the age of 14 years, we remain convinced that
it should be extended to the age of 18 years.

Currently, the government is essentially taking away support just at that
stage in the poverty-stricken child’s development when he or she is
entering high school and is on the verge of building a better future. The
UDM continues to hold the view that the current social grants are not
adequate. We appreciate that the social grants already constitute about 3%
of the GDP.

Whilst we celebrate our so-called “age of hope”, we should not hesitate to
share the fruits of our large economic harvest with those less fortunate
than ourselves. The economy is growing at a rate far better than even the
biggest optimist expected. The rich are getting richer, and the employed
have received repeated and generous tax cuts over a number of years. The
UDM supports the Budget Vote. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr K W MORWAMOCHE: Agb Voorsitter, agb Adjunkpresident, agb Minister en
Adjunkminister, Lede van die Parlement ... [Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy
President, hon Minister and Deputy Minister, Members of Parliament ...]

The Department of Social Development relies on the Department of Home
Affairs for the issuing of faultless birth certificates, ID documents and
death certificates, as well as on doctors and social workers from the
Department of Health.

I want to remind the DA that the Department of Social Development does not
control social workers. The Department of Social Development relies on the
Department of Health to supply it with social workers to perform speedy
service delivery, in order to make a better life for all.

Modulasetulo, ntumelele ke laetše gore, re le ANC, re thekga kabo ya kgoro
ye ka baka la leano-pušo la ANC la go phala a diphathi ka moka tša
bomagogorwana ka Ntlong ye. Leano la dipeakanyo tša kgoro ye le sepelelana
le moeno wa Freedom Charter wa gore: The People Shall Govern! Ke therešo
batho ba a buša ka gore ba bona dipoelo tša mmušo wa bona o moswa.

Kgoro ye e hlagiša dikabelo tša mašeleng go thuša setšhaba, e le taetšo ya
gore e dirile konteraka le setšhaba gore e tla se hlankela. Go na le kabelo
ya mphiwafela wa batšofe - Old Age Grant – wo o swanetšego go amogelwa ke
monna ge a le nywaga ye 65 le mosadi ge a le nywaga ye 60. Gape go na le
mphiwafela wa digole goba digwahla goba dikoka - disability grant – wo o
swanetšego go amogelwa ke mosadi ge a le nywaga ye 17 go iša go ye 59 le
monna ge a le nywaga ye 18 go iša go ye 64. Monna o swanetše go amogela
mphiwafela wa bogwahla ge mogolo wa gagwe goba seo a nago le sona se sa
rone dinyakwa tša Means Test.

Ke rata gore setšhaba se kwešiše gore mphiwafela wo ga se wa motho yo
mongwe le yo mongwe goba monna-o-wetše goba mosadi-o-wetše, eupša ke wa bao
ba hlakago. Mmušo o hlagiša dikabelo go bafepi ba ditšhuana - care
depenedant’s grant – tšeo di swanetšego go amogelwa ke motho ge a na le
ngwaga go iša go ye 18. Motho o swanetše go ba le lengwalo la taelo ya
kgorotsheko - Court Order - go laetša gore kabelo ya bofepi e swanetše go
ba diatleng tša gagwe. Seo se dirwa ka baka la gore go na le ba bangwe bao
ba tšeyago ditšhelete tšeo ba di golelago ba bangwe gomme ba ye go nyala ka
tšona mola ba bangwe ba reka dipoane ka tšona. Kgoro ye ga e thušetše gore
go sepelwe ka tsela yeo.

Go na le ditlhohlo tšeo di lebanego le kgoro ye. Bjaloka ge ke laeditše go
tloga mathomong, kgoro ye e holofetše Kgoro ya tša Selegae gore e fe batho
dipasa le disetifikeiti tša nnete. Ge bašomedi ba Kgoro ya tša Selegae ba
nea batho dipasa tša bofora, kgoro ye ke yona e šikarago bothata bja
merwalo yeo e sego ya yona.

Kgorong ya tša Maphelo le gona ge dingaka di nea batho mangwalo gore ba ye
go ikgopelela dikabelo tša mphiwafela wa bokoka ka moo go sa lebanago,
bothata bo rwalwa ke kgoro ye.

Kgoro ya tša Mešomo e swanetše go hlohleletša batho gore ba be le
retirement fund le pension fund gore e re mohlang motho a gobetše mošomong
a se ke a ba morwalo wa Kgoro ya tša Leago, eupša e be gore ka boyena seo a
bego a se šomela a kgone go se hwetša.

Kgoro ya tša Toka le yona e rweša kgoro ye morwalo ka go se šale morago bao
ba ganago go fepa bana bao ba ba belegego, gomme ba fetše ba wela ka
diatleng tša kgoro ye ka baka la gore kgorong ye ga go nyakege moemedi ge
motho a ingwadišetša go gola mphiwafela.
Kgoro ya tša Dinamelwa le yona e rweša kgoro ye morwalo ka ge dinamelwa tše
dingwe di se na inšorense. Ge batho ba gobela mo ditseleng, Kgoro ya tša
Leago e rwala morwalo ka ge e le yona e swanetšego go bona gore bahlaki bao
ba a hlokomelwa.

Bjaloka ge ke laeditše, go na le mabaka a mantši ao a dirago gore ANC e
thekge kgoro ye. Ke šetše ke laeditše gore bagolwane ba diphathi tša
bomabinagosolwa ga ba kwešiše selo ge ba botšwa gore motho o a hlaka. Le ge
ba fela ba bolela mo pele ga rena, ba re ba bolela legatong la bahlaki, ga
re tsebe gore gabotse ba ra eng ka gore ge re bolela ka Means Test ga go le
yo tee wa bona yo a kago o phasa. Sa bona ka mo Ntlong e no ba fela go
šireletša mahumo a bona.

Go na le maano ao kgoro ye e a logilego gore go be le mphiwafela wa bagale
ba marumo - war veterans grant – e lego bao ba lwetšego tokologo; e sego
bao ba bego ba lwela gore apartheid e buše go ya go ile; gape e sego bao ba
bego ba lwela gore mebušwana ya dinagamagae e tšwele pele. Kabelo ye e
diretšwe bao ba bego ba lwela tokologo yeo bjale ka moka re iphsinago ka
dienywa tša yona.

Gape Kgoro ya tša Leago e rwele bothata ka ge kua diprofenseng ditšhaba tša
rena, segolothata tšeo di bapilego le dinaga tsa go swana boZimbabwe le
Mozambique, moo batho ba rego ge ba e kwa bohlaki, ka ge dinageng tšeo tša
bona go se ditšhelete tše bjaloka mphiwafela wa tša leago, ba fetšago ba
seletše ka mo nageng ya rena gomme e re ka ge naga ye ya rena e na le
botho, e ba amogele, eupša ba fetše e le morwalo kgorong ye. Kgoro ye e
tseba e na le dipalopalo tša bao ba lebanwego ke go thušwa, eupša ge go iwa
ditirelong, ditirelo tša ntshe di feta kabo yeo kgoro e e filego diprofense
tša rena gore di tšwetše mošomo wo pele.

Ke dira boipiletšo go makgotla-kganetšo a bomagogorwane ka Ntlong ye gore
re thekgeng mmušo wa ANC gore o buše go ya go ile. (Translation of Sepedi
paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, allow me to point out that as the ANC, we support the
department’s budget allocation because of the organisations’ strategic
plan, more than those of minority parties present in this House. The plan
of action coincides with the clause enshrined in the Freedom Charter that
says: ‘The people shall govern’. It is true that the people govern because
they can see the benefits of the new government.

This department is delivering their budget allocation to assist the people,
as a sign of the contract it has with the people to serve them. There is
the old age grant, which is due to a man who is 65 years of age and a woman
who is 60 years of age. There is also the disability grant, which is due to
women between the ages of 17 and 59 years and men between the ages of 18
and 64 years. A man must only receive a pension when his salary or his
assets correspond with the needs for the means test.

I would appreciate it if people understood that this grant is not meant for
every aged man and aged woman, but only for those who are in need. The
government offers a care dependant grant, which is due to persons between
the ages of one and 18 years. One needs a court order to prove that the
child is in his or her care. This measure is in place, because some people
take the money and use it to get married or to buy cattle for themselves.
This department does not approve of that.

This department is still facing challenges. As I said in the beginning,
this department is hoping that the Department of Home Affairs will provide
people with appropriate IDs and certificates. If the Department of Home
Affairs’ employees give people inappropriate IDs, this department will
suffer the consequences. When the doctors from the Department of Health
issue letters to people who do not qualify for grants, this department will
suffer the consequences.

The Department of Labour must encourage people to have retirement and
pension funds so that the Department of Social Development does not carry
the burden when they incur injuries while on duty.

The Department of Justice also creates problems for this department by
failing to do follow-ups on those people who are not willing to pay their
children’s maintenance. Those children end up being this department’s
responsibility, because this department does not require an attorney to
access the grants.

The Department of Transport also creates problems for this department due
to uninsured vehicles. When people are involved in accidents on the road,
the Department of Social Development suffers the consequences because they
have to make sure that those people get assistance.

As I pointed out, there are a lot of reasons for the ANC to support this
department. I have already pointed out that those leaders of the minority
parties that only benefit from the ANC’s efforts do not understand anything
when we talk about the needy people, even though they claim to be speaking
on their behalf. We do not know what they are talking about because none of
them would pass the means test. Theirs is only to protect their own wealth.

This department has arranged for the war veterans to receive grants - for
those people who fought for freedom and not those who fought hard to retain
apartheid, nor those who fought hard to retain the homelands. This grant is
meant only for those who fought for the freedom that we are all benefiting
from.

Again, the Department of Social Development is facing another challenge,
especially in the provinces that are closer to Mozambique and Zimbabwe. The
people from those countries escape the hunger in their countries as they do
not have grants in their countries and end up in our country, making it the
department’s responsibility to take care of them. As this is a warm
country, we welcome them, but they end up being the department’s burden.
This department has a huge number of needy people, but the services exceed
the department’s budget that has been allocated to our provinces to fast-
track services.

I am appealing to the minority opposition parties in this House to support
the ANC government to govern forever.]

Agbare Minister, mag die pad wat voorlê altyd skoon wees. Baie dankie,
Voorsitter. [Applous.] [Hon Minister, may the road ahead always be free of
obstacles. Thank you very much, Chairperson. [Applause.]]

Ms F BATYI: Chairperson, the aim of the Department of Social Development is
to ensure the provision of a comprehensive, integrated, sustainable and
quality social development service against vulnerability and poverty, and
to create an enabling environment for sustainable development in
partnership with those committed to building a caring society. Hon members,
the budget for 2006-07 must do justice to this aim.

The ID wants to commend the department on its efforts to provide social
grants for all the needy in our country, and we are looking forward to even
more positive results through the work of the SA Social Security Agency
with regard to a reduction in corruption and to the efficient paying out of
grants.

Services to children and older persons are a priority for the ID. Although
grants have gradually increased over the years, there are still thousands
of children that fall outside of the social security net. In addition, the
ID is appalled that only about 13 300 abused children have been placed on
the child protection register in the past 32 years. More must be done about
those children who are HIV-positive as only 4 000 of the 50 000 are
receiving ARV medication.

The ID also encourages the speedy completion of both the Children’s Bill
and the Older Persons Bill in order for real delivery to commence. The
costing of each Bill must be done in such a way that those whose lives the
Bill aims to improve, must be kept in mind at all times.

The ID places great value on the upliftment of the most vulnerable and
needy in our country. This department has a very important mandate to put
real delivery where the President’s mouth is. A recent study by the Bureau
of Economics has proven that government grants have made a substantial
difference towards ensuring that those who are poor are better off. But
much more work needs to be done. The ID supports this budget. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, hon Minister, the ACDP acknowledges the much-needed
increase in critical grants. However, the failure to extend the child
support grant to children over the age of 14 years is unfortunate. Children
over this age living in destitution are particularly vulnerable to sexual
exploitation and exploitation in other forms, such as child labour, as
there is no other income available to them.

Extending the child support grant to this age group would not only protect
these children from abuse, exploitation and interrupted schooling, but
possibly impact positively on early pregnancies in girls aged 14 to 17
years, who allegedly fall pregnant in order to access the child support
grant.

Concerns have been expressed that access to disability grants is
problematic for persons living with HIV/Aids. As grants are only available
when a person reaches a certain stage of the syndrome, it is often too late
for the grant to bring relief. It has also been said that this actually
prevents people from accessing antiretrovirals, as they fear losing their
grant or not being eligible for the grant.

The process adopted by the department for social provision for HIV/Aids
orphans and vulnerable children, namely that all have to go through a
foster care application and grant process, has brought the entire child
protection system to a halt. As a result one service provider alone has 100
000 outstanding foster care applications. This unnecessary waste of
resources is counterproductive and cripples services. The costing of the
Children’s Bill is well under way, but is likely to reveal that the budget
to implement it is seriously lacking.

Finally, the question of whether or not the department has adequate
resources to carry out its research and planning function is not easily
answered in the budget, and this is a concern to many. Research and
planning in general is far from adequate and sets the department up for
unnecessary failure. The continued nonexistence of any kind of needs
analysis is a glaring omission.

The national strategy for the prevention and management of child abuse,
neglect and exploitation, for example, has still not been completed, but
has been in the making for about 10 years. The ACDP calls on the department
to ensure that this vitally important research is made an urgent priority.
The ACDP will nevertheless support this Budget Vote. Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, hon Deputy
President, hon Minister, hon members, MECs for social development,
distinguished guests, members of the community present here today, ladies
and gentlemen, Budget Vote 18, as highlighted by the Minister, outlines our
intention to give effect to government’s programme of action and to
contribute positively to the age of hope, as mentioned in the President’s
state of the nation address.

This year, as we celebrate the 30th anniversary of battles fought by our
youth for social and economic inclusion and the 50th anniversary of the
Women’s March, we acknowledge the successes of this department in ensuring
equitable access to comprehensive social security services, thereby
instilling hope for 11 million of the poorest of the poor, the majority of
whom are women and other vulnerable groups. The establishment of Sassa, the
SA Social Security Agency, has refocused attention on the remaining
services in the developmental social service basket.

The Minister of Finance stated in his Budget Speech that a core priority is
to strengthen social welfare services. In this regard, the launching of the
integrated service delivery model and the passing of key legislation, such
as the Children’s Bill and the Older Persons Bill, have laid the foundation
for the accelerated delivery of quality social services to the poorest and
most vulnerable people.

Hon Mike Waters ... I don’t even see him here. [Interjections.] Oh, hello.
I’m actually astonished by your breathtaking lack of understanding of the
difference between a section 75 Bill and a section 76 Bill. The Minister
referred to a section 76 Bill, which is a Bill that still has to be passed
through the NCOP. A section 75 Bill - all of it - has been passed, you will
be happy to know.

Getting back to my speech, the implementation of the integrated service
delivery model, which was launched in 2005, provides the framework for
delivering developmental services, whilst defining the roles and
responsibilities of all tiers of government, including civil society. This
model is crucial in formalising relationships of the department with
community-based organisations, faith-based organisations and NGOs as
implementing partners at community level.

In order to give effect to government’s priorities in this age of hope,
this department has a strategic role to play in developing and
strengthening relationships with its partners to alleviate poverty and
deliver improved quality services to the poorest of the poor. We
acknowledge and thank our many partners, in particular the nongovernmental
organisations, the community-based organisations and the faith-based
organisations, that form a crucial link in the chain of service delivery as
implementing agents.

The service delivery model highlights the role of government as well as
that of organs of civil society, including private organisations, community-
based organisations, faith-based organisations, parastatals, etc. It is
critical to mention that the model calls for a radical transformation of
the way things are currently done.

This shift in focus is reflected in the increased allocation to integrated
developmental social welfare services. I would like to point out that
although there is an increase in the allocation to developmental social
services, social security still has 99% of the department’s total budget
with only 1% for the remainder of services and administration. Of this 1%,
which is almost half a billion rand, 22% of this is allocated to
developmental social welfare services. This will be applied to strengthen
and expand capacity for the development of social development policies,
strategies and programmes, as well as norms and standards.

The social crime prevention allocation is increased by 32,2% in the current
year. To reduce the number of children in prison and awaiting trial, the
current legislation and regulations will be reviewed, a departmental social
crime prevention strategy will be developed and approved, appropriate
programmes and guidelines for children awaiting trial will be developed,
three secure care centres will be established and the minimum standards for
diversion programmes will be launched, and 600 probation officers will be
trained.

In terms of childcare and protection services, we are proud to report that
the Children’s Bill section 75 has been passed by Parliament in its
entirety. The regulations for the Children’s Bill will be developed during
this financial year. The other key priorities include the computerised
child protection register and the implementation and the monitoring of the
policy on the prevention of child abuse, neglect and exploitation. Training
and early implementation of the national integrated early childhood
development plan will be facilitated.

With regard to substance abuse, the renewal of the national drug master
plan is complete and will go to Cabinet for approval. The new plan proposes
an array of drug control, prevention and treatment initiatives, which will
inform new legislation and programmes.

The first term of the first Board of the Central Drug Authority came to an
end last year, and I trust you will join me in thanking the outgoing board
for their achievements in the last five years and particularly in 2004-05.
The new members of the Board for the Central Drug Authority have been
appointed, and I am hopeful the new board will keep the momentum and take
up the challenge of achieving a drug-free society with the same vigour.

Current legislation governing services on the prevention and treatment of
substance abuse and rehabilitation is outdated and will be reviewed during
this financial year. The prevention and treatment of substance abuse Bill
will provide for the transformation of services in the field of substance
abuse, for community-based interventions, for the development of minimum
norms and standards for different levels of service delivery for substance
abuse, and for ensuring the registration and monitoring of facilities. The
Bill will be introduced to Parliament by the end of June 2006.

A model for community-based services will be developed, including best
practice models for children and the youth. Our department will also be
hosting an international summit on substance abuse to share best practices
at national, regional and international levels in managing the problems of
substance abuse.

With regard to victim empowerment, women and gender, in line with this
year’s commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the Women’s March, our
department will intensify efforts to improve services to women through the
mainstreaming of gender in all programmes of the department.

In continuing the work on the prevention of victimisation and on services
to women and children, two shelters will be established and the victim
empowerment policy will be launched. Monitoring and evaluation of the
implementation of the victim empowerment policy will continue. The strategy
for the involvement of men and boys in the prevention of violence against
women will be finalised.

With regard to orphans and vulnerable children, through the implementation
of the department’s Expanded Public Works Programme services for and care
of orphans and other vulnerable children will be improved, 5 000 home-based
caregivers will be trained and a database for orphans and vulnerable
children will be established in each province in this financial year. This
will assist in ensuring well-functioning structures to deliver services at
all levels.
The policy framework for this sector will be finalised and a national
action plan for orphans and vulnerable children will be developed. The
number of childcare forums will be increased by 800 over the next two
years.

With regard to the National Youth Service, as part of the 30th anniversary
youth celebrations, youth development will receive prioritisation in this
financial year. In addition to the National Youth Service Programme
mentioned by the Minister, the integrated youth strategy will be launched
in June during Youth Month. Guidelines for the training of provincial staff
and service providers will be completed by December 2006. A skills
programme for protecting vulnerable youth is being developed and will focus
on the homeless and youth living on the streets.

With regard to social service professionals, the delivery of developmental
social services necessitates the creation of an enabling environment for
social service practitioners. To this end, the Social Service Professions
Act and the Social Services Act will be reviewed and implemented. All
professions in the social welfare sector will be graded appropriately and
job descriptions will be benchmarked for child and youth care workers, as
well as social auxiliary workers.
This will be done in collaboration with our partners in the new SA Council
for Social Service Professions and the professional boards to assist in
completing this process. Training manuals for capacity building on the
service delivery model will be developed, and 50% of managers and service
professionals will be trained in this financial year. Research into the
norms and standards for social service provision will be conducted in all
provinces with a view to developing norms and standards for approval.

With regard to services for people with disabilities, the draft policy
framework on disability has been finalised and the guidelines for support
services to children with disabilities will be developed during this
financial year. The existing policies are not sufficient to address the
needs of this vulnerable group. Therefore the department will conduct
research into the needs of people and children with disabilities. To this
end, an increase of R1 million has been allocated.

The age of hope is reflected in the passing of the Older Persons Bill in
Parliament last week. The implementation of this Act signifies better and
more access to care and services for older persons. A significant increase
of 32% has been allocated for the completion of the draft regulations - the
draft South African plan of action on ageing, developing the charter on the
rights of older persons and the guidelines for the transformation of old
age homes and service centres to promote accessibility.
With regard to population development and research, the country’s most
important population challenges include mitigating the demographic impact
of the HIV/Aids epidemic and to promote youth development and gender
equality. The main thrust of our interventions is to strengthen the
capacity of government, especially in the local sphere, to respond to
population trends that shape the social environment.

Government wants to build a social security system that is sustainable. As
the social sector’s contribution to Asgisa, we are responding with a
programme called Gwebindlala, which aims to provide income support while
simultaneously developing the human capital of beneficiaries through skills
development and job-placement services.

Gwebindlala will address vulnerability, social exclusion and hunger or
poverty. We cannot support income assistance without other interventions.
We attach great importance to the fight against the manifestations and
causes of poverty and underdevelopment. This underlines the critical roles
that have to be played by all cadres of social development professionals,
namely social workers, auxiliary social workers, child and youth care
workers, probation officers and community development practitioners. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M V NGEMA: Chairperson, Deputy President, Ministers and the honourable
House, Nadeco (The National Democratic Convention) approaches this Social
Development budget debate with a bigger picture in mind, which is that
social development is necessary because of poverty, and it is this fact
that causes Nadeco to cautiously welcome the new SA Social Security Agency.

Until now, provincial departments of social development have been so
preoccupied with the administration of pensions and grants that social
development projects, which are vital to the reduction of poverty, have
underperformed. This situation can now be corrected, because, as the Deputy
Minister said, with Gwebindlala government can indeed find time to address
hunger.

Concern has been expressed about the sharp increase in the numbers of
beneficiaries over the past three years and about whether the social
assistance system would be sustainable, should the numbers of beneficiaries
continue to increase at the current rate. The department and the provincial
governments will have to ensure that the removal of social security
allocations leave the provincial departments with adequate budgets, to
undertake the huge tasks that hitherto have been obscured and inhibited by
the budget load of social security.

The development of social assistance policies for families, for children
and for disabled persons has taken a long time, and each year the estimates
of national expenditure notes this work ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon member, your time has
expired.

Mr M V NGEMA: Nadeco supports the Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Mr B M MKONGI: Chairperson, Deputy President of the Republic of South
Africa, hon members, the work of the Department of Social Development is
aimed at providing comprehensive and integrated social development services
to vulnerable and poor communities and individuals in South Africa.

As a constitutional requirement, the department is responsible for the
establishment of policies within which social development services are
delivered, the monitoring of the implementation of policies and the
delivery of services at provincial level.

The Department of Social Development has, for the past decade, placed a
significant emphasis on achieving efficiency and sustainability with regard
to the social assistance system. From having inherited a fragmented social
assistance system that comprised different departments, social assistance
is now provided within a unitary policy framework, and a national agent has
been established that will eventually be responsible for the delivery of
grants in all provinces.

In his Budget Vote address of 2002, the Minister of Social Development, the
hon Skweyiya, focused his attention on the need to put children first. He
was pleased to announce that more than 2,6 million children under the age
of seven years had been registered for the child support grant. That was a
significant increase from a mere 60 000 in 1999. This was boosted by an
announcement made in the same year by the President of the Republic to
increase the age of children eligible to receive grants to the age of 14
years.

Today social grants are provided to an estimated 10,8 million people, the
majority of whom are older persons and children. It is indeed true that
today is better than yesterday and tomorrow will be better than today.

The estimated cost of social assistance for the new financial year amounts
to R61,5 billion, compared to R55 billion for the previous year. The
challenge is whether government will be able to sustain the sharp increase
in beneficiary numbers and also whether the social assistance system will
be sustainable should beneficiary numbers continue to increase at this
rate.

It is, therefore, of pivotal importance that the department ensures that
its social assistance policies are applied uniformly in all provinces and
that grants are targeted at eligible beneficiaries.

Last year this Parliament celebrated the 50th anniversary of the Freedom
Charter, an authentic document of the people of South Africa. Clauses of
the charter are embedded in the founding principles of our new South Africa
and in the Constitution. The charter expressed, in essence, a vision of a
society that is both inclusive and sensitive to the rights of the most
vulnerable members of our society.

Today our government, under the leadership of the ANC, has achieved much in
ensuring that the fundamental principles enshrined in the charter become a
reality for all. This indeed is evident from the commitment of the state to
the core principles of the charter, and correctly so.

During the year of the 50th anniversary of the charter, the Minister of
Social Development, in his address on Budget Vote 18, drew attention to the
direct relevance of the objectives contained in the charter to the work of
the Ministry and the Department of Social Development.

In this regard he had this to say:

  Eleven years after the inauguration of our democratic dispensation, we
  have achieved much in ensuring that the fundamental principles set out in
  the charter become a reality for all our people.

To achieve this goal, in particular the provision of security and comfort
for all, his department followed a path that sought to ensure the provision
of comprehensive social protection services by not in any way walking away
from its obligations to come to the aid of the poor – the needy - bearing
in mind available resources.

In the year 2000, the Department of Social Development, together with civil
society organisations and other important stakeholders, adopted a 10-point
plan on social development priorities. Central to this plan was ensuring
the provision of comprehensive social protection services against
vulnerability and poverty to as many deserving South Africans as possible,
in an effort towards ensuring that we care for all our people and restore
dignity to them.

Our government presented in this House the norms and standards for social
assistance security delivery. At that time the department had an
unacceptably low ratio of staff to beneficiaries, and it indeed continued
to enhance its capacity in areas in which there were substantial
inadequacies. These inadequacies included, among other things,
administrative and institutional reform, personnel development and fraud
prevention and detection.
To ensure the programmatic expression of the norms and standards, our
government embarked on an improvement programme, with a dual focus on
enhancing the integrity of the social security system and the quality of
the services we are delivering.

As the Minister of Social Development said, it is fitting to acknowledge
that in a number of areas our government has improved the capacity of the
grant system to ensure that the right people receive the right grants in a
manner that respects their dignity.

In 2002 the government received recommendations on a comprehensive,
affordable social security system for South Africa, which were published by
government for public comment in the same year. These recommendations
covered a broad spectrum of social security issues relating to poverty,
health, unemployment, retirement and measures to support people with
special needs.

In reponse to that, in 2003 the ANC assured South Africans that our attack
on poverty was underpinned by our desire to empower our people to extricate
themselves from this poverty, and that we were creating adequate social
nets to protect the most vulnerable of our society.

This year, as before, our government will focus on improving the efficiency
and effectiveness of social grant spending and reduce the risk of the abuse
of social grants. These measures include, among other things, the continued
implementation of the comprehensive antifraud detection and prevention
plan, the application of the means test and a review of the eligibility of
all beneficiaries.

In dealing with the comprehensive antifraud detection and prevention plan,
in 2004 our government embarked on a campaign to offer indemnity to all
those who were illegally accessing social grants. This was to ensure the
integrity of the grant administration system.

The integrity of our grant administration system became a success, although
some people did not come forward voluntarily to declare their illegal
access to social grants. This behaviour necessitated the Minister and his
department to resort to enforcing the law. This began with the public
servants and syndicates behind much of the fraud.

A key government human resource database was interrogated with the State
Information Technology Agency, the Government Employees Pension Fund, the
government employee salary system hereinafter referred to as Persal, and
the Department of Home Affairs, the Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development and the Department of Correctional Services.

As a step forward in improving this integrity, the Department of Social
Development together with the SA Police Service and the National
Prosecuting Authority, came together in an effort to combat fraud and
corruption. The department has made considerable efforts to ensure that
fraud and corruption are addressed at provincial level.

Through the ongoing campaign to eliminate fraud, thousands of people have
come forward to apply for amnesty in relation to grants illegally received,
and large numbers of provincial social services officials have been charged
with fraud and corruption.

To complement these efforts, our government has moved a milestone in
implementing three pillars of the system of our comprehensive social
security. The comprehensive social protection programme is responsible for
the development and monitoring of policies and norms and standards for the
comprehensive social security system. This programme further assesses the
socioeconomic and fiscal impact of social security programmes.

However, the allocation to this programme amounts to R48,8 million for the
2005-06 financial year, nearly 75% lower than the allocation for the
previous year. This reduction is as a result of the SA Social Security
Agency taking over some of the functions previously located in this
programme. This will mean that provincial departments responsible for
social welfare services will have to start reorienting resources for the
delivery of social welfare services.

The national department will, therefore, play a supportive role in ensuring
that provinces are able to focus on service delivery and that the funding
mechanisms for these services function effectively.

In conclusion, the central aim of transformation is to improve the
conditions of the people, especially the poor. In order to deal with the
crushing poverty to which millions have been relegated, government will
intensify its programme to provide food security and basic nutrition to
those in dire need. This has to be based on proper tracking, improvement in
efficiency, and integration with community development.

The programme to restructure the system of pensions and grants will
continue to ensure that all eligible citizens are afforded equal treatment.
Thank you very much. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr B E PULE: Chairperson, allow me on behalf of the UCDP to congratulate
the department on the following notable achievements, which have, of
course, already been mentioned by the previous speaker.

During the past decade the department placed significant emphasis on
achieving efficiency and sustainability with regard to social assistance.
That is appreciated. The department inherited a fragmented social
assistance system that comprised 13 different departments, and this system
is now provided for within a unitary policy framework. That is appreciated.

The establishment of the SA Social Security Agency (Sassa) is an important
project, which will take over the delivery of social assistance from April
2006, though not in all provinces.

Social grants are provided to an estimated 10,8 million people who are
mostly older persons and children. That is also very much appreciated. The
estimated cost of social assistance for the new financial year amounts to
R61,5 billion, as compared to R55 billion allocated for this purpose for
the previous financial year.

Having said that, the following, in any case, merit attention. The
development of a social assistance policy for families, children and
disabled persons has taken too long. Each year the estimates of national
expenditure note this work, but the target dates for completion change.
Targets set by the department are either unrealistic or there are capacity
challenges that cause delays in the process.

For persons living with HIV/Aids, access to disability grants has
reportedly been challenging, as grants are only available when a person
reaches a certain stage of the syndrome, which may be too late for the
grants to be effective.

Regarding the social security transfers and administration programme, the
programme is responsible for providing continued support to Sassa in
rolling out the full function. The allocation for the establishment of
Sassa grows from R135 million in 2006-07 to R167 million in 2008-09. It is
doubtful whether this increase will be adequate for the agency to take up
its grant administration responsibilities in all the provinces.

It should be clarified what arrangements, again, have been made with regard
to social ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order, hon member! I regret your
time has expired.

Mr B E PULE: The UCDP supports the budget.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, Minister and Deputy President, when we look at
this year’s budget allocation of R80 billion to this sector, we realise
that though the amount is huge, an even greater challenge is to deliver to
an estimated 10,8 million social grant beneficiaries.

Concern is expressed regarding the steep increase of social assistance
costs from R55 billion to R61,5 billion - whether this social need will
continue to grow as rapidly during forthcoming financial years. However, we
do note that there are many persons who qualify for social grants who are
not yet on the system. We hope that with the introduction of the SA Social
Security Agency, improvement in delivery and accessibility of services to
those who qualify will be attained.

This sector has been severely hampered by the defrauding of the grant
system by many foreigners and locals. An estimated 43 000 civil servants
have been wrongfully claiming social grants, with an estimated R50 million
per annum being child grants. A further 79 000 people have also been
removed from the programme by voluntarily stopping to collect these funds,
while another 36 000 people voluntarily requested to be removed, noting
that the long arm of the law is finally clamping down on the perpetrators.

While it is shocking to see how many people have been defrauding the system
as these funds could have been used in developing and providing other basic
needs to communities, the MF feels that the department has invested in the
right technique of amnesty and punishment in order to deter these
criminals. We do, however, continue to feel that the funds allocated for
pensions, social grants and so forth need to be re-evaluated and brought
into line with cost-of-living standards.

We return to the importance that this department has placed on poverty
alleviation and reducing the impact of HIV/Aids on poverty- stricken
communities. Noting its important function and the dependence of our people
on this sector, we welcome it as the second highest in the social cluster
in terms of allocations for this financial year.

We believe in the fervent effort to stamp out fraud and corruption, and
realise how much this is costing the state. This effort shall certainly
open the way for greater and more efficient service and delivery.

Hon Minister, in your speech you mentioned that more social workers are
needed and that your department was looking at engaging more social
workers. For this, we thank you very much and wish you all the success. The
MF supports Budget Vote 18. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mnu B M SOLO: Sihlalo, Sekela-Mongameli, Mphathiswa ohloniphekileyo, Sekela-
Mphathiswa namanye amasekela abaphathiswa akhoyo apha, malungu
ahloniphekileyo ePalamente, nabantu boMzantsi Afrika, kwiminqweno yethu
yokuba siphile impilo engcono sihlala siyijongile into yokuba sibe
siluluntu olwahlukeneyo. Kukho umsantsa omkhulu phakathi kwamahlwempu
angathathi ntweni kunye nabo banento yonke, ngokugqithisileyo. Aba bathi
badle, badle, behlekela phezulu, kube kukho abo soloko bejongile,
belindile, benqwena, benethemba lokuba mhlawumbi bangashiyelwa. Yingxaki
enkulu ke le kubantu bonke baseMzantsi Afrika, ekufuneka ukuba sonke
siyilungise. Sinabantu abaninzi kakhulu abaphila phantsi kweemeko ezinzima,
abahlwempuzekileyo. UKhongolose watsho kwamhlamnene ukuba uzimisele ukuba
abantu bonke baphile impilo efanelekileyo, engcono, ngakumbi abantu
abahluphekileyo, abamnyama. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Mr B M SOLO: Chairperson, Deputy President, hon Minister, Deputy Minister
and other Deputy Ministers present here, hon members of Parliament, and the
people of South Africa at large, in our wish for a better life we must
always keep in mind that we are a diverse nation. There is a distinct gap
between the haves and the have-nots. There are those who benefited and
laughed loudly, while others are waiting in anticipation with the hope to
get the leftovers.

This is a big problem that South Africa is facing, which needs corrective
measures. There are large numbers of people living in poverty. The ANC is
committed to improving the lives of all our people for the better,
especially poor and black people.]

In the 2004 manifesto of the ANC we said we would enter into a contract
with our people to not only construct a society that cares, but, further,
to reduce poverty by half through economic development and comprehensive
social security, and further ensure that all South Africans, especially the
poor and those at risk - children, the youth, women, the aged and people
with disabilities - are fully able to exercise their constitutional right
to enjoy the full dignity of freedom.
The Budget Vote of 2006-07 should be seen in that context. It should be
seen as realistically responding to the question asked in the ANC
manifesto: “What should we do together in the next five years practically
to meet these objectives of creating work, fighting poverty and promoting
equality?”

Of course, the manifesto has a whole range of response programmes, from
growing the economy, having sustainable livelihoods, access to services,
comprehensive social security, etc. It then looks at how these will be
done. Amongst a whole range of others, the manifesto indicates the need to
improve the system of monitoring and evaluation in order to improve the
implementation of all these programmes through stronger monitoring and
evaluation units.

These programmes of the Budget Vote speak to these issues in practical
terms. They make provision for a strategy, and regulatory and oversight
management. They attempt to reduce the whole thing to a project. For this
to happen, about R27,842 million has been set aside for this new programme.

This programme is crucial for strengthening the department’s capacity to
exercise its regulatory and oversight role in relation to implementation
partners, public entities and other national institutions. It will deal
with both the vertical and horizontal integration of sector policies and
strategies, focusing on aligning experiences and aligning strategy with
business to ensure optimal performance and use of resources. Further, it
will co-ordinate, monitor, evaluate and assess the department’s performance
in meeting its own objectives and its overall contribution to the country’s
development.

In a nutshell, this new programme is aimed at strengthening the
department’s capacity with regard to oversight over programmes and
institutions that report to it. Accordingly, the system of service will be
improved particularly at provincial and local government levels, so as to
ensure that today is better than yesterday and that tomorrow will be a
different day from today.

This will instil the age of hope, as the department would be proactive
rather than being an obstacle to the achievement of the goal of a better
life for all, because of insufficient attention to the critical issue of
the effective and speedy delivery of services, as stated by President Mbeki
in the state of the nation address of 2006.

This is one element in the set of interventions espoused in the Accelerated
and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa, commonly known as Asgisa.
Whilst we recognise the significant progress made to alleviate the poverty
affecting millions of our people and the strides made to expand and
modernise our economy, we still recognise that more has to be done. The
progress made signifies the hope that we will meet our goals or set
targets. The President put it clearly when he said:

  It is because of what these millions did that our people know from their
  own experiences that today is better than yesterday, and are confident
  that tomorrow will be better than today.


The President made a clear call to move faster in addressing the challenges
of poverty, underdevelopment and marginalisation confronting those within
the second economy. As such, we must sustain and improve the effectiveness
of our social development programmes targeted at providing a cushion of
support to those who are most exposed to the threat of abject poverty.

Isilungu ke asitolikwa; kunjalo, siza kuyenza loo nto, silungiselela abantu
bethu, njengokuba etshilo uMongameli. [This is self-explanatory; it is so,
and we are preparing for that, as the President stated.]

It is inspiring to see the department adhering to this, making provisions
to create tools that will ensure service delivery and that services are
taken to a higher level through such a programme, in order to ensure better
services so that the hope of our people is not in vain.

Isebe ke liyabonakalisa elubala ukuba le nkqubo intsha elize nayo iza
kuzama ukuba silwe nendlala, silwe nobuhlwempu. Phofu ke asinto yethu
ukuphila ngamalizo thina bantu bamnyama. Kodwa ke xa iimeko zingavumi siye
sibe neenzame esizenzayo, sikhuphe le nto kuthiwa yinkomo yenqoma. Nokuba
isengwa kubhekwa, noko indoda iye ikwazi ukuba yenze izapholo, iseng’
ubisi, ikwazi nokulima.

Ngoko ke kufuneka siluqonde ukuba uhlahlo lwabiwo-mali lwenziwe njani na.
Kungoko kukho le nkqubo intsha, eza kuzama ukuqinisekisa ukuba bonke abantu
bayalungiselelwa. Ezinye ke izinto ezithethwayo apha zibonakalisa elubala
ukuba laa madoda atya kwakudala, aphinda atya. Asatya nangoku, kwaye
aphangela thina bantu ekufuneka betyile ngoku. [Kwaqhwatywa.]

Awayiqondi le meko esiphila phantsi kwayo, ngoba wona atya, izisu zide
zabomvu. Afana nezinja ezithi nokuba sezityile, uthi xa usondela uzama
ukwahlula ukutya, uyive igragrama, kubonakala ukuba ingathi noko ayithandi
ukuba usondele. Ingaze ikulimaze xa kunjalo.

Kufuneka sizilumkele ke izinto ezithethwa ngala madoda, ngoba awayiboni le
nto siyenzayo, yokuba sizama ukulungiselela abantu bethu. Ngalo lonke
ixesha sisenza imizamo, sisiza neenkqubo ezintsha, wona awaboni. Atyile
kaloku, ahluthi. Kodwa ke mawabe nomzamo awenzayo, akhe akhuphe kula
maqhekeza anawo.

La madoda akwiinkampani zonke ezikhoyo kweli lizwe. Anezabelo azishiyelwa
ngooyisemkhulu emva kokuba beba iinkomo zethu. [Kwahlekwa.] Sithi noko
mawabe nendlela yokubuyisa. Oyisakala nokwenza oku kuchaziwe kwinkqubo i-
Asgisa. Kufuneka ngalo lonke ixesha siwakhumbuze ukuba noko sele edlile,
kwaye ayaphinda ayatya. Afuna ukutya ngecephe elikhulu.

Masikhumbule ukuba noko kukho abantu abangamahlwempu, abangathathi ntweni.
Aba bantu abazenzanga. Siyazi ukuba aba bahluthayo batya kwamhlamnene, xa
babesiba iinkomo zabantu bethu, bephethe nalo mqulu bawutolika ngale ndlela
bawutolike ngayo.

Nizibile iinkomo zona, naze nabulala. Sithi ke ngoku, njengokuba
senihluthi, noko masenzeni imizamo ukuze kule demokhrasi nakolu xolelwano,
nisiqhekezele nathi. Siyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[The department has proven that the newly introduced programme will help
fight hunger and alleviate poverty. Nevertheless, maintaining our lives
through charity is not black people’s way of living. Whenever we found
ourselves in situations beyond our control, we would be given a cow.
Although one would not get ownership of the cow, one would be able to get
milk and plough the fields.

We must understand how the budget is calculated. For this reason the reason
the new programme was introduced, it caters for all people. Another aspect
highlighted in it is the fact that those who benefited long ago are still
being advantaged. They are now blocking our chance to gain. [Applause.]

They do not understand the prevailing situation we are faced with, because
they make big profits. They are like dogs that feed themselves, but still
chase you when you want to divide the food. These dogs show you that you
are not welcome. They can even injure you in that situation.

We must be careful about what the fat cats say. They see things
differently. They do not understand that we are paving the way for our
people. Every time we introduce new programmes they see things differently.
They have enough on their plates, therefore, they must help by making a
contribution towards development.

These men are found in all the companies of this country. They inherited
shares from their grandfathers after they stole our cattle. [Laughter.]
They must return part of what they have gained. They are unwilling to do
what is expected in terms of Asgisa. We have to remind them every time that
they gained and that is now someone else’s turn. They want to get a bigger
share.

We must remember that there are poor people who have nothing. This is not
their fault. We know that those who are rich benefited long ago, even
before they stole our cattle. They had a document, the Bible, that they
used as a tool and interpreted it as they wished.

You stole the cattle and you killed. We now say you have had enough; let us
make an effort to get something back from you, in this democracy and
reconciliation. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr S SIMMONS: Chair, since the first democratic budget, substantial
allocations have been made to the Department of Social Development in order
for it to achieve its core function and its support functions.
Unfortunately, despite the substantial allocations, the Department of
Social Development has been unable to execute fully its constitutional
mandate.

The past few years have seen the department boasting about its achievements
of gradually increasing the social security net, and rightfully so. The
problem is that by the department’s own admission, it has, to date, had a
scary number of failures which it prefers to call challenges.

After the first two or three years of democracy, the expansion of the
social security net posed significant challenges, especially logistically,
because of the greater number of people having to benefit from social
grants. But after more than 10 years we cannot still refer to these as
challenges – they now become failures.

These failures, or challenges as the department prefers to call them,
include the fragmentation of the social grant system, poor customer
service, poor financial management and disturbing levels of fraud. The
question now is: To what extent will the department be able to successfully
meet these challenges, given the establishment of the SA Social Security
Agency? I sincerely hope that this is not an attempt by the department to
shift accountability from the department to its agency. It is ultimately
the core purpose of the Minister to take political responsibility for
delivery by the department.

In conclusion, I want to express the hope that in the interests of the most
vulnerable people in our society, the department, in conjunction with the
SA Social Security Agency, will be able to produce an effective and
efficient social security system with improved levels of customer service
and better financial management that is corruption-free - all in the true
spirit of Batho Pele. The United Party of SA supports the Bill. I thank
you.

Ms H WEBER: Chairperson and hon Minister, it is alarming that such a large
amount of money is budgeted for fraudulent claimants. This poses a major
challenge to the department. The Department of Social Development is
important for improving the lives of those South Africans with special
needs. Here the disabled and the elderly come to mind.

Imagine how much more could be done for these vulnerable groups with that
money? As previous speakers have said, stringent steps must be taken to
curb this practice. The DA would like to see faster action and stiffer
sentences both in terms of the recipients and others who participate in
this practice.

The plight of the elderly has been partly addressed by the amended Older
Persons Bill, but there is room for improvement. Much more respect for the
elderly must be taught to the youth; even at schools this should be
addressed. The elderly are very often considered a commodity to bring in a
pension and care for grandchildren and sickly children.

Without the co-operation of many other departments, the department cannot
function efficiently. The SA Social Security Agency must speed up its
delivery of grant payments quickly and efficiently. Home Affairs must
supply documentation correctly and quickly. The Department of Agriculture
has failed dismally in training people to have sustainable food gardens.
Vegetable seeds were supplied to recipients of food parcels but this was
not successful. Too many agricultural officers have lost touch with the
soil and prefer to sit in sterile offices.

The Department of Health fails to see that necessary medication is always
available at clinics. The impact of HIV/Aids remains alarming. No matter
how the figures are fiddled, this scourge is not being addressed. Without a
faster roll-out of antiretroviral drugs, we are heading for disaster. The
ripple effect on society by way of child-headed households is alarming.

The Department of Education must encourage school feeding in impoverished
areas. This encourages children to go to school where they can be fed –
both in body and in mind. Most importantly, the problem of social workers
has to be addressed with the utmost urgency. Everything revolves around
what social workers do. Without the gallant efforts of the nongovernmental
organisations, those in need in South Africa would be in a sorry plight.

NGOs make up for many of the government’s failings in delivering services
and caring for the poor. The government recognises this and money is given
to them. Not only are NGOs reliant on these funds, but they are also
reliant on grants.

In these two areas I want to draw the department’s attention to what is
happening. Many shelters for orphaned and abandoned children have been
waiting for three years for grants, only to realise that the applications
have been lying in cardboard boxes in offices all along. This is due to
neglect from officials, and stringent measures must be put in place to
ensure that the grant applications are processed timeously.

The second concern is the cutting of grants to the NGOs of Gauteng. This
caused a significant cutback in services to the most needy. The irony is
that this money was then allocated to the Gautrain project. We must get our
priorities right. Are people more important, or is the Gautrain more
important? Most rural people have not even heard of the Gautrain.

Must the important budget of Social Development be the one to be tapped
into for this project? Are there not other departments that could be tapped
into? Unless we do more for bettering the lives of our people, the beggars
on the streets will continue to grow in number and street children will
become the norm and not the exception. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr T M MASUTHA: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, as I rise in
support of this Budget Vote, allow me to anchor my contribution to this
debate on the theme of “Fighting poverty and building social cohesion”, for
I believe it is essentially what this Vote is about.

But before I proceed with my contribution to the debate, allow me to
respond to some of the comments and distortions that have been made this
afternoon. The child protection register, Mr Waters from the DA, as you are
aware, is a new tool to fight abuse and the neglect of children.
[Interjections.] For years and years we had laws introduced under the
apartheid regime purporting to protect children. None of them ever
contained an important tool such as that.

The Child Care Act of 1983, for example, requires people to report such
instances of suspected abuse and neglect. And yet, it was only after 1994
and, in fact, very recently, that despite a clear provision in the existing
Act, through regulations, a child protection register was created. So, it
is a new thing. Give it time to develop. You cannot expect new systems and
new tools to be fully functional overnight. [Interjections.] It’s
unrealistic.

Let me also respond to the comment about the shortage of social workers.
Social workers under the apartheid regime were relegated to status of
insignificance. Their wages and salaries were at the bottom of the pit,
and, as profession, they were never given the recognition that they
deserved.

So, let us not create the wrong impression. I know you have just got Cape
Town, and probably you are aiming higher. [Laughter.] [Applause.] But it is
always important and, in fact, honourable to always give the other side of
the picture. That is being honourable.

Without derailing me from the focus of my speech, allow me to proceed and
to state that Social Development is one of the lead departments in the ANC-
led government in terms of ensuring efforts to reduce poverty and improve
social cohesion. It is also a key department in government’s attempt to
mitigate the impact of HIV/Aids on families and communities. In line with
this, the department’s aim is to ensure the provision of comprehensive
social protection services against vulnerability and poverty within the
constitutional and legislative framework, and to create an enabling
environment for sustainable development.

The department is responsible for policy and oversight in the critical
areas of social assistance and social welfare services. The recommendations
to government made in 1996 by the Lund committee of inquiry into income
support for children, households and families, for instance, gave impetus
to the launching in 1998 of the child support grant.

This report, in analysing patterns of poverty in South Africa with special
reference to women and children, made the following observations at the
time:


  South Africa is characterised by extremes of wealth and of inequality. It
  is classified as a middle-income developing country, but has two nations
  within it - a small number of very wealthy people and the vast majority
  who are very poor. The Project for Statistics on Living Standards and
  Development, PSLSD, shows that poverty is racially and spatially
  distributed and has a gender dimension. Ninety-five per cent of the poor
  being African; 75% of the poor live in rural areas, although only just
  over half of the population lives there; and many of the very poorest
  households are headed by younger women in rural areas.

The report proceeded to state that:


  In general, poverty rates and shares are worst for the African population
  and white South Africans are the wealthiest. Indicators for coloured
  people tend to look more like those for Africans though they are not as
  extreme. Social and economic indicators for the Indian population have
  come to resemble those of whites in recent years.

Over the past three years, there has been a large expansion of the social
assistance system, with beneficiary numbers increasing from 3,8 million in
April 2001 to 9,2 million in January 2005. All these achievements have, of
course, been made possible through sound policies adopted by the current
government in managing the economy to ensure that we as a nation enjoy, as
we do today, enhanced capacity to meet our national goal of alleviating
poverty.

In his state of the nation address, the President alluded to Rudolf Gouws
who, having made a number of observations about the progress we have made
as a nation, concluded by stating:

  Faster growth, coupled with efforts to improve the environment for doing
  business and addressing the plight of the poor more effectively, means
  improved chances for a sustainable improvement in the general welfare of
  all South Africans.


The President then proceeded to state:


  We agree with the observations made by Rudolf Gouws. Indeed, because of
  the factors he mentioned, we have for instance, with 90% coverage of more
  social grants, almost met the objective we set for ourselves in 2002 of
  ensuring that all who are eligible for these grants receive them within
  three years.

This, indeed, is a promise made to our people and a promise kept. The ANC
leads; the ANC cares.

The Minister of Finance in his Budget Speech gives greater specificity to
this when he states, and I quote: “This is a mountain to be climbed in
stages, joys to be reached step by step.”

I refer, for example, to the growth in income support to vulnerable
households through social security and social assistance grants. This has
been the fastest growing category of government expenditure since 2001, and
it now amounts to R70 billion a year - 3,4% of the GDP and reaches more
than 10 million beneficiaries.

Social grants contribute more than half of the income of the poorest 20% of
households and have doubled in real terms over the past five years.

Recent survey data has provided clear empirical evidence of significant
improvements in child nutrition associated with the child support grant.

Ke nnete tlala e mo kotsing. Re re go bommago bana, ke kgale le swere thipa
ka bogaleng, bjale tlou e wele mohlabeng. Tona ya tsa Leago o e wišitše. Re
re tlang le dithipa tša lena le tle le segele bana ba lena ba se hwe ka
tlala. (Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[We are really dealing with poverty alleviation. We are saying to mothers
out there: You have been working too hard, and now is the time to reap what
you have sown. The Minister of Social Development has made provision for
you to benefit from the grants so that you will be able to feed your
children.]

In addition, there has been significant progress in improving the
administrative and institutional framework for the social assistance
system, eliminating leakages through massive defrauding of the system and
in developing legislation for and oversight of social welfare services.

The departmental mandate has also widened in recent years with growing
responsibility for a broad set of initiatives to improve the livelihoods of
South Africans through co-ordinating home-based care for people with
HIV/Aids, food relief programmes, a focus on programmes for particularly
vulnerable groups, and oversight of the National Development Agency.

An area of concern for the department has been the rapid growth in social
assistance grants and transfers, and questions are being asked regarding
the sustainability of such growth, especially regarding the foster care
grant. Grant expenditure has grown from around 2% of the GDP in 2000-01 to
more than 3% of the GDP in 2004-05. This is expected to reach 3,4% of the
GDP in 2005-06.

The child support grant reached 5,5 million children in January 2005, and
today over 7 million children are benefiting, while 1,3 million people are
receiving a disability grant and more than 2 million women above 60 and men
above 65 are receiving the old age grant.

In the context of this rapid expansion, ensuring the integrity of the grant
system is a major priority and especially applying rules for eligibility
consistently and effectively. The department is addressing this through
institutional restructuring, implementing norms and standards for grant
administration and through having a sharper focus on fraud prevention.
Operation Isidima, launched in late 2004, is a short-term measure to
improve the efficiency, effectiveness and impact of the department’s
service delivery, and it centres on improving business processes and
conditions at paypoints. Social grants alone are not enough to address
social challenges such as the breakdown of family structures resulting from
crime, violence, loss of parental support owing to HIV/Aids, and substance
abuse, drug dependency, etc, remain challenges to be confronted head-on.

In addition to income support, the department therefore also provides
developmental welfare services. In this regard, the department will oversee
the completion of the legislative framework to protect and support
children, disabled persons, older persons and women.

To further protect children, a national child protection register was
introduced in seven provinces. The register creates a database of
information of children who have suffered some form of abuse and neglect.
The register was said to have been completed in 2005 as well as the
implementation of a national policy framework for the prevention and
management of child abuse, neglect and exploitation. I thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Thank you, Mr Chairman. First of all, I
think I want to acknowledge basically the way the House has been working
with this department, and the role that has been played by different
members of the portfolio committee, and how they have been able to assist
both the department and the Ministry in facing the challenges that face
South Africa as a whole. These challenges are not small, because they
affect more than 50% of the people in this country.

Hence I take it as a challenge, personally, and also as a challenge to
government to try to keep ourselves focused on what we want to do as South
Africans beyond party-political affiliations because, in that manner, we
will be able to meet the challenges that face us all and ensure that we are
more directed at what we all have agreed to - improving the lives of our
people as a whole, especially that of elderly people, people with
disabilities and children in general.

I welcome all the statements that have been made here because, in one way
or another, they do reflect the care and the need to keep South Africans
together and improve their lives, irrespective of their political
affiliation as a whole.

I do quite agree and admit that as a department we still face quite a lot
of challenges, and those challenges can only be met and satisfied if we
work together. I accept and welcome the criticisms. We are looking at them,
irrespective of party-political intervention. But, in so doing, I think we
should be more constructive and face the realities of this country in a
more acceptable way, in a way that brings us together to achieve what we
want to achieve.

It cannot be agreed that it can only be the ANC or the government that is
able to do that. This needs the support of almost everybody. I have many a
time said here that whatever has been achieved in the field of social
development cannot only be because of the ANC; it cannot only be because of
the government. It must necessarily mean that all South Africans must take
care and work together to ensure that the lives of our people are improved
bit by bit.

It cannot all happen in a year or two. There is still a lot that ought to
be done, until we are able to say that at least we have met and we have
moved a little further than we were the year before.

As such, it is in that spirit that I am going to answer some of the
challenges that have been put here, and I hope we agree on that. This does
not necessarily mean only the ANC, it does not mean the IFP, nor does it
mean the ID - or any other party. It means that, as this Parliament, we
ought to come out clearly and work together to improve the lives of our
people, because if we do not do that, we are creating a bomb for ourselves
as South Africans. The whole world is looking at us to see whether what we
promised in 1994, which emanated from the Freedom Charter and the struggle
that we went through, is really possible to achieve.

That is why the ANC, on 8 January every year, puts forward the note that it
does, not for the ANC, but basically for the rest of South Africa to be
part and parcel of that. As such, I also welcome the comments that have
been made, especially by the other parties - the ID, the DA, the IFP, the
UCDP and everybody else. I think we are facing a challenge, which all of us
have to bear.

But, until then, let me answer some of the questions that have been put
here to me. The hon Mr Waters maintained that no detailed budget was
presented to the portfolio committee. However I am told by the department
and some members of the portfolio committee that budget figures were indeed
presented at the high-level slide presentation. The details thereof were
provided two weeks before the time to the committee, in the form of Vote
18, with a detailed explanation of expenditure trends.

However, when the hon Waters requested further details on the slide
presentation, this was gladly provided to him by the Department of Social
Development. The detailed budget was also contained in the strategic plan
document circulated to members in advance. That is what I am told.

On the question of the lack of social workers, obviously it is quite clear
- we have been saying this for some time - that we do not have enough
social workers in South Africa simply because, as other members have said,
the way in which we all looked at the question of social workers as South
Africans before apartheid and after apartheid, was not very fair in
general.
They were paid less than other professionals even with all their skills,
which are sometimes even more than that of other professions. They study
for, I think, four years. Teachers and nurses study only for two or three
years, and then they go out there.

Previously they were not organised and they are still not organised at the
present moment. Their voice is not heard in the bargaining chamber. Despite
that, we ourselves thought that we should be able to do that on our own,
and try to uplift them and listen to the demands that they are putting
across.

I think we all agree that something has to be done. We agree, quite
obviously, that we have to have a small indaba – that is yesterday -to look
at the issues that are being raised there, and to look at the possibility
of auxiliary social workers that could be deployed throughout the country.
We are talking to the universities all over to organise that. I think there
has been some separate budgeting by the department in order to deal with
that.

Regarding that indaba, I am definitely sure all those hon members who are
interested would be invited, openly and clearly, and they can look at this
matter – as well as all the universities and technikons. In fact, we wanted
all those, especially in terms of the rural areas where these people are
needed more to do that and ensure that we at least have something moving.
Also, the salaries are being upgraded as much as possible to make the
profession of social worker more attractive to younger people.

I was talking to the Deputy President now. We have agreed that we should,
as soon as possible, look at that - she says she has data on more than
6 000 graduates - to check if there is the possibility of taking those
people, in terms of Asgisa, and make sure that they are trained as fast as
possible at some of the universities in order to look into the question of
the shortages that we have, especially in the rural areas of South Africa.

In so far as the budget is concerned, hon Waters, of the Central Drug
Authority (CDA), I am told - and I think I believe – that the function of
the CDA is the co-ordination and monitoring of the implementation by
various departments, based on mini drug plans from each and every
department.

Departments need to ensure they have an adequate budget for the
implementation of these mini-drug master plans and, of course, we agree
that each and every department should have an effective budgeting mechanism
to take up the various challenges coming out of it in the clusters
themselves that exist currently.

I am told about the R240 000 budget spent on cocktails in the last year.
The vast amount of that money was for travelling from Pretoria to here for
all those public servants that are involved in this process. Some of them
are up there and over here in order to assist me with this Budget Vote. Mr
Waters is originally from Gauteng, so I am told. I thought you came from
the Eastern Cape, you see.

On the question of children awaiting trial, the Association of Children
Awaiting Trial’s assessment of children is taken very seriously by the
department: On a monthly basis 2 500 children are assessed at police
stations, magistrate offices and various facilities.

Provincial departments have appointed additional probation officers in the
past two years. The department has also allocated R9 million from the
integrated justice system project for 2006-07 to the development of both a
tracking and management system for children awaiting trial in the
department’s facilities. The tracking system will be aligned to
Correctional Services, the Department of Justice and Constitutional
Development and the SA Police Service systems.

Regarding child protection, the ultimate effective functioning of the child
protection register requires all provinces to have the necessary electronic
equipment and skilled staff. It is expected by the end of the financial
year that all provinces, including the Eastern Cape, will be linked to the
central database at national level. The process of recruiting and training
the relevant staff is under way.

The hon Dudley spoke on the limited budget for the implementation of the
Children’s Bill and the delay in the implementation of the strategy on
child abuse. The costing of both the Children’s Bill and the strategy for
child abuse, neglect and exploitation is under way and has not been
completed as yet.

It is, therefore too early to draw conclusions that the department does not
have the budget or the capacity to implement the Children’s Bill, as this
will be informed by the cost and implementation plans to be developed by
national and provincial government.

Although costing of the strategy for child abuse has been finalised as
indicated, it is important to ensure that some aspects of the strategy,
which do not have huge cost implications, are implemented in the provinces.

Hon Mrs Dudley, on the issue of long delays experienced by families to
access the foster care grant: Until the section 76 Children’s Bill is
finalised in Parliament, the placement of children in kinship foster care
will continue to be processed through the present Child Care Act, which
requires a court order.

The department has, however, initiated some measures to speed up the
placement of children in foster care. Our campaign on orphans and
vulnerable children during 2005 resulted in the prioritisation of foster
care by provincial departments of social development and the Department of
Justice and Constitutional Development.

The department is currently developing a strategy to address the backlog in
foster care at different levels of placement and aftercare. The strategy is
expected to be completed by June this year.

In other words, what I am trying to say is that these issues are issues
that challenge us all, and we should accept the roles individually,
politically and party-wise that we should be playing in resolving these
issues.

You cannot leave these issues to the public servants. You cannot leave them
to the Ministers, and you cannot leave them to the provinces. They cannot
be looked at as things that are party-orientated. They are duties that all
parties in South Africa ought to participate in, especially when it comes
to the issue of children.

They are things that affect us. They are things that all of us should
participate in. We should not allow ourselves to be embarrassed in that
there were things we could have stopped and roles we could have played more
comprehensively, than what we are doing currently individually and
collectively.

In other words, I do appeal again to the House to take the issues of social
development as seriously as they take those of economic development.
Because, without resolving those issues, without resolving the issues of
employment, we will never be able to ensure that the issues that affect
children, that affect the elderly, will ever be resolved.

On the issue from hon Mrs Smuts on the fact that the department reviews
disability beneficiaries currently on ARV treatment, this raises the
question on the need for income support. The law currently requires that
grants be reviewed at regular intervals to validate the eligibility and the
beneficiary status of all people who receive grants. The purpose is to
reduce the possibility of fraud. The issues we are raising are issues that
came from this House in general and that we are trying to address at the
present moment.

For instance, all the time we have been concentrating all the time on the
issue of each and everybody receiving a grant, and rightly so. But we came
back to this House and said that if we concentrate on social security there
is something that we are also missing, and that is the issue of the welfare
services for the vast majority of our people. As such we all agreed with
the ANC at its conferences in Mafikeng and Stellenbosch that we should
address the question of having a social security agency, and this went
through into law and we all participated in it.

Now that we have done that, quite obviously there is a gap that exists,
that of welfare services, and that is something that all of us ought to be
looking into. That is something that all of us should participate in. It is
not nice when you hear that children and older people are being abused, and
we are only giving them grants.

If we did give them grants and ensured that what we gave them went to them
directly and improved their lives - that would be good. But basically, at
the present moment, we are unable to ensure that those welfare services,
which are part and parcel of their constitutional rights, are fulfilled.

I hope from now onwards, with the setting up of the agency, that we will
concentrate on that and ensure that the laws that we are passing in this
House will be implemented to the benefit of the poorest of the poor in this
country, and older persons like the hon Mlangeni should be able to look at
these issues and participate in them. I will be joining you on the older
people’s side.

These are issues that are there that affect us all. They affect the
communities from which we come. One of the issues that we are not
concentrating on in this House and in South Africa is community building.
Our communities are in crisis. This is shown quite clearly by the crime
rate that we have currently in our communities.

The lack of strong families is one of the issues we ought to be looking at,
not to fragment the whole process of uplifting our social lives in general.
If we had strong families, if we had strong communities then some of the
things that are happening today would not be happening.

That is why we are trying to give more attention to giving capacity to
nongovernmental organisations and civil society. We are aware that even
this budget that we are putting forward now is not enough, but we hope to
increase it bit by bit, so that it plays quite an important role in looking
after the children, protecting the elderly and building stronger
communities and stronger families.

This is because without strong families, centrally controlled by the father
and the mother and without ensuring that women are respected and have
access to what is in the Constitution, we will never be able to resolve
this. As much as we agree and thank this Parliament, we say we have to work
and go together, and not be fragmented. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, Minister. In your
introduction you spoke for 20 minutes, so, using my prerogative power, I
gave you another 10 minutes. So, all in all, you have spoken for 50
minutes. Thank you for that.

That is a matter that the Whips should deal with – the duty Whips, in
particular. If you wanted additional time, they should have asked you, but
I did use my prerogative to give you that additional time because you did
not use all of it.

Debate concluded.

Business suspended at 12:45 and resumed at 14:05.


                    FEE SCRAPPING IN WESTERN CAPE SCHOOLS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R P Z VAN DEN HEEVER (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, “The doors of learning
and culture shall be opened” the Freedom Charter declares. The ANC is
committed to working with the people in an effort to improve access to
quality education.

The MEC for education in the Western Cape, Cameron Dugmore, recently
announced that for 424 of the poorest primary schools fees would be
scrapped. The provincial department of education has allocated R29 million
to the first phase of the national no fees roll-out plan initiated by the
ANC government. The initial roll-out will benefit more than 140 000 pupils
in the province. The ANC welcomes the initiative taken by the MEC and the
government of the Western Cape. Thank you. [Applause.]




                  ELECTION OF WESTERN CAPE METRO GOVERNMENT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr W P DOMAN (DA): Adjunkspeaker, die DA wens alle raadslede geluk met
hulle verkiesing. Op almal, maar veral die ANC, wat die meerderheid
munisipaliteite in die land regeer, rus ’n besondere verantwoordelikheid om
toe te sien dat dienslewering en skoon administrasie nou voorkeur kry.

’n Besondere woord van sterkte aan uitvoerende burgemeester Helen Zille en
haar veelpartyspan, wat die taak het om Kaapstad om te keer en uit te bou
as ’n wêreldstad met gehaltedienslewering vir sy inwoners en al die
besoekers van regoor die wêreld. Die feit dat kleiner partye, ten spyte van
geweldige druk en intimidasie, kon uitstyg bó politieke verskille om te
verhoed dat Suid-Afrika ál hoe meer ’n eenpartystaat word waarin die ANC
alles wil domineer, is prysenswaardig. [Tussenwerpsels.]

In Kaapstad moet die ANC nou toon dat hulle ware demokrate is en hulle rol
as opposisie op konstruktiewe wyse vervul. [Tussenwerpsels.] Die DA sal so
’n voorbeeld stel waar die party in die minderheid is.

Die swak politieke oordeel van die agb De Lille in die geval van Kaapstad
het haar en die OD ontmasker as beleidlose opportuniste wat eintlik ook
maar net die ANC ter wille wil wees. [Tussenwerpsels.] Enige pogings van
die OD om Kaapstad te destabiliseer sal die bietjie kiesersteun wat die OD
nog mag oorhê, vervreem en die agb De Lille se politieke beeld finaal
verwoes. [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement
follows.)

[Mr W P DOMAN (DA): Deputy Speaker, the DA congratulates all councillors on
their election. On all, but particularly the ANC, who governs the majority
of municipalities in the country, rests a special responsibility to see to
it that service delivery and clean administration are now receiving
priority.

A special word of encouragement to Executive Mayor Helen Zille and her
multiparty team, who have the task to turn Cape Town around and to develop
it as a world city with quality service delivery for its citizens and for
visitors from across the world. The fact that smaller parties, despite
tremendous pressure and intimidation, could rise above political
differences to prevent South Africa more and more from becoming a one party
state where the ANC wants to dominate everything, is praiseworthy.
[Interjections.]

The ANC will now have to show in Cape Town that they are true democrats and
must fulfil their role as opposition in a constructive manner.
[Interjections.] The DA will set such an example where the party is in the
minority.

The poor political judgement of the hon De Lille in the case of Cape Town
exposed her and the ID as opportunists devoid of policy, that really only
wants to exist for the sake of the ANC. [Interjections.] Any attempts by
die ID to destabilise Cape Town will alienate the little bit of voter
support that the ID may still have left and will finally destroy the
political image of the hon De Lille. [Interjections.]]

                       HIGH ACCIDENT TOLL ON SA ROADS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, 15 people were injured in
Tshwane on Sunday night after a military truck that was transporting troops
to Walmanstahl for training crashed into a car in the city centre. The
driver of the truck was detained by police for allegedly driving under the
influence of alcohol. The police are also investigating charges of reckless
and negligent driving.

The high accident toll in South Africa is a serious problem and claims many
lives each year. People who continue to drive under the influence of
alcohol are showing total disregard for the law and a total lack of respect
for the lives of their fellow citizens.
We urge the SA National Defence Force to launch its own internal
investigation into this matter and take the necessary action to ensure the
safety of their troops as well as other road users, and to limit the
chances of similar incidents occurring when transporting troops in the near
future. Thank you.


              ELECTIONS IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs M M MAUNYE (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, on 18 June 2006 the people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) will go to the polls for the
first time in 46 years to elect a government of their choice.

This will be the culmination of efforts by Africans to make their continent
a better place. The commitment demonstrated by the people of the DRC
communicates the message that they are determined to overcome their
difficult past to make theirs a country of peace, democracy, economic
growth, development and prosperity.

It is in this context that the ANC welcomes the efforts of the Congolese,
the African Union and the United Nations to ensure peaceful and democratic
elections in the DRC. We call upon all patriots to mobilise the
international community to support the cause of the people of the Congo. I
thank you, Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

                        POWER OUTAGES IN WESTERN CAPE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L W GREYLING (ID): Deputy Speaker, the recent power outages in the
Western Cape have shown that we urgently need to diversify the energy mix
in this province. The government’s response is to simply propose another
nuclear energy plant along the same lines as Koeberg. This will once again
centralise energy generation and make citizens vulnerable to further power
outages.

In addition, nuclear energy has the longest energy payback period of all
technologies, and we will be consuming our scarce energy resources before
it is able to produce any.

The ID would like to know whether the building of this new nuclear plant is
in any way tied to the agreement with France to supply Koeberg with a new
rotor. The timing of this proposal seems very suspicious and leaves many
unanswered questions. In addition to the billions which will be spent on
this new nuclear plant, R16 billion will also be spent on the highly
dubious pebble bed modular reactor.

Renewal energy in South Africa does not receive a fraction of this amount
of spending, yet it holds the potential to deal with our energy crisis in
an environmentally sustainable manner – R16 billion will provide 3 million
households with solar water heaters and present South Africa with a saving
of over 2 000 megawatts.

It is also ludicrous to the ID that the ANC, which was initially opposed to
nuclear energy, is now prepared to spend billions of rands on outdated
German nuclear technology while Germany has bought the rights to produce
our cutting-edge solar panel technology. This technology holds the promise
of bringing about a worldwide solar revolution, and positions South Africa
as the leader in this field.

Surely it is time for the government to embrace the future and invest in
innovative solutions that our own scientists are pioneering? I thank you.


               TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN SOUTH AFRICA AND INDIA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M RAMGOBIN (ANC): Madam Chair, the Freedom Charter of the people of
South Africa declares that there shall be peace and friendship in the
world. In pursuit of this noble perspective, the ANC works tirelessly for,
among other things, co-operation amongst the countries of the South in
areas of economic sociopolitical programmes and in terms of efforts to
ensure peace and equitable global relations.

In the past week our government and the government of India signed an
agreement that will facilitate the easy movement of cargo ships between the
two countries. The agreement also entails that the government of India will
provide maritime training to our youth from previously disadvantaged
backgrounds.

Today our trade with India stands at R14 billion. This agreement has the
potential to improve these figures. This bilateral agreement reinforces our
efforts in the context of centering South-South relations and co-operation.

The ANC calls upon the business community in our country to take advantage
of this opportunity and establish relationships with their counterparts in
India, and to further strengthen and consolidate the historical ties
between the two countries, especially because this agreement stems from the
principle strategic position of both India and South Africa. I thank you.
[Applause.]


                  MMABANA CULTURAL CENTRE AND ITS SUCCESSES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr I S MFUNDISI (UCDP): Deputy Speaker, there have always been questions
about small places to the extent that when sceptics spoke of Jesus Christ,
they asked what good had ever come from Nazareth. The trend continues
today, hence some people are hard-pressed to associate internationally
recognised icon former President Mandela with the sleepy village of Qunu.

The UCDP and its achievements of the past fall into this category. Very few
people are aware of the Mmabana Cultural Centre in Mmabatho in the North
West province. This cultural centre is the only one of its kind in the
southern hemisphere.

The arts and sports centre boasts world-acclaimed products such as gymnast
Tseko Mogotsi, a silver medallist at the World Tumbling Championships in
2001, and Chris Seabelo, the youngest fifth Dan Black Belt attainer in
South Africa graded in Japan. In dancing, Tebogo Kgobokoe and Kagiso
Ntseane, together with Tyrone Watkins and Salome Sechele, did well to
represent South Africa in the world Latin-American dancing championships in
Miami.

In the field of drama, greats such as Aubrey Sekhabi and the present
executive at the state theatre Walter Chakela cut their teeth in this field
at Mmabana. Musicians such as Bhudaza and Kagiso Boinamo, the opera singer,
are all products of this cultural centre. The current Oscar award
recipient, Presley Chweneyagae of Tsotsi fame, is also a product of the
Mmabana Cultural Centre, having grown up in the sleepy village of Ramosadi.

This is but one example for the government to invest in the arts all over
the country. Where there are no facilities, the government should build
some, even in remote areas, because talent abounds in this country. The
black-led government should hone and nurture youngsters to develop their
talents by erecting facilities so that this country can pride itself in
more similar facilities and achievements.

The UCDP has shown that greats do not come from places of glitz, glamour
and glitter. We should guard against letting these young flowers waste
their sweetness in the desert of no opportunity. I thank you.

                  ILLEGAL PRACTICE OF BULKING PENSION FUNDS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L M GREEN (FD): Deputy Speaker, the FD welcomes the swift action taken
by the Financial Services Board (FSB) in giving all life insurance
companies a deadline in revealing to the FSB and the public whether they
have made secret profits from the illegal practice of bulking.

The FD furthermore commends the FSB pension fund registrar for bringing to
our attention the fact that an estimated 60% of the large pension
administrators have taken part in bulking, although most of them have not
yet admitted as much. We commend the FSB for compelling companies to come
clean on bulking by April 30 and that criminal prosecution could follow if
companies refuse to give details of the secret bulking profits they have
made.

The FD congratulates Mr Bruce Cameron of Personal Finance on the excellent
exposé done on the illegal practice of bulking. We note with great concern
from Mr Cameron’s article that Alexander Forbes, a company that manages
several pension funds, has come under fire for secretly bulking together
the money in pension funds it controls and negotiating higher interest
rates from banks, then pocketing part of this interest without disclosing
it.

The FD now calls on all insurance companies, including Old Mutual and
Sanlam which also administer pension funds, to reveal to the FSB and to
Parliament whether they have made secret profits as a result of bulking.

If this is established to be true, we call on the FSB to take the strongest
possible action against such companies, and to ensure that the illegal
profits are returned, with interest, to the affected pension funds. I thank
you.


          IRREGULARITIES IN TENDER PROCEDURES BY ANC SENIOR MEMBERS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R JANKIELSOHN (DA): Deputy Speaker, the DA recently requested the SA
Police Service to investigate tender irregularities relating to two tenders
in the Dihlabeng Municipality in the Free State province. This was after
the ANC-run council ignored recommendations by auditors that this should be
done.

One of these tenders involves a senior member of the legislature, who also
happens to be the regional chairperson of the ANC. Now the same individual
is involved in another scandal involving the sale of municipal property.
Various other irregularities involving senior ANC politicians are
identified by both the Auditor-General and other bodies at all levels of
government every year. In many cases, the ANC uses its majority in
legislatures to sweep allegations of wrongdoing under the carpet.

It is apparent that in some instances government has become a network of
crime syndicates hellbent on plundering or stealing all our country’s
resources. [Interjections.] Does anyone in the governing party have the
guts to save our country from imminent destruction by a corrupted ANC cadre
policy that undermines both the Freedom Charter and our democratic
Constitution? Thank you, Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]
Mr T M MASUTHA: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: Is it
parliamentary for the hon member to accuse government of being a network of
syndicates of crime? [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, it is difficult for me to follow the point
of order. Hon Masutha, you have the floor.

Mr T M MASUTHA: Hon Deputy Speaker, my question is: Is it parliamentary for
an hon member to accuse government of being a network of syndicates of
crime?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I followed the statement, and the Table also concurs
that it was very broad in the way it was given. But to make sure that we
satisfy everyone, let us go back to the statement to check if there is any
element of it being unparliamentary. Mr Masutha, will you please allow us
time to study it and come back to the House on this?

Mr T M MASUTHA: I will certainly appreciate that, Deputy Speaker, because I
think the remarks were quite disparaging.


               DEATH OF PROMINENT ANC LEADER IN KWAZULU-NATAL


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu B Z ZULU (ANC): Somlomo, uComrade uVeli Nyawo ubengomunye wabaholi baka-
ANC abaqavile futhi ubengenele ukhetho lobukhansela endaweni yaseJozini.
Ukubulawa kwakhe ngesihluku edutshulwa ngezinhlamvu eziyisishiyagalombili
kushaqise abantu abaningi endaweni yaseJozini.

UComrade Veli ubulawe emveni kokuba kumenyezelwe emhlanganweni womphakathi
lapho bekukhona ngisho imeya kamasipala obumhla ka-22 Mashi. Kuthiwe
uthengisele amaSwazi umhlaba wakwaNyawo ehlangene no-ANC. Kuthe ngosuku
olulandelayo wabulawa ngokudutshulwa emini enkundleni yebhola ebigcwele
izibukeli.

Ukuhlaselwa kwabaholi baka-ANC ngalolu hlobo KwaZulu-Natali kukhombisa unya
nenzondo eyatshalwa ezingqondweni zabantu balesi sifundazwe maqondana no-
ANC. Thina njengeqembu lika-ANC siyakuchitha lokhu kubulala okuhleliweyo
nokuqondiswe ebuholini bukaKhongolose.

Sinxusa onke amaqembu ezombusazwe KwaZulu-Natali ukuba eze sibambisane nawo
ekulweni nalesi sihlava somdlavuza wokubulawa kwabaholi. Sinxusa kabanzi
ukuba amaphoyisa abophe abagqugquzeli bodlame ababonakala bememezela
esidlangalaleni ukuthi bazobulala, bagcine bebulele, badlula bangaboshwa.
Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr B Z ZULU (ANC): Madam Speaker, Comrade Veli Nyawo was one of the
prominent leaders of the ANC and he was a ward candidate for the Jozini
municipality. His brutal murder - he was shot nine times - shocked many
people in the area of Jozini.

Comrade Veli’s murder was announced at a community meeting on 22 March
where even the municipal mayor was present. It is alleged that he sold the
land of Nyamo’s tribe to the Swazis in collaboration with the ANC. The
following day, he was gunned down in the soccer stadium packed with
supporters.

This spate of killings of ANC leaders in KwaZulu-Natal demonstrates the
cruelty and hatred that was left in the minds of people about the ANC in
this province. As the ANC, we condemn this systematic killing of the ANC
leaders.

We urge all political parties in KwaZulu-Natal to come together in the
fight against this cancer of killing leaders. We urge the police to arrest
the perpetrators of violence who are announcing publicly that they are
going to kill. After that, they kill and they are not arrested. Thank you.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Is it in order for the hon member to mislead the House
by presenting things that are not factual about this story?
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members! If the hon member would like to
correct the information ... [Interjections.] Order, hon members!
Malungu ahloniphekile, siyanicela bandla ukuba ningawubangi umsindo. Sifuna
ukumuzwa ukuthi uthini ubaba uMpontshane. [Hon members, please don’t make a
noise. We want to hear what Mr Mpontshane is saying.]

Hon members, I am going to allow the hon member, because the IFP was next
to give a statement to make use of that time to correct the facts if you
think that what we have just been given ... because if the information is
not factual, then it is misleading. But if it is misleading, then you
better take the floor now and address us on the matter. Hon member?

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Deputy Speaker, the hon member is saying that it was
announced when the mayor of Jozini was at that meeting. That is not
factually correct.

I come from the area ... [Interjections.] ... and I personally knew the man
who was killed. I know the story surrounding the selling of land to the
Swazis. Now ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, some of you may have information that we
do not have. Allow some of us who do not have it, to be able to get it,
please.

So what you are saying is that it is not factual, that it was not announced
at that meeting. Is that what you are saying?
Mr A M MPONTSHANE: No, it wasn’t, that is what I’m saying.

Ukuhlanganisa ukushona komntwana wenkosi ... umntwana wenkosi lo. INkosi
uNyawo yinkosi engingaphansi kwayo mina. Ukuhlanganisa ukushona kwenkosi
nomhlangano wamakhansela akulona iqiniso.

Okwesibili, ukuhlanganisa ukushona kwenkosi nokuthi ubemele i-ANC
njengekhansela le-ANC akulona iqiniso ngoba ubemele i-ANC kuwodi 8 futhi
wehlulwa kulelo wodi, ehlulwa yi-IFP.

IPHINI LIKASOMLOMO: Ususele nemizuzwana eyi-17.

Mnu A M MPONTSHANE: Ngakho-ke akulona iqiniso okushiwo yilungu elisuka
kwaNongoma, okuyindawo ecishe ibe ngamakhilomitha ayi-100 uma usuka kuleyo
ndawo, ukuthi lizokhuluma lidukise iNdlu ngokufa komntwana wenkosi ...
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[I am personally under chief Nyawo. To mix the death of the king and the
council’s meeting is incorrect.

Secondly, to mix the death of the king and the fact that he was a ward
candidate for the ANC is incorrect, because he was an ANC candidate in ward
8 and he was defeated in that ward by the IFP.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have 17 seconds left.

Therefore, it is incorrect for a member from kwaNongoma, which is
approximately 100 kilometres from that place, to come here and mislead the
House about the death of a chief’s child.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, distance has nothing to do with that. You should
know that.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: It has, because I come from that place. I know what
happened. I also know the story about the selling of land in that area.
[Interjections.]

                         WATER TO BE USED OPTIMALLY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C B JOHNSON (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC congratulates the
Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry on the successful launch of the
National Water Week. The event took place yesterday in Plettenberg Bay,
under the theme “Water for growth and development”.

This programme is aimed at celebrating our scarce water resources and at
creating awareness of the optimal utilisation of water. It is important
that water users should utilise water productively, efficiently and
responsibly.

The ANC government is committed to ensuring access to clean water for all
the people of South Africa, and this programme is indeed part of the
broader government programme, which is geared towards ensuring that every
South African has access to clean water by 2010. Thank you. [Applause.]

          SKILLS REVOLUTION REQUIRED FOR SA TO REACH 6% GROWTH RATE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr C M LOWE (DA): Deputy Speaker, the DA agrees with the Deputy President
that a skills revolution is required for South Africa to reach its economic
growth target. Unfortunately, the ANC government’s track record on this has
been a complete failure, and their new skills initiative simply confirms
that the expensive and bureaucratic Seta system and the Expanded Public
Works Programme are not delivering.

Lack of skills in South Africa is a key constraint preventing us from
growing the economy at a rate of 6% or more. While we agree with government
that we must hire retired persons, foreigners and graduates with the
necessary skills, we have yet to hear a comprehensive plan from government
on improving our education systems or for producing technologically
qualified people to fill jobs and help bring South Africa into the
technologically advanced 21st century. The Departments of Labour and
Education should be working with each other to achieve this, not working
against each other.

If South Africa puts emphasis on using the skills its people possess and on
creating new skills, there will be opportunities for thousands of people -
black and white. But the crude reracialisation in the jobs and skills
market is one of the key reasons for the crisis in which we find ourselves.

Government needs to address this problem too if we wish to reach that magic
6%+. Then we too will really endorse the views of the Deputy President.
Thank you.


                             PROVISION OF HOUSES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M R MORUTOA (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, this is a statement on Mama
Mavundla’s house. “There shall be houses, security and comfort.” This is
one of the declarations made by South Africans 50 years ago in Kliptown.

Mama Doreen Mavundla, who is 105 years old, has been living in a temporary
structure for many years. The ANC-led eThekwini Municipality recently
handed Mama Mavundla keys to her very first house at Mount Moria near
Durban.
We congratulate the ANC government on implementing the Freedom Charter and
the fundamental freedoms enshrined in the democratic Constitution. Mama
Mavundla today joins millions of other South Africans who have benefited
from the efforts to provide the people of our country with basic services,
including housing.

Let the struggle to create a better life continue. I thank you, Deputy
Speaker. [Applause.]

               CLAIMS OF SEXUAL VIOLENCE IN ANC CAMPS IN EXILE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms J A SEMPLE (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, South African women watch with
dismay and outrage as events unfold at the Johannesburg High Court. One
reason for the apparent callousness towards the suffering of rape survivors
may be found in the revelations of widespread sexual violence in ANC camps
in exile, which went unpunished.

The DA is concerned at the ANC’s continued indifference to this matter. A
history of sexual abuse, in which victims remain silent because
perpetrators go unpunished, will lead to a society in which the abuse of
women is seen as inevitable and unremarkable.

The attitudes to gender violence, such as rape, prevalent in the ANC camps
in the past, might well explain the hostile attitude of female Zuma
supporters towards a rape survivor. Male perpetrators believe that they
have a right to sexual favours from women, even when they receive no
encouragement. This cannot continue.

The DA Women’s Network calls on the ANC, and especially the ANC Women’s
League, to investigate claims of sexual violence within their camps.
[Interjections.] They owe it to their female comrades who have kept quiet
for so long. [Applause.]

                CRIME SYNDICATES AND DEALING WITH CORRUPTION

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to say with
regard to the matter of Dihlabeng, that steps are being taken to
investigate the issues mentioned in the Auditor-General’s report. It is
misleading to suggest that nothing is being done about that matter.

I do want to say, though, that to make an allegation that government has
become a network of crime syndicates hellbent on plundering or stealing all
our country’s resources is a statement that begs for direct evidence. Any
member of society in our country who has evidence that somewhere there
exists networks plundering state resources and so on, are welcome free –
and, in fact, they are encouraged and we invite them - to provide
affidavits and evidence so that government is able to deal with such
corruption.

It is not helpful for responsible citizens who know that a crime is being
committed somewhere, not to come forward and make themselves available as
witnesses so that those who are busy with crime can be brought to book.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order, hon members!

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Now, to come into the House ... I’ve said this
before: The struggle against crime in this country is not the sole
responsibility of one party or another; it’s a collective responsibility of
the citizens of our country - black and white, rich and poor.

This is because the police will never be able to uproot corruption unless
all of us support the police, by way of providing evidence and standing as
witnesses in the courts. The reason I’ve stated this in this House before
is that even as we struggled for freedom, as long as members of the public
felt that they were disenfranchised, the police could not find and arrest
us because the people sympathised with the cause.

I do not believe that the majority of the people of our country sympathise
with crime. However, it alarms me when members of this honourable House
make statements that they cannot back up with evidence or witnesses, so
that we can uproot corruption.

I want a person who is masquerading as a member of the ANC to face evidence
from any party, so that we can lock him or her up and free society of this
corruption. But don’t make statements here that have no meaning whatsoever.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]


                             DEALING WITH CRIME


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Madam Deputy Speaker, following on
what the Minister of Defence said, I want to say this in isiXhosa and
isiZulu, because he put it very well in English.

Bab’uMpontshane, nokuba izigebenga bezisuka phi, kwaye nokuba le nkcazo
ibifundwa apha ibifundwa ngubani, ohlala kufutshane okanye kude, into
ebalulekileyo kukuba sithi thina amapolisa mawaphume azingele eza zigebenga
zibulele uVeli, eze nazo enkundleni, zigwetywe, akugqiba eze nazo apha kum
ndize kuzivalela. [Kwahlekwa.] Ungakhalaza uye kuma apho uthand’ ukuma
khona ... (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Mr Mpontshane, it does not matter where the criminals came from and
whether the person who gave the explanation here lives far or nearby, what
is important is that the police should go and look for the criminals who
killed Veli, bring them to court to be prosecuted, and afterwards bring
them to me so that I can ensure their imprisonment. [Laughter.] You can
complain as much as you like ...]

... it doesn’t matter, they have done wrong; end of the story. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Uyabona baba, wena noNgqongqoshe nizoqhubeka
ngaphandle, ngale kwalokho ngizonixosha manje. [Sir, you and the Minister
are going to continue outside, otherwise I am going to dismiss you.]
[Interjections.]

Hon members, please!

Bab’ uMpontshane sengikhulumile kodwa uma ungafuni ukulalela baba,
ungahamba sikudedele uyokhuluma ngaphandle noNgqongqoshe ngoba kufanele
siqhubeke nomsebenzi namhlanje. [Mr Mpontshane, I have spoken but if you
don’t want to listen, you can go and talk outside with the Ministers,
because we must continue with work now.] [Laughter.]

Bab’ uNdlovu, you are not part of this equation.

Ngicela ukuthi uthule. [Be quiet, please.] [Laughter.]
Hon Minister, you are allowed to continue with your work because I don’t
want Mr Mpontshane to join you. [Laughter.]

Ungahlupheki kakhulu baba. Ungamlandeli uNgqongqoshe uyosebenza manje. Nami
nje nginguwena bengingeke ngimlandele. Uyambona phela lo muntu ukuthi
wakhekile. [Don’t worry, Sir. Don’t follow the Minister; he is going to
work now. If I were you, I would not follow him. You can see that he is
sturdy.] [Laughter.]


     IMPROVING EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES AND SUPPORT FOR PRIORITY SKILLS


                            (Minister’s Response)

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZOLIMO NOMHLABA: Ngiyabonga Sekela Somlomo namalungu eNdlu
yePhalamende. Ngithi nje angibalule kulokhu okushiwo amalungu amabili e-
Democratic Alliance. Okokuqala, kumayelana nokubaluleka kokuthuthukisa
amathuba ezemfundo. Ngiyasho ngithi siyavumelana sisonke siwuhulumeni
ukuthi lolu hlelo oluphakanyiswe iPhini likaMongameli lokuqalisa uhlelo lwe-
Jipsa lubalulekile. Mhlawumbe kufanele sizikhumbuze ukuthi inkinga yabantu
yokungaqeqesheki kwabantu bakithi akusiyo into eqale kulo hulumeni.

Yingxaki esiyifice ivele ikhona nesizama ukuyilungisa kanye nokuvula
amathuba emfundo kulabo bantu ababengenawo amathuba - abanye babegqilazwe
ngenhlupheko, abanye ngokuphoqelelwa ngezilimi abangazifundanga, abanye
ngoba abazali bengenazimali kwabenza ukuthi bangakwazi ukuqeqesheka kahle.

Ngiyethemba ukuthi ngeke sime lapha singamalungu onke ale Ndlu, sibe
neqholo lokukhomba ngeminwe ngoba siyazi ukuthi uma sikhomba eminye ibheke
kithi, ikakhulukazi kithina labo esasikhona lapha kule Ndlu
yesishayamthetho ngaphambilini. Kufanele ngabe siyathula singakhulumi
kakhulu.

Okwesibili, ngithanda ukusho kudadewethu obekhulumela i-Democratic Alliance
ukuthi umthethosisekelo nomgomo we-ANC kucace bha mayelana nenkinga
yokudlwengula nokuhlukunyezwa kwabantu besifazane nabantwana.

Angikholwa ukuthi singama lapha ngeqholo lokukhomba ngeminwe futhi sithi
lokhu esikubona kwenzeka ngaphandle kwenkundla yamacala eGoli lapho kumanje
kuxoxwa khona udaba lokudlwengula oluthinta abanye bale nhlangano
kuyisiboniso sokwakwenzeka ngaphandle ezinkambini ze-ANC.

I-ANC ayikaze nangelinye ilanga ikhuthaze ukudlwengulwa kwabantu
besifazane. [Ihlombe.] Lapho bekutholakala khona ukudlwengulwa kwabantu
besifazane, ngisho ngaphandle, kwakuthathwa izinyathelo ezinqala. Yingakho
nanamhlanje ubaba uLekota ongusihlalo we-ANC wakhuluma ekhulumela le
nhlangano egxeka isithombe esasisibona ukuqala kwaleli cala ukuthi lokhu
esikubona kwenzeka akukhombisi umgomo nomthethosisekeko we-ANC. Ngithanda
ukuthi ngisiphendule leso sithombe ngisicacise ngoba akusilo iqiniso ukuthi
singama lapha bese sithi lokhu esikubonayo kuyinkomba yokwakwenzeka.
[Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairperson and Members of
Parliament, I wish to respond to what was said by the two members of the
Democratic Alliance. The first point is about education development. I
think we as a government unanimously agree that the institution of Jipsa is
very important. Perhaps we need to remind ourselves that this government
did not lead to the start of unemployables.

We found this problem here and we are trying to sort it out. We are opening
the doors of learning to those who were denied access to education. Some of
these people were languishing in poverty and some were even forced to learn
certain languages. Certain parents did not have money; as a result certain
people could not be trained.

I just hope that as members of this House we will collectively work
together and not point fingers, because remember, as soon as you point a
finger at other people, other fingers point at you. I’m afraid that those
who were here before need not talk much ...

Secondly, I wish to say to my sister who was talking on behalf of the
Democratic Alliance that the constitution and the policy of the ANC are
very clear as far as the rape and abuse of women and children are
concerned.

I do not think it is prudent and wise to stand here at the podium and point
fingers at what is happening in the ongoing trial outside the Johannesburg
High Court. The rape trial in which an ANC member has been implicated does
not reflect what was happening in the ANC camps in exile.

The ANC has never encouraged the raping of women. [Applause.] When a woman
had been raped, even outside the ANC camps, necessary steps would be taken.
It is for this very reason that the chairperson of the ANC, Mr Lekota,
spoke on behalf of the party condemning the ugly picture that we saw during
the start of this trial. What 0was happening there does not reflect the
constitution of the ANC. I just wish to correct that, because it is not
good for people to stand here and claim that what is happening outside the
Johannesburg High Court is reflective of a certain past.]


        SCHOOL FEES TO BE SCRAPPED IN POOREST SCHOOLS IN WESTERN CAPE


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Madam Deputy Speaker, recently the
MEC for education in the Western Cape, Comrade Cameron Dugmore, announced
that fees would be scrapped at 424 of the poorest primary schools in the
Western Cape. He also allocated an amount of R29 million to the first phase
of this national no fees roll-out plan. This initial roll-out plan, we were
told, will benefit 140 000 pupils in the province.

We wish to applaud the efforts of the Western Cape provincial government in
executing our promise to the children of South Africa that tomorrow will
certainly be better than today, and for demonstrating to the parents of the
poorest of the poor that our government, led by the ANC, is indeed
committed to implementing our policies that will bring about a better life
for all.

This also gives the assurance that the best circumstances for our people
will enable them to get out of the poverty of an economic and
discriminatory past. We are not only demonstrating that we have a plan as a
government, but that we are indeed executing that plan. Thank you.
[Applause.]


                       RENEWABLE ENERGY WELCOME IN SA


                            (Minister’s Response)

USEKELA-MPHATHISWA WEZIMBIWA NAMANDLA: Sekela-Somlomo, ndifuna ukuxelela
ilungu elibekekileyo, uMnu Greyling, ukuba siyi-ANC siyawaxhasa amandla
amatsha kwanamandla ahlaziyiweyo, kwaye siyawafuna kweli lizwe lethu.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[The DEPUTY MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Madam
Deputy Speaker, I would like to tell hon member Greyling that the ANC
supports renewable energy and it is definitely needed in our country.]

Internationally, it has been proved that one of the cleanest forms of
energy is nuclear energy.

Okwesibini ke, njengokuba siyifuna nje ... [Secondly, although we need it
...

... we are still doing research on renewable energy and the different forms
of renewables. Unfortunately, we have not reached a stage at which ...

... singaba namandla ahlaziyiweyo afikelela kwinqanaba lokuba anganezisa
iimfuno zeKapa noqoqosho lwaseKapa naseMzantsi Afrika uphela. Ukuba ke
umntakwethu unawo, nokuba ngawaphi na amandla angasetyenziselwa oku, nokuba
ngacatshulwe emoyeni okanyeni elangeni okanye nakuwuphi na umthombo
wamandla ohlaziyekileyo nonokufezekisa iimfuno zoqoqosho lwaseNtshona
Koloni, singavuya kakhulu. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[... we have renewable energy that can satisfy the needs of Cape Town and
its economy as well as those of the rest of South Africa. We would welcome
any suggestion from my brother, whether it is about solar energy or any
other form that is renewable, which could meet the demands of the economy
of the Western Cape.]

We’ll definitely welcome that information. Ndiyabulela, Sekela-Somlomo.
[Thank you, Deputy Speaker.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is an opportunity for one more response from a
Minister.


              A BETTER LIFE FOR ALL AND THE BUILDING OF HOUSES


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms E Thabethe): Thank you,
Deputy Speaker. I’ve been raising my hand, but maybe because I’m on this
other side ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are taking your time. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms E Thabethe): I just want to
respond to the statement made by the member Morutoa confirming that yes,
indeed, the ANC is committed to making sure that a better life for all is
achieved. That is why Mrs Mavundla received her house at the age of 105
years. That also confirms what the President said when he opened Parliament
this year – when he spoke about the age of hope.

Also, this confirms then that in 1955 when the men and women of this
country had the vision that there would be rights for all of us: The right
to housing and the right to – you might say ... [Inaudible.] This is the
reality, because this is what is happening today, and the ANC’s commitment
to the people is really being implemented. I hope that many other people
will be able to benefit, because building these houses means there will be
more jobs and also that the economy is being steered. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Deputy Minister. We really apologise for
taking time to recognise you.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


Debate on Vote No 25 – Agriculture – and Vote No 29 – Land Affairs:

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Aa! Murangaphanda wa nndu,
vhathomphei, Mulangi wa Buthano la Lushaka ... [Greetings to the House
Chairperson, hon members, Speaker of the National Assembly ...]

... Ministers and Deputy Ministers, directors-general and other leaders of
the Public Service present here today, heads of departments from provincial
departments of agriculture and land affairs as well as land claims
commissioners, heads of agricultural public entities, distinguished guests,
friends and comrades, I wish to extend a warm welcome to the members of the
executive councils responsible for agriculture present in this House today.

Clearly, without you, colleagues, the co-ordination of the activities of
the agricultural sector would not have been possible. To our partners, the
farmers and farmers’ organisations; leaders of agricultural business, some
of whom are represented by their organisations here; members of the
agricultural CEO Forum from various industries and agricultural businesses;
our local government mayors; some of whom have come back as deployed cadres
in the sector of local government - some of them have not taken up their
deployment - we would like to say to all of them: Thank you for the role
that you have shared with us in ensuring that we revive our rural economy.

To our female farmers of the year and many other women in the sector who
have always reminded us that this is a section in which both women and men
make a difference to our agricultural economy and food security; to the
young farmers who are our future; to the educators in the agricultural
colleges and universities who cultivate the necessary human resources
critical in supporting agrarian and land reform; to the many traditional
leaders who have given user rights to land for many people in communal
areas, in order for them to continue to get sustenance as they continue to
face the challenges of fighting hunger and poverty; to the landless
communities whose life in land is still insecure; to the farmworkers and
workers in the food and agricultural industries; and, to the
nongovernmental organisations involved in the land and agrarian sector, I
want to say to all of you that our promise of changing this skewed
ownership patterns of land in our country is being realised each day, as we
deliver the land through the variety of programmes that your government has
put in place.

Today it is no longer a dream that it is possible to conclude our
restitution programme by 2008. To our land claims commissioners and their
staff, I want to say: Thank you for your efforts.

Ningadinwa nangomuso. [Thank you, I hope you will do it again.]

To the farmers and landowners who have worked with us to ensure that we
deal with this programme efficiently and faster, I also want to say thank
you for their co-operation.

Abaningi abantu ababefake iziphakamiso zamabanga omhlaba bayisikhumbuzo
kithi sokuthi impela ithemba alibulali. Ngikhuluma nje sesixazulule izicelo
ezibalelwa ezinkulungwaneni ezingama-71 589. Sekusele nje kuphela
eziyingcosana kulezo ezibalelwa ezinkulungwaneni ezingama-79000 ezazifakiwe
ekupheleni kukaNovemba 1998. Yingakho sineqholo lokusho sithi impela izolo
alifani nanamuhla nenamuhla aliyukufana nengomuso. Konke lokhu
esingakubalula njengempumelelo kwenziwe ukusebenzisana nokubambisana.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Most of the people who forwarded land claims are reminders to us that
patience does pay. As I’m talking, we have settled 71 589 applications. We
are left with a few applications totalling 79 000 that were made in 1998.
That is why we are proud to say that yesterday is not like today and today
will not be like tomorrow. This progress is the result of working together
and co-operation.]

It is our hope that the new partnership and commitment we build prior and
during the Land Summit will act as a reminder that ours is and must be a
collective effort that seeks to bring about equity and prosperity for all.
In his state of the nation address, our President spoke about the age of
hope that our nation and country is now going through. Echoing the same
sentiments, the Minister of Finance, Mr Trevor Manuel, cited
Nhlanhlayenkosi Mhlungu who stated that, I quote:

“Inala ifikile asivuneni.” [Abundance is here. Let us reap.]

In Tshivenda they will say ...

“Ndi tshifhinga tsha khano khulu – kha ri kane.” [It is the time of great
harvest. Let us reap.]

I submit Vote Nos 25 and 26 to this House with a statement by more than
8 000 delegates to our Land Summit of July 2005 held in Johannesburg who
proclaimed that, and I quote: “Genuine progress gives us hope for the
future.” The progress that these delegates were referring to was the
economic growth and poverty alleviation in our society.

The hope of millions of our rural people of future growth and poverty
alleviation in agriculture and the rural economy is based on a complex and
complicated mixture of economic, social and cultural factors. It is for
this reason that the issue of land access and use continues to be a
limiting factor for others to actively participate in the agricultural
economy.

The Land Summit was a critical forum for the evaluation of our policies and
programmes. Some of the concerns that were raised are as follows: Firstly,
that the state has not used effectively all the instruments provided for it
in the Constitution, in particular, expropriation in the public interest;
secondly, that the exclusive use of the willing-buyer, willing-seller
approach has had a limiting effect and therefore needs a review; thirdly,
that the challenge of settling labour tenure security remains a legacy that
none of us sitting in this very Chamber would be proud of; fourthly, that
the nonlimitations on foreign land ownership have exposed the challenge in
terms of the very programme of land reform as an instrument of achieving
equity; fifthly, they said that the lack of alignment amongst the spheres
of government and departments did not ensure sustainability of projects in
which land had been transferred to beneficiaries; and, lastly, they said
that the length of time that it took to finish a project negatively
affected those who were ready and willing to work with government in land
delivery.

It was through the thorough examination of these challenges that the Land
Summit concluded that working as partners, we, as government, should from
our side, review the willing-buyer, willing-seller principle; look at a
combination acquisition strategy which may mean proactive land acquisition
where possible; and create local structures, which include local government
representatives, farmers, farmworkers, labour tenants and community
organisations, so that they together can be able to identify the land needs
in their localities and what the best way is of ensuring that we can
address these challenges.

The other matter that they raised was that we needed to fast-track the
implementation of the Communal Land Rights Act, so that indeed we could
improve the capacity of our rural producers to become economically viable
and move beyond being subsistence farmers. They also charged us with
implementing fully the mechanisms, as articulated by our Constitution.
They also indicated that we needed, as government, to improve our alignment
amongst government departments and the spheres of government, and that we
should ensure that the work undertaken on the investigation of foreign land
ownership should inform us of an appropriate policy on how best we can
manage this issue.

Indeed, the question of land in South Africa is one of a paradigm of
paradoxes. Whilst the colonialists and the apartheid architects used land
conquest and land deprivation as a strategic tool for suppression and
subjugation, the new democratic state in this country uses land and
agrarian reform as a catalyst and foundation for economic development, the
eradication of poverty and economic growth in order to improve the quality
of life of all South Africans.

The Land Affairs budget reflects that we will do some of these things that
the summit recommended we do. We will be implementing our proactive land
acquisition strategy. This strategy will embrace two approaches: A needs-
based approach and a supply-led mechanism, focusing on the state as the
lead driver in land redistribution, rather than the current beneficiary
redistribution programme.

The state will proactively target land and match this with demand or on a
need-for-land basis, obviously working with the local associations and the
local government. This strategy will be piloted at sites within the
agricultural development corridors, areas with a majority of labour tenants
or where there are great possibilities for agricultural growth.

In the same breath, we have to deal with cases of human settlement, such as
the need for land in the East London area and in Ekhurhuleni where, in
collaboration with the Department of Housing, we will need to work together
to remove the challenges of land hunger for housing development.

The first phase of the implementation of the Communal Land Rights Act is
already under way. We have worked with the University of KwaZulu-Natal in
the development of the curriculum of land officers, who will be critical to
the administration of the land after it is transferred to communities.
These individuals will be selected by the communities themselves so that we
can ensure that they remain accountable to them.

Towards the end of 2004 we visited the Houses of Traditional Leaders in the
Eastern Cape and Mpumalanga, with the aim of discussing the implementation
of the legislation. During these visits we agreed on a follow-up strategy
to go to the regional areas and working particularly with the traditional
leaders at regional level, so that we collectively can appreciate the
challenges that we will face in the implementation of this legislation, and
so that we collectively, as traditional leaders and communities, can also
manage tensions that are likely to arise when the issues emerge in terms of
the transfer of land, particularly with regard to boundaries.

Delegates to the Land Summit were conscious that land and agricultural
development should be seen as one programme rather than two separate ones.
As we deliver the Agriculture Vote, we want to reflect on the contribution
of agriculture to our economy. It is by now almost common knowledge that
every R100 that is invested in agriculture generates more jobs and income
redistribution than any other sector of the economy. Yet the share of the
sector in terms of the GDP has fallen consistently over the past five years
to the current level of about 3,5%. Agriculture, in terms of employment,
despite the fact that this has also been in decline, is still a major
employer because its share of the GDP is 10,1% of the total employment in
the country.

Furthermore, more than 3 million people or 52% of households that live
below the poverty line in our entire country live in rural areas, many of
which depend on agriculture and agriculture-related sectors. These people
also share part of that hope of our people in the future growth of the
sector and poverty eradication. This means that the hope of these millions
of people relates to very complex challenges and opportunities that must be
addressed.

A recent study by the Monitor Group, which we asked to work with us as the
Department of Agriculture and Land Affairs, to identify what we needed to
do to indeed contribute towards 6% growth, indicated that the growth of
approximately R68 billion, and its attendant employment and investment-
creation opportunities that took place in agriculture in the recent past,
was in fact limited not only in the primary parts of the sector but, most
importantly, that it was also generated in the value-adding chains of
downstream agriculture-related industries.

This is imperative, because the fundamental objective of this government in
agriculture in the rural economy is to reduce the differences that exist –
the differences between the urban and rural areas - to a simple question of
choice that would be exercised by people where, otherwise, the quality of
life between the rural and urban areas would largely be similar in the not
so distant future.

Agriculture-related industries have shown faster growth than the primary
sector. The windfall and the effect of the 2003 producer price index, which
was primarily driven by maize prices, has also allowed our farmers to
reduce their debt-to-equity ratio, which moved from over 30% in the 2001
season to just about 25% currently.

Unfortunately, when this windfall occurred, the consumer price index also
rose, but the government was quick to implement food security intervention
strategies to protect the vulnerable and the insecure, as far as food was
concerned. Although the net farm income seems to have dropped on an annual
basis, since 2002-03 until the present moment, the average net farm income
increased from R11 billion to R7 billion over the last five years, hence
the determination of government to embark on a new trajectory as embodied
in the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa (Asgisa).

It is clear to us that we cannot achieve the gains we are pursuing in the
agricultural sector without galvanising our resources to address the
organisation and capacity of our government institutions, whilst
strengthening the partnerships we have established through the process of
developing the sector plan in November 2001.

We are all familiar with the challenges that the ostrich and poultry
industries have faced over the past year regarding the threat of avian flu.
This challenge is not unique to South Africa, as the poultry industry
internationally is under pressure with the weakening of prices, owing to
declining demand as a result of the spread of the avian influenza H5N1
strain.

We are also aware of the decrease in the harvest of grapes attributed to
the continual drought and heat conditions that have affected the wine
harvest negatively. The 2006 wine grape harvest is estimated at over
one million tons, approximately 2% less than the estimate of January 2006.

Climatic changes, as observed in recent times, are resulting in periodic
droughts interspersed with flooding, causing a decline in the yields in the
different commodities. A drought management plan in line with the Disaster
Management Act was approved and is being gazetted for public comment.

This plan responds to disasters related to drought that affect small
farmers, and it makes provisions for animal feed and water. The declaration
of 2006 as the international year to combat land degradation and
desertification will assist us in galvanising our resources to combat the
effects of climatic change in our communities.

Umnotho wakuleli usukhulile. [The economy of this country has grown.]

Our nation is going through the major challenge of uplifting millions of
our people who are below the poverty line. They need housing, food, health
care, education and employment that will provide a better quality of life.
It is this hope that our government and, in particular, the Departments of
Agriculture and Land Affairs must preserve.

It is also the departments’ objective to ensure that we as these
departments recommit and rededicate our efforts to the upliftment and
support our people, particularly those confined to the periphery of
economic activity, those whose hopes are vested in the land and other
natural resources – and of course, those whose hopes are at the heart of
the sector strategy.

The question is therefore: How then have we fared to date and what have
been some of the milestones since the advent of democracy? In making this
assessment, I would like to remind this House of the words of the hon
member Kraai van Niekerk in his first budget speech in the National
Assembly on Tuesday, 13 September 2004:

  It is widely acknowledged that agriculture is the cornerstone of any
  development of any developing country. This also applies to South Africa.
  In fact, the growth of the South African economy over the past year or so
  can mainly be attributed to agriculture.

It may be 11 years ago, hon Van Niekerk, when you said those words, but I
am confident that they are as true today as they were then. We can cite
examples, more of what we have done already in order to affirm that the
role of the agricultural sector in the economy remains critical.

Conscious of the importance of the role of this sector as a foundation of
our economy and rural development in 2001, government identified
agriculture as part of microeconomic reform, as one of the growth sectors
of our economy. Our intervention as government in this sector, either in
the opening of market access opportunities beyond our traditional markets
or in strengthening our veterinary support in order to continually ensure
that our livestock industry remains economically viable, has been, among
other things, an indication that acknowledges the role this sector plays in
our own economy.

In this instance I would like to refer to the grain industry especially
maize, which is produced for domestic consumption, particularly with regard
to food security. The grain industry is also a subsector that contributes
to our animal feed industry and to our foreign exchange through exports.
The concern over the price of maize has had most of us worried over the
past two years.

However, in the true tradition of “’n boer maak ’n plan”, we have seen the
expansion of feed lots as another way of ensuring that the absorption of
the grain surplus actually enters this area of animal or livestock
development. This resulted in the red meat and the poultry industries
delivering impressive results of 11,5% and 1,2% added margins for 2004-05,
as compared to the same period in the previous year of 2003-04.

This concern over the price of maize should, however, not be taken lightly,
particularly with regard to the change in consumption patterns of our
society, as indicated by the study done by Grain SA and the need for better
crop forecasting models and techniques. We hope that the current efforts by
the industry, the Maize Trust and the Department of Agriculture to develop
better forecasting methods, will provide us with a better tool to exploit
this going forward.

The challenges exist, but opportunities also exist. We are grateful for the
efforts of our partners in the sector, particularly those who have come
forward to provide both participation and skills. The norms and standards
for extension and agricultural advisory services will enable national
programmes, and particularly provincial departments of agriculture, to
focus on capacity for extension officers to perform their work effectively
by indicating the farmer-extension-officer ratio for different farm areas
and sizes, as well as the farming systems. Human resources, skills
development and outlining the competencies and skills required of an
extension agent are also critical.

Managing mentorships, particularly for extension officers and farmer to
farmer, where possible, is again important. Here, I am referring to
organisations such as the newly established chief executive officer’s
forum. This is a forum through which, as the Department of Agriculture led
by the director-general, we have brought together all the CEOs of
agricultural businesses in South Africa so that we can share collective
wisdom on how we can manage and govern this sector effectively; and how we
can bring the experience that they have had over many years to bear as we
continue to support agricultural development in our country.
I would also like to refer to the Maize Trust and the gestures from AgriSA,
as articulated by our newly elected chairperson Neels Ferreira, whom we
wish Godspeed in doing his job. We are also encouraged by the ostrich
fraternity, with whom we as the Department of Agriculture, have interacted.
They have indicated to us their willingness to assist in broadening access
and providing for the empowerment of those historically disadvantaged
individuals.

The overview I have just given and numerous other indicators not mentioned
here tend to support our assertion that the state of agriculture in the
country is good, even though the benefits, I must say, may not be shared by
all, but that is something that all of us have to work at.

Considerations coming out of the Land Summit and our own commitments and
achievements indicate that there is reason for agriculture to celebrate the
age of hope. Within the sector strategy and together with sector partners,
we are all beginning to feel both the opportunities and challenges of
deregulation and the emergence of the competitiveness of our sector.

In summary of what preceded, opportunities exist within new interventions,
such as in biofuels and the gold industry. For this reason it has become
necessary for us as a department to position ourselves, as well as our
provincial departments, so as to ensure that we improve our animal health
regulatory system and that we restructure our industry through the AgriBEE
intervention and other empowerment tools to ensure that, indeed, we can all
share in this age of hope.

I would like to report to this House that the programme that was launched
last year on assisting farmers, small farmers in particular, through Mafisa
– the Micro Agricultural Finance Schemes of SA - has been launched in a
number of provinces. We will continue to roll out to those provinces in
which we have not yet been able to launch.

But it is also necessary to say to this House that the Comprehensive
Agricultural Support Programme, which was an intervention to ensure that we
could have targeted support for farmers, has continued. Unfortunately, we
continue to face challenges of spending. At yesterday’s Minmec meeting and
today when we had political discussions among members of the executive
councils and their senior officials, we came up with a strategy of how to
deal with the bottlenecks that were there so that we could truly ensure
that these programmes, identified as sorely in need of support, could
indeed meet their objectives.

Issues of food security have never been as important as they are today.
Although the plight of the poor and malnourished has improved during the
first decade of our democracy, it has also been recognised that a more
integrated approach is needed to ensure sustainable results. To respond to
these challenges, the Cabinet endorsed the Integrated Food Security and
Nutrition Strategy as a priority for the social cluster.

The Integrated Food Security and Nutrition Programme further recognises,
and is aligned to, the broad regional food security framework highlighted
within the Regional Indicative Strategic Development Plan of SADC. It is
within this framework that the government of South Africa has responded in
the past three years to the humanitarian appeal by the World Food Programme
for food emergency relief operations in the SADC region.

Agricultural development thus becomes critical in providing vulnerable
communities with the hope for a better life, free from poverty, hunger and
unemployment. It will be done, and we will continue to do what we have been
doing, to ensure that we can assist those communities that are vulnerable
and particularly those that are still dependent on subsistence farmers for
their livelihood.

Here I would like here to applaud my colleagues, the MECs for agriculture
in various provinces, who have created province-specific programmes within
the Integrated Food Security Programme. We have Siyazondla in the Eastern
Cape. Some of you may be aware that at the Mbashe Municipality we have been
able to target each and every household within the 12 wards of the
municipality, with the aim of ensuring that no household’s land is untilled
and that no household goes to bed without food. [Applause.]

We intervened by ensuring that those communities in those 12 wards would
share in the implements that have been so acquired, will each receive seeds
and will each be assisted with mechanisation using some of those power hoes
that we acquired from Agrid. These are some of the interventions that we
use ukuxosha indlala [to fight poverty].

The Siyavuna programme in KwaZulu-Natal and other programmes such as the
revitalisation of smallholder irrigation schemes, Resis, in Limpopo are but
some of the ways in which, together with the provincial departments of
agriculture, we are attacking the challenge of poverty in our country.

It is clear to me that whatever we want to do, it cannot be done if we do
not, at the same time, attend to the governance of the sector. It is for
this reason that I would want to assure the Members of Parliament that in
our meeting with the MECs for agriculture, we agreed that we needed to do
something to ensure that we implemented the Intergovernmental Relations
Framework Act so that we do have a better way of managing our sector. It is
our belief that the success of the land and agrarian sector will occur when
we also improve the capacity of our officials, both in terms of skills and
knowledge, so that they can truly be advisers to our people.
I can highlight a number of challenges and a number of achievements that we
have made over the years, but I think today there is less time to do so. I
am sure that these Members of Parliament, together with our people,
particularly those of our partners in the industry and our farmers, will
continue to give you hope for the future - that in agriculture we can
create a better foundation for our economic growth as a country. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mrs D G NHLENGETHWA: Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members, MECs from
different provinces, department officials, we have already entered the
second decade of freedom and this financial year’s budget is yet another
tool through which we continue to advance the objectives of the national
democratic revolution, the NDR.

The stated aim of the budget is a fundamental pillar of the ANC five-year
programme and manifesto, which is to build a better life for all.

Namhlanje kungcono akufani nayizolo lapho abantu bakithi bekuyizigqila
zokusebenza amapulazi kuthiwa bazini ngokuba ngabanini mapulazi. [Today is
better than yesterday when our fellow countrymen were slaves and worked on
farms where it was said that they do not have the capabilities to be farm
owners.]

Our theme is to move forward decisively towards the eradication of poverty
and underdevelopment, taking care of the process of social cohesion and
building a social security net. The preamble to Act 108 of 1996 states
clearly that:

  We, the people of South Africa,
  Recognise the injustices of our past;
  Honour those who suffered for justice and freedom in our land;
  Respect those who have worked to build and develop our country; and
  Believe that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in our
  diversity.
  We therefore, through our freely elected representatives, adopt this
  Constitution as the supreme law of the Republic so as to –


  Heal the divisions of the past and establish a society based on
  democratic values, social justice and fundamental human rights;


     ... Improve the quality of life of all citizens and free the potential
     of each person.

Section 25(1) of the Constitution established the framework for the
implementation of land reform, as it states, “No one may be deprived of
property except in terms of law of general application, and no law may
permit arbitrary deprivation of property.”

Sihlalo, ngitawuphuma ngicaphune kancane kuloMtsetfosisekelo welive
njengoba ngifuna, kuze ngisite laba labangafuni kubuyisela umhlaba
kubanikati bawo, kutsi bawuvisise kahle lomtsetfo.

Ukhona lomtsetfo sawubeka kuyo yona leNdlu yeSishayamtsetfo. Ukhona-ke
futsi lomtsetfo, unematinyo futsi uyaluma. Nasibona kutsi, awulumi kahle
sitawengeta lamatinyo, alume kuvakale endvodzeni. [Tandla.]

Kantsi futsi sigaba 25(2) (a) na (b) ukhuluma ngekutsatfwa kwemihlaba.
Ukhona umtsetfo waloko, futsi sitawusebentisa. Kuyabonakala kutsi kukhona
bontsamolukhuni labacinile ekusombululeni leyonkinga yekutsi umhlaba
ubuyiselwe ebantfwini. UMhlon Abram utawukhulama kabanti ngawo lowo
mtsetfo. (Translation of Siswati paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, I will deviate and quote from the Constitution of the land
because I want to help those, who do not want to give land back to the
rightful owners, to understand this legislation.

The legislation is there; we passed it in the National Assembly. The
legislation is there, it has teeth, and it bites. If we realise that it
does not bite properly, we will add the teeth so that one can feel the
pain. [Applause.]

And also section 25(2)(a) and (b) talks about expropriation. There is
legislation with regard to that, and we will use it. It is clear that there
are those who are stubborn and who make it difficult to find a solution to
the problem of giving land back to the people. The hon Abram will elaborate
on that legislation.]

Minister, allow me also to join you in adding to the recommendations that
came out of the indaba on land agrarian reform. This summit was attended by
a diverse range of stakeholders who came from all walks of life. The summit
put land and agrarian reform at the centre stage of national discussion.
The aim of the summit was to review the performance of South African land
agrarian reform after 10 years of its implementation, by identifying
challenges that have led to its slow place, given the target set in the
Reconstruction and Development Programme.

One of the challenges identified was the slow pace of delivery. Also, high
land prices have affected the pace of land delivery. There has been a 20%
increase in land prices in the past two years. Integrated delivery and
commitments made by municipalities and other government departments have
not yet been realised. Stepping up capacity-building and technical advice
to land reform beneficiaries is still a daunting task.

I mention these challenges, hon Minister, hon members, all of us, precisely
because I hope we have taken these marching orders very seriously - and
also from the President in his state of the nation address, as well as from
the land summits we had in July.

In his state of the nation address on 3 February 2006, the President stated
clearly that land reform and land restitution, which the hon Dlali will be
talking about, were critical in the transformation of our society, and he
also referred to the reviewing of the willing-seller, willing-buyer policy,
that the Minister alluded to and something that the hon Abram will also be
talking about.

Also, one of our monitoring strategies as a committee is to ensure that the
land redistribution programme is aligned to the provincial growth and
integrated development plans - the IDPs - of municipalities, and to attend
to the proper use of funds that have been made available for the productive
utilisation of land.

This directive has a very significant impact on the budget of Land Affairs.
As of now, more resources must be made available to attain the given
targets. As we all know, the total landmass in South Africa is 122 million
hectares. Of this total, 82 million hectares constitute prime white-owned
agricultural land. So this means that 22 million hectares is white-owned
agricultural land that is expected to be delivered by 2014.

Kusho kwekutsi kulomnyakatimali lophela mhlaka 31 March 2006, siphumelele
kunikela umhlaba loti 3,7 tema-hektha kubantfu bakitsi. [It means that in
this financial year that ends on 31 March we have succeeded in giving 3,7
hectares of land to our people.]

Act 22 of 1994, as amended, states clearly that the role of the Land
Commission is to provide for victims who have been dispossessed of land
rights as a result of racially discriminatory laws and practices that took
place after 19 June 1913.

Sihlalo, loku kusiniketa ligunya lekutsi sisondzele kulesikhatsi
lesitibekele sona kumele sinikele ngemhlaba longemahektha lati 3,7
kuleminyaka lemitsatfu letako.

Sihlalo, kunanatelela loku lesengikushito, Likomidi Letekulima Netemhlaba
livumelene Nelitiko Letekulima Netemhlaba ... [Kuhlaba lulwimi.]
(Translation of Siswati paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, this gives us the right to meet the deadline that we have set
for ourselves. We must give 3,7 hectares of land in the next three years.

Chairperson, to add to what I have said, the Portfolio Committee on
Agriculture and Land Affairs have come to an agreement with the National
Department of Agriculture and Land Affairs ... [Interjections.]]

Chairperson, I can’t concentrate. [Interjections.] This is my maiden speech
as the chairperson of the agriculture committee.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs C-S Botha): Members!

Mrs D G NHLENGETHWA: Please behave yourself. [Interjections.]

Kusukela kulomnyaka lesikuwo litiko litawuta kulelikomidi litesitjela kutsi-
 ngelilanga letabiwotimali tematiko satsi sitawenta loku naloku. Natsi
njengelikomodi sitabe sesiyababuta kutsi senikwentile yini? Nelitiko
litawusho nalikwentile kutsi yebo sikwentile, kodvwa sihlangabetana nanati
tinkinga. Sitabe sesiyasho kusti asishintjeni sibuke ngalelinye liso
sindzawonye kuze sikwati kuphumelela.

Sivumelene kutsi loku kutawukwenteka njalo ngekota yemnyaka, hhayi kutsi
sime kuze kufike lomunye umnyakatimali kube kungikhona sitawubuta kutsi
nanitsite nitakwenta kutsi nekutsi, nikwentile yini? Sitawusho kutsi nente
kahle la, anikenti kahle la, lapha-ke yenyusani emasokisi, nalapha nicinise
tintsambo teticatfulo tenu. (Translation of Siswati paragraphs follows.)

[Starting from this year, the department will come to this committee to
tell us that on the day of the departmental budget we said we would do this
and that. We, as a committee, will then ask if you have done it. The
department will account and explain the challenges they are faced with.
Together we will then look for an alternative that will make us successful.

We agreed that this would happen every quarter of the year, and that you
should not wait for another financial year to account on what you did and
did not do. We shall compliment the work that has been done and advise on
what is to be improved on.]

This exercise will improve our monitoring strategies in meeting our targets
as expected, as the theme of Land Affairs is “A partnership to fast-track
land reform - a new trajectory towards 2014”, which is a true reflection of
the goals it intends to achieve.

Between 2002-03 and 2005-06 overall expenditure grew significantly from
R1,1 billion to R3,9 billion at an average annual rate of 52,7% with the
largest rate in the 2004-05 financial year. This increase is being driven
by the acceleration of delivery in land reform programmes, in particular
the land restitution programme.

The land restitution programme has an expenditure increase of
R394,3 million to R2,7 billion in 2005-06 at an average rate of 90%. This
spending is expected to decrease from R3,4 billion in 2006 to R2,5 billion
in the 2008-09 financial year, owing to the phasing out of some other
programmes in 2009-10.

The Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa, Asgisa, that
the hon Nkuna and the hon Thomson will be talking about, has identified
agriculture as one of the sectors to be developed for accelerated growth.

The hon Thomson will be talking about addressing the challenges of poverty,
underdevelopment and marginalisation confronting those in the second
economy. The department has come up with a programme that will provide
assistance to emerging farmers, namely the Comprehensive Agricultural
Support Programme, CASP. The aim of this initiative is to provide
postsettlement support to targeted beneficiaries of land reform and other
producers who acquired land through private means.

The total allocation to the Department of Agriculture for the 2006-07
financial year is R1,95 billion, which represents a decrease of 2% from the
previous financial year, which was R1,99 billion.

For the food, animal health and disaster management subprogramme, the issue
of the shortage of veterinary scientists and other skilled personnel has
been a challenge. How is this going to be addressed if the budget is cut by
more than half - a 51% cut? I think we need to revise this for the benefit
of our people.

Another challenge is infrastructure development. As this is one of our
priorities, one would have expected a significant increase in engineering
as there is a shortage of energy and resource use, and there is the
management subprogramme that facilitates the development of agricultural
infrastructure and deals with land care programmes and the revitalisation
of irrigation schemes. But with the small increase, we will find it
difficult to address these issues effectively.

Another challenge is that the department has a target of training 200
agricultural students by the end of 2007. Is this amount of students going
to be enough to meet the increasing demand for research and advisory
support to emerging farmers? Are there enough benefits to maintain them
within the sector? Is the sector attractive enough to lure more scientists
to the sector? We need more, hon Minister of Finance.

In conclusion, on behalf of the ANC I would like to extend my heartfelt
condolences to the family in the North West that, owing to unforeseen
circumstances – floods - lost a newborn baby. The parents were trapped in
the house and unable to get help.

I would also like to thank the North West provincial government for their
intervention in distributing food parcels to the affected communities. They
showed one of the ANC characteristics, which is that the ANC really cares.
[Applause.] The ANC supports both Budget Vote 25 and Budget Vote 29. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Hon Chair, hon Minister, colleagues, I’d like to thank
the Minister for her well-prepared speech and for the fact that she
acknowledged the importance of agriculture. I think it has to be emphasised
because people sometimes forget the important role it plays.

In the seven minutes at my disposal I will, in the true tradition of the
opposition, embark on a few critical areas related to agriculture.

Minister, the main problem with agriculture in South Africa at present is
that, on the one hand, macroeconomic conditions are exerting pressure on
the profit margin of agriculture and, in doing so, limit the opportunities
in agriculture. On the other hand, there is a political drive and need to
establish more entrepreneurs on a smaller economic scale, and to increase
job opportunities in agriculture. These are contradicting tendencies. This
is the crux of the problem in South Africa, at the moment.

I would like to point out some of the consequences of the economic
realities and government policies of the day in the agricultural field in
this regard. It is an economic reality that when profit margins come under
pressure, costs are cut, labour forces shrink and farming units tend to
increase in size.

Last year the profit margin in agriculture decreased by 22% and debt
increased by 11% - a tendency that has continued over the past five years.
The logical reaction to these economic realities over the past number of
years in agriculture is that 400 000 job opportunities have been lost. They
decreased from, basically, 1 million to at least 600 000. Minimum wages in
this regard did not help to stem the job losses.

The economic pressure and challenges also caused a number of commercial
farmers to decrease over the past 10 years, from approximately 60 000 to
40 000. However, these farmers still manage the same number of farms, which
means that the unit size per surviving farmer has increased. It is against
this direction that the commercial farming sector is moving, which is to
increase economic units. The restitution and reform policy is moving in the
opposite direction, namely to establish more farmers or more people on
smaller units in agriculture.

These new farmers do not have the experience, knowledge and funds to
survive, yet they have to play on the same economic field and experience
the same pressures, increasing labour costs and diminishing profit margins.
The final result of these conditions is reflected in the many failures of
well-intended restitution and reform projects in South Africa. A lot of
attention in this regard is required from you, Minister.

The problem of the day for the Minister is even more complicated. To assist
the Minister, she has two large Ministries available, namely Agriculture
and Land Affairs. Both departments have good, qualified staff and excel in
reorganisation and restructuring. They are very prominent on the talk
shows, new planning and new schemes, but fail dismally on the practical
side on many fronts to implement their own suggestions.

The responsibility to have functional departments is the responsibility of
the Minister and the two directors-general. Why, Minister – and I can ask
many questions – have extension services just gone out the window? Only one
or two provinces have made some efforts. Why, Minister, on the restitution
side, do officials act one-sidedly and deal with problems in half measures?
Why, Minister, are there extensive delays, lack of communication and poor
negotiations between the Department of Land Affairs and commercial farmers?
Why, Minister, the large delays in dealing with permits and the subdivision
of agricultural land?

Het u kennis geneem, Minister, van die welwillendheid ten opsigte van
grondhervorming en die bereidwilligheid van boere om in dié proses te help?
Hierdie welwillendheid is besig om te vervaag, as gevolg van die arrogante
optrede van baie van die amptenare van die Departement van Grondsake.

Die uitdaging is groot, naamlik om die twee departmente van Landbou en
Grondsake te aktiveer, nie net om verskonings aan te bied nie, maar om
oplossings te vind vir wat in Suid-Afrika werkbaar is. Dit help nie om elke
keer te verwys na voorbeelde van lande met sosialistiese beleide en dan te
verwag dat dit klinkklaar net so in Suid-Afrika se moeilike
klimaatsomstandighede en vryemarkstoestande sal werk nie.

Om grondhervorming te laat slaag, moet die kundigheid van die bestaande wit
en swart kommersiële boere betrek word. Tans word hulle hoofsaaklik
geïgnoreer. Gevolglik slaag bitter min projekte. Daar is baie redes vir dié
mislukkings, maar die gebrek aan kundigheid by nuwe boere oor hoe om die
grond en die landbou-ekonomie te bestuur, is sekerlik die belangrikste.

Mense wat nog nooit geboer het nie, en deur restitusie op plase beland,
word gou ontnugter deur realiteite. Té veel mense op té min grond was nog
altyd 'n probleem. Daar kan nie verwag word dat 'n plaas waarop een eienaar
'n bestaan kon maak, skielik in staat sal wees om 'n groot groep nuwe
eienaars - wat geen ervaring het nie; nie genoeg fondse beskikbaar het nie
en feitlik geen begeleidende voorligting ontvang nie - suksesvol ekonomies
te laat voortbestaan nie.

Hierdie is die reël en nie die uitsondering nie in feitlik al die
hervormingsprojekte. Kyk maar na die jongste Sondagkoerant, Minister, die
Rapport, waarin geskryf is oor 'n plaas Whitehall in Tzaneen wat in 1999 'n
ekonomiese plaas was en oorgedra is aan 144 nuwe eienaars. Hulle het drome
gedroom en opgewonde die nuwe plaas beset. Dit het 'n nagmerrie geword.
Vandag is al die pompe stukkend, die kabels is weg, die pype is opgesaag,
en meeste van die bome dood. Feitlik al die mense is weg van die plaas en
bevind hulle weer in plakkerskampe. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Minister, have you noticed the goodwill regarding land restitution and the
farmers’ willingness to assist in this process? This goodwill is slowly
fading as a result of the arrogant conduct of many officials of the
Department of Land Affairs.

The big challenge is to get the two departments of Agriculture and Land
Affairs going and not just to offer excuses, but rather to find solutions
that could be implemented in South Africa. It does not help to refer to
examples of countries with socialist policies all the time and then to have
the expectation that it will work in South Africa’s difficult climate and
free market conditions without any problems.

In order for land restitution to be successful, the expertise of existing
white and black commercial farmers should be utilised. At the moment they
are being ignored for the most part. The result is that very few projects
are successful. There are many reasons for these failures, but the lack of
expertise of the new farmers on how to manage the land and agricultural
economy is without a doubt the most important.

People with no farming experience, who have ended up on farms through
restitution, are quickly disillusioned by the realities. Too many people on
too little land have always been a problem. One cannot expect a farm where
one owner could make a living suddenly to be capable economically to allow
a large group of new owners with no experience, not enough funds available,
and virtually no related guidance to be successful in surviving
economically.

As a matter of fact, in all the restitution projects this is the rule and
not the exception. Minister, just take a look at the Sunday newspaper of
last week, the Rapport, about a farm, Whitehall in Tzaneen, that was an
economically viable farm in 1999 and transferred to 144 new owners. They
had big dreams and occupied the new farm with great excitement. It became a
nightmare. At the moment all the pumps are broken, the cables are missing,
the pipes are cut up, and most of the trees have died. Virtually all the
people have left the farm and are finding themselves in squatter camps
again.]

Through disastrous planning the dreams of scores of people have been
destroyed through the neglect on the part of national and provincial
government departments in this regard.

Dié is maar enkele voorbeelde van letterlik honderde plase in elke
provinsie. Die erns van die probleem is groot, as in ag geneem word dat 68%
van die kommersiële landbougrond in Limpopo en selfs Mpumalanga onderhewig
is aan restitusie-eise, en dié tendens duur voort. Kan u dink wat met die
ekonomie van die landbou gaan gebeur?

Die oplossing lê daarin om die meer gevestigde boere in Suid-Afrika te
betrek. Hierdie boere het die kundigheid en hul leiers bied op kongres na
kongres hul samewerking en kundigheid in dié verband aan. Maar, keer op
keer ignoreer die Minister en die departemente dié aanbod en skryf juis die
mislukkings toe aan bestaande boere se onbetrokkenheid. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[These are but a few examples of literally hundreds of farms, in every
province. The gravity of the problem is enormous if one takes into
consideration that 68% of the commercial agricultural land in Limpopo, and
also Mpumalanga, is subjected to restitution claims, and this tendency is
continuing. Can you imagine what is going to happen to the agricultural
economy?

The solution lies in getting the more established farmers in South Africa
involved. These farmers have the expertise, and their leaders have offered
their co-operation and expertise in this regard from the one congress to
the next. But the Minister and the department ignore this offer time after
time and attribute the failures in particular to the lack of involvement of
existing farmers.]
Minister, you are busy squandering the goodwill of the large majority of
commercial farmers who want to help and have the expertise to transform the
reform and restitution actions into a success. Baie dankie. [Thank you.]
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr D M DLALI: Chairperson, Ministers, Deputy Ministers, hon members, as we
debate this Budget Vote today, the principles of the people’s document are
more relevant than ever in that the land shall be shared among those who
work it. There shall be equitable access to the land of this country, so
says the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa.

Now, since we all embrace and hold the Constitution in high esteem, the
question that we need to ask ourselves in this Parliament is: How far have
we gone in terms of that equitable redistribution of our land? How soon are
we going to realise that we are still very far from the realisation of the
Constitution? All of us here in this Parliament are constitutionally
obliged to make sure that we accelerate land reform as fast as we possibly
can.

We do have the means and mechanisms to speed up agrarian reform if we use
our legislation and the Constitution effectively, because the land and
agrarian reform is deemed to be in the public interest. Therefore, the
policy also states that where land is acquired for land reform through
purchase or expropriation, the state is obliged to pay just and equitable
compensation.
On the basis of the above, we had a land summit some time ago in Gauteng at
which all stakeholders gathered for one purpose only and that was to look
at the pace of land and agrarian reform in this country. I therefore
believe that in that summit the delegates mentioned that we need to relook
at some of our mechanisms to meet this constitutional requirement.

The government set a target to redistribute 30% of agricultural land to
previously disadvantaged groups within a period of 10 years, namely by
2015. This objective is not likely to be met if one considers the rate at
which land reform implementation is taking place at the moment. Ultimately,
that would delay the process of land delivery in this country of ours.

In the South African experience over the past 11 years with the
implementation of the land and agrarian reform programme, the white
commercial farmers or landowners have had the latitude in terms of
determining the price that suits them, regardless of the buyer’s ability to
enter into transactions regarding the land in question. They exercised
their veto power.

For example, we were told by Azapo at the land summit that I referred to -
Mr Nefolovhodwe is listening there - that statistics showed that 10 years
after democracy land ownership was roughly as follows: 55 000 white farmers
owned all farmland outside the designated poor reserves, and black-owned
land and emerging farmers were still to be quantified.

They went further and said that 83% of land was white-owned, 17% was black-
owned; or rather, that 87% was white-owned farmland, and 13% was black-
owned poor land. This was according to Azapo. If the state of affairs
stated above by Azapo is correct, we are in trouble.

To go back to what I have just said, because beneficiaries of land and
agrarian reform are powerless - albeit they are supported by the state in
their endeavours – they cannot and will not exercise a veto power as
opposed to commercial farmers.

Therefore, in the prevailing circumstances is it not necessary, Comrade
Minister and Deputy Minister, to think carefully about expropriation in
terms of the Constitution and other relevant legislation, as they say that
where land is acquired for land reform through purchase or expropriation,
the state is obliged to pay just equitable compensation? What just
equitable compensation means is for you to determine, but it should not be
blown out of proportion. It means what it means.

The public interest also includes the nation’s commitment to land reform,
and to bring about equitable access to all Africa’s natural resources.

In restitution, selective expropriation is advocated, especially in areas
where negotiations with landowners are not fruitful, or where excessive
prices are being demanded by landowners. Such expropriation is adequately
provided for in the Constitution. Sections referred to are sections 25(4),
25(1), 25(2) and 25(3). Therefore, that will not be a problem.

The recognition of land distribution as part of the broader developmental
objectives of government need to be clearly outlined by the department - in
both restitution and redistribution. Most of the focus has been mainly on
the delivery of land, rather than on enhancing the sustainability of land
reform projects and programmes.

For example, in the committee’s oversight visit in August 2005, we found
some projects really wanting. I will mention one of them, the Paprika
Project, which is in the Northern Cape. I am told that this is a provincial
project. We need more explanation regarding this project. What went wrong?
We were told that that project had 12 emerging farmers who became workers
on their own farm, and that the Gili Company was responsible for the
management of that particular project.

We need to know what went wrong with that project. The government injected
R90 million into that project. Farmers were allocated 10 hectares each. The
money allocated was for water infrastructure. We were also told that the
Land Bank came on board to assist farmers with a loan of R57 million for
production purposes.

Furthermore, we were told that the problem started to develop between the
company and the farmers. The Orange River is within walking distance from
that farm. Opposite, on Namibian soil, the farmers who were doing very
well. That particular area was green when we were there. In this area of
ours there was no production and tractors were broken down. Of course we
need to learn from some of these mistakes to see what we can do to avoid
repeating the same mistakes and to look for a way forward. This particular
project has completely collapsed.

We also visited a project in Upington where we found two female farmers who
were doing very well with cotton and lucerne production on 17 hectares of
land. They had already produced 70 tons of lucerne at R700 a ton. Also,
they got R6 000 per hectare for cotton per annum.

We also went to the Free State where there was a project called the
Kutlwanong Farm Trust, which was part of a select project of about 200
beneficiaries who were settled on 4 000 hectares of land in 1996. This also
needs urgent intervention by both the provincial and the national
governments. This is just to mention a few. Nothing was taking place on
that farm and the project was also deteriorating. The implements bought
were not taken care of, Comrade Minister and Deputy Minister. There is a
need for legislation to force these provinces to perform as expected. As a
committee we will help if needs be.

The Eastern Cape Land Care project in Sterkspruit is also doing very well.
More community members are involved and working very hard, but more needs
to be done there in terms of co-ordination between the project managers,
traditional leaders and public representatives - in particular the ward
councillor and the broader community, including your community development
workers and ward committee members. The only problem there was that the
workers were not properly paid as expected, in terms of this particular
project.

In his state of the nation address of 2006, the President indicated that
government would ensure that the land redistribution programme was aligned
to the provincial growth and development strategy and integrated
development plans of municipalities. The challenge is that the directive
demands that the department devises a coherent, interdepartmental
development support strategy, that will enable beneficiaries of land reform
to gain access to the support offered by various departments and agencies.

Therefore, it is critical that we embark vigorously on the skills
development programmes. One of the reasons why some of the projects are in
the state in which they are now is because of a skills shortage. I am
wondering what Nafu (National African Farmers Union) is doing about their
members who need some assistance in skills development. Are Nafu and AgriSA
meeting as farmer organisations to address these problems or are they just
looking after their own individual interests?

We need a joint effort in terms of skills development. All stakeholders
must join hands to address this issue - the state, AgriSA, Nafu, Agriseta
and all other interested parties, in particular the white commercial
farmers. They have been in this game for decades if not centuries. We need
them. We need their individual support and assistance with individual
emerging farmers to make sure that land reform progresses very well.

In order for us to deal with the growth and development envisaged by Asgisa
and to build an economy so that every South African will have a better life
and be part of poverty eradication, we must look at the proper realignment
of these agencies. It is also critical that we move with speed, that we
accelerate land transformation so that poor people will benefit, more
especially the rural community that depend on land for survival.

Infrastructure development is very important and that part of the Asgisa
programme should also focus on agricultural infrastructure development,
because we all agree that land and agriculture are the backbone of the
South African economy. Therefore, without infrastructure in terms of water
irrigation and proper roads that link these farmers with the markets, our
efforts to transform this sector will be doomed or fruitless. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr E J LUCAS: Chairperson, I have only recently joined the committee on
agriculture and land affairs, so it is an honour for me to be speaking here
today for the first time on these two important Budget Votes.

The Departments of Agriculture and Land Affairs have the potential to make
an enormous impact both economically and socially on the lives of many
South Africans. It is of vital importance that they receive the necessary
funding and attention needed to accomplish their objectives. We, in the
IFP, were therefore pleased that they received attention during President
Mbeki’s state of the nation address earlier this year.

The aim of the Department of Land Affairs is to create and maintain an
equitable and sustainable land dispensation that results in social and
economic development for all South Africans. The overall allocation to this
department has increased from R3,9 billion in the 2005-06 adjusted
appropriation to almost R4,9 billion in 2006-07, with Programme 3:
Restitution, receiving the largest share. With the exception of Programme
2: Surveys and Mapping, the rest of the programmes all received increases
to their allocations in 2006-07.

The land question has been a burning issue in South Africa for some time
now and it shows no signs of dying down. We do understand that the
department is faced with many challenges and obstacles, but it is
imperative that all the role-players and stakeholders work together to try
to reach some sort of consensus, so that the important issues are dealt
with in a way that does not lead to uncertainty and enables current
deadlines to be met.

The department is currently faced with the very difficult situation in
which some landowners are reluctant to part with their land or accept the
terms of condition of sale offered by government. This is contributing to
the slow pace of land reform and is causing many people, who are still
waiting for their land, to become frustrated and to call for more drastic
measures to be taken in order to speed up the process.

The situation cannot continue. Ways and means of moving forward and
completing this process within the specific period must be found. It is
also time that all relevant and effective parties work together in a
cohesive, open and honest way to assist with the completion of this
process.

The total allocation to the Department of Agriculture for 2006-07 financial
year has decreased from R1,99 billion last year to R1,95 billion in the
current budget. This represents an overall decrease of 2%. The decrease is
as a result of, amongst other things, the allocation to the Biosecurity and
Disaster Management Programme decreasing by 35,8%, and the Sector Service
and Partnership Programme decreasing by 0,8%.

The fight against poverty alleviation and the plight of the poor,
especially in the rural areas, are just some of the pressing issues in
which agriculture can play a leading role. It is, therefore, a matter of
concern that the department’s expenditure is only expected to grow by 0,3%
in the medium term. We, in the IFP, hope that this will not negatively
affect the performance of the department and get in the way of reaching its
objectives.

Agriculture impacts on the lives of many people in different but equally
important ways. Although it has a leading role to play in the alleviation
of poverty and in ensuring food security, the impact that agriculture can,
and should, have on the economy is also great.

One of the major challenges facing the department is to broaden
participation in the agricultural sector and to provide access to the
industry for those who were previously disadvantaged. It is therefore with
great anticipation that we await the finalisation and adoption of the
AgriBEE charter, which will, hopefully, facilitate ownership and
participation by previously disadvantaged people within this important
sector.

The government had to intervene recently in the matter relating to 75 farms
given back to the communities in the Limpopo region. It was reported that
the majority of the farms, which were bought for R150 million, were not
productive as beneficiaries lacked the funds and skills to utilise them.

Situations such as the above must not become the norm. Getting previously
disadvantaged people access to farms and the agricultural sector is just
the first step. We must make it a priority to leave them with the necessary
skills so that they are not disadvantaged in any way, and have the means
not just to make their farms productive but economically successful. We
urge the department, as well as the relevant role-players, to seriously
look into this important issue. We need to retain ownership of our land and
make the farms more profitable.

The Departments of Agriculture and Land Affairs have already contributed
greatly to the improvement of the lives of many South Africans, but there
is still so much more that they can do, both socially and economically. The
potential impact of these departments can be immense, if the many
challenges and obstacles that they are currently facing are overcome. Only
then will the true impact of these departments be felt. The IFP supports
Budget Votes 25 and 29. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S N (Sylvia Nomatamsanqa) SIGCAU: Madam Chair and hon members, the
Department of Agriculture, with its programmes now reduced to five, has by
far the most important priorities residing under Programme 2: Livelihoods,
Economics and Business Development. Rightly so, the single largest chunk of
the department’s budget is allocated to this programme.

The UDM maintains that emerging farmers require a type of one-stop shop
support facility in each major agricultural region, which would not only
bring together the variety of the department’s and the private sector’s
services, but would also draw upon the expertise of established farmers as
mentors. We believe that the various objectives of the Comprehensive
Agricultural Support Programme, the CASP, can best be achieved in this
fashion.

Another facet that impacts upon Programme 3 is the question of regular
droughts, especially the increasing frequency and duration of the dry
seasons in certain parts of the country. The department needs to revisit
the question of irrigation schemes in order to, where possible, extend
current schemes to cover larger areas. It would also not be amiss for the
department and the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry to explore the
possibility of irrigation and water supply redistribution in the Eastern
Cape, where significant amounts of water are essentially untapped.

The second matter is the resolution of the willing-buyer, willing-seller
issue. Rights, including those to property, can be limited in certain
circumstances and the departments would do well to turn to expropriation
only as a last resort. The redistribution of land is important and should
always be pursued with awareness of the highly emotional nature of
landownership.

The UDM supports Budget Votes 25 and 29 – Agriculture and Land Affairs. I
thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Ms B THOMSON: Thank you, Chair.

... mhlonishwa Thoko Didiza, oNgqongqoshe abakhona eNdlini ... [The hon
Thoko Didiza, Ministers present in the House ...]

... MECs, heads of departments present, hon members, ladies and gentlemen,
thank you, hon Minister, for the encouraging words on this Budget Vote
today. It is now 11 years since we started out on the road to democracy. We
have indeed seen positive changes in some of our people, especially in the
previously disadvantaged groups of this country.

Be that as it may, I’m also equally concerned about the evident poverty
engulfing our people, especially the rural masses. This is a form of
everyday life. Our people still find themselves in this poverty trap. There
is at least one hope, though, that could break this cycle and it is
agriculture. A certain writer once said, “No farmer, no food.”

Nokho-ke kudingeka siyithathe le nselelo yendlala futhi siyenze ibe yithuba
esingalisebenzisa ekuguquleni izimpilo zabantu bakithi, ikakhulukazi
ezindaweni ezisemaphandleni lapho indlala isina izibethela khona kubantu
bakithi. Ingani siyavumelana sonke ukuthi amaphesenti angama-70 wabantu
base-Afrika bahlala kulezi zindawo ezintulayo. Yilapho-ke kulele khona
mathuba okwandisa izitshalo, imfuyo, ukutshalwa kwezimbali ngenhloso
yokuzithumela emazweni angaphandle ukuze phela sikwazi ukuqinisa amakhukhu
abantu bakithi, ngoba phela nawo amakhukhu lawa awanalutho.

Kwelakithi KwaZulu-Natali, sibonga asiwuvali umlomo futhi siyaziqhayisa
ngemisebenzi yalo mnyango. Ngiyethemba uSolwazi, ubaba uNdabandaba
noDokotela uMjwara, bakhona phakathi kwethu namuhla. Ngiyazibongela futhi
ngiyazikhuthaza nezinye izifundazwe. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[However, we need to take up the challenge of poverty alleviation. We need
to use it as an instrument to improve the quality of the lives of our
people, particularly those who stay in rural areas where poverty is very
rife. We all agree that 70% of our African people stay in poverty-stricken
areas. That is where we need to increase harvesting, the breeding of
animals, as well as the production of flowers which we export in order to
generate funds for our people, since their pockets are empty.

In our province, KwaZulu-Natal, we are very grateful and proud of the
services we receive from this department. I hope that both Prof Ndabandaba
and Dr Mjwara are here today. I thank you and encourage other provinces to
follow suit.]

What is striking in KwaZulu-Natal is the Siyavuma Programme, a hands-on
approach to poverty alleviation, food security and the gradual elevation of
resources to poor and emerging farmers. Household food security is one
thing, while commercialisation is another.

Ngizwile-ke ngandlebenye ukuthi ngisho namagundane aseMaphophoma kwaNongoma
akhuluphele ayaqhuma, ingani nawo azitika ngokudla lokhu okutshalwayo.
[Uhleko.] [I heard rumours that even the rats of Maphophoma, KwaNongoma,
are very fat because they are feeding on our agricultural produce.]
[Laughter.]]

Equally commendable are the innovative programmes and projects, such as the
production of mushrooms and upland dry rice. Though these are pilot
projects, the momentum has been unstoppable. People are eating mushrooms
and people are eating rice. I urge other provinces to take a keen interest
in this. We all know that a few grams of mushrooms cost no less than R10,
yet surprisingly I have learnt that mushrooms can easily be produced and
harvested on a frequent basis. Yes, the agrarian revolution in KZN is a
step ahead. It encompasses a ladder of development in terms of which
subsistence farmers can graduate to commercial farming.

I also need to emphasise the fact that agriculture cannot progress without
land. Agriculture needs the support of the Department of Land Affairs and
the Land Claims Commission. This will enable agriculture to align itself
with the targeted areas of land restitution and redistribution, especially
in this Budget Vote.

It only makes sense knowing that the targeted areas, effectively land and
agricultural potential, will be put to proper use. It makes me feel good to
say so, because the hon Minister Thoko Didiza’s competence is both Land and
Agriculture.

Uma sengiphetha, ngifuna ukusho ukuthi abantu balibheke ngabomvu uhlelo
lomnyango wethu, i-Agribee. Sizobhukula-ke, senze konke okusemandleni
ukuthi lube yimpumelelo. [In conclusion, I must say that our communities
are looking forward to our department’s programme, called AgriBEE. We are
going to work very hard in order to make it a success.]

In the pursuit of agricultural activities, let us all use our natural
resources wisely and judiciously. Let us eradicate poverty without
compromising the environment. That is sustainability.
Ngiyabonga kakhulu. [Ihlombe.] [Thank you very much. [Applause.]]

Mr L W GREYLING: Hon Chair, South Africa has moved from a highly protected
and subsidised agricultural sector to one of the least protected in the
world, which in the face of huge agricultural subsidies in the North have
made farming a very risky profession. This is coupled with the threat of
climate change and the enormous strain which it is putting on our water
resources.

These changes have led to agriculture shedding a number of jobs and
exacerbating our high unemployment rate. Some commentators believe that
South Africa’s future does not lie in agriculture and that the government
should place its emphasis on simply creating an industrialised economy.

The ID disagrees with this. It is important to note that many of the so-
called Asian tigers initially relied on agriculture as the basis for their
economic takeoff. In the economies such as those of China and Taiwan it was
the extensive land reform programmes that created an equitable basis for
their future economic growth.

It is important that we truly tackle the issue of land reform in South
Africa, and that government and landowners work together to prevent our
land reform target from becoming a constantly moving target.

The ID is also concerned that despite the enactment of the Extension of
Security of Tenure Act, we are still seeing the eviction of farmworkers,
particularly in the Western Cape. The ID would like to see rights education
programmes being stepped up throughout the country and, in accordance with
the court judgment of 2001, all possible evictees being given free access
to legal representation.

Ultimately, though, the challenge for land reform is to not only transfer
land, but to ensure that the land generates wealth for the beneficiaries in
society as a whole. To do this the level of post-settlement support needs
to be drastically improved.

The Freedom Charter states that the state shall help the peasants with
implements, seeds, tractors and dams to save the soil and assist the
tillers. I know of many rural communities that don’t receive a fraction of
that support, and it is time for us to prioritise their needs. This is
particularly the case for small-scale agriculture which, if nothing else,
could be a very effective poverty alleviation strategy and provide a
sustainable livelihood for many rural people who are enduring grinding
poverty.

The ID therefore commends the work that is being done in the Mbashe region
to assist small-scale farmers. This initiative needs to be extended to all
impoverished areas in the Eastern Cape where so many of our people rely
solely on the land to provide for their livelihood. It is extremely sad for
me to visit rural areas where people are buying their vegetables from local
trading stores at sometimes three times the price charged in cities.

I have also, however, seen some households turn their plots of land into
productive farming entities through the assistance and training of
nongovernmental organisations. These efforts need to be broadened and the
government should be running a Public Works scheme that trains some rural
unemployed people. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, hon Minister, the ACDP recognises that in the fight to
alleviate poverty in South Africa, agriculture has a critical role, and the
ACDP supports efforts to address the challenges of poverty and
underdevelopment.

Capacity problems continue to plague provinces, and the North West
agriculture department is one such example. Having suspended several key
directors and chief directors in 2005 on charges of fraud and corruption,
it is reported that they are unlikely to spend more than 2% of the R140
million budget this year.

The group managing director of Nepro (National Emerging Red Meat Producer’s
Organisation) referred to “lack of capacity, indecisive officials and
misallocation of funds” as contributing to deteriorating service delivery
in almost all provincial departments of agriculture, posing a threat not
only to agriculture but to the economy as a whole. Nepro represents South
Africa’s emerging livestock farmers who own about 47% of the country’s
total livestock and who are said to contribute about 5% to the country’s
GDP.

Of particular concern for the ACDP is the budget cut of over 51% in the
allocation to food, animal health and disaster management. Not only will we
fail to address shortages of veterinary scientists and other skilled
personnel, the problem will also be intensified.

Funds allocated to land acquisition are being scaled back, with the
exception of land restitution, which does not bode well. Government’s
stated intention to abandon its willing-buyer, willing-seller policy is
highlighted by an HSRC study, which concluded that even without taking into
account land values since 2003, at least R4 billion a year would be needed
if land were to be purchased. This is more than the department’s entire
budget this year.

The R80 million allocated over the next three years to the implementation
of the Communal Land Rights Bill also falls far short of the estimated
R500 million a year that is needed. The ACDP will not be able to support
this budget. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Madam Deputy Speaker,
a few years ago our President gave a quite remarkable speech, which was not
mentioned much in the media, at an international event in Esselen Park. He
asked in that speech that we, once again, attend to the concept of the
agrarian question.
In a sense he was revisiting the work of the late Govan Mbeki, who was a
major figure in the leadership of the ANC and who participated in and
analysed the problems of rural people during the rural political structure
of the 1940s up to the early 1960s. You must read his book called The
peasants revolt.

What is this agrarian question? I personally believe that we can understand
a lot better if we take it from this perspective. The agrarian question
analyses two historical processes. On the one hand, as a kind of first
phase, it analyses how capitalist-social relations are established in
agriculture, and how there is a consequent transformation of production and
productivity.

On the other hand, as a kind of second phase, this agrarian question
analyses the mechanisms through which you get increased agricultural
production, which leads to the formation and development of industry or
agro-industry. Actually, I think we are in a kind of third phase of this
agrarian transition.

In the first phase the agrarian question was resolved for white farmers by
the apartheid system. In the second phase, it was being completed for big
capital and agro-industrial development by the waves of deregulation and
market liberalisation. The agrarian interest in the apartheid state was
expressed in the extensive subsidies and regulation, to support white
farming.

My hon friend of the Freedom Front will remember that as the state and big
capital started to plan for the end of apartheid, support for white farming
dwindled, and they joined the Conservative Party in those days.
[Interjections.] Now with the assertion further, of greater competitiveness
and efficiency, large-scale capitalist agriculture and industrial farming
is striding forward. That is where we are now.

But for the dispossessed and the historically disadvantaged, the agrarian
question is not resolved and it is not completed. We are still in this
third phase, and this is likely to continue for some time. Without state
involvement in the socioeconomic relations and state involvement in the
conditions of accumulation, progress will not happen.

What gave success in the first and second phases must be retained. There
must be state support and there must be building of capital, but that is
not enough. More must be added, because of the simple enormity of the
remaining agrarian problem. There are two issues regarding this third
phase. I just want to concentrate on two of these issues that are
conspicuous.

In the first place, the agrarian question has a quite localised nature. In
the second instance, we should take very good care that the building of
capital does not exclude the masses of the people. In other words, that
economic growth is shared and that agricultural black empowerment is indeed
broad-based and extensive.

Let me just first talk about the local nature of the agrarian question and
give you a practical example. If you go to Mafikeng, you will see that
there is a large communal area in the Molopo area, which is part of the old
Bophuthatswana. There is a problem in that it is mostly grazing areas for
cattle. There is a problem with water, as the boreholes are not working,
and the windmills have not been repaired. Where there is pumping equipment,
it just stands there.

What the people do - and I would have done the same - is that in the
evenings they take their cattle to their homes, and let them drink from the
small towns’ water. A large cow consumes about 60 litres of water per day,
whilst a human being comfortably consumes 25 litres. Although all the
systems of reticulation in those towns are in working order, the storage
dams are running empty. There is a water problem. It can be solved very
easily. We must just repair the windmills and the boreholes, and it can be
done.

We have the Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme, the CASP, which
the provinces can lend support to. We can train some of the young guys to
work with the pipes, windmills and pumps. We can get the local water board,
which has the capacity, involved. But then we must work together with the
local authorities in that area. That is why I say this has a local
character.

We have made much progress in delivering land reform and services at the
local level. But there is considerable room for improvement, especially in
terms of planning and implementation of co-ordination between the three
spheres of government. The President has articulated this. We need to move
fast. We need to get local economic growth with state support at national,
provincial and local levels.

The second issue, which I want to address in this regard, is that we must
have great clarity on the extensive nature, the wide nature of the AgriBEE
policy. We have this Asgisa plan, but we tend to ignore the “s” in Asgisa.
It is the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa. We all
talk about this accelerated economic growth, but we sometimes ignore the
“shared” part. Am I right?

What are the goals of Asgisa? There are three goals. Firstly, it is
accelerated economic growth, and that is good. The second goal of Asgisa is
employment creation. The third goal is to reduce poverty. In other words,
this Asgisa programme has broad developmental goals. Yet, it is true, that
we must develop meaningful economic participation by mainstreaming new
black farmers and entrepreneurs.

But we must not forget that AgriBEE must also contribute to job creation
and reduce poverty, otherwise we have got it wrong. AgriBEE must truly
become part of the resolution of this third phase of the agrarian question.
South Africa has a limited potential for horizontal expansion of
agriculture production. There is some potential for vertical expansion,
especially in the old former homeland areas.

If AgriBEE must, as I say, create job opportunities and reduce poverty, we
must consider two other matters besides mere economic growth. The first one
Dr Kraai referred to, namely that international evidence suggests that
small farms are more efficient per hectare than larger farms. That is an
international given. This is attributed to the greater use of labour per
unit of land, mainly family labour.

But we can only understand why the production rate of smaller farms is
lacking in South Africa if we look at this from the perspective of the
agrarian question. Professor Kassier said to farmers in the late 1980s or
early 1990s: “Get bigger, or get out.” This was because of the profit
explanation of farming, which Dr Kraai referred to this afternoon.

The moment you look at it you see that the real reason for this tendency is
the first and second phase of the solution of the agrarian question - that
it becomes an agro-industry. Then one can understand why the family farmer
is disappearing - it is the same all over the world. It is only possible
when you see these historical processes in perspective. So, the big
challenge is how you can turn the tide in that respect.

The second thing I want to mention is that land reform, on its own, may
have adverse consequences, I dare to say, for rural livelihoods. Land
reform cannot stand on its own. It must include the objectives of job
creation and poverty reduction. Land reform must be accompanied by the
availability of labour-intensive methods, efforts to improve the skills of
farmworkers and owners to create greater employment.

This must be proactively promoted by the state. Land reform will not, of
necessity, provide more jobs in agriculture. It may be that it will merely
replace the current labour on farms. To conclude the third phase of the
agrarian question, land reform must be developmental in nature. There must
be a long-term commitment by the state. We must commit human resources, we
must commit financial resources, and we must commit natural resources to
production processes, which we can then say are labour-intensive and not
labour-saving.

I also want to mention a few successes achieved by the state-owned entities
reporting to this Ministry. The Land Bank has a programme called corporate
social investment. It entered into a partnership to provide safe drinking
water to previously disadvantaged schools and communities in the outlying
rural areas. The pilot phase of this started in Limpopo, with the provision
of safe drinking-water boreholes at nine schools. The second phase of the
project will be rolled out to 18 schools in the Eastern Cape in the present
2006-07 financial year.

If you look at the Agricultural Research Council (ARC), you will see that
their Exotic Diseases Division has evaluated the efficacy of two vaccines
produced by Fort Dodge and Intervet respectively, against avian influenza
of the H5N2 version. The intention is that if the vaccines are efficacious,
the Department of Agriculture will recommend licensing them for use by the
ostrich industry.

As part of the application of the Meteosat second-generation data in
agriculture project, which is funded by the EU, a satellite dish was
installed at the ARC by means of which the whole of Africa and its oceans
are receiving data every 15 minutes from a satellite located 3 600
kilometres above the earth.

The project researches the data received for agriculture purposes like
drought monitoring, animal stress, and certain plant pest indices. The
control of migratory pests, weeds and diseases is a public good basic to
the agricultural sector and to risk management in agriculture. At the ARC
Infruitec-Nietvoorbij, here in the Western Cape, a number of table grape
selections from their breeding programme have been evaluated overseas, and
extremely positive results were obtained in Spain and California during the
past seasons.

A late white seedless selection did especially well in both California and
Spain, and registration for plant breeders’ rights are under way. A licence
agreement to commercialise two of the ARC’s red table grapes in Tunisia and
Saudi Arabia was finalised. Currently, we are busy with three other licence
agreements to commercialise Infruitec-Nietvoorbij’s red-stone fruit
varieties in Tunisia, Turkey, Morocco, Chile and Australia.

The first ever contract with regard to international collaboration between
the ARC and CIRAD in France, regarding the evaluation of foreign pineapple
cultivars under local conditions, was signed during November 2005. These 11
pineapple hybrid lines are now being multiplied by tissue culture in
Nelspruit. This is a major intervention that would benefit the pineapple
industry in South Africa, because material of superior and improved quality
with regard to several horticultural aspects may now become available
locally in South Africa. Thank you very much. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Voorsitter, ek wil net vir die agb Adjunkminister
sê dat die subsidiëring van die landbou 'n wêreldverskynsel is; dit was nie
'n unieke verskynsel voor 1994 nie, en my beskeie advies aan die agb
Adjunkminister is: Agb Adjunkminister, u moet tog asseblief nie probeer
boer nie, ek dink nie dit sal 'n sukses wees nie.

Daar word gereeld in verskeie mediabronne berig dat die boere die oorsaak
vir die vertraging in grondhervorming is. Die boere wil glo té veel geld hê
vir hul plase en dit is die boere se skuld.

Ek wil vanmiddag hier een voorbeeld noem, net een voorbeeld om aan die agb
Minister te verduidelik dat dit nie die boere is nie, maar sy en haar
departement wat grondhervorming in dié land beperk en strem. Ek verwys
spesifiek na die Dalmanutha-grondeis wat ingestel is in Machadodorp.

In Maart 2004 besoek die boer, mnr Oostewald van Niekerk, die agb Minister.
Hy vlieg spesiaal af Kaapstad toe. Hy verduidelik sy probleem: Daar is twee
waardasies gedoen; 'n kontrak is ogestel en hy het dit onderteken en die
aanbod aanvaar. Toe skielik is daar 'n probleem met die twee waardasies.
Die agb Minister onderneem om daaraan aandag te skenk. In die
begrotingsposdebat in 2004 vra ek die agb Minister daarna en sy erken dat
daar 'n probleem is en dat hulle daaraan aandag skenk. Sy vra selfs om
verskoning.

Ons is nou in Maart 2006 en nog steeds is daardie eis nie afgehandel nie.
Daar is al 'n derde waardasie gedoen; inteendeel, dié waardasie is in
Meimaand 2005 gedoen. In September 2005 maak hulle weer 'n aanbod aan die
boere en wat deur hulle onderteken word.

Die probleem is, intussen moes dié boere hul boerderybedrywighede staak. In
mnr Van Niekerk se geval het hy 'n florerende forelbesigheid tot niet
gemaak. Waarmee en hoe kan daardie boere oorleef?

Nee, dít is die departement en die agb Minister. En ná sy ingegryp het,
neem dit nog steeds twee jaar. Dit kan nie so aangaan nie. Ek vra die agb
Minister: As u u amptenare wil herontplooi, daar is party van hulle wat nie
herontplooi moet word nie, moet u hulle liewer “fire” [afdank], want dan
sal daar dalk iets gebeur. Dankie, Voorsitter. (Translation of Afrikaans
speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Chairperson, I just want to tell the hon Deputy
Minister that the subsidisation of agriculture is a world-wide phenomenon;
it was not something unique before 1994, and my humble advice to the hon
Deputy Minister is: Hon Deputy Minister, please do not try to go and farm,
I do not think it will be a success.

It is often said in various media sources that the farmers are the cause of
the delay in land reform. Apparently the farmers want too much money for
their farms and it is the farmers’ fault.

I want to mention one example here this afternoon, just one example to
explain to the hon Minister that it is not the farmers, but she and her
department who are limiting and hindering land reform in this country. I am
referring specifically to the Dalmanutha land claim which was submitted in
Machadodorp.

In March 2004, the farmer, Mr Oostewald van Niekerk visited the hon
Minister. He flew down to Cape Town especially. He explained his problem:
Two valuations had been made; a contract had been given and he had signed
it and accepted the offer. Then suddenly there was a problem with the two
valuations. The hon Minister promised to attend to the matter. In the Vote
debate in 2004 I asked the hon Minister and she admitted that there was a
problem and that they were attending to it. She even apologised.

We are now in March 2006 and that claim has still not been finalised. A
third valuation was made; on the contrary, this valuation was made in May
2005. In September 2005 they made another offer to the farmers, which was
signed by them.

The problem is that in the meantime these farmers had to cease their
farming activities. In the case of Mr Van Niekerk a flourishing trout
business was destroyed. With what and how can those farmers survive?

No, it is the department and the hon Minister. And after she had
intervened, it still took two years. We cannot go on like this. I ask the
hon Minister: If you want to redeploy your officials, there are some of
them who should not be redeployed; you should rather fire them, because
maybe something would happen then. Thank you, Chairperson.]

Mr M V NGEMA: Chairperson, may I begin my speech by quoting Oliver Wendell
Holmes who said, “The great thing in this world is not so much where we
stand, as in what direction we are moving.”

The above statement focuses on the importance of moving in the right
direction - to achieve excellence and success in whatever we set out to do.
The statement does not say that where we are is irrelevant, because it is
on the basis of knowing where we are in relation to our destination that we
are able to make an extra effort or change direction and move on.

The two departments are looked to to lead our efforts in addressing the
challenges of the second economy, as posed by poverty, and understanding
the marginalisation of the majority of our people, which is underpinned by
the issues resulting from the lack of access to land.

The experience such as one that was reported in Limpopo of the 71 black
farmers and the one reported in the Isolezwe yesterday, indicate that we
still have problems: Firstly, our system of availing land, particularly
productive land to our people should be accompanied by the relevant skills.
The second issue in Isolezwe relates to problems experienced by farmers as
far as yesterday’s story is concerned.

The expenditure of the Department of Agriculture has declined by 2%, and is
expected to grow by only 0,3% over the MTEF period. How does the Minister
see success in terms of the expectations of Asgisa in the face of this
budget reduction?

We ask this question against the fact that during 2005-06 we needed an
additional allocation to cover unforeseen expenditure on drought relief and
on combating the outbreak of swine fever. The present climatic conditions
keep on changing, suggesting that South Africa will still experience
drought as well as recurring outbreaks of diseases. Nadeco supports the
budget. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms C NKUNA: Hon Chair, Hon Deputy President, hon Ministers and Deputy
Minister, agriculture and land MECs from provinces, land commissioners,
heads of entities for agriculture and land, colleagues, I thank you. Allow
me to start by quoting the Director-General of the Department of Land
Affairs.

  South Africa’s political and economic isolation by the rest of the world
  during apartheid has made us believe that inequality in land ownership
  created by apartheid is the norm. It is not. And it is quite valid to
  want a different agrarian structure, not just one in which some of the
  existing white faces are replaced by black faces, while leaving the farm
  size distribution essentially unchanged.

Director-General Glen Thomas, I totally agree with you. What one would like
to say is: Let us now work towards changing the norm - this negative norm
into a positive normative statement.

The President in his state of the nation address highlighted that Asgisa
identified agriculture as one of the sectors to be developed for
accelerated growth and that it was an important component of the economy,
located within the underlining intentions of Asgisa.

Ndzi pfumelele ndzi vulavula hi vamanana, hi vantshwa kun’we ni vatsoniwa.
Ku komba leswaku ndzhawulo leyi yi na vamanana embilwini, murhangeri wa
yona hi yena holobye Manana Thoko Didiza. Hina vamanana lava va humaka eka
swifundzankulu vo fana na vamanana Magadzi, lava rhangelaka ndzawulo ya ta
vurimi exifundzeni xa Limpopo.

Hina vamanana Tina Joemat Petersen, lava rhangelaka vurimieka xifundza xa
Northern Cape. Loko a ku ngari timhaka ta reshuffling leyi endlekaku
minkarhi yo tala a hi ta va hi ri na vamanana vo tala laha eka ndzawulo ya
vurimi. Ha swi tiva leswaku vamanana vo tala va rhangerile mindyangu,
hikuva vatatana va yile emintirhweni lomuya emadorobeni. Leswi swi ta lava
leswaku hi swi siva kumbe hi swi herisa. Ndzawulo ya Swavurimi yi na
minongonoko leyi landzelaka, ndzi ta yi vulavula hi xilungu, external
busary schemes, agriculture industry development, experimental training and
internship, membership programme and Abet.

Ndzi pfumeleleni ku va ndzi sungula hi ku vulavula hi external busary
scheme. Yi sungurile hi lembe ra 2004. Vana lava va pfunekeke sweswi va
fika eka 344, vaxinuna i 152, vaxisati 192, leswi swi kombaka leswaku
ndzawulo leyi yina vamanana embilwini ya yona.

Xavumbirhi lexi ndzi lavaka ku vualavula hi xona eka nongonoko I
agriculture industry development programme. Ndzawulo leyi yi trainer
vantshwa, eka swa mabindzu na leswaku va fanela ku ya hlayisisa ku yini.
Varimi vantshwa la va nga na lembe rin’we kumbe mabirhi va pfumeleriwa ku
va va ya tsarisa na yunivhesithi ya Stellenbosch, xi nga xikolo xa
swamabindzu.

Nongonoko un’wana I agricultural management development programme, vantshwa
va nyikiwa tibazari kuri va kota ki tipfuna. Va vitaniwa ti-interns kumbe
titrainees. Va tlhela va kuma na muholonyana ehenhla ka swona leswaku va
kota ku ya xava mabindzu ya vona vinyi. Xana impela a yi swi voni leswaku
ndzawulo leyi ya swa vurimi ku na leswi yi endlaka swona naa? Naswona
nongonoko lowu wu pfunile 60 ya vantshwa eka vona 36 vaxinuna na 24
vaxisati.
Xikongomelonkulu eka nongonoko lowu i ku endla leswaku lembe ra 2007, 50%
ya vona vava va ri na mabindzu ya vona. Leswi swi ta hunguta ku pfumaleka
ka mintirho.

Nongonoko wun’wana lowu vitaniwaka experiential training internship
programme, lowu nongonoko i wo pfuna lava va pfumalaka mintirho va ri karhi
va ri tigraduates, ha swi tiva leswaku hina vana vo tala lava nga graduata
in agriculture kambe a vana mintirho, va kota ku endla swintirhwana va nga
si kuma degree ya vona.

Ndzi pfumelele ndzi nghena eka vatsoniwa, tanihi hi laha ku endliweke
leswinene eka vamanana na vatshwa, vatsoniwa a va endleriwanga nchumu. A
kuna mutsoniwa loyi a thoriweke eka xiyimo xa le henhla, ntsena ku na ku na
xiphemu xa zero comma two three per cent xa vatsoniwa lexi xi thoriweke. Ku
na xiyenge ehofisini ya DG leyi nga ta langutana na timhaka ta vatsoniwa.

Mundzuku loko hi yima laha hi tlhela hi debate hi ta va hi vula leswaku
tolo u tlula namuthla. Ndzawulo leyi yi pfuna vamanana, xin’wana ku na
mhaka ya tifomo, mikuma leswaku tifomo ti amendiwile laha eka ndzawulo ku
endla leswaku vatsoniwa va kombela mintirho swi nga angarheli, swi tiveka
leswaku i mutsoniwa loyi a kombelaka ntirho kutani na miako ya karhi ya
cinciwa leswaku yi ta kota ku va friendly towards persons living with
disability.

Ndzawulo leyi yi pfuna vamanana eka mintlangu ya xifundzankulu, yi tlhela
yi pfuna eka mintlangu ya vurimi ya province- ku hlohletela vamanana kuri
va yisa emahlweni mintirho ya vona ya vurimi. (Translation of Xitsonga
paragraphs follows.)

[Allow me to focus on the vulnerable, being the women, the youth and the
disabled, and let me start with the women. The fact that a woman, ie the
hon Thoko Didiza, heads this department shows the seriousness with which
this department considers women. We have women who hold leadership
positions in different provinces. In Limpopo there is Mrs Dikeledi Magadzi
who is the MEC of the Department of Agriculture.

We also have a woman, the hon Tina Joemat-Peterson, who is the MEC for
Agriculture in the Northern Cape. Had it not been because of regular
reshuffling, we would have many women at the Department of Agriculture. We
are all aware that women run most households because their husbands work in
far-away urban areas and this has to be addressed.

The Department of Agriculture has initiated a number of capacity-building
programmes like the External Bursary Scheme, the Agriculture Industry
Development Programme, the Experiential Training and Internship Programme,
the Mentorship Programme and Abet. Allow me to first speak about the
External Bursary Scheme that was started in 2004. There are 344 youths who
received assistance from this scheme, of whom 152 are male and 192 female.
This is a clear indication that the department does have the interests of
women at heart.

Secondly, I want to speak about the Agriculture Industry Development
Programme. This department trains youths on business enterprises and how to
run them. Young farmers with one or two years experience are identified and
selected to enrol with the Stellenbosch Business School.

The other programme is the Agricultural Development Programme wherein
youths are given bursaries to study, considered as interns or trainees and
qualifies for an allowance that will help them to buy their own
enterprises. Looking at what I explained to you, can we still say we do not
realise that the department is doing something? Through this programme, 60
youths were assisted, of whom 36 are male and 24 female. The main objective
of this programme is to ensure that by 2007, 50% of the youth own their
enterprises.

The Experiential Training and Internship Programme’s objective is to
enhance employability of the unemployed, agricultural graduates by
affording them an opportunity to gain practical work experience as is
required of them to obtain their degrees.

Allow me to talk about the disabled. The disabled did not receive the
benefits due to them, as did women and the youth. Not a single disabled
person is employed at decision-making level, but the department has
employed 0,23% of the disabled. There is a unit in the DG’s office that
will address this issue.

When we gather here again tomorrow, we will attest that today is better
than yesterday. This department helps women. The good thing is that
application forms are being amended to cover people with disabilities and
not to generalise. The buildings are being upgraded so that they can be
friendly towards persons living with disability. This department hosts
agricultural related activities for women at provincial level, thus
encouraging female farmers to forge ahead in their farming activities.]

In conclusion, let us encourage the vulnerable to participate in these
programmes. Let us create a situation that is conducive and friendly, so
that they can participate so as to allow for a better tomorrow.

Lastly, hon Van Niekerk, on what you said earlier: There are a number of
challenges, there are a number of disputes and conflicts in the communities
over land that is claimed, and solving these is a big task. Hence, we talk,
we talk and then there is implementation. I thank you all. [Applause.]]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Deputy Chair, Minister, the government has put forward
a challenge to achieve an economic growth rate of 6% in order to address
the issue of job and wealth creation. The implication of this proposed
growth is that all sectors of our economy have to work at full capacity to
boost production for domestic and international markets. Therefore, the
question that we have to ask ourselves is: Has the government laid a solid
foundation for such growth to take place?

This question becomes more relevant in regard to the agricultural sector.
Are we competitive enough to produce quality products efficiently and
effectively, and in a manner that meets the market demands of international
markets that are characterised by unfair trading conditions for developing
nations?

This challenge of competitiveness has further implications for government
policies in terms of how it has to capacitate emerging farmers and
agribusiness in general, in order to compete favourably at this level. It
is this area of our economy that we need to get right if we are to achieve
the dual purpose of growth and competitiveness.

It is a fact that the agricultural sector of our country is a major
employer of rural labour as its activities are mostly labour-intensive.
There is no doubt that this is the sector that can help halve our high
unemployment rate of 26%.

As a country we are disadvantaged at this point in time as most of our
agricultural, operational and production costs are said to be expensive
compared to their counterparts elsewhere. Indeed, another dimension of our
problem is the low number of formidable black farmers and professionals in
this sector.

However, we have a well-developed agricultural sector, as driven by the
private sector, but access to its technology and know-how by the previously
disadvantaged communities has to be accelerated. We will support this Vote.
Thank you, Chair. [Time expired.]

Mnu M T LIKOTSI: Mgcinisihlalo, malungu ahloniphekileyo, umbutho we-PAC
uyavuya ngokuba sixoxa ngohlahlo lwabiwo-mali lonyaka-mali ka-2006-07 lweli
sebe. Le mali sijonge lukhulu kuyo, ukuba iza kunceda ukulwa ubuhlwempu,
ukunqongophala kwezindlu nentswelo-mhlaba ngabemi beli.

Amafama ethu angama-Afrika ayasokola kwiifama zawo ezincinci. Adinga
umhlaba omhle otyebileyo kunye nemali yokuphuhlisa iifama zawo. Akulaa
ntsokolo kaNowa.

Abantu abaninzi abafuna ukuba ngamafama abaphumeleli ukufumana iifama
ngenxa yemigaqo ekhoyo elawula ukufumaneka komhlaba. Abantu bakuthi bahlala
ematyotyombeni ngenxa yokudinga umhlaba wokubakhela izindlu kunye nezinye
izinto ezininzi ekuhlaleni.

I-PAC ivakalisa phandle ukuba isizwe esingakwaziyo ukuphemba, esiphenjelwa
ngabasemzini, siya kuhlala singamakhoboka naphakade. Masiyekeni ukudlala,
madoda, nani boomama. La madlagusha, aba ndlebezikhanyilanga, bafika kweli
lethu sikwazi ukuziphembela. Sasingabantu abahluthayo, sizithanda
njengesizwe.

Urhulumente makakhawulezise iphulo lokubuyisela ilizwe lethu kubaninilo
phambi kokuba singene engxakini. Ukufa kusembizeni! Izwe lethu!
(Translation of isiXhosa speech follows.)

[Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairperson and hon members, the PAC is happy to be taking
part in the debate on the department’s Budget Vote of 2006/07. The fund
allocated to the department will be used to harness resources for poverty
alleviation, address the housing backlog and access land for the citizenry.

African farmers experience difficulties on their small farms. They need
access to more arable and fertile land, and money to assist them to develop
their farms. They struggle like Noah did.

Many people who would like to enter into farming do not succeed to secure
land because of policies that regulate access to land. People live in
informal settlements because there is no land available on which to build
houses for them and many other amenities that they need in their
communities.

The PAC would like to say explicitly that a nation that does not take the
initiative, but waits for other nations to prescribe to them will remain
slaves forever. Let us stop playing, fellow countrymen and women. These
white people found us capable of doing a lot of things. We were a proud and
affording nation.

The government should hasten its campaign of taking the country back to its
rightful owners before we find ourselves in trouble. Trouble is brewing
inside and we are the cause of it. Our land!]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, hon Deputy President, in view of the budgets,
both sectors yield great benefits for our economy, and agriculture in
particular is set to make great contributions to South Africa’s shared
growth strategy. Not only is agriculture set to alleviate poverty through
food security, but job creation and the facilitation of ownership and
participation of the less affluent in the sector by AgriBEE promises
development too.

We do, however, acknowledge that this sector is greatly challenged by
natural disasters such as drought, a shortage of skills and, as recently
noted, the safety of farms. We do believe that these are prioritised by the
department, and the reduction of its programmes from nine to five in order
to secure greater oversight and delivery will serve to address these
issues. Asgisa has also identified agriculture as a great contributor to
our economy.

The MF believes that the effective mobilisation of Mafisa (Micro-
Agricultural Finance Schemes of South Africa), the CASP (Comprehensive
Agricultural Support Programme), and AgriBEE will yield development and
will benefit the disadvantaged in the sector. Further, we stand with our
President who, in his state of the nation address, noted that job creation
and gender equality in the agriculture sector are priorities.

The MF notes the 2% decrease in the allocation to this sector and expresses
our concern as the challenges of drought and diseases such as the world’s
feared avian flu, can impact greatly on the performance of this sector this
year.

As for land reformation and redistribution, we value the President’s
undertakings to meet the targets for this sector in his state of the nation
address. We, however, note the impact this makes on the Department of Land
Affairs’ budget, as a greater need for resources emerges. However, the
R6 million increase to the restitution budget shall hopefully serve to
address that need.

The willing-seller, willing-buyer programme restitution of 8 651 claims by
31 March 2007, the distribution of 30% land to the previously
disadvantaged, the disposal of 41 143 hectares of state land to the land
reform programme, and the 224 777 hectares of land restitution all need to
be accelerated so that the use of this land, once acquired, can be utilised
to contribute towards the development of other sectors - poverty
alleviation, social development and the growth of our economy.

Further, we express concern about the duplication and corruption in the
sector and hope that funds will be utilised effectively and efficiently to
oversee the DLA’s delivery and commitments as well. The MF supports Budget
Votes 25 and 29.

Mrs M L NGWENYA: Chairperson, hon Minister, colleagues, MECs, allow me to
quote the Speaker of the National Assembly Ms Baleka Mbete, who said during
the state of the nation address:

   This year’s theme sets the tone for reflection on achievements, failures
   and challenges regarding equality legislation we have passed since 1994.

The question that the theme seeks to ask is: To what extent have the
ordinary citizens benefited from equality laws? All have equal rights.

A re dumeleng gore ge e le melao re e ngwadile, e phasitše. Dipholisi le
tšona re di dirile, ke tše botse. Se se re šaletšego ke gore melao ye e
phethagatšwe le gore mananeo a rena a fetole maphelo a batho bao ba sa
gateletšwego. Mohlala ke bašomi le badudi ba mo dipolaseng.

Re phasišitše Extension of Security of Tenure le Labour Tenants Act. Melao
ye e fokoditše bogale bja boradipolase go kgatelelo yeo ba bego ba e dira
go bašomedi ba bona. Le bona bašomi ba a leboga kudu ka gore ga go sa swana
le maloba ka mmušo wola wa go buša ka lepara la tshipi.

Seo ke ratago go se bontšha Ntlo ye ke gore go sa na le bomaganagobušwa mo
dipolaseng tša bašweu bao ba sa lebeletšego go ja ga bona feela empa
matsogo a bašomi ao a dirago dijo tše ba sena taba le wona. Bona ba ntše
bare “lehono go phala mabaane, lehono go tla phalwa ke ka moso!” Se se ra
gore le ge ebile re gatelelwa ba sa nale tshepo ya gore diphetogo di tla ba
gona. Feela se se ra gore ena re eme ka maoto re leke gore re hlabolle
maphelo a bona.

Re swanetše go thiba mašobana ao boradipolasa ba a šomišago go gatelela
bašomi ba le badudi mo molawaneng wo wa rena wa ESTA le Labour Tenants. Re
kwa bohloko ge re bona bomma le makgarebjana ba namela dilori ka iri ya
bohlano mo mesong, ba lala ba boa masego ka boiri ya sewai, ba nameditswe
dilori tseo di sego tsa apeswa ditente le nakong tsa marega. (Translation
of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[Let us acknowledge that we have Acts and that they have been passed. We
also have wonderful policies that we need to make sure are implemented, and
that our programmes manage to change the lives of people who are oppressed,
especially those who work and live on the farms.
The Extension of Security of Tenure Act and the Land Reform (Labour
Tenants) Act have been passed. These Acts have decreased the amount of
cruelty that the farmers were displaying towards their employees. Employees
are very grateful, because things are different compared to what they were
during the apartheid era.

I would like to point out that there are still hard-headed white farmers
who only care about themselves regardless of what circumstances their
employees are in. They keep saying, ‘today is much better than yesterday
and tomorrow will be better than today’. It means that even if they are
oppressed today, they are hopeful about tomorrow and that things will
change for the better. This means though that we should do everything in
our power to make sure that their lives are improved.

We must close all the little gaps in the Extension of Security Tenure Act
and the Land Reform (Labour Tenants) Act that the farmers use to abuse the
employees and residents. It hurts a lot to see old and young women getting
into the lorries at five o’clock on a winter’s morning, and then come back
as late as eight o’clock, when the lorries don’t even have canopies.]

Some of them say that they only see their kids on Saturdays and Sundays. On
Mondays to Fridays they find them sleeping already, and in the mornings
they leave before they wake up.

Hon Minister, I couldn’t agree with you more when you said:

The major priority areas of land reform include the disposal of state land,
the increasing of the pace of delivery for Land Redistribution for
Agricultural Development (LRAD) and continued focus on vulnerable groups
such as labour tenants, farmworkers, women and youths.

I sometimes feel that we need unobtrusive officials from our department to
gain access to these farms so that they can monitor the living conditions
of these farmworkers and labour tenants and make sure that they get
security of tenure. Our implementation has to be monitored for speedy
delivery.

Another option, Minister, is for us to utilise some available state land
close to the very farms where people work and, in collaboration with the
Minister of Housing, provide suitable housing and give them title deeds to
those homes.

If there is no state land to be utilised, Minister, we have no option. You
are left with the last option, namely expropriating adjacent farms so that
these workers and tenants can lead independent lives like every other South
African. [Applause.] Some of them have asked for places to stay on our
communal land, and it is difficult for our “magosi” to reject their
request, even when there is not enough land at present for their own
community.
In conclusion, the portfolio committee appreciates all the good programmes
that our department comes up with. All we need is implementation, followed
by monitoring – that is our task for 2006. The ANC supports this budget.
Land security of tenure for all! The land will be shared amongst all those
who work it!

I just want to inform the Minister that on the 24th we were in Durban.
Unfortunately you missed us, but the Deputy Chairperson was there. I had a
cap of the rural women where Mr Swart and his team actually conducted the
workshop. It was fascinating, and I just hope that we will proceed. We have
tied a partnership with the National Movement of Rural Women, which Mam
Lydia leads. I thank you.  [Applause.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Chairperson, the literature on poverty, basic needs
and human development generally assumes that decision-makers and those
responsible for implementing agricultural poverty-alleviation measures have
a fair amount of knowledge about the problem involved.

The slow pace of implementing land reform programmes, especially
restitution in rural areas, confirms this view and has become an issue of
concern to Azapo. The willing-seller, willing-buyer approach has also been
identified by the majority of our people as a major obstacle to the
resolution of the land question in our country. Added to this concern, is
also the issue of landownership by foreigners.

On all these issues Azapo has time and again stated that even if the
present land reform, land redistribution and land restitution processes
were to be completed, the rich - especially whites - would still own most
of the land and the struggle for land would continue.

Azapo believes that landownership patterns should be addressed in different
ways than the traditional willing-seller, willing-buyer approach that has
thus far characterised government land reform programmes. Equal access to
land should become a reality and should not depend on the whims of
landowners.

Azapo believes that we should never allow a situation in which foreigners
own land, when the poor have no land on which to build their houses or land
on which to engage in productive activities. [Applause.]

In his book Rural Development: Putting the Last First, Robert Chambers came
to the conclusion that efforts to counter poverty, particularly in rural
areas, are undermined from the outset by lack of knowledge regarding the
nature and scale of the problem on the part of those whose task it is to
alleviate poverty.

According to Chambers, neither policy-makers nor professionals have a
proper understanding of rural poverty, and their direct rural experience is
limited to brief and hurried visits and a tendency to visit the most
accessible parts of the rural areas.

In most cases, when we go on our normal visits as parliamentarians, we
visit the most accessible areas, because that is where we can go with cars.
Therefore, we lack the knowledge of knowing exactly what rural poverty is.
Azapo supports this Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Chairperson, in the department’s strategic plan of March 2005
the hon Minister said, and I quote:

  For restitution it was decided that a special commission, the Commission
  on Restitution for Land Rights, and a special court, the Land Claims
  Court, be set up to ensure that the restitution process has the necessary
  institutional foundation upon which claims can be implemented within a
  specific timeframe.


  The government has since made a decision to settle all outstanding
  restitution claims in the next three years, in order to bring about
  certainty and therefore stability in the economy as far as potential land
  claims are concerned. By 28 February 2005 we had delivered over three
  million hectares of land through all programmes of land reform.

Ek wil egter vandag spesifiek verwys na die gesukkel die afgelope tyd met
grondhervorming in die Limpopo-provinsie. Dit gaan beroerd op ’n eens
vrugbare en produktiewe plaas, een van die eerstes in die provinsie.
Hierdie plaas is ingevolge die grondhervormingsbeleid aan opkomende boere
gegee. Weens ’n oormag van probleme word tans niks geproduseer nie.

Die plaas is destyds vir R2 miljoen van die vorige eienaar gekoop. Die nuwe
kollektiewe eienaarskap bestaan uit 143 mense. Byna al die nuwe eienaars
het padgegee en woon nou in plakkerskampe en die departement beoog om ’n
verdere 71 plase terug te neem vir soortgelyke redes. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Today I would, however, like to refer specifically to the recent hassles
with land reform in the Limpopo Province. What was once a fertile and
productive farm, one of the first in the province, is now in a state of
shambles and misery. This farm had been handed over to emerging farmers in
accordance with the land reform policy. Currently, due to a predominance of
problems, nothing is produced on the farm.

At the time, the farm was bought from its former owner for R2 million. The
new collective ownership consists of 143 persons. Nearly all the new owners
have moved off and are now living in squatter camps and the department
envisages repossessing a further 71 farms for similar reasons.]
As far as the Limpopo province is concerned, common sense tells me that
land allocation, especially that of agricultural land, suffers grave
deficiencies. This situation has worsened through the absence of an
effective and efficient post-allocation support system to new owners.

This presents the department with the challenge of structuring its budget
in such a way that these owners are adequately supported. In practical
terms, this means that the new owners are given appropriate training in
farm management, which would include operational, production, marketing and
HR management.

Heroorweging moet gegee word aan die toekenning van enkele stukke
landbougrond aan groot getalle eienaars. [Tyd verstreke.] [Reconsideration
has to be given to the allocation of a few pieces of agricultural land to a
large number of owners. [Time expired.]]

Mnr A H NEL: Voorsitter, ons het verlede jaar die begrotingspos oor
grondsake ondersteun, maar hierdie keer kan ons nie. Ons doen dit veral om
drie redes.

Eerstens, geld wat begroot word, word nie bestee nie. Die verskil tussen
die aansuiweringsbegroting van Oktober-November en die beraming in Januarie
is ten opsigte van restitusie, R800 miljoen en ten opsigte van
grondhervorming, R150 miljoen minder. Dit is ’n totale onderbesteding van
beskikbare geld van R950 miljoen. Ons het hulp gevra vir meer geld en nou
spandeer u departement dit nie.

Is u ingelig oor die probleem? Gaan u aksie neem? Ek kon geen bevredigende
antwoorde op my vrae hieroor van die Departement van Grondsake kry nie. Ek
kan talle voorbeelde noem waar eisers al twee jaar of meer wag vir
uitbetalings. Mense soos mev Colleen Davids en Anita Benjamin van Kaapstad.
Hulle vra tereg hoekom hulle moet instaan vir die verlies van koopkrag van
hierdie uitbetalings en dit terwyl daar geld beskikbaar is.

Tweedens is daar die oneffektiewe administrasie. Gewone onbevoegdheid speel
’n groot rol by sommige. Onnodige rompslomp en die nie-nakoming van wetlike
voorskrifte is van die grootste probleme. Is u ingelig hieroor? U adjunk,
die agb Dirk du Toit ís blykbaar, want hy sê – en ek haal aan: “We have
many problems on the administrative level.” Miskien moet die Adjunkminister
ophou filosofeer en aandag gee aan die oplossing van hierdie probleme. Kom
ek gee ’n paar voorbeelde.

Mnr Engelbrecht van Buffelshoek, Lydenburg is ’n gewillige verkoper en het
die departement se aanbod alreeds in 2004 aanvaar. Hy is vandag nog nie
betaal nie. Eers is vir hom gesê dat die gemeenskap nie wil teken nie. Toe
weer was daar ’n dispuut tussen lede van die gemeenskap.

Die feit is: Mnr Engelbrecht verkoop nie aan die gemeenskap nie; hy verkoop
aan die staat. Die amptenaar met wie ek gepraat het, het erken dat die
kommissie se probleme met die spesifieke gemeenskap nie mnr Engelbrecht
hoef te affekteer nie. Tog word ’n koopkontrak eers ’n jaar later aan hom
besorg.

Nog is dit einde nie. Die koopkontrak is veertien dae gelede teruggetrek,
want, volgens die nuwe kommissaris in Mpumalanga, voldoen dit nie aan sy
standaarde nie. En wie was sy voorganger? Mnr Tozi Gwanya, die
hoofkommissaris wat waargeneem het.

’n Ander voorbeeld is die eis van die Nyati’s op die grond aangrensend aan
die Addo-olifantpark wat aan die Botha’s behoort. Daar is geen probleem met
die eis nie. Die Botha’s erken die eis. Albei partye het groot probleme met
die amptenare van restitusie. Hulle sê dat tussen die Nyati’s en die
Botha’s was daar sedert 2002 geen onwillige party nie. Dit is steeds nie
afgehandel nie.

Dan is daar CLARA (Commercial Land Rights Act). Dit het sewe jaar geneem
voor die wet aanvaar is. Dit is nou twee jaar later en al wat ons het, is
dat daar volgende jaar ’n implementeringsplan op die tafel gaan wees. Teen
hierdie spoed sal daar oor 30 jaar nog nie aan die belangrike vereistes van
die wet naamlik besitreg en die beskerming daarvan, aandag gegee en
erkenning wees nie. Dit is totaal onaanvaarbaar.

Op my vraag oor koördinering en samewerking tussen u departemente het die
Direkteur-Generaal van Landbou erken dat dit ’n probleem is, op die hoogste
vlakke en op provinsiale vlak. Is dit DG’s, die LUR’e en die onbevoegte
amptenare se skuld? Wie moet die uiteindelike verantwoordelikheid hiervoor
neem?

Dit is slegs ’n paar voorbeelde van swak en onvoldoende administrasie. Dit
veroorsaak oneindige frustrasie by beide eisers en grondeienaars, asook by
baie goeie en welwillende amptenare. Die probleme het nie die afgelope jaar
ontstaan nie. Hulle is ook nie onoplosbaar nie. Dit is net die politieke
wil om dit aan te spreek wat ontbreek.

Derdens is daar die onverantwoordelike uitsprake van senior amptenare oor
grondbelasting, die wegdoen met die vrywillige basis van verkope,
beperkings op grondbesit en aanvalle op buitelanders oor grondbesit.

Die negatiwiteit wat hierdeur geskep word, breek die welwillendheid af van
mense wat eintlik as vennote en vriende beskou moet word. Daar is baie
welwillendheid onder grondeienaars ten opsigte van grondhervorming. Verlede
jaar by AgriSA se kongres het elke provinsie met ’n plan vorendag gekom hoe
om grondhervorming te versnel en toe te sien dat dit volhoubaar benut word.
Grondeienaars verskil nie oor die beginsel dat grond beter verdeel moet
word nie. Daar is egter wel kritiek op sekere metodes en ongegronde
uitsprake.
Ek sal graag wil hê die Minister moet ’n bietjie uitbrei oor die uitspraak
van haar amptenare oor die beperkings op grondbesit, die sogenaamde “land
ceilings”. Die regering moedig mense aan om aan die ekonomie deel te neem
en hulle potensiaal te ontwikkel.

Daar is geen beperking op die entrepreneurskap van ’n Patrice Motsepe om
meer as een myn te besit nie. Daar is geen beperking op ’n Tokyo Sexwale om
eiendomme te ontwikkel, myne te koop, ensovoorts nie. Daar is geen
beperking op ’n Ramaphosa om koerante en ’n casino te besit nie, behalwe
ander markspelers wat hom kan uitbie.

Maar arme Sipho Didiza of Klein David Dali wat wil boer  kan  nie  sy  volle
potensiaal gebruik nie, want hy moet beperk word tot een plaas. Is  dit  die
pad waarop u die landbou in  hierdie  land  wil  lei?  Minister,  u  is  die
politieke hoof en moet die verantwoordelikheid  dra  vir  hierdie  probleme.
Tot tyd en wyl ons kan sien  dat  dit  u  erns  is  om  die  probleme  in  u
departement en in die landbou in die algemeen aan te  spreek,  sal  ons  nie
hierdie twee poste ondersteun nie. Baie dankie. [Applous.]  (Translation  of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr A H Nel: Chairperson last year we supported  the  Budget  Vote  on  Land
Affairs, but this time we cannot. We are doing  so  specifically  for  three
reasons.

Firstly, money that has been budgeted  for  is  not  spent.  The  difference
between the adjustments appropriation of October-November and  the  estimate
in January is R800 million and R150 million less with regard to  restitution
and land reform respectively. This is a  total  underspending  of  available
money of R950 million. We asked for more money and now  your  department  is
not spending it.

Are you informed about this problem? Are you going to  take  any  action?  I
did not get a satisfactory answer  to  my  questions  about  this  from  the
Department of Land Affairs. I can list  many  examples  of  where  claimants
have been waiting for two years or more  for  their  payouts.  Examples  are
people like Mrs Colleen Davids and Anita Benjamin of  Cape  Town.  They  are
asking, and rightly so, why they should stand in  for  the  loss  of  buying
power from these payouts while money is available.

Secondly there is  the  ineffective  administration.  Ordinary  incompetence
plays a big role in some. Unnecessary fuss and the  noncompliance  to  legal
prescriptions are of the biggest problems.  Are  you  informed  about  this?
Your deputy, the hon Dirk du Toit is  apparently,  because  he  said  and  I
quote: “We have many  problems  on  the  administrative  level.”  Maybe  the
Deputy Minister should stop  philosophising  and  attend  to  solving  these
problems. Let me give some examples.

Mr Engelbrecht from Buffelshoek, Lydenburg is a willing seller  and  already
accepted the offer from the department in  2004.  Until  today  he  has  not
received any payment. At first they told him that  the  community  does  not
want to sign. After  that  there  was  a  dispute  amongst  members  of  the
community.

The fact is: Mr Engelbrecht is not selling to  the  community,  but  to  the
state. The official that I spoke to admitted that the commission’s  problems
with this specific community should not affect Mr  Engelbrecht.  However,  a
lease contract was only handed to him after a year.

Still the end is not in sight. The contract of sale was  withdrawn  fourteen
days ago, because, according to the new commissioner in Mpumalanga,  it  did
not meet his standards. And who was his predecessor?  Mr  Tozi  Gwanya,  the
acting head commissioner.

Another example is the claim of the Nyatis on the  ground  adjacent  to  the
Addo Elephant Park that belongs to the Bothas.  There  is  no  problem  with
this  claim.  The  Botha’s  acknowledges  the  claim.  Both   parties   have
experienced problems with restitution officials. They say  that  since  2002
there has been no unwilling party between the  Nyatis  and  the  Bothas.  It
still has not been settled.

Then there is CLARA (Communal Land Rights Act). It took seven  years  before
this Act was accepted. It is now two years  later  and  the  only  thing  we
have, is that there will be an implementation plan on  the  table  for  next
year. At this pace, within 30 years no attention and recognition would  have
been given to the important pre-requisites of the  law,  namely  tenure  and
the protection thereof. This is totally unacceptable.

To  my  question  regarding  co-ordination  and  co-operation  between  your
departments the Director-General  of  Agriculture  admitted  that  it  is  a
problem, at the highest and at provincial level. Is  it  the  fault  of  the
DGs, the MECs and the incompetent officials? Who has to  take  the  ultimate
responsibility for this?

These are only a few examples of poor and  insufficient  administration.  It
causes endless frustration both with claimants and landowners,  as  well  as
with very good and willing officials. The problems did not  develop  in  the
past year. They are also not unsolvable. It is only the  political  will  to
address it that is lacking.

Thirdly there are the irresponsible statements of senior members about  land
tax, the elimination of voluntary selling, limitations on landownership  and
the attack on foreigners over landownership.

The negativity created by this  breaks  down  the  goodwill  of  people  who
should be seen as partners and friends. There is a lot of  goodwill  amongst
landowners with regard to land reform. Last  year  at  the  AgriSA  congress
each province came with a plan of how  to  accelerate  land  reform  and  to
ensure that it is being used in a  sustainable  manner.  Landowners  do  not
differ on the principle that land must be better shared. There is,  however,
criticism regarding certain methods and ungrounded statements.

I would like the Minister to elaborate on the statements  of  her  officials
on the limitations on landownership,  the  so-called  “land  ceilings”.  The
government encourages people to take part in  the  economy  and  to  develop
their potential.

There is no limit on the entrepreneurship of a Patrice  Motsepe  to  be  the
owner of more than one mine. There is no limit on Tokyo Sexwale  to  develop
property, buy mines, etc. There is no limitation  on  Ramaphosa  to  be  the
owner of newspapers and a casino, except for other market players  that  can
bid him out.

But poor Sipho Didiza or little David Dali who wants to farm cannot use his
full potential, because he is limited to one farm. Is it along this road
that you want to take agriculture in this country? Minister, you are the
political head and should take responsibility for these problems. Until we
can see that you are serious about addressing the problems in your
department and in agriculture in general, we will not support these two
Votes. Thank you very much. [Applause.]]

Mnr S ABRAM: Mnr die Voorsitter, vandag is beter as gister, môre sal nog
beter wees as vandag. Ek wil net graag vir die agb lid Nel sê dat hy nou
baie dinge hier kwytgeraak het, en ek is daarvan oortuig dat baie van die
goed wat hy hier gesê het, hy administratief met die departement of selfs
met die ministerie kon opgeneem het.

Ek is daarvan oortuig dat die deure van die Minister en die Adjunkminister
altyd oop is, en dat hulle daar kon aangeklop het. Maar, as die agb lid Nel
sê dat daar baie vrywillige verkopers in die land is, dan wil ek net daarop
wys dat ... (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr S ABRAM: Mr Chairman, today is better than yesterday, and tomorrow will
be even better than today. I would just like to tell hon Nel that he has
now said a lot of things here and I am convinced that many of the things
that he said here, could have been taken up administratively with the
department or even with the Ministry.

I am convinced that the doors of the Minister and the Deputy Minister are
always open and that he could have asked them for assistance. But, if the
hon Nel says that there are many willing sellers in the country then I just
want to point out ...]

... when you talk about the so-called concept of willing buyer and willing
seller, you must remember that, in the South African experience in the past
11 years with the implementation of land and agrarian reform programmes,
the white landowners have had the latitude to determine the price that
suited them, regardless of the buyer’s ability to enter into transactions
regarding the land in question. [Applause.] [Interjections.]

They, the white farmers, exercise the veto power over the beneficiaries of
land and agrarian reform, because the latter are powerless. Although they
are supported by the state in their endeavours, they cannot and will not
exercise the veto power that is wielded by the white commercial farmers.

The willing sellers as private landowners not only have the choice of not
selling to the willing buyers, but in the context of the willing-buyer,
willing-seller principle they are free to sell to the highest bidder or
buyer of their choice. Thus the landowners can actively avoid offering
their land for sale for land reform purposes, say, for example on racist
grounds, and still dispose of their land on the open market.

I think that the hon Nel needs to be reminded of this - that those that pay
the piper can call the tune and, in this case, it is the white landowner.

Die agb Kraai van Niekerk het onder andere gesê dat betrek moet word in die
hele proses van ontwikkeling en hervorming en dies meer. Ek wil net die agb
lid daarvan herinner dat landbou-organisasies, soos AgriSA en Nafu, heerlik
saamwerk met die regering volgens die sektorplan. Nou onstaan daar ’n vraag
by my: Wat is die probleem, want die agb lid sê die welwillendheid van
boere vervaag? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The hon Kraai van Niekerk said among other things that farmers should
become involved in the whole process of development and reform and so on. I
would just like to remind the hon member that agricultural organisations
such as AgriSA and Nafu are happily collaborating with the government
according to the sector plan. Now the question that comes to mind is: What
is the problem, because the hon member says the goodwill of the farmers are
fading?]

He goes further and says that we are busy squandering the goodwill of
scores of farmers, but these farmers are working through their
organisations, with the state in terms of the sector plan. I cannot
understand where that argument comes from.

But then, Sir, the hon member argues about the fact that agricultural
income is dropping. Now let me remind him of something. Yes, Sir, last year
the price of maize was extremely low, but then, Sir, many farmers decided
that they were going to give the maize to their animals to fatten them up.
The returns for beef, mutton and poultry were high and, in fact, they are
even higher now.

On average, net farm income over the past five years has increased from
R11 billion to R17 billion. Investments in property and farms have
otherwise increased substantially, which is borne out by current high land
prices.

May I remind my hon friends on this side that this government’s policies
have helped and contributed towards increasing the number of net worth
dollar millionaires in this country to 37 000, and I know that a
significant number of them are your supporters.

The establishment of feed lots in areas where new beef cattle breeders are
located will add value to the weaners they breed and will also benefit the
economy of the surrounding areas, and so, too, will goat breeding. The
portfolio committee had, on numerous occasions, promoted the idea of feed
lots when interacting with the department, and this needs to be pursued
further.

The hon Minister should also seriously consider the promotion of the
breeding of dual-purpose sheep for wool and mutton production. During one
of our oversight visits, we noted the involvement of the National Wool
Growers Association in some projects in the Free State and Eastern Cape.

However, livestock health problems can prevent farmers from achieving
optimal agricultural production. Livestock production relies heavily on the
availability of accessible, efficient and quality animal health advisory
services. Many communities have no such access to veterinary services,
resulting in reduced productivity, diseases and the death of livestock.

The solution lies in farmers, especially small-scale farmers, being able to
recognise, prevent and treat their livestock so that they are less
dependent on outside assistance and can have healthy and productive
animals.

Although the use of adequately trained nonveterinary personnel in South
Africa is still highly contentious, it might be the only
short-term solution to the shortage of veterinarians and the lack of access
for new farmers, as long as the activities of such personnel, including
their training equipment, technical support and work, are controlled and
monitored by state veterinarians.

We therefore need to have community-based animal health workers and animal
health technicians who can, amongst other things, do the following tasks:
Mouth-dosing, castration of animals, injection techniques, techniques of
handling, storage of vaccines, etc, including artificial insemination.

The critical challenges facing veterinary services so that South Africa can
have accessible, efficient and quality animal health systems for commercial
and new farmers, are the following: The differences in the quality, nature
and accessibility of vet services available to farmers, the lack of human
resources, infrastructure, laboratory apparatus and support staff;
competition between national and provinces and within provinces on
recruiting staff, and unco-ordinated recruitment policies.

The Department of Agriculture and entities such as the Onderstepoort
Veterinary Institute and the Agricultural Research Council must ensure that
new farmers benefit from these services by providing basic training and
information on animal health for unemployed young people, who will be able
to provide basic animal health services to communities in the rural areas.

Land Redistribution for Agricultural Development grants are an integral
part of the activities of the department. According to their statistics,
LRAD, which is the short word for what I just have said, has delivered
72 687 hectares of land to 5 109 beneficiaries. However, there are
challenges which need to be addressed urgently so as to ensure that those
who are to benefit from the programme are, in fact, able to do so with the
minimum of hitches.

For the information of hon members, an LRAD grant is a nonrefundable form
of funding by government in order for prospective farmers to acquire land.
Some of these challenges are the lengthy period it takes for the evaluation
and, in principle, approval of grants. In some instances, it takes months
if not years, because the process is too long and cumbersome, and more
often results in aspiring beneficiaries becoming frustrated.

Community members often approach our constituency offices for assistance in
obtaining LRAD funding. This has been difficult as there is often a lack of
communication from regional and provincial land affairs offices, and often
the time taken by these offices to initiate the process is too long.

Communities that identify land enter into an agreement with the seller, in
terms of which there is a 90-day period within which to provide guarantees,
but, by the time the process really gets going, the 90 days are over, the
landowner has then negotiated the sale on the open market, the communities
are left disappointed and frustrated, and we fall short of our target of
transferring 30% of commercial agricultural land by 2014.

Another problem, sir, are the soaring land prices. Three to four years ago
the going rate for farmland was calculated in hundreds of rand per hectare.
It is now in the thousands.

En so het ons gesorg dat jul ondersteuners miljoenêrs word. [And thus we
saw to it that your supporters become millionaires.]

If one takes grazing land, with a carrying capacity of one large animal per
four hectares on the highveld, one will probably pay around R3 000 per
hectare, and the price of a good breeding cow is around R5 000. This
equates to a capital input of R17 000 and that without even calculating
other costs like winter feed, vets, medication, labour, interest, bulls,
etc. The average gross return for a 200-kilogram weaner at R10 per kilo
will be R2 000 and there is no guarantee that the cow will calve annually.

LRAD was launched in 2001 and the agricultural landscape has undergone many
changes. We therefore call on the Minister and the department to consider
adapting the amount of the grant, so as to cater for the challenge posed by
soaring land prices.

In the very short time that I now have available, I would just like to say
that with respect to the so-called willing-seller, willing- buyer concept,
the Constitution is quite clear about the use of expropriation in the
public interest. However, there seems to be an apparent contradiction
between the Constitution and the ancient Expropriation Act of 1975, in the
sense that section 12(1) of the latter defines compensation as being the
amount which the property would achieve if sold on the open market, as
between willing buyer and willing seller.

If there is an open market, compensation is the replacement cost of
improvements and not the land, nor is it determined in any suitable manner.
The Expropriation Act is not aligned to our Constitution. Hence, the
process of replacing it with a new expropriation Act.
We request the hon Minister to press for the finalisation of the amending
Bill as a matter of extreme urgency, so that the parliamentary processes
can be followed for its eventual approval. However, it is important to note
that where the state uses expropriation to meet the imperatives of section
25(4) of the Constitution, the strength of expropriation lies in its
threat. If the expropriation mechanism is used judiciously, the message
that the state is serious about expediting land and agrarian reform
programmes and is no longer prepared to indulge in unjustifiably prolonged
negotiations, will be quite clear and unambiguous.

Hon Minister, I also wish to make the appeal where monies have been
designated for use for certain programmes by provinces, that the provinces
be given some latitude, and that where there are unspent funds that they be
cross-transferred to other activities of the province as designated by
national competency. In this way, we will not have unspent funds, and we
will probably find that these funds are used judiciously for the promotion
of the development of agriculture within those communities that require it
most.

In conclusion, I am convinced that the hon van Niekerk is not really
serious about land reform, land redistribution and land restitution, and
that he would like to see the ownership of large farms by white owners
being sacrosanct and untouchable, and not available for use by people who
need them most. Thank you very much, Chairperson. [Applause.]
The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Aa! [Greetings!]
Chairperson, Deputy President, vhathomphei mirado ya Buthano la Lushaka
[hon members of the National Assembly], inala ifikile, asivuneni [the
period of abundance has arrived, let us reap].

Ndi tshifhinga tsha khano khulu, kha ri kane. [The period of abundance has
arrived; let us reap.]

In response to the debate, I once again would like to quote the hon Van
Niekerk when he tabled his budget on 13 September 1994. It was on a
Tuesday, when he said (Hansard 1994, col 2575):

  With a view to linking agriculture’s functions to the RDP, the Department
  of Agriculture will support the Reconstruction and Development Programme
  with respect to the establishment of new farmers, participate in land
  reform actions, protect the environment, develop human resources,
  recognise farmworkers’ rights by enlightening farmers and workers
  regarding their responsibilities towards each other, and develop a sound
  regional policy for all.

This was said in 1994, when the hon Van Niekerk was the Minister of
Agriculture. In the same debate in 1994, the now member of the provincial
legislature in Mpumalanga, Mr Ginindza, had this to say, and I quote
(Hansard 1994, col 2609):

  The RDP, amongst other things, means land restitution and restoration. We
  need that land back for agriculture and residential purposes. Through the
  restoration of land ownership rights, we want to eliminate poverty,
  landlessness, homelessness and frustration, as well as starvation and
  hunger in particular.

  We want to own land our forefathers owned before our country was
  colonised. As described, our agricultural land was taken away by a
  seizure of power, and we in turn have to organise a seizure of power and
  take the land that was taken away by the forces of apartheid.

[Applause.]

I mention these two statements deliberately, because in some way both of
them remind us of what we committed ourselves to doing early in 1994. The
statements show, however, that maybe we had a different interpretation of
the RDP. Maybe we understood what it wanted, but going forward in its
execution we started to wonder whether we had to accept this policy indeed.


I want to say that what the hon Van Niekerk committed us to doing as
government, as Minister of Agriculture in 1994, we have indeed taken
further and implemented. We have executed land reform, albeit with the
challenges that all members have highlighted. We have established new
farmers, as former Minister Van Niekerk then said.
We have participated in land reform actions. Through the LandCare Programme
we have protected the natural environment. We have continued to develop
human resources, a point that hon Nkuna has articulated so well at this
podium. Yes, we have recognised the farmworkers’ rights, and we have
enlightened farmers and workers regarding their responsibilities to each
other. That is why we had to execute the redetermination of farmworkers’
conditions. Yes, we have developed a sound regional policy for all.

Clearly, if we go back to those statements, as articulated by hon Ginindza
and hon Van Niekerk, inherent in them was that there was no quick fix.
There were going to be challenges in dealing with the legacy of our past.

Indeed, there are contradictions, because when we said, as articulated by
the hon Van Niekerk then, we would participate in land reform, what that
actually meant was that in the process of implementation there would be a
transfer of ownership from those who have to those who have not. It meant
the land size was not going to expand, because it is a natural resource
that cannot expand like any other thing. What it meant is that those who
had more, had to sacrifice and have less. It is through this process, which
members have articulated, that more time was spent in negotiations and
deliberations trying to resolve the legacy of our past.

Sometimes I worry, because, rightly so, we are frustrated by the pace of
land reform, but, in the same breath, when we start to talk about the need
for implementing expropriation, we are equally worried. I say to myself,
“What is the best instrument?” [Interjections.] I wouldn’t rush to say so.
But the reality is that we have to contend with the challenges at hand.
Negotiations, by their very nature, are a give and take. They don’t get
easier.

Hon Groenewald, you have raised the matter of Levubu. Indeed, it took time.
Members of the provincial legislature of Limpopo would know. When I visited
Levubu, as a way of intervening in that problem, some of the community
members and some of the landowners, albeit the security services, came
armed to the meeting – clearly saying that they could not accept that
process. I was calm. I asked the community members to be calm; I asked all
of us to negotiate to find a settlement, no matter how painful the
situation was.

Negotiations in that meeting took almost four hours. At the end of that
process, half of the members agreed to the settlement. The first phase of
that land settlement has been concluded. The second phase, as you rightly
said, has not been concluded. Some farmers have come back indicating, in
terms of some of the offers they made – taking into consideration the time
- they appeal to government to re-evaluate. As you correctly said, that is
why there has been a re-evaluation for the third time.

I have used this example of Levubu, because it must say to us that the
challenge of dealing with land reform, particularly regarding the course of
negotiation that we have chosen as a country – of negotiation, of allowing
a process of willing buyer, willing seller – cannot, by its very nature, be
as fast. I think we have to be humble enough to acknowledge that this
process will have its own pains.

So as we reflect on new mechanisms - and as we said in the Land Summit we
will do certain things, ourselves as government, in order to improve our
own capacity to be able to fast-track some of these processes - it is also
true that some of our partners on the other side must do the same.

I want to say to the hon Kraai van Niekerk that extension has not gone out
of the window. There might have been challenges. I am sure that me and you,
and maybe few hon members here know, when there was a devolution of certain
functions to the provinces, we acknowledged that there was going to be a
problem of co-ordination. I think we should accept that the challenge of
our own governance, in terms of concurrent powers, is inherent with
problems, because the MECs also have legislative power.

We added further, in terms of finance, that once funds had been transferred
to provinces, provinces had the latitude to spend. In order to reverse
that, there are certain things you have to do. Even if you want to
implement section 100, you can’t do it willy-nilly. Hence, this government
agreed that we needed to have legislation to strengthen that co-ordination,
so that the concurrent governance system that South Africa has decided on
can support the implementation of our programmes.

I am raising these things because, indeed, they are true. As we are
critical of the problems in this sector, we also need to be mindful of
steps that have been taken to correct them. I also want to say, hon Van
Niekerk, that I am happy as a Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs –
as is my Deputy Minister - because the members in the gallery reflect our
partners.

They are members who come from the Agribusiness Chamber, members who come
from agricultural local associations and agricultural unions – both black
and white - who said, “We are willing to work with government in the land
sector and in agricultural development, because the success of this
programme offers benefits to all, not to a few.”

So, I am not very worried. I know the journey might be long. But the
commitment to the partnership has not only been in word, but in action in
terms of what those farmers at local level have done in holding each
other’s hand, particularly those who are new, so that they succeed.

It is important for us to remember how we, as South Africa, maybe in the
first phase that my Deputy Minister was talking about, dealt with the poor
white problem in this country. In the 1930s, when the then South African
government decided to have the Carnegie Commission to investigate what
could be done to deal with the poor white problem, one of the instruments
of dealing with that problem was precisely land reform – in the first
phase, as Dirk said.

I think, if we have to be honest, if we can just go back to that phase, it
never took those white farmers who were put through that programme 10 years
to succeed. It took them more years. Some of them had to be asked to exit,
because they didn’t make it. Some of them had to be supported and nursed
through like children learning to walk. I think we need to afford the same
to the new black farmers in this country, if we want to complete the third
agricultural revolution, as the Deputy Minister articulated. [Applause.]
That’s precisely what we are doing in Limpopo.

Regarding the 70% of projects that have collapsed that you referred to, MEC
Magadzi – I’m sorry that she has left now - is working with our land office
in Limpopo. She is going back to those projects to identify those that have
failed, those that are still willing, to try to support them and to ask the
others nicely to deregister because we don’t want to penalise everybody. We
know that, maybe, in 1994 everybody was excited and thought they wanted to
farm, but actually they were not interested enough. So we want to give them
an opportunity without punishing them.

Hon members, the time may not be enough here, but it is important that we
give space to complete this third leg of agrarian revolution, which is now
about the black majority of this country who are the African people. If we
do so, 20 years from now, when we talk about agriculture’s contribution to
the economy, towards Asgisa that is led by the Deputy President, we will
not be talking about the dual agricultural sector in this country. We will
be talking about about one sector that represents South Africa’s citizens –
both black and white, women and men. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 17:35.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                            FRIDAY, 24 MARCH 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS:



National Assembly


The Speaker

1.    Membership of the Assembly
     a) The following member vacated his seat in the National Assembly with
        effect from 23 March 2006:

        Lekgoro, M K.

2.    Referral to committees of papers tabled

    (1)     The following paper is referred to the Joint Committee on
        Ethics and Members’ Interests for consideration:

          a) Report of the Auditor-General on the Declarations of Interest
             by Ministers, Deputy Ministers and Government Employees [RP 19-
             2006].

    (2)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Works for consideration:

        a)  Memorandum  by  the  Minister  of  Public  Works  setting   out
           Particulars of the Building  Programme  for  2006-2007  [RP  25-
           2006].


TABLINGS:



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Finance


      a) Government Notice No 115 published in Government Gazette No 28469
         dated 3 February 2006: Determination of the daily allowance in
         respect of meals and incidental costs for purposes of the Act,
         1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

2.    The Minister of Public Works


      a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Works for 2006-2010.


3.    The Minister of Health


      a) Co-operation Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
         Tunisia and the Republic of South Africa on Public Health and
         Medical Sciences, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:


National Assembly


1. First Report of Standing Committee on Public  Accounts:  Ingonyama  Trust
  Board, dated 18 March 2006:


   The Standing Committee on Public  Accounts  (SCOPA),  having  heard  and
   considered evidence on the Annual Report and the Report of the  Auditor-
   General on the financial statements of the Ingonyama Trust Board (Board)
   for the financial years ending 31 March 2002/03 and 2003/04,  tabled  in
   Parliament and refered to it, reports as follows:


1. Inadequate debtors system


   The Committee noted that the Board’s debtor system  was  inadequate  and
   therefore unable to properly maintain royalty and Permission  to  Occupy
   income records. For example, these records did  not  provide  sufficient
   financial information on the completeness and accuracy of the R3 234 775
   debtors’ figure in the annual  financial  statements.  This  matter  was
   raised in subsequent annual reports from 1999 to date.


   The  Committee  was  informed   during   the   hearing   that   debtors’
   reconciliations will now be available for review by the auditors as  the
   debtor system is now internally processed.


   The Committee recommends that:
   a) Data integrity should be improved  to  enable  the  Board  to  provide
      sufficient information regarding the proper management of debtors;
b) It be provided with time frames  for  the  full  implementation  of  the
   debtor  system,
      within 30 days after the tabling of this resolution;
c) Debtors’ reconciliations should be prepared in terms of Treasury
   Regulation
      31.1.2(j); ie weekly;
   d) It be furnished with the progress report within 30 days after tabling
       of this
      resolution regarding outstanding debtors which  has  been  sent  final
      reminders and against which legal action has been taken.


   2. Accounts payable
   The Committee is concerned about the lack  of  supporting  documentation
   presented to substantiate surface restoration deposits amounting to  R55
   800,00.


   The Committee recommends that the  Accounting  Authority  should  ensure
   that:
    a) Proper controls are in place for record keeping;
   b) All records are kept for a specific period before  being  archived  as
      per National Treasury regulations; and
   c) It be provided with evidence that a thorough  investigation  has  been
      undertaken in an effort to establish the source of this money,  within
      30 days after tabling of this report.


   3.      Provision


   No provision was created in the financial  statements  for  expenditure,
   estimated to be in the region of R22 million, and approved by the  Board
   in respect of the Tribal Authorities.


   The Committee recommends that in  future,  financial  statements  should
   reflect all relevant items as prescribed by South African Statements  of
   Generally Recognised Accounting Practise (GRAP) in order to have a clear
   picture of the financial affairs of the Trust.


4. Land holdings


   The audit  report  highlighted  some  weaknesses  in  the  Board’s  land
   holdings records, for example:
    ▪  The  land  holding  register  does  not  agree  with  the   financial
      statements resulting in an unexplained difference of R188 million;
 ▪ Title deeds to the  value  of  R177  135  684  were  not  submitted  for
   auditing purposes;
    ▪ Title deeds for land amounting  to  R398  092  165  were  verified  on
      uncertified copies of title deeds; and
 ▪ A lack of supporting documentation for an increase of  R30  524  700  in
   the land holdings.
   The Committee recommends that the Board should:
a)  Establish accurate records of its land holdings
b)  Ensure that filing and safekeeping  of  title  deeds  meets  acceptable
   standards;
c)  Obtain certified copies of all title deeds; and
     d)  Furnish a progress report to Parliament based on the issues  raised
        in this Report, within 30days after tabling of this report.


5. Cost of Board meetings


   The Committee is also concerned about certain high attendance  costs  of
   Board meetings.


   The Committee recommends that the Board should:


    a) Consider reducing costs incurred in respect  of  board  meetings,  as
       these seems to be excessive for a single day visit; and
b) Furnish a progress report to Parliament based on the issue raised above.




6. Arrear rates


   The Committee noted with disappointment that the Board has been invoiced
   over a number of years for municipal rates in respect of land  owned  by
   the Board. The Committee further noted that an amount of R88 million has
   been disclosed in respect of arrear rates, but  that  it  is  not  clear
   which portion belongs to the Province and which to the Board.


   The Committee is of the view that the Board seems reluctant to  exercise
   its power by forcing the municipalities in question to provide  accurate
   information.


   The Committee recommends that:
   a) The Board ensure that proper steps are taken by following up with  the
      relevant ministry in order to identify the legal liability of property
      rates;
    b) The Board ensure that negotiations between municipalities  and  other
       stakeholders take place to resolve the arrear rates issue – the Board
       should facilitate this process;
   c) The Board ensure  that  title  deeds  of  the  land  in  question  are
      available in order to  establish  ownership  between  the  Board,  the
      Province and the relevant municipalities;
   d) The Board ensure that time frames to resolve problems of arrear  rates
      be provided to it within 30 days of the tabling of this Report; and
   e) The Auditor-General follow up these issues during the  next  financial
      year end audit and provide feedback to it on the progress.


   7.      Segregation of the accounting duties


   Weaknesses were highlighted in the audit report with regard to
   separation of duties. The Committee is not aware of any improvements
   made to address these weaknesses identified.


   The Committee finds the situation unacceptable, as this matter has been
   reported on for several years and to date the Board has not rectified
   the situation.


   The Committee recommends that the necessary internal control measures be
   implemented immediately.


8. Expired contracts


   The  Committee   noted   that   the   employment   contracts   for   the
   employees/service providers of the Board could not be provided for audit
   purposes.


   The Committee further noted with disappointment that the Board could not
   quantify the extent of the losses which  resulted  from  illegal  mining
   operations by mining contractors whose contracts had expired.


   The Committee is still awaiting replies from the Board, promised during
   the hearing, with regards to expired contracts, for instance the extent
   of the losses incurred and number of contracts outstanding as well as
   the reasons why.


   The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority ensure that:
    a) Appropriate and suitable staff is employed for the positions as
       outlined in the Auditor-General’s report;
    b) Proper controls over employment contracts and any other internal
       control weaknesses and non-compliance issues are implemented
       immediately, monitored and that any discrepancies identified should
       be timeously followed up.


   The Committee was also informed during the hearing that the Board
   members contracts would expire at the end of June 2005.
   The Committee recommends that the new Board is appointed in terms of the
   laid down procedures.


   9. Internal Audit and Audit Committee


   The report highlighted non-compliance with the PFMA and Treasury
   Regulations regarding the establishment of internal audit function and
   the Audit Committee.


   The Committee was informed during the hearing that the Board is
   attending to these concerns. However, the Committee noted that the
   appointment of the Audit Committee will be discussed at the next board
   meeting, on 6 May 2005.


   The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority urgently ensure
   that:


    a) It be provided with the minutes of the meeting of the Board where the
       establishment and appointment of both the internal audit and the
       audit committee will be discussed, including the relevant
       timeframe(s); and
    b) The Corrective steps are taken where the Board has not fully complied
       with applicable laws and regulations and that the Committee be
       advised of such corrective steps taken within 30 days after tabling
       of this report.


   10.     Concluding comments


   The core business of the Trust is to manage the land for the material
   benefit and social well-being  of the individual members of the tribes.
   Although the Trust has a revenue distribution policy in place, it has
   experienced difficulties in distributing the monies accumulated.  The
   Committee noted that none of the programmes of the Trust deals with the
   distribution of funds or assist communities to develop business plans or
   to invest these monies according to the core business of the Trust.


   The Committee recommends  that  the  Trust,  in  consultation  with  the
   traditional authorities and any other bodies involved, ensure  that  all
   the underlying reasons that led the Trust not to perform its duties, are
   resolved and that the Trust reports quarterly to SCOPA on progress made.




   Finally, the Committee wishes to express its general  disappointment  at
   the performance of the Board and urges the incoming Board  to  undertake
   responsibilities with greater dedication and accountability.



   Report to be considered.



2. Second Report of Standing Committee on Public  Accounts:  Central  Energy
   Fund and Subsidiaries, dated 18 March 2006:

   The Standing Committee on Public  Accounts  (SCOPA),  having  heard  and
   considered evidence on the Report of the Auditor-General on  the  annual
   financial statements of the Central Energy Fund (CEF) for the year ended
   31 March 2004, (RP 132/2004) tabled in Parliament and  referred  to  it,
   reports as follows:


1. PetroSA


   The Committee noted that the company has:
   a. Several offices, of which  four  are  rented  and  two  are  owned  by
      PetroSA. The Committee is concerned  about  the  wasteful  expenditure
      incurred by PetroSA as they are renting expensive offices in the  Cape
      Town Waterfront while they own offices in Parow;
   b. Experienced a drop in production at the Mossel  Bay  plant  which  had
      adverse
   c. effects on revenue. This was due to a statutory shutdown of the  plant
      for
   d. maintenance and the breakdown of  waste  heat  boilers  on  the  three
      methane
   e. reformer units.
   f. Internal control weaknesses as reported by the Auditor-General


   The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority ensures that:


   a. Measures are taken to minimize the loss  as  result  of  rental  still
      payable for the Waterfront offices after they have moved to the  Parow
      offices;
   b. The plant is properly maintained and  that  contractors  are  properly
      assessed and monitored so as to avoid a recurrence of  the  breakdowns
      in future; and
   c. The study of feedstock purchases should be completed before the end of
      the year, the outcome to be submitted to the Committee.


   The Committee further noted PetroSA’s advance payment /loan amounting to
   approximately R15 million made to Imvume Management (Pty) Ltd.


   In this regard, the Committee noted that:
   a. The Auditor-General’s report stated that there were internal  control
      weaknesses at PetroSA;
   b. PetroSA’s explanation for the advance payment which was according  to
      them  within  policy,  was  that  Imvume  Management  (Pty)  Ltd  was
      experiencing cash flow problems for that month and was thus unable to
      pay for a delivery of oil condensate;
   c. In granting the advance payment, PetroSA  was  under  the  impression
      that Imvume Management (Pty) Ltd needed to pay  its  employees  their
      end of year remuneration including cash bonuses;
   d. The decision by  PetroSA  to  deposit  the  advance  payment  into  a
      separate bank account to the standard contract account  used  between
      PetroSA and Imvume  Management  (Pty)  Ltd  was  irregular  and  that
      PetroSA considered that there was a lapse in terms of  monitoring  on
      the part of PetroSA with regard to the decision to  pay  the  advance
      payment;
   e. According to PetroSA, they did not undertake a risk assessment before
      granting the advance payment to Imvume Management; and
   f. Imvume Management (Pty) Ltd clearly misled PetroSA with regard to the
      purpose behind its request for an advance payment.


   The Committee recommends that:
   a) A progress report be made available to SCOPA by  PetroSA  on  the  re-
      payment of the R15 million debt incurred by  Imvume  Management  (Pty)
      Ltd;
   b) In  future,  PetroSA  improves  its  risk  assessment  and  management
      regarding  advance  payments  and  adheres  strictly  to   their   own
      procurement policies;


2. SFF Association


   The audit report highlighted the following:
a. Whether SFF is a going concern due to:
 • a net loss of R72 million (R277 million in 2003);
 • income generated that may not be sufficient to cover future  expenditure
   of the company due to cessation of commercial activities;
b. Non-compliance with the ministerial directive  concerning  the  approved
   strategic crude oil and petroleum stock policy as approved  by  Cabinet;
   and
c. Non-compliance with the Companies Act, 1973.


   The Committee recommends that:
   a) A strategy should be established to ensure that the going concern risk
      and any other potential future losses are appropriately addressed;
   b) SCOPA should call on the relevant ministers to engage on the necessity
      and importance of this and the level at which the stock should be held
      – pass appropriate resolution in respect thereof;
   c) Consideration should be  given  to  re-assessing  the  requirement  to
      comply with the minimum stock level of 14,9 million barrels (strategic
      stock levels);
   d)  Regarding  the  ministerial  directive,  the  Board   should   ensure
      compliance or take up the issue with the relevant minister  to  either
      amend or come to an agreement on how it can be complied with; and
   e) A register be maintained of  all  the  relevant  requirements  of  the
      Companies Act, 1973 and this should be regularly  reviewed  to  ensure
      compliance.


   It was stated that the group works in silos and as a result, PetroSA did
   not  pick  up  the  issue  of  a  previous  employee  causing  fruitless
   expenditure of R14 million. The Committee therefore recommends that  the
   group should put in place a system of controls  to  co-ordinate/  manage
   these types of events.


   3.      OPCSA, IGAS and PASA


   The Committee is concerned about the companies  in  question  not  being
   able to continue their operations as going concerns, for example:
   a) OPCSA incurred a net loss amounting to R8,4 million. The Committee was
      informed that the OPCSA has been involved in negotiations in order  to
      improve its profit. The negotiations will be concluded at the  end  of
      this financial year and a contract will be in place;
   b) IGAS has not generated any revenue to date and incurred a loss of R3,7
      million (same as previous financial year); and
   c) PASA’s primary income is based on  royalties  received  from  PetroSA.
      There was a decrease in gross revenue due  to  problems  at  PetroSA’s
      manufacturing plant.


   The Committee recommends that:
   a) OPCSA should develop and  implement  proper  reporting  structures  in
      order to comply with the PFMA and Treasury regulations;
   b) The business plan of OPCSA and IGAS should be  provided  to  SCOPA  to
      show what their plans are to make these entities profitable;
   c) PASA should provide a progress report to SCOPA on  additional  revenue
      sources identified (non-PetroSA).


    4.      Dormant companies


   The Committee noted that there were several companies in the  CEF  group
   that were dormant. These companies had specific purposes and carried out
   different mandates. The companies had not yielded the  results  intended
   and hence a decision was taken to liquidate all of them.


   The Committee is concerned about the time CEF is taking to liquidate all
   of these companies as their continued existence might lead  to  loss  of
   income to the CEF group.


   The Committee recommends that Management should:
   a) Urgently investigate the profitability of the  dormant  companies  and
      the process to close down these companies;
   b) Follow up on progress regarding the deregistration of  companies  that
      have been earmarked for closure; and
   c) Do all in its power to conclude the process in the  2005/06  financial
      year so as to eliminate further losses.


   5. PETROLEUM AGENCY SA


   A forensic investigation was conducted regarding the awarding of license
   applications  for  the  Tugela  block  and  compliance  with   corporate
   governance requirements. A disciplinary hearing was undertaken  and  the
   employee was allowed to go on early retirement.


   The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority ensure  that  the
   investigation referred to above be finalised and that the  Committee  be
   furnished with the outcome.


   6. CEF


   Having  considered  the  Auditor-General’s  report  and  the   financial
   statements for the 2003/04  financial  year,  the  Committee  recommends
   that:


   a) Management should  investigate  the  possibility  of  utilising  other
      options (financial instruments) in order to  prevent  losses  incurred
      due to the fluctuation of the rand against the dollar;
                 b)  Financial statements  process  be  implemented  and  be
                    received in the required time;
   c) Ensure oversight from CEF over its subsidiaries  to  ensure  that  the
      necessary  dormant  companies  are  closed  down  and  that   start-up
      companies become profitable as soon as possible.


   The report further highlighted various non-compliance  issues  with  the
   PFMA, Treasury Regulations and the Companies Act, 1973.


   The Committee recommends that control measures should be put in place to
   detect and correct all instances of non- compliance with best  practice,
   company policies, laws and regulations.


   Report to be considered.


 3. Third Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: Department of
   Home Affairs, dated 18 March 2006:


   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOPA), having heard and
   considered evidence on the Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-
   General on the financial statements of the Department of Home Affairs
   for the financial years ending 31 March 2002/03 and 2003/04, reports as
   follows:


   1. Government Printing Works (GPW)


      (i)   Operating Surplus, (page 141, Income Statement) R200, 519
      million
   In terms of Treasury Regulation 19.7.1, an Accounting Officer of a
   Department operating a trading account is required to declare any
   operating surplus to National Treasury, and Treasury may decide what
   should happen with that surplus.  However, at the public hearing the
   Department informed the Committee that no arrangements have been made
   with Treasury with regard to retention of operating surplus.


   The Committee recommends that:


 a) The Accounting Officer immediately takes all appropriate steps to
   comply with the applicable Treasury Regulations and report back to the
   Committee on steps taken within 60 days after this resolution has been
   adopted by Parliament.
   (ii)    .Corporatisation process of Government Printing Works


   The Committee is concerned at the delay of the corporatisation process
   of the GPW.


   However, the Committee was informed that the Department will be
   presenting its proposal on the way forward with regard to
   corporatisation of GPW to the Minister by June 2005.


   The Committee therefore recommends that the Accounting Officer:


   a) Ensures that this process is finalised as a matter of urgency; and
   b) Reports on progress made to the Committee within 60 days after this
      resolution has been adopted by Parliament.


   (iii) Management of Debtors (page 137, par. 3.2)
   The Auditor-General reported lack of effective and efficient steps to
   collect all the money due to the GPW, compounded by a lack of skilled
   staff and insufficient management reviews.


   The Committee noted progress made with regard to establishment of the
   Debt Collection Division and filling of the managerial position.


   However, the Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer:


   a) Ensures that all outstanding debt older than 60 days is collected as a
      matter of urgency;
   b) Ensures that the GPW charges interest on overdue accounts; and
   c) Finalises the skills audit at the GPW and fill the critical positions
      as soon as possible.


   (iv) Supply chain management framework (page 139, par. 5.2.3)


   The Auditor-General reported to the Committee that the GPW had not
   implemented the regulations regarding the framework for supply chain
   management that requires trading entities to develop and implement an
   effective and efficient supply chain management system for:
       ▪ The acquisition of goods and services, and
       ▪ The disposal and letting of state assets.


   The Committee therefore recommends that:


      a) The Accounting Officer complies with section 76(4)(c) of the PFMA
         and ensures that all the requirements of the supply chain
         management framework are implemented.


   2.  Controls at the Lindela Detention Centre (page 93, par. 3.1)


   The Auditor-General reported inadequate financial management controls at
   Lindela detention centre, and that he could not evaluate the accuracy
   and validity of the holding expenditure amounting to R95, 9 million. The
   Committee noted weaknesses in the awarding of contracts where State
   Tender Board procedures were not followed.


   The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:


      a) The Service Level Agreement with the company contracted to provide
         a service is reviewed and that the company complies with the
         conditions of the agreement.
      b) When the contract of Bosasa expires in August 2005, the
         requirements of Tender Board procedures are complied with when
         awarding the contract for the next contract period.


   3. Management of Revenue (page 94, par. 3.2)


   The Auditor-General reported that regional offices of the Department are
   responsible for amongst others, the collection, depositing and the
   capturing onto the Basic Accounting System (BAS) for receipts for
   revenue generated by the Department for various services rendered.
   However, due to various logistical constraints BAS was not available to
   all regional offices and as a result the Department experienced
   significant backlogs in capturing the receipts onto BAS. For example, at
   the end of March 2004 unallocated deposits from various regional offices
   amounted to approximately R32 million.


   The Committee therefore recommends that the Accounting Officer urgently
   ensures that:
      a) BAS is implemented at all regional offices;
      b) Revenue is timeously allocated to appropriate accounts;
      c) Unallocated deposits are cleared as a matter of urgency; and
      d) Bank reconciliation is performed properly.


   4. Internal Audit and Internal Controls (pages 74 and 95)


   The Audit Committee reported that the internal audit division was not
   operating effectively and remained under-resourced.  The Auditor General
   could also not rely on the work of internal audit as only 19 per cent of
   the unit's approved annual work plan was executed.


   The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:


      a) The lack of capacity is addressed as a matter of urgency;
      b) He complies with all requirements of the PFMA and Treasury
         Regulations relating to internal audit; and
      c) The internal auditors follow-up on management's action plans in
         response to audit findings.
      d) The Department reports back to the Committee on steps taken within
         60 days after this resolution has been adopted by Parliament


   Report to be considered.


 4. Fourth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: State
   Information Technology Agency (PTY) LTD (SITA), dated 18 March 2006:


   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOPA), having considered the
   Annual Reports of SITA for the financial years ending 31 March 2003 and
   31 March 2004, the Standing Committee on Public Accounts reports as
   follows:


   1. Attendance of the Board


   As the Board was not in attendance at the hearing the Committee would
   like an explanation with regard to this. The Committee recommends that
   it responds to all of the below mentioned matters in the 2003-2004
   Annual Report to Parliament.


   2. Gateway Project  (par 4.2, page 41)


   The rollout of the Gateway Project, a South African citizen centric
   project initiated by the Department of Public Service and
   Administration, was awarded to SITA.  In the year under review, the
   operating and capital expenditure on the project amounted to
   approximately R77 million.


   The Auditor-General reported that SITA’s internal auditors had
   undertaken a forensic investigation into possible irregularities
   relating to the Gateway project during the year under review.


   During the hearing, the Committee had engaged the Chief Executive
   Officer of SITA on the matter.


   Recommendation:


   The Committee recommends that the Board of SITA - as the Accounting
   Authority - take the following steps:


      a) Ensure the expeditious finalisation of the report on the forensic
         investigation. (The role of all persons involved in the initiation
         and approval of the project should be clarified.)
      b) Institute all appropriate disciplinary procedures and or legal
         action if the forensic audit produce evidence of any negligence or
         wrongdoing.


   3. Governance Issues (page 6)


   The Committee noted[1] the problems created by the simultaneous
   appointment of all of the Directors of a Board, or where the full
   Board's terms of office expire simultaneously.


   Recommendation:


   SITA should follow best practice as outlined in Section 5 of the
   Protocol on Corporate Governance issued by the department of Public
   Enterprises.


   The Committee therefore recommends that the Board institute as a matter
   of urgency, a system that will ensure continuity at SITA with regard to
   Board Membership.


   4. Service Delivery and Client Relations (page 46, 4th par.)


   Numerous complaints have reportedly been received from user-departments
   regarding perceived poor service delivery by SITA.  Poor performance was
   admitted by SITA on page 46 of the 2004 Annual Report, and it has
   identified certain key strategic imperatives for improved performance.
   The Auditor-General reported that he has planned an Information Systems
   Audit to commence in April 2005 that would reflect on certain service
   delivery aspects.


   Recommendation:


   The Committee recommends that SITA should investigate the causes of the
   complaints from the user-departments and implement measures to improve
   service delivery as a matter of urgency.


   SITA links with Auditor-General on Information System Audit and takes
   recommendations on board.


   5. Special Investigation on Procurement


   A review by the Auditor-General of SITA procurement processes revealed a
   number of instances of non-compliance with SITA Procurement Policy and
   Procedure when tested against the relevant acts and regulations, such as
   the SITA Act, the PFMA and the State Tender Board Regulations.


   Recommendation:


   The Committee recommends to the Board that the Internal Audit:
       • Make procurement a specific focus area until such time as
         procurement processes and procedures are at a sufficiently high
         standard.
       • A matter such as the implementation of an effective fraud
         prevention strategy, and the establishment of a fraud hotline also
         has to be fasttracked.
       • Quarterly reports in this regard should be reviewed by the Board's
         Audit Committee, and should be reported on in its next Annual
         Report to Parliament.


   6. During the hearing a concern was expressed with regard to awarding of
      performance bonuses. The committee found the performance bonuses
      awarded at SITA were overly excessive.


   The Committee recommends that:


   The performance bonuses awarded should be in line with sector norms.


   Report to be considered.


 5. Fifth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: Trade and
   Investment South Africa, dated 18 March 2006:


   INTRODUCTION


   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Annual
   Report and the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
   Statements of Trade & Investment South Africa for the year ended
   31 March 2005 tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as
   follows:


   1. AUDIT OPINION


   The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by
   independence auditors, and trusts that future audit opinions shall be
   equally unqualified.


   2. CONCLUSION


   The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the
   accounting authority of Trade & Investment South Africa is necessary for
   the financial year under review.


   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report of
   the Independent Auditors.


   Report to be considered.


6.    Sixth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: South African
   National Accreditation System (SANAS), dated 18 March 2006:


   INTRODUCTION


   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Annual
   Report and the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
   Statements of the South African National Accreditation System (SANAS)
   for the year ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to
   it, reports as follows:


   1. AUDIT OPINION


   The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
   Independent Auditors, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
   equally unqualified.


   2. CONCLUSION


   The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the SANAS
   is necessary for the financial year under review.


   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report of
   the Independent Auditors.


   Report to be considered.


 7. Seventh Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: South African
   Broadcasting Corporation, dated 18 March 2006:


   INTRODUCTION


   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Annual
   Report and the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
   Statements of the South African Broadcasting Corporation Limited (SABC)
   for the year ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to
   it, reports as follows:


   1.  AUDIT OPINION


   The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
   Independent Auditors, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
   equally unqualified.


   2. CONCLUSION


   The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the SABC
   is necessary for the financial year under review.


   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report of
   the Independent Auditors.


   Report to be considered.


 8. Eighth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: Onderstepoort
   Biological Products Ltd, dated 18 March 2006:


   INTRODUCTION


   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Annual
   Report and the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
   Statements of the Onderstepoort Biological Products Ltd for the year
   ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as
   follows:


   1. AUDIT OPINION


   The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
   Independent Auditors, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
   equally unqualified.


   2. CONCLUSION


   The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the
   Onderstepoort Biological Products Ltd is necessary for the financial
   year under review.


   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report of
   the Independent Auditors.


   Report to be considered.


9. Ninth  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts:  Industrial
   Development Corporation of South Africa Limited, dated 18 March 2006:

   INTRODUCTION


   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the  Annual
   Report and the Report of  the  Independent  Auditors  on  the  Financial
   Statements of the Industrial Development  Corporation  of  South  Africa
   Limited (IDC) for the year ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and
   referred to it, reports as follows:


  AUDIT OPINION


   The Committee noted the  unqualified  audit  opinion  expressed  by  the
   independent auditors, and trusts that future  audit  opinions  shall  be
   equally unqualified.


  CONCLUSION


   The Committee is of  the  view  that  no  further  interaction  with  the
   Industrial Development Corporation  of  South  Africa  Limited  (IDC)  is
   necessary for the financial year under review.

   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the  Report  of
   the Independent Auditors.


   Report to be considered.


 10. Tenth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: Godisa Trust,
   dated 18 March 2006:


   INTRODUCTION


   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Annual
   Report and the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
   Statements of the Godisa Trust for the year ended 31 March 2005, tabled
   in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:


   1. AUDIT OPINION


   The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
   independent auditors, and trusts that future audit opinions shall be
   equally unqualified.


   2. CONCLUSION


   The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the Godisa
   Trust is necessary for the financial year under review.


   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report of
   the Independent Auditors.


   Report to be considered.


 11. Eleventh Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: Financial
   Services Board, dated 18 March 2006:


   INTRODUCTION


   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Annual
   Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
   of the Financial Service Board for the year ended 31 March 2005, tabled
   in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:


   1. AUDIT OPINION


   The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
   Auditor General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
   unqualified.


   2. CONCLUSION


   The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the South
   Financial Service Board is necessary for the financial year under
   review.


   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report of
   the Auditor-General.


   Report to be considered.


 12. Twelfth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: Development
   Bank of Southern Africa, dated 18 March 2006:


   INTRODUCTION


   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Annual
   Report and the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
   Statements of the Developmental Bank of Southern Africa Limited (DBSA)
   for the year ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to
   it, reports as follows:


   1. AUDIT OPINION


   The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
   Independent Auditors, and trusts that future audit opinions shall be
   equally unqualified.


   2. CONCLUSION


   The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the
   Developmental Bank of Southern Africa Limited is necessary for the
   financial year under review.


   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report of
   the Independent Auditors.


   Report to be considered.



 13. Thirteenth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: Airports
   Company South Africa Ltd (ACSA), dated 18 March 2006:


   INTRODUCTION

   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered  the  Annual
   Report and the Report  of  the  Independent  Auditors  on  the  Financial
   Statements of the Airports Company South Africa Ltd (ACSA) for  the  year
   ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports  as
   follows:

  1. AUDIT OPINION

   The Committee noted  the  unqualified  audit  opinion  expressed  by  the
   independent auditors, and trusts  that  future  audit  opinions  will  be
   equally unqualified.

  2. CONCLUSION

   The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the ACSA is
   necessary for the financial year under review.

   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the  Report  of
   the Independent Auditors.


   Report to be considered.


14. Fourteenth Report of Standing Committee on Public  Accounts:  Accounting
   Standards Board (ASB), dated 18 March 2006:



  INTRODUCTION



     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Annual
     Report and the Report of the  Independent  Auditors  on  the  Financial
     Statements of the Accounting Standard Board (ASB) for  the  year  ended
     31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and  referred  to  it,  reports  as
     follows:


  1. AUDIT OPINION


    The Committee noted the unqualified  audit  opinion  expressed  by  the
    independent auditors, and trusts that future audit  opinions  shall  be
    equally unqualified.


  2. CONCLUSION


    The Committee is of the view  that  no  further  interaction  with  the
    accounting  authority  of  the  Accounting  Standard  Board  (ASB)   is
    necessary for the financial year under review.


    The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report of
    the Independent Auditors.


   Report to be considered.


 15. Fifteenth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: National
   Agricultural Marketing Council, dated 18 March 2006:


   INTRODUCTION


   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Annual
   Report and the Report of the Auditor General on the Financial Statements
   of the National Agricultural Marketing Council (NAMAC) for the year
   ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as
   follows:


   1. AUDIT OPINION


   The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
   Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
   unqualified.


   2. CONCLUSION


   The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the NAMAC
   is necessary for the financial year under review.


   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report of
   the Auditor-General.


   Report to be considered.


 16. Sixteenth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: Greater St.
   Lucia Wetland Park, dated 18 March 2006:


   INTRODUCTION


   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Annual
   Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
   of the Greater St. Lucia Wetland Park for the year ended 31 March 2005,
   tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:


   1. AUDIT OPINION


   The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
   Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
   unqualified.
   2. CONCLUSION


   The Committee is of the view that, no further interaction with the
   Greater St Lucia Wetland Park is necessary for the financial year under
   review.
   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report of
   the Auditor-General.


   Report to be considered.


17. Seventeenth Report of  Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts:  South
 African National Biodiversity Institute (SANB), dated 18 March 2006:

  INTRODUCTION

   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered  the  Annual
   Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements
   of the South African National Biodiversity Institute (SANBI) for the year
   ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports  as
   follows:

  1. AUDIT OPINION

   The Committee noted  the  unqualified  audit  opinion  expressed  by  the
   Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions  will  be  equally
   unqualified.

  2.  CONCLUSION

   The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with  the  SANBI
   is necessary for the financial year under review.


   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the  Report  of
   the Auditor-General.
   Report to be considered.


 18. Eighteenth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: Export
   Credit Insurance Corporation of South Africa Limited (ECIC), dated 18
   March 2006:


   INTRODUCTION


   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Annual
   Report and the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
   Statements of the Export Credit Insurance Corporation of South Africa
   Limited (ECIC) for the year ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament
   and referred to it, reports as follows:


   1. AUDIT OPINION


   The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
   independent auditors, and trusts that future audit opinions shall be
   equally unqualified.


   2. CONCLUSION


   The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the Export
   Credit Insurance Corporation of South Africa Limited (ECIC) is necessary
   for the financial year under review.
   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report of
   the Independent Auditors.


   Report to be considered.


 19. Nineteenth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:
   Competition Tribunal, dated 18 March 2006:


  INTRODUCTION

   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered  the  Annual
   Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements
   of the Competition Tribunal for the year ended 31 March 2005,  tabled  in
   Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:

   1.AUDIT OPINION

   The Committee noted  the  unqualified  audit  opinion  expressed  by  the
   Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions  will  be  equally
   unqualified.

  2.CONCLUSION

   The Committee is of  the  view  that  no  further  interaction  with  the
   Competition Tribunal is necessary for the financial year under review.

   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the  Report  of
   the Auditor-General.
   Report to be considered.


 20. Twentieth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: South
   African National Parks, dated 18 March 2006:


   INTRODUCTION
   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Annual
   Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
   of the South African National Parks for the year ended 31 March 2005,
   tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:


   1. AUDIT OPINION
   The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
   Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions shall be equally
   unqualified.


   2. EMPHASIS OF MATTER
   The Committee noted that South African National Parks during the
   financial year, controls were not always operating efficiently and
   effectively as required by section 51 (1) (a) (i) of the PFMA.
   Management has indicated that they are giving ongoing attention to these
   matters.


   The Committee expects this issue to be addressed as a matter of urgency
   and will monitor this concern in the next Annual Report.


   3. CONCLUSION
   The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the South
   African National Parks is necessary for the financial year under review.
   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report of
   the Auditor-General.
   Report to be considered.


   21. Twenty-First Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: South
   African Bureau of Standards (SABS), dated 18 March 2006:


   INTRODUCTION


   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Annual
   Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
   of the South African Bureau of Standards (SABS) for the year ended
   31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as
   follows:


   1. AUDIT OPINION


   The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
   Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
   unqualified.


   2. CONCLUSION


   The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the SABS
   is necessary for the financial year under review.


   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report of
   the Auditor-General.


   Report to be considered.


 22. Twenty-Second Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts: South
   African Tourism, dated 18 March 2006:


   INTRODUCTION


   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Annual
   Report and the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
   Statements of the South African Tourism for the year ended 31 March
   2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:


   1. AUDIT OPINION


   The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
   independent auditors, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
   equally unqualified.


   2. CONCLUSION


   The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the South
   African Tourism is necessary for the financial year under review.


   The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report of
   the Independent Auditors.


   Report to be considered.
23. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Housing on 2005 Annual Report,
  dated 15    March 2006:

The Portfolio Committee on Housing Annual Report from January – December
2005, reports as follows:

   1. Name of the Committee: Portfolio Committee on Housing
      Chairperson:           Ms ZA Kota-Fredericks
      Committee Secretary:   Ms NM Ntuli


   2. Chairperson’s Overview:
   This has been a watershed year for the Portfolio Committee on Housing.
   Two most important events took place, firstly; the conference on
   “Challenges of Fire and Floods in Human Settlements” in which all the
   relevant stakeholders came together. Secondly, the overseas study visit
   by the committee to Norway and the Netherlands to learn more about social
   housing. The committee also had public hearings with eight housing
   institutions as well as the National Department of Housing.


   3. Mandate of the Committee:
   The mission of the committee is to ensure that Parliament gets value for
   money spent for the purpose of building houses. The committee will
   continue to encourage visible housing delivery and adherence to better
   quality of housing units.


   The vision of the committee is to work with all relevant stakeholders
   willing to participate in the building of houses and assist the
   department in its constitutional imperative and mandate of providing
   everyone with an access to adequate housing.


   4. List of Public Entities Over Which the Committee Exercises Oversight:
     1.   National Home Builders’ Registration Council (NHBRC)
     2.   National Housing Finance Corporation (NHFC)
     3.   National Urban Construction and Housing Agency (NURCHA)
     4.   People’s Housing Partnership Trust (PHPT)
     5.   Rural Housing Loan Fund (RHLF)
     6.   Servcon Housing Solutions (SERVCON)
     7.   Social Housing Foundation (SHF)
     8.   Thubelisha Homes


   5. Number of Meetings Held and those Cancelled:
   1.    Committee meeting was held on 19 January, 2005
   2.    Committee meeting was held on 9 February, 2005
   3.    Committee meeting was held on 16 February 2005
   4.    Committee meeting was held on 1 March 2005
   5.    Committee meeting  which  was  scheduled  for  4  March  2005,  was
      cancelled
   6.    Committee meeting was held on 9 March 2005
   7.    Committee meeting was held on 18 May 2005
   8.    Committee meeting was held on 25 May 2005
   9.    Committee meeting was held on 27 May 2005
  10. Committee meeting was held on 1 June 2005
  11. Committee meeting which was scheduled for 22 June 2005, was cancelled
  12. Committee meeting was held on 2 August 2005
  13. Committee meeting was held on 10 August 2005
  14. Committee meeting was held on 16 August 2005
  15. Committee meeting was held on 24 August 2005
  16. Committee meeting was held on 31 August 2005
  17. Committee meeting was held on 14 September 2005
  18. Committee meeting was held on 11 October 2005
  19. Committee meeting was held on 26 October 2005
  20. Committee meeting was held on 9 November 2005
  21. Committee meeting was held on 16 November 2005


   6. Legislation Referred to the Committee:
   1. Prevention of Illegal Eviction from and Unlawful Occupation of Land
      (PIE) Amendment Bill (B 11-2005) was referred to the committee for
      consideration and was published in ATC: 7 March 2005. A briefing by
      the National Department of Housing on the Bill was held on 25 May
      2005. Amendments to the Bill were made (please see page 2, point 5, of
      the Minutes dated: 25 May 2005). An interim report of the Portfolio
      Committee on the Bill, was published in ATC: 2 November 2005.
   7. Papers (International Agreements, Protocols, Reports etc.) Referred to
      the Committee:
        1. Report and Financial Statements of Thubelisha Homes for
           2004/2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
           the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 (ATC: 5 October 2005).


   8. Oversight (Local) Visits:
      8.1   The Portfolio Committee undertook an oversight visit to the
           Western Cape province. The main objectives of the visit was to
           assess the relief needs in the areas that were affected by the
           fire disaster and also to give support to the victims of the
           fire disaster.
        2. The oversight visit was undertaken on 25-26 January 2005.
        3. The delegation was comprised of the following:
    • Ms ZA Kota             ANC (Chairperson)
                                     • Mr RJ Tau   ANC (Chairperson of the
                                       Select Committee on Public Services)
    • Ms BN Dambuza          ANC
    • Mr DC Mabena           ANC
    • Mr GD Schneemann ANC
    • Ms NJ Ngele            ANC
    • Ms MM Ramakaba-Lesiea  ANC
    • Mr AC Steyn            DA
    • Ms M Ntuli             Committee Secretary
    • Mr S Makeleni          Committee Assistant
        4. The Committee  visited  the  Joe  Slovo  area  in  KwaLanga  and
           Khayamnandi in Stellenbosch.
        5. The report was adopted by the committee on 16 August 2005.
        6. The report was published in the ATC: 14 November 2005

   9. International Visits:
        1. The Portfolio Committee undertook a study tour to Norway and the
           Netherlands.  The main objectives of the study tour were as
           follows:
              • To gain insight into the policy basis for the social and co-
                operative housing approach in Norway and the Netherlands.
              • To gain insight into the results achieved through the social
                housing and co-operative housing approach.
              • To learn how the international and social co-operative
                housing approaches relate to and compare with the South
                African context and policy development approach as well as
                the roles, functions and responsibilities of the different
                spheres of government, these, national, provincial and
                local.
              • To strengthen parliamentary relations and share experiences
                on the aspects of social and co-operative housing.
      9.2   The study tour was undertaken from 4-18 June 2005.
      9.3   The delegation was comprised of the following persons:
     • Ms ZA Kota            ANC   (Chairperson)
     • Ms BN Dambuza         ANC
     • Ms MM Ramakaba-Lesia  ANC
     • Mr GD Schneemann            ANC
     • Mr TS Dodovu                ANC
     • Mr AC Steyn                 DA
     • Ms S Sigcau                 UDM
     • Ms NM Ntuli                 Committee Secretary
     • Mr Brian Moholo       Managing Director: Social Housing Foundation
     • Mr Marlon Abrahams          Social Housing Foundation
     • Ms Odette Crawfton          Social Housing Foundation
     • Mr William Jiyana           National Department of Housing
     • Mr Thloriso Thelejane National Housing Finance Corporation
     • Ms Mandu Mamatela           National Housing Finance Corporation
      9.4   The committee visited Oslo in Norway and the Hague in the
           Netherlands.
      9.5   The report was adopted by the committee on 16 August, 2005.
      9.6   The report was published in the ATC: 14 November 2005

  10. Budget Vote:
      • The Memorandum on Vote No. 28 “Housing” Main Estimates, 2005-2006
        was referred to parliament on 2 March, 2005.
      • The committee had a briefing on the Budget by the National
        Department of Housing on 9 March, 2005.
      • Public hearings on the Budget Vote were held on12-13 April 2005.
      • The Report on the Public Hearings was adopted by the committee on
        16 August, 2005 and is ready to be published in the ATC.


  11. Annual Report of the Executive:
      • The Annual Report 2004/05 of the National Department of Housing was
        referred to parliament on 30 September 2005.
      • The National Department of Housing briefed the committee on its
        Annual Report 2004/05 on 26 October 2005.
      • The minutes on the briefing were adopted by the committee on 9
        November 2005. The National Department of Housing will come back
        before the Portfolio Committee for another presentation on the
        Annual Report next year (2006), after which a report will be
        compiled.
            • There were no public hearings held on the Annual Report
              2004/05.

              12. Other Committee Activities (Briefings, Workshops,
                  Conferences):
       12.1 The Committee attended the African Ministers’ on Housing and
             Urban Development (AMCHUD) conference in Durban, on 3-4
             February 2005.
       12.2 The Committee had a briefing by the Minister of Housing on the
             N2 Gateway Project on 1 March, 2005.
       12.3 The Committee organised a conference on “Challenges of Fire and
             Floods in Human Settlements” on 19-20 April, 2005 in
             parliament.
       12.4 The Committee attended the North West Provincial and Local
             Government Housing Summit on 6-8 June in Mafikeng, North West.
       12.5 The Committee had a briefing by the Institute for Housing of
             South Africa (IHSA) on its activities on 2 August, 2005.
       12.6 The Committee had a debriefing by Social Housing Foundation
             (SHF) on 16 August 2005,on the study tour which was undertaken
             by the Portfolio Committee on 4-18 June 2005 to Norway and the
             Netherlands.
       12.7 The Committee had a briefing by the Banking Association on the
             Banks’ Proposal on the Low-Income Housing Finance on 24 August
             2005.
       12.8 The Committee attended a Housing Indaba conference at the ICC in
             Cape Town, which was hosted by the National Department of
             Housing, on 22-23 September 2005.
          9. The Committee attended an International Housing Conference
             which was hosted by the Institute for Housing of South Africa
             (IHSA) at the ICC in Durban, on 16-19 October 2005.
       12.10      The Committee attended an Awards Ceremony which was hosted
             by the National Home Builders’ Registration Council (NHBRC) in
             Gauteng on 26 October, 2005.
       12.11      The Committee attended a housing handover ceremony by the
             Habitat for Humanity of South Africa and African Bank, in
             Protea South, Gauteng on 28 October 2005.
       12.12      The Committee attended the” Fifth Global Parliamentarians
             on Habitat Forum” held in Rabat, Morocco, on 10-12 November
             2005.


  13. Budget of the Committee:
       Budget Allocated to the Committee                       R525, 406.00
     • Expenditure:
                 Catering                                    R37 341.30
                 Provincial Visits                           R37 039.20
                 Overseas Trips                       R479 188.00
                 Conferences, Seminars, Workshops             0
                 Public Hearings                                    0
                 _____________
                 BALANCE                                 R553, 568.50
                 Closing Balance as at 15 March 2006       -R28 152.50


  14.   Outstanding Matters:
        1. Briefing on the Annual Report of 2005/06 by the National
           Department of Housing
        2. Deliberations on the PIE Amendment Bill (B 11-2005)
        3. Provincial Visits to the Northern Cape and North West
        4. Appearance before the committee of the Housing MECs from the
           Eastern Cape and KwaZulu Natal on their housing budget.

    15.  Support Staff:
      Committee Secretary:              Ms Mkoti NM Ntuli
      Control Committee Secretary: Ms N Nonkelela
      Committee Assistant:              Ms K Pasiya
      Secretary to Chairperson:         Ms E Scholtz
      Researcher:                  Mr W Manona

 16.  Formal Adoption of the Report by the Committee
      Annual Report of the Portfolio Committee on Housing, having been put
      to the Committee, was adopted by the Committee on 15 March 2006.


                            MONDAY, 27 MARCH 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS



National Assembly


The Speaker

1.    Appointment of whip


    Ms C Dudley has been appointed as a whip for the smaller parties with
    effect from 15 November 2005.

 2. Report on Rule amendments to establish Committee on Auditor-General
    At the meeting of the National Assembly Rules Committee, held on 14
    October 2005, it was agreed that a separate standing Committee be
    established in terms of the Public Audit Act to oversee the functions
    of the Auditor-General.


    The Subcommittee on the Review of Rules was mandated by the Rules
    Committee to draft the Rule amendments which would then be presented to
    the Speaker and circulated to parties and then put directly to the
    House for adoption.


    The Subcommittee has concluded its consideration of the matter and
    presented its report to the Speaker. The report has been circulated to
    parties.


    The following rule amendments are recommended for adoption by the
    House:


                 Part 10A:    Committee on the Auditor-General


    Establishment


    208 A   There is a Committee on the Auditor-General, established in
           terms of section 10(3) of the Public Audit Act, 2004.


    Composition


    208 B   The Committee on the Auditor-General consists of 13 members or
           such other number of members as the Speaker may determine with
           the concurrence of the Rules Committee.
    Functions and Powers


     208 C  (1)   The Committee on the Auditor-General must –
                 (a)   maintain oversight over the Auditor-General;
                 (b)   perform the functions and exercise the other powers
                     as specified in the Public Audit Act, 2004.


           (2)   The Assembly may by resolution assign any other function,
                 task or duty to the Committee on the Auditor-General within
                 its area of competence.


           (3)   The Committee on the Auditor-General may not consider –
                 (a)   audit reports produced by the Auditor-General;
                 (b)   any budget or business plan other than that of the
                     Auditor-General.


    Decisions


    208 D   A question before the Committee on the Auditor-General is
           decided when a quorum in terms of Rule 133 is present and there
           is agreement among the majority of members present.


                           TUESDAY, 28 MARCH 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bill passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 28 March 2006:


          a) Additional Adjustments Appropriation Bill (2005/06 Financial
             Year) [B 4 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 77).


National Assembly


The Speaker

1.    Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly in
     respect of Bill

     (1)    Bill amended and passed by National Council of Provinces on 28
        March 2006 and returned for concurrence:


          a) Division of Revenue Bill [B 3B – 2006] (National Assembly –
             sec 76)


        The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
        the National Assembly.


TABLINGS:



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Finance


     a) Government Notice No 177 published in Government Gazette No 28550
        dated 24 February 2006: Fixing of rate per kilometer in respect of
        motor vehicles for the purposes of section 8(1)(b)(ii) and (iii) of
        the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

2.    The Minister of Correctional Services


     a) Report of the Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons for 2005-2006 [RP 27-
        2006].


COMMITTEE REPORTS:



1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works (National  Assembly)
   on the oversight visits  to  the  nine  provinces  dated  7  March  2006:
   (Reprint)

   The Portfolio  Committee  on  Public  Works  (National  Assembly)  having
   conducted oversight visits to the National  Department  of  Public  Works
   (NDPW) and the Provincial Departments of Public Works, municipalities and
   local  communities  between  February  and  September  2005,  reports  as
   follows:


   The structure of this report is as follows:

   Glossary
   Foreword
   Introduction
   Findings
   Overview
   Oversight visit to Provinces
   Recommendations
   Conclusion


   GLOSSARY
   BEE                 Black Economic Empowerment
   CBPWP               Community-Based Public Works Programme
   CDW                 Community Development Workers
   CIDB                Construction Industry Development Board
   CETA                Construction Education and Training Authority
   CTM                 City of Tshwane Management
   CHW                 Community Health Workers
   DM             District Municipality
   DORA                Division of Revenue Act
   DPTRW               Department of Public Transport, Road and Works
   EPWP                Expanded Public Works Programme
   EXCO                Executive Council
   ECD                 Early Childhood Development
   HCBC                Home Community-Based Care
   IDP                 Integrated Development Plans
   IDT                 Independent Development Trust
   ILO                 International Labour Organisation
   IMDC                Integrated Development Management Committee
   ISRDP               Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Programme
   KZN                 KwaZulu-Natal
   LED                 Local Economic Development
   MEC                 Member of Executive Council
   MFMA                Municipal Financial Management Act
   MIG                 Municipal Infrastructure Grant
   MoU                 Memorandum of Understanding
   MPC                 Multi Purpose Centres
   NDPW                National Department of Public Works
   PEC                 Provincial Executive Committee
   PFMA                Public Finance Management Act
   PMIS                Property Management Information System
   PPWD                Provincial Public Works Department
   PSC                 Provincial Steering Committee
   PTC                 Provincial Technical Committee
   SALGA               South African Local Government Association
   SAWIC               South African Women in Construction


   FOREWORD


   The Portfolio Committee, wishes to extend gratitude to the following:
         • The National Department of Public Works,  for  its  co-operation
           and their responsiveness  to  constructive  criticism  from  the
           Portfolio Committee and Standing Committee on Public Accounts.


         • The Committee further appreciates  the  immediate  and  positive
           response by the Department to the proposals and  recommendations
           made by the Committee.


         • The Committee notes the appointments of  the  Deputy  Directors-
           General for the EPWP and Asset Management respectively.


         • The Committee observes the Leadership Way Initiative  introduced
           by the  Department  in  an  attempt  to  redress  administrative
           shortcomings of the Department during the year under review.


         •  The  Committee  further  notes  the  improved   financial   and
           accounting systems that were  subsequently  complimented  by  an
           unqualified audit report for 2004/05 financial year.


         • The  Committee  thanks  all  provincial  MECs,  Members  of  the
           Provincial Legislatures and officials  of  the  departments  for
           their support and co-operation during the hearings.


         • The Committee also recognises the  cordial  reception  from  the
           Premiers of Northern Cape and Limpopo provinces respectively  as
           well as mayors of Johannesburg, Durban metropolitan councils and
           District Mayors of OR Tambo, Chris Hani and Alfred Nzo  District
           Municipalities  in  the  Eastern  Cape   and   Ulundi   District
           Municipality in KwaZulu-Natal.
         • The Committee further recognises the frankness and  constructive
           contribution  made  by   representatives   of   SALGA,   mayors,
           councillors,   beneficiaries   and   communities   during    the
           deliberations.


         • A tribute to South African Women in Construction (SAWIC) for the
           seminal role demonstrated in exhorting,  mobilising,  empowering
           and  effectuated  South  African  women  to  be  part   of   the
           challenging and  lucrative  construction  industry  through  the
           EPWP.


         • The Committee acknowledges with appreciation the  support  given
           by  the  IDT  to  the  Department   and   communities   in   the
           implementation of the EPWP at  Hlabisa  hospital  and  Zibambele
           road construction in Ndwedwe; KZN, and at Dutyini, Mount  Ayliff
           in Eastern Cape and Zivuseni in Gauteng.


         • The Committee appreciates  the  contributions  rendered  by  the
           Chairperson of the NCOP  Select  Committee  on  Public  Services
           during the information sharing in the advancement of the work of
           the two Committees.


   Notwithstanding the above,
             o The  Committee  during  its  oversight  visit  observed  with
               concern that in  most  provinces  the  intergovernmental  and
               interdepartmental  relations  are  still  a   challenge   and
               recommends that Parliament and its committees must  intensify
               the oversight role and promote the  understanding,  need  and
               the importance of these relations as contained in  chapter  3
               of the Constitution.


             o It is evident that in some provinces the non-availability  of
               public  representatives  directly  and   indirectly   affects
               service delivery.


             o The visibility of all  public  representatives  at  national,
               provincial and local spheres of government  is  paramount  in
               making   the   necessary   interventions   and   assists   to
               disseminate  information,  monitor  and  evaluate  government
               programmes.


             o The co-ordination of the departmental programmes (i.e.  EPWP)
               and  non  co-operation  of  cluster  Departments  remains   a
               concern, the Committee recommends that  designated  officials
               by the NDPW to regional and local spheres of government  must
               be capacitated and resourced in order to effectively  improve
               the co-ordination and the implementation of the Programme.


             o The  Committee  further  recommends  that  the  regional  and
               provincial co-ordinators of the EPWP constitute  a  forum  to
               co-ordinate and monitor the implantations  of  the  programme
               thereby    strengthening    the     intergovernmental     and
               interdepartmental relations.


             o On assets and asset management the Committee  recommends  the
               Property Management Information System (PMIS)  being  a  data
               capturing and  an  early  warning  system  developed  by  the
               Mpumalanga, North West and Western  Cape  provinces  must  be
               considered as a case study by the NDPW.



   INTRODUCTION


   The report is structured to present a general trend  and  a  consolidated
   perspective of all provinces rather than  province-by-province.  In  some
   instances a specific mention of a province is  highlighted  to  emphasise
   attention and action to be taken.

   The Committee as required by the Constitution of the  Republic  of  South
   Africa (1996), must ensure that the Department of  Public  Works  carries
   out its mandate and responsibilities viz: -
    o Policy implementation at all spheres of government.
         o Monitor progress on service delivery and meeting of  targets  by
           the department as enunciated in the state of the nation  address
           by the State President, the budget speech by Minister of Finance
           and, the Minister of Public Works’  strategic  plan  and  budget
           vote speech.
    o  Strengthening  of   the   intergovernmental   and   interdepartmental
      relations.
    o Management and maintenance of state assets.
    o Monitor the Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Programes.


   OVERVIEW


   The main focus of the oversight was on the performance of the  department
   in key areas of its responsibilities as set out hereunder:
     • The provision and management of land and  accommodation  to  national
       departments and public institutions,
     • To  give  strategic  leadership  to  the  construction  and  property
       industries,
     • To co-ordinate and monitor the implementation of the EPWP and,
     • Adherence and conformity to the requirements of  the  Public  Finance
       Management Act of 1999 (PFMA), Division of  Revenue  Act  (DORA)  and
       Municipality Finance Management Act (MFMA).

The period under review is from 31st January 2005 to 2nd September 2005.

The oversight report on the National Department of Public  Works  undertaken
between 31st January 2005  and  2nd  September  2005  is  contained  in  the
Committee  report  of  the  Department’s  Annual  report  (please  refer  to
Committee’s report on the Annual report of the Department).


FINDINGS


1. OVERSIGHT TO PROVINCES

   The Committee visited the following Provinces:

   1.1 Eastern Cape 31 January – 3 February 2005
   The following delegation visited the province:
                                              Party
   Mr F Bhengu, Chairperson                   ANC
   Mr L Maduma, Acting Leader of the delegation          ANC
   Mr M Magubane                              ANC
   Mr K Moonsamy                              ANC
   Ms MM Ntuli                                ANC
   Ms NM Mdaka                                UDM
   Mr S Opperman                              DA


   Areas and organisations visited:
   a) Met with Honourable MEC for Public Works: Mr S Kwelita.
   b) Met with the Department officials.
   c) Met with Amatola District Municipality and Mayor Mr S Somyo.
   d) Met with Chris Hani District Municipality and Mayor Mr M Sigabi.
   e) Visited Alfred Nzo District Municipality and  Executive  Mayor  Mr  GG
      Mpumza.
   f) Met with Chairperson of SALGA in the Province Mr S Somyo.
   g) Met with OR Tambo District Municipality and Executive Mayor Ms Z Capa-
      Langa.

   1.2 Free State –7-10 February 2005
   The following delegation visited the province:
                                        Party
   Ms CMP Ramotsamai, Leader of the delegation     ANC
   Mr HP Maluleka                       ANC
   Mr NJ Gogotya                        ANC
   Mrs TLP Nwamitwa-Shilubana                 ANC
   Mr JPI Blanche                       DA
   Mr MT Likotsi                        PAC
   Mr J Leburu                          Support staff
   Mr S Makeleni                        Support staff


   Areas and organisations visited:
   a) Met the  Honourable  MEC  Mr  S  Mohai.  (The  MEC  was  part  of  the
      entourage).
   b) Met with officials from the department.
   c) Met with Thabo Mofutsanyana District Municipality and Executive  Mayor
      Mofumahadi Mathokoana Mopedi.
   d) Met with the Maluti a Phofung Local Municipality.
   e) KM Mankwane Construction Road in Qwaqwa.
   f) Hydroponics (Agricultural) project in Qwaqwa.
   g) Tswarang Waste Management Project in Qwaqwa.


   1.3 Gauteng 31 January – 3 February 2005
   The following delegation visited the province:
                                        Party
   Ms CMP Ramotsamai, Leader of the delegation     ANC
   Mr HP Maluleka                       ANC
   Mr NJ Gogotya                        ANC
   Mr S Siboza                          ANC
   Mrs TLP Nwamitwa-Shilubana                 ANC
   Mr JPI Blanché                       DA
   Mr MT Likotsi                        PAC
   Mr J Leburu                          Support staff
   Mr S Makeleni                        Support staff


   Areas and organisations visited:
   a) Met with Honourable MEC for Public Transport, Roads and  Works:  Mr  I
      Jacobs.
   b) Met officials of the Provincial Department of Public Works.
   c) Met with Mayor of Johannesburg Metropolitan Council: Mr A Masondo.
   d) Matengteng road and storm water canal project in Stinkwater, Tshwane.
   e) Zintombeni Taxi project in Bronkhorspruit.
   f) Poortjie Hospice in Region 11 of Johannesburg.
   g) Almac MPCC (learnership and skill development project) in Ekurhuleni.
   h) Bophelong Skill Resource Centre in Lekoa District.
   i) Working for Fire project in Culinan.
   j) Working for Water (alien vegetation clearing projects) in Silverton.


   1.4 KwaZulu-Natal – 7-10 February 2005
   The following delegation visited the province:
                             Party
   Mr F Bhengu, Chairperson  ANC
   Mr L Maduma               ANC
   Mr M Magubane             ANC
   Mr K Moonsamy             ANC
   Ms MM Ntuli               ANC
   Mr S Opperman             DA
   Ms NM Mdaka               UDM
   Ms NP Nonkelela                Support staff
   Ms P Kakaza               Support staff


   Areas and organisations visited:
   a) Met with Honourable MEC for Transport in KZN Mr H Cele.
   b) Met with Honourable MEC for Public Works in KZN Mr Gwala.
   c) Met with officials from the department.
   d) Met with Mayor of Durban metropolitan Mr. O Mlaba.
   e)  Visited  King  George  Hospital  project  Presidential  lead  Project
      launched on 14 February 2004 for the rehabilitation and  extension  of
      the Hospital.
   f) Met with Deputy Mayor  of  Mkhanyakude  District  Municipality:  Mr  S
      Sibanda.
   g) Visited  Zibambele  and  Vuk’Uzenzel  Road  maintenance  programme  in
      Ndwedwe.
   h) Visited Jozini – SANDF Base.
   i) Met with Ulundi Mayor Ms Z Magwaza.
   j) Visited Hlabisa Hospital (rehabilitation and extension).
   k) Visited State owned  properties  in  Ulundi  previously  occupied  the
      Departments of Justice and Correctional Services.
   l) Met with Amajuba Local Municipality Mayor Mlangeni in New Castle.
   m) Beneficiaries of EPWP.


   1.5 Limpopo 1-3 August 2005
   The following delegation visited the province:
                                  Party
   Mr F Bhengu, Chairperson       ANC
   Mr NJ Gogotya                  ANC
   Mrs TLP Nwamitwa-Shilubana           ANC
   Mr TG Anthony                  ANC
   Mr S Siboza                    ANC
   Mr JPI Blanche                 DA
   Mr J Leburu                    Support staff
   Mr S Makeleni                  Support staff



   Areas and organisations visited:

   a) Met with the Honourable Premier of Limpopo: Mr S Moloto.
   b) Met with MEC for Public Works: Mr T Mufamadi.
   c) Met with Provincial Portfolio Committee.
   d) Met with Greater Sekhukhune District Municipality.
   e) Visited Mohlaletsi home-based care centre.
   f) Visited the Gundo Lasho projects.
   g) Visited the Tzaneen Municipality.
   h) Visited the agricultural project managed by women in Tzaneen.
   i) Visited CHOICE (Organisation  that  caters  for  people  infected  and
      affected by HIV/Aids) care givers project in Tzaneen.
   j) Imbizo in Polokwane (Beneficiaries of EPWP).


   1.6 Mpumalanga 6-8 June 2005
   Committee Delegation visited the province:
                                              Party
   Ms. CMP Ramotsamai, Leader of the delegation          ANC
   Mr L Maduma                                ANC
   Mr NE Magubane                             ANC
   Ms PS Sekgobela                                 ANC
   Ms MM Ntuli                                ANC
   Mr S Opperman                              DA
   Ms NM Mdaka                                UDM
   Mr M Nguqu                                 Support staff


   Areas and organisations visited:
   a) Met with Honourable MEC of Public Works in Mpumalanga: Ms C Mashego.
   b) Met with officials of the PPWD.
   c) Met with Provincial Portfolio Committee.
   d) Visited Thembelihle home community based care projects in the Nkomazi
      area.
   e) Visited Mbuzini and Thambokhulu land care projects in Mbombela
      district municipality.
   f) Visited Gutshwakop-Lubisi Road construction learnership and Skills
      transfer project in Mbombela district municipality.
   g) Visited Vukani Sisebente Community project in Mbombela district
      municipality.
   h) Beneficiaries of EPWP.


   1.7 Northern Cape 6-8 June 2005
   The following delegation visited the province:
                                  Party
   Mr F Bhengu, Chairperson       ANC
   Mr S Siboza                    ANC
   Mr TG Anthony                  ANC
   Mr JPI Blanche                 DA
   Mr MT Likotsi                  PAC
   Mr J Leburu                    Support staff
   Ms NP Nonkelela                      Support staff


   Areas and organisations visited:
   a) The Committee attended a  provincial  lekgotla  hosted  by  Honourable
      Premier: Ms D Peters.
   b) Met with Honourable MEC for Public Works: Mr F Wyngaard.
   c) Met with the officials from the PPWD.
   d) Road paving project – Upington.
   e) Road curbing project – Keimoes.
   f) Road construction project – Kakamas.
   g) Gravel road construction at the Kgalagadi Transfrontier Park.
   h) Beneficiaries of EPWP.


   1.8 North West 9-10 June 2005
   The following delegation visited the province:
                                  Party
   Mr F Bhengu, Chairperson       ANC
   Mr S Siboza                    ANC
   Mr TG Anthony                  ANC
   Mr L Maduma                    ANC
   Mr NE Magubane                 ANC
   Ms PS Sekgobela                      ANC
   Ms MM Ntuli                    ANC
   Ms NM Mdaka                    UDM
   Mr S Opperman                  DA
   Mr JPI Blanche                 DA
   Mr MT Likotsi                  PAC
   Mr J Leburu                    Support staff
   Ms NN Nonkelela                      Support staff


   Areas and organisations visited:
   a) Met with Honourable MEC for Public Works: Mr H Yawa.
   b) Met Members of Provincial Legislature.
   c) Met with officials from the Department.
   d) Met with Councillors.
   e) Visited Modimola Road Maintenance Project phases one and two.
   f) Visited Mmabatho Paving Project.
   g) Imbizo (Beneficiaries of EPWP).


   1.9 Western Cape 1-2 August 2005
   The following delegation visited the province:
                                                   Party
   Ms CMP Ramotsamai, Leader of the delegation                 ANC
   Mr HP Maluleka,     Acting Leader of the delegation         ANC
   Mr L Maduma                                     ANC
   Mr NE Magubane                             ANC
   Ms PS Sekgobela                                       ANC
   Ms MM Ntuli                                     ANC
   Mr S Opperman                                   DA
   Ms NM Mdaka                                     UDM
   Ms NP Nonkelela                                       Support staff
   Ms N Chaso


   Areas and organisations visited:
   a) Met with Members of Provincial Legislature.
   b) Met the DDG EPWP: Mr B Gxilishe.
   c) Met HOD:  Mr A Yasir.
   d) Visited Khayelitsha train station.
   e) Visited Marrydale Primary School.
   f) Visited Nonkqubela road construction.
   g) Visited Moreson road construction.
   h) Visited Droëhoewel road construction.
   i) Imbizo at Robertson city council (Beneficiaries of EPWP).


   2. Findings



   2.1 DEPARTMENTAL PROGRAMMES


   2.1.1 Asset Management and Maintenance (Movable and Immovable)


   a) Mpumalanaga, North West and Western Cape provinces have developed PMIS
      in an attempt to address the shortcomings within their asset
      management system.
   b) Provincial Departments do not have a consistent and accurate  auditing
      system for both movable and immovable state properties.
   c) There is a critical backlog on the maintenance of state properties  in
      the provincial departments.
   d) In most provinces the government properties are vacant,  not  properly
      maintained, have illegal occupants and are vandalised (ie in  KwaZulu-
      Natal Jozini army base and government properties in Ulundi).
   e) The finalisation of land restitution in Limpopo  and  other  provinces
      hinders the compilation and finalisation of the asset registers.

   2.1.2 Recommendations on Asset Management and Maintenance


    o The Mpumalanga, North West and Western Cape provinces asset management
      system initiatives should be taken  as  a  case  study  to  develop  a
      holistic,  accurate  and  reliable  asset  management  system  by  the
      national and provincial departments.


    o Audit of all state properties utilised, under-utilised and  unutilised
      including all military bases must be completed and an  interim  report
      be tabled to Parliament  before  the  end  of  the  first  quarter  of
      2006/2007  financial  year.  The  Committee  is  conscious   and   not
      undermining the fact that the Departments of  Public  Works  and  Land
      Affairs are conducting a vetting  process.  The  Committee  recommends
      that a uniform and centralised PMIS must be developed to address  this
      anomaly.


    o An investigation and appropriate legal  action  should  be  instituted
      against  all  tenants  who  are  unable  to   produce   title   deeds,
      certificates of occupation or lease agreements on demand.

    o Services in vacant government properties that are unoccupied and those
      occupied by illegal occupants must be terminated.

    o Lease and service agreements must be honoured  by  client  departments
      and public institutions and defaulters be penalised.

    o A mechanism must be developed to cause individuals who  are  occupying
      properties belonging to the state, knowing and unknowingly to  declare
      their occupation in order to qualify  for  indemnity  and  failure  to
      disclose be punishable by law.
    o Cognisant of the fact  that  land  restitution  is  still  an  ongoing
      process the finalisation of the asset register  is  dependent  on  the
      completion of the process.

    o There must be uniformity on  the  disposal  of  state  assets  in  all
      spheres of government.

    o The NDPW must, in consultation  with  all  other  Departments  in  all
      spheres of government, develop a uniform disposal policy of all  state
      assets.

    o Any disposal  of  government  property,  whether  be  at  a  national,
      provincial or local level of government, must be by agreement  of  all
      roleplayers.

    o The PDPW must have a disposal strategy for old and depreciated movable
      properties (ie plants and  machinery).  When  auctioning  takes  place
      preference must be given to learner and emerging contractors.

    o The Committee recommends that the maintenance and renovation of  state
      properties must fall directly under the EPWP to ensure  that  emerging
      contractors and contractors  in  the  Incubator  Programme  are  given
      preference.


   2.2 Expanded Public Works Programme (EPWP)
   2.2.1 Launch of the EPWP in Provinces:
    • Eastern Cape Province launched the  EPWP  on  the  3  September  2004,
      (Infrastructure Sector).
    • Free State Province launched  the  EPWP  on  the  28  September  2004,
      (Environment Sector).
    •  Gauteng  Province  launched  the  EPWP  on  the   31   August   2004,
      (Infrastructure Sector).
    •  KwaZulu-Natal  EPWP  launched  the  EPWP  on  the  28  August   2004,
      (Environment Sector).
    •  Limpopo  Province  launched  the  EPWP   on   the   1   April   2005,
      (Infrastructure Sector).
    •  Mpumalanga  Province  launched  the  EPWP  on  the  30  August  2004,
      (Economic/Agriculture Sector).
    • Northern Cape Province launched  the  EPWP  on  the  27  August  2004,
      (Infrastructure).
    • North West Province launched  the  EPWP  on  the  16  September  2004,
      (Infrastructure).
    • Western  Cape  Province  launched  the  EPWP  on  the  1  April  2005,
      (Infrastructure/Building maintenance).

   2.2.2 The co-ordination of the EPWP


      The EPWP is driven by four Clusters viz:
         • Infrastructure;
         • Social;
         • Environmental & cultural;
         • Economic.
   The co-ordination  and  performance  of  the  clusters  varies  from  one
   province to another.



   2.3 Infrastructure

   The infrastructure cluster is  leading  in  all  provinces  in  terms  of
performance.


   A  Eastern Cape


    o In Alfred Nzo District Municipality, the Rural Housing project,  which
      manufactures bricks, has employed women and youth with  the  exception
      of people with disabilities.
    o In OR  Tambo  District  Municipality,  infrastructure  projects  (i.e.
      Vukuzakhe project - a rural housing  and  agricultural  project  which
      benefited 30 000 households) were not integrated into EPWP.
    o In Chris Hani District Municipality, women in construction stated that
      they were harassed and discriminated against in the  industry  and  at
      the construction sites.
    o General complaints were levelled against the conduct and behaviour  of
      government officials, who do not conform to Batho Pele.
    o Late  payments  were  cited  by  emerging  contractors  as  a  general
      phenomenon.


   B  Free State


   Women and youth with the  exclusion  of  people  with  disabilities  were
      involved
   in the construction of Mankwe Road in Qwaqwa.


   C  Gauteng


    o Tshwane-  Stinkwater  road  construction  in  Hammanskraal  was  badly
      constructed due to non-adherence to specifications by consultants.
    o The Almac local municipality in collaboration with the  Infrastructure
      Cluster adopted and supported the  multi-purpose  centre  situated  in
      Almac (ie training of carpenters, welding, baking).
    o In Bara taxi and bus  terminal,  the  Committee  was  briefed  on  the
      rehabilitation, upgrading and renovation of the terminals.
    o The Zithombeni Taxi Project in Bronkhorspruit needs to be  constructed
      with water drainage system.
   D  KwaZulu-Natal province


    o The Zibambele and Vuk’uzenzel road project are labour-intensive  (road
      construction and maintaining projects) that created job  opportunities
      for communities in Ndwedwe.
    o The Zibambele road project deliberately targeted and employed  female-
      headed households.
    o  Other  labour-intensive  projects  benefited  learners  and  emerging
      contractors and communities on the upgrading of King  George  Hospital
      and  Hlabisa  Hospital,  (Hlabisa  hospital  is  a  Presidential  lead
      project).


   E  Limpopo province


    o The Committee is concerned that the Gundolasho road  construction  was
      constructed without curbing and this could lead to erosion.
    o The Committee is concerned that most provinces have not  budgeted  for
      road maintenance.
    o Across provinces a concern has been  raised  by  emerging  contractors
      regarding fronting and  irregularities  on  the  tendering  processes,
      which also implicate government officials and that  no  decisive  pre-
      emptive measures were in place.


   F  Mpumalanga province


    o  The  Gutshwakop-Luphisi  learnership  programme  imparted  skills  to
      learners on re-graveling, compacting, filling and drainage of  a  300-
      kilometre road in Mbombela local municipality.
    o Vukasisebente community project in Mbombela local municipality  caters
      for  packaging  facility  of  beverages  and  bakery,  which   imparts
      financial and management skills to beneficiaries.


   G  Northern Cape province


                     o Upington road making and road paving.
                     o Keimoes road curbing.
                     o  Kgalagadi  Transfrontier  rehabilitation  and   road
                       construction project.
    o All three projects had a reasonable involvement of women and youth but
      the Committee is concerned about the lack of people with disabilities.
    o The Councillors in Kakamas were not actively involved  or  unaware  of
      the road construction projects that were taking place within their own
      constituencies.
    o The Committee observed that in most labour-intensive projects, workers
      are not adhering to occupational health and safety standards.


   H  North West province
    o Mmabatho CBD road paving projects (owned and driven by youth) must  be
      promoted in other provinces.
    o The Modimola integrated flagship project driven by the Departments  of
      Agriculture, Water Affairs and Public Works,  has  not  been  properly
      managed.


   I  Western Cape province
    o The Saamstaan is a broad programme that  includes  road  constructions
      (Nonkqubela,  Môreson   and   Droëhoewel   roads),   renovations   and
      maintenance of schools (Merrydale School) in Robertson.
    o The Klipfontein Corridor  project  encompasses  the  EPWP  guidelines,
      which benefited 22 learner contractors in the Incubator Programme.
    o The Committee did not complete its  visit  and  it  will  revisit  the
      province during the course of 2006/2007 financial year.


   2.3.1 Recommendations on Infrastructure
    • Late payments to emerging contractors must be avoided by  paying  them
      according to the schedule of the projects.


    •  The  NDPW  should  look  at  the  Regulations  of  the   Preferential
      Procurement Policy Framework Act and consider which  amendments  could
      be effected to strengthen this Act.


    • The Committee  recommends  that  the  co-ordination  and  co-operation
      between NDPW and other departments at all spheres of  government  must
      adhere to contractual agreements entered into and payment must be made
      within prescribed period.

    • The Committee notes that the department is investigating fronting  and
      therefore an interim report should be tabled in Parliament on all acts
      of fronting that have been investigated and corrective measures taken,
      on or before the first quarter of 2006/2007 financial year.

    • The  department  must  assign  dedicated  inspectors  to  monitor  and
      investigate fraudulent  claims  committed  and  shoddy  work  done  by
      contractors and appropriate legal action be taken against perpetrators
      inclusive of blacklisting.

    • Whilst the Committee appreciates the progress made by  the  office  of
      the MEC and the Department of Public Works  in  the  Eastern  Cape  in
      addressing the discrimination against women, it is  incumbent  on  all
      departments in all spheres of government to act against the  violation
      of women’s rights at workplace.

    • Occupational health standards are not maintained  and  adhered  to  at
      EPWP projects (ie Kgalagadi Transfrontier Road and Chris Hani district
      municipality).  The  Committee  recommends  that   the   PPWD   should
      continuously  educate  contractor  workers  about  the  importance  of
      adhering to the occupational health and safety standards.


    • The NDPW must ensure that the Department of Labour assigns  inspectors
      to enforce safety standards regulations.

    • The Department of Labour should ensure  that  protective  clothing  is
      supplied to potentially hazardous projects.

    • The Committee recommends that provinces must budget for maintenance of
      completed projects (ie Gundolashu road project).

    • The mismanagement of Modimola Integrated flagship project must be
      investigated and a report must be tabled in Parliament before the end
      of the first quarter of 2006/2007 financial year.

    • Consultants have  committed  to  rectify  the  irregularities  on  the
      construction of the Stinkwater Road in  Tshwane  and  to  comply  with
      Council decision. The Committee recommends that a report be tabled  in
      Parliament on this before the end of the first  quarter  of  2006/2007
      financial year.

    • The Committee is concerned about youth of school going age working  at
      the EPWP projects. The NDPW in collaboration with  the  Department  of
      Education   must   investigate   the   socio-economic    circumstances
      contributing  to  this  and  make  necessary  interventions  i.e.   in
      Kgalagadi Transfrontier Road Project and other projects in Upington.


   2.4 Social Cluster
    o CHOICE, an established organisation in Tzaneen supported by  the  NDPW
      focusing on learnership and skills transfer to  communities  and  home
      based caregivers of people affected and infected by HIV/AIDS.

    o It was reported that the University of Southern Africa would train the
      CDW and HCBC volunteers.

    o Training of Home Community Based Caregivers  (HCBC),  Early  Childhood
      Development Educators (EDC) and Community Health Workers (CHW)  is  an
      ongoing process.


    o The Committee appreciates the collaboration between the Infrastructure
      and Social clusters in the establishment of the  HIV/AIDS  hospice  in
      Poortjie.

    o  The  Youth  of  Christ  in  collaboration  with  the  Social  Cluster
      established HIV/AIDS Hospice at Poortjie.

    o The Infrastructure and Social clusters’ collaboration  in  support  of
      the municipality of Thabong  in  the  HIV/AIDS  awareness  project  is
      commendable.


    o The establishment of Thembelihle Home  Community  Based  Care  Project
      (vegetable garden) in Mbombela has provided employment and  skills  to
      300 caregivers volunteers for/to people with HIV/AIDS.

   2.4.1 Recommendations on Social Cluster


    • The Departments of Public Works, Agriculture and Forestry must  assist
      the communities in Limpopo and other  provinces  in  fasttracking  and
      developing community gardens as part of the EPWP.
    • The Committee recommends that the PPWD  should  in  consultation  with
      Departments  of  Social  Development  and  Health  establish  and   or
      strengthen social cluster for the realisation of the objectives of the
      EPWP.

   2.5 Environment and Cultural Cluster

      The Committee commends the support the NDPW has given to  the  Working
      for Fire in Culinan and  Working  for  Water  and  clearing  of  alien
      vegetation in Silverton.


   2.5.1. Recommendation on Environmental and Cultural Cluster


      Disaster management must be devolved to municipalities to form part of
      job creation for the local community within the EPWP Guidelines.

   2.6 Economy

    o In Limpopo the Agriculture project in Tzaneen spearheaded by women has
      benefited the local community with employment and skills.
    o In Free State the Hydroponics project in Qwaqwa should have  benefited
      all involved with life skills and employment and  therefore  the  NDPW
      should monitor its progress.
    o Provinces in general are still at the planning stage  of  implementing
      the EPWP in the Economic Sector.



   3. Incubator Programme


    • The Incubator Programme is inconsistent from province to province  and
      the co-ordination and monitoring of the programme by the department is
      crucial in achieving the intended results.
    • Collateral  required  by  financial  institutions  from  the  emerging
      contractors is a concern for most provinces and  the  NDPW  must  make
      necessary interventions.
    • The NDPW, private sector and  institutions  of  higher  learning  must
      establish a joint venture  whereby  Built  Environment  graduates  are
      placed on internships.
    • The NDPW in co-operation with PPWD in the  Eastern  Cape  must  ensure
      that the CIDB implements the Incubator Programme and further  consider
      the reviewal of the programme.
    • The Committee commends the progress made on the learnership and skills
      transfer under the Incubator Programme. The  Provincial  Public  Works
      Departments must from time to time consolidate, synchronise and update
      the data of all beneficiaries of the EPWP.
    • The short-term employment and  the  lack  of  sustainability  of  jobs
      created through the EPWP is viewed as constraint  and  a  shortcoming.
      The Committee recommends the reviewal of the EPWP to accommodate long-
      term job opportunities.
    • The Committee recognises the short period  that  emerging  contractors
      spent on the Incubator Programme. The NDPW should  develop  supporting
      mechanisms that  would  ensure  sustainability  of  those  contractors
      through NEPAD initiatives as they exit the programme.



   4. SALGA and Municipalities


    o  The  NDPW,  PPWD  and  SALGA  must  assist,  train  and  support  the
      councillors in order to effectively fast-track  government  programmes
      and meet set targets.
    o Most municipalities were not sufficiently trained and briefed  on  the
      principles  and  guidelines  of  the  EPWP  and  those  that  do,  are
      inconsistent in the implementation thereof.
    o The NDPW in consultation with DPLG should assist  municipalities  with
      the integration of MIG in the IDPs within the EPWP.
    o The weaknesses observed in the local municipalities are unabated;  the
      Committee recommends that the important complementary role  played  by
      the CDW must be clearly defined to avert unnecessary tensions at  that
      tier of government.
    o The under-utilisation and depreciation of the Multi Purpose  Community
      Centres (MPC) at most municipalities  is  common.  The  municipalities
      should budget for the maintenance of the MPC.



   5. Imbizo

     Matters and concerns raised at the Imbizos
 • Lack of budgeting for maintenance of EPWP infrastructure projects.
 • The involvement of the youth and people with disabilities in the
      construction industry is minimal
 • Unprofessional, poor dissemination of information and service rendered
      by the department officials is unacceptable.
    • The EPWP  guidelines  and  information  booklets  are  viewed  as  not
      assisting and not user-friendly.
    • Complicated and laborious tender documents were not user-friendly.
    • Fronting and alleged  involvement  of  officials  and  councillors  in
      irregular tendering processes.
    • EPWP Guidelines are restrictive regarding overtime and medical  health
      benefits that should accrue to workers.
    • The EPWP does not provide sustainable employment.
    • There is lack of  clarity  and  envisaged  support  for  emerging  and
      learner contractors when emerging from the programme.


        6. NEPAD Programmes

      The Committee recommends that the National Department of Public  Works
      should develop a clear policy that defines its role in NEPAD.



   4 Conclusions


o Some public representatives have a challenge in understanding the concept
  and application of the EPWP. The current information booklet on the  EPWP
  is inhibitive and lacks details.


o The role of the four sectors within  which  the  EPWP  operates  must  be
  clearly defined. Presently the work being done by  the  clusters  is  not
  well co-ordinated and an immediate intervention is needed.

o The bridging of the two  economies  through  the  EPWP  must  be  clearly
  elaborated in the information booklets and pamphlets.
o The variance between the Labour Relation Act and EPWP Guidelines must  be
  clearly defined. The Committee is of the view that the Guidelines  should
  be reconsidered to be in tandem with the Labour laws.

o Co-ordination at all spheres of government  is  still  a  challenge  with
  regard to the intergovernmental and interdepartmental relations.

o Section 13-14 of DORA elucidates how provinces and  municipalities  could
  apply the Act and mechanisms in the maintenance  of  the  infrastructure,
  which is a perpetual challenge.

o Some provinces do not  have  a  conclusive  and  reliable  immovable  and
  movable asset register. This must receive immediate attention and control
  measures be instituted.

    o Immediate attention as recommended by the Committee in addressing  the
      fronting  and  irregularities  in  the  tendering  process   must   be
      considered.

    o The Committee notes that all provinces are striving to  implement  the
      EPWP by putting more emphasis  on  learnership  and  skills  transfers
      through CETA.

    o The Committee further notes the commitment,  enthusiasm  and  benefits
      received by beneficiaries of this programme.

    o The Committee commends the training received and quality of work  done
      by beneficiaries in various provinces despite logistical and  teething
      problems experienced.

    o The Committee observed that some communities are continuing to benefit
      from the EPWP objectives by establishment of  own  businesses  ie  job
      creation and poverty alleviation.

    o The NDPW must give effect to  the  involvement  of  women,  youth  and
      people with disabilities in the EPWP as emphasised by the Committee.

    o  The  municipalities   must   take   control,   full   ownership   and
      responsibility of maintaining the multi-purpose centres.

    o The Committee urges and encourages departments and  municipalities  at
      local levels to optimise the utilisation of the multi-purpose centres.

    o The Tugela dam as a resource could benefit the communities with  water
      provision as immediate necessity and the  creation  of  jobs  for  the
      construction of the water infrastructure.

    o In the Northern Cape Province co-ordination of the programme is in the
      office of the Premier, which is commendable.

 - Due to the  vastness  of  the  Northern  Cape  province,  the  provincial
   officials travel long distances from one region to another.  To  save  on
   travelling expenses, the Committee recommends that the existing  regional
   offices be resourced and sub-regional offices be established  where  they
   do not exist.

    o As part of  the  EPWP  the  Departments  of  Public  Works,  Land  and
      Agriculture, Forestry and  Water  Affairs  and  Provincial  and  Local
      Government  in  establishing  agricultural  projects  to  benefit  the
      communities is encouraged.

    o Those departments that are not within the EPWP clusters must  identify
      and commit programmes that will compliment the EPWP.

    o In the Free State province the Provincial Steering Committee (PSC) has
      been established to co-ordinate the implementation of  EPWP  and  that
      the EXCO takes the total responsibility of the implementation  of  the
      programme.

o It is with appreciation that the empowerment of women is taking place  ie
  one woman with no formal education in Mpumalanga supported by  her  child
  underwent the learnership programme of the EPWP and  graduated.  She  has
  established her own construction company that provided job  opportunities
  for her community.

    o The Committee commends the Mpumalanga province for data capturing of
      all contractors and subcontractors as a best practice in the
      monitoring and exposing corrupt tendencies where some beneficiaries
      who were tenderers are repeatedly awarded tenders at the exclusion of
      new applicants.


2. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works on Annual Reports of
  Department and Entities, dated 9 March 2006:





  Committee Report


  This is a report on the annual reports of the National Department of
  Public Works, the Independent Development Trust (IDT) and the Construction
  Industry Development Board (CIDB).


  The structure of this report is as follows:


  Glossary
  Introduction
  Findings
  Department programmes
  IDT
  CIDB
  Recommendations


  Glossary
  BEE                  Black Economic Empowerment
  CETA                 Construction Education and Training Authority
  CIDB                 Construction Industry Development Board
  DDG            Deputy Director-General
  DORA                 Division of Revenue Act
  EPWP                 Expanded Public Works Programme


  IDT                  Independent Development Trust
  ISRDP                Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Programme
  MFMA                 Municipal Finance Management Act
  NQF            National Qualification Framework
  NPWP                 National Public Works Programme
  NDPW                 National Department of Public Works
  PFMA                 Public Finance Management Act
  PPP                  Public Private Partnership
  SALGA                South African Local Government Association
  SETA                 Sector Education and Training Authority
  SMME                 Small, Medium and Micro Enterprises


  1. Introduction


  The Constitution of the Republic of South Africa mandates Parliament
  through House Committees to exercise the oversight function over the
  Executive, pass legislation and monitor the implementation of such
  legislation and encourage public participation.


  Guided by the Rules of Parliament promulgated in terms of the Constitution
  to play an oversight role on the Ministry, Department and the Entities,
  the Committee has to scrutinise the annual report of the Department in
  order to see if the funds allocated have been spent correctly as per their
  strategic plans.





  2. Report


  The Report gives an analysis of the 2004/05 Annual Report of the National
  Department of Public Works (NDPW), the Independent Development Trust
  (IDT), the Construction Industry Development Board (CIDB), the
  Construction and Built Environment (CEB), the Construction Education and
  Training Authority (CETA) and comments from civil societies.

  The Committee, as required by the Constitution of the Republic of South
  Africa (1996), must ensure that the Department of Public Works and
  Entities reporting to it carry out their mandates and responsibilities,
  viz:
    o Policy implementation at all spheres of government.
    o Progress on service delivery and meeting of targets.
    o Strengthen intergovernmental and interdepartmental relations.
    o Management and maintenance of state assets.
    o Monitor the Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Programes
      (ISRDP).
    o Whether entities carry out and comply with the mandate assigned by the
      Department.

  The briefing by the NDPW and interrogation by the Committee focused on the
  responsibilities of the NDPW as set out hereunder:
    • Provision and management of land and accommodation to national
      departments and public institutions.
    • Leadership given to the construction and property industry by the
      Department.
    • Co-ordination, monitoring and the implementation of the EPWP.
    • Adherence and conformity to the requirements of the Public Finance
      Management Act of 1999 (PFMA) and the Division of Revenue Act (DORA).
    • Support given to Entities by the Department.
    • The role and the responsiveness of Entities to their assigned
      mandates.

  3. Departmental Programmes


  3.1 Administration

  The Committee, having read and interrogated the Department’s annual
  report, reports as follows:
     ➢ On Human Resource

    The Committee is concerned:


      about 1 074 vacant posts that have not been filled for the past two
           financial years;


      that the Department has retention strategy of personnel with skills
           and mechanisms in place to attract such skilled personnel.


    • The Committee therefore recommends that there should be a full
      complement of staff to ensure a comprehensive service delivery and all
      vacancies budgeted for should be filled by the end of 2006/2007
      financial year.
    • Complaints regarding late payments of emerging contractors is a
      concern. The Committee recommends that late payments be avoided and
      payments be made in accordance with the schedule of projects.
    • The Committee noted that a contract with WSP Facility Management (Pty)
      Ltd was subsequently extended without convincing and sufficient
      reasons being given by the Department.
    • The Committee recommends that monitoring and renewal of contracts
      outsourced be reconsidered and contractual agreements providing undue
      benefits be expunged.
    • The Committee further recommends that the Department introduce an
      internship programme, which will be a partnership with the tertiary
      institutions in realisation of the turnaround strategy.
    • The litigation process on outstanding debts must be processed within
      the prescribed period to avoid such debts being prescribed.

    ➢ Procurement
    • On fronting and corruption, the Committee, cognisant of the fact that
      the NDPW is conducting an investigation, recommends that it be
      provided with an interim report regarding investigation as soon as
      possible.
    • Intergovernmental and interdepartmental relations should be
      strengthened in order to address the complaints about the NDPW’s
      inability to perform.

  3.2 Land, Accommodation and Maintenance

    • The initiative of vesting process being conducted by the Department of
      Land Affairs in consultation with the Department of Public Works must
      be met as per timeframes suggested.
    • On the consolidation of State assets register and disposal of
      immovable State property, the Committee recommends that:
        a) A disposal of State lands and properties be suspended until a
           Committee as setout hereunder has been established,
        b) A Committee constituted by the Departments of Public Works,
           Provincial and Local Government, Land and Housing be established
           to oversee the immediate finalisation of this process and
        c) A common and inclusive disposal framework be developed.
    • The Committee recommends that there must be a moratorium on the
      disposal of State lands and properties until a joint consolidated
      disposal framework as proposed above has been finalised.
    • When State land and/or property is to be disposed of, there must be
      extensive consultation with other Departments and consideration must
      be given to previously disadvantaged communities, such as women, youth
      and people with disabilities.
    • The Committee commends the Department for contracting young graduates
      as built environment officers and their deployment to regional offices
      to verify the asset register information.
    • The Committee commends the recent appointment of the DDG for Asset
      Management, which was long overdue.
    • The Committee recommends that the Department must invite all people
      illegally occupying state property and land (without title deeds,
      deeds of sale, certificates to occupy and/or any other legal
      instrument) to declare the occupancy thereof within a reasonable
      period of time so as to avoid any legal action being taken against
      them.

  3.3 NPWP

    • The co-ordination of EPWP by the NDPW remains a challenge - the
      intergovernmental and interdepartmental relations must be strengthened
      in all spheres of government to realise the objectives of the EPWP.
    • Through the institutional arrangements that are presently in place,
      there should be active engagement and commitment in the realisation of
      decisions made regarding the co-ordination of the EPWP.
    • The Department must improve the capacity of the project managers that
      monitor the work of consultants.
    • The unco-ordinated implementation of the Expanded Public Works
      Programme is perceived as an inability and/or failure of the
      Department to co-ordinate the Programme.
    • The Committee recommends that the NDPW coordinate a national workshop
      within the first six months of the 2006/2007 financial year with
      cluster Departments, entities and other stakeholders to evaluate the
      programme.
    • The Committee recommends that the Local Government SETA and
      Construction CETA embark on a joint venture for training of municipal
      officials and emerging contractors.
    • In the spirit of intergovernmental and interdepartmental relations,
      the Committee recommends that provincial and municipal annual budgets
      provide, through Provincial Infrastructure Grants and Municipal
      Infrastructure Grants, for the maintenance of projects in accordance
      with guidelines as provided in DORA.
    • The NDPW must continuously monitor and evaluate all the flagship
      projects in the nodal points jointly with IDT.




  3.4 Financial Matters



    • On financial matters:
     i)   Adherence to Public Finance Management Act;
    ii)   Report of the Auditor-General; and
   iii)   Debtor collection system and governance.
      The Committee appreciates the fact that the NDPW had an unqualified
      audit report, which signifies a commitment by the Department in its
      performance management.
    • The Committee acknowledges interventions and co-operation made by the
      National Treasury in assisting the Department to improve its financial
      and accounting system.

3.4.1 Recommendations on Financial Matters

    • It is commendable that the Department has adhered to the PFMA in their
      budgeting and as a result has avoided over-expenditure.
    • The Committee is still concerned about the unauthorised expenditure
      and expects the Department to address this anomaly by the end of the
      2006/ 2007 financial year.
    • The Committee notes that the Department ensured that client
      Departments are informed about their liabilities. However, the
      Department does not indicate how they are dealing with outstanding
      debts.
    • The Committee recommends that the Department develop a yearly review
      of leases as a monitoring mechanism.
4. Entities

4.1 Independent Development Trust (IDT)

4.1.1 Responsibilities and function of IDT

As highlighted in their annual report:
    • Plays a crucial role in the government’s three flagship development
      initiatives: the Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Programme
      (ISRDP), the Expanded Public Works Programme (EPWP) and Project
      Consolidate.
    • Contributes in three specific areas of the national development
      agenda: Poverty reduction, the development of community capacity, and
      the reduction of infrastructure backlogs.
    • Manages programmes known as “special projects” on behalf of the
      National Department of Public Works (NDPW). In addition, the IDT
      manages projects for other departments, such as the Department of
      Social Development (the Poverty Relief Programme) and the Department
      of Provincial and Local Government (the Programme Design Document).
    • Plays an important role in the national development agenda.
    • Works towards being a fully transformed government development agency
      implementing projects commissioned to it by government departments.

4.1.2 IDT Projects

Some of the projects highlighted are:
   1. Zivuseni Programme in KwaZulu-Natal has contributed to poverty
      reduction through the channelling of programme funds into local
      communities through employment, and the procurement of local
      contractors and emerging service providers.
   2. In the Eastern Cape School Building Programme, 15% of funds were
      channelled to 9 985 people employed as local labour resources.
   3. The Asisebente Programme in Mpumalanga has contributed to building the
      capacity of community members participating in infrastructure
      programmes. Training has been provided for local labour in skills such
      as carpentry, masonry and painting.
   4. The Committee commends the financial management by the IDT and their
      compliance with the PFMA. It further appreciates an unqualified audit
      report the entity has received for a third year in succession, as this
      affirms the integrity and commitment with which it acts on its
      mandate.
   5. In 2004/05, the IDT set up more than 344 new community structures and
      also project-managed, amongst others, the construction of hundreds of
      infrastructure projects across the country.
   6. The IDT made a significant impact on the reduction of infrastructure
      backlogs across the country through the following:
         ➢ Construction of 75 schools in the Eastern Cape Schools Building
           Programme.
         ➢ Hlabisa Hospital in KwaZulu-Natal.
         ➢ 10 out of 25 Schools in KwaZulu-Natal have been completed.
         ➢ Repair and renovations to four libraries have been completed.
   7. Regarding EPWP, the IDT has been instrumental in conceptualising its
      implementation plan for the infrastructure, and has signed agreements
      to support the delivery of various EPWP components at national and
      provincial levels.
   8. Building institutional capacity and harnessing additional resources to
      enhance the impact and sustainability of the IDT’s initiatives.
   9. Improving budgetary controls, procurement procedures and better
      programme accounting controls.

4.1.3 Recommendations

    • The commitment displayed by the IDT in implementing projects
      commissioned to it by government departments warrants a consideration
      and reviewal of its status as a government development agency.
    • As the report is silent on the IDT’s assigned responsibilities
      regarding ISRDP, the Committee recommends that the IDT table a report
      to the Committee in this regard for its consideration.
    • The Committee recommends that the IDT should strengthen its
      relationship with SALGA in the capacitation of municipalities.
    • IDT, DBSA, SALGA and all municipalities in partnership must drive
      Project Consolidate, EPWP and ISRDP in the realisation of targets set
      for 2010, 2012 and the millennium goals for 2014.

4.2. Construction Industry Development Board (CIDB)

    • The Construction Industry Development Board is a statutory body
      appointed by the Minister of Public Works to provide leadership for
      industry growth, reform and improvement (CIDB Act 38 of 2000).


   4.2.1 Aims and Objectives of CIDB
    • To transform and restructure the construction industry.
    • To regulate and develop a framework that builds the construction and
      delivers capacity for
      South Africa’s social and economic growth.
   4.2.2 Key functions and responsibilities
    • Restructuring and transformation of the construction industry.
    • Empowerment of the historically disadvantaged and marginalised
      communities.
    • Improved industry standards of performance (quality, employment,
      skills, safety, health).
    • To develop procurement best practice guidelines.
    • Empowering SME contractors
    • To develop a construction charter.


   4.2.3 National Construction Register Services
   The CIDB Act 38 of 2000 –
    • mandates the CIDB to establish the National Register of Constructors;
    • facilitates public sector procurement, delivery and risk management;
    • supports contractor development;
    • promotes better performance – improved quality, safety, health and
      environment;
    • categorises contractors according to their capability;
    • drive improving performance of contractors; and
    • promote client practices that shape a transforming, healthy and
      sustainable industry.


   4.2.4 Recommendations


    • The Committee, having interrogated the report and responses received
      from CIDB, appreciates the role played and commitment displayed in the
      development of the Construction Charter. Nevertheless, it recommends
      that the Construction Charter, as an instrument for transformation, be
      continuously reviewed in order to conform with government policies and
      changing construction environment.

4.3 Construction and Built Environment (CBE)
    • The report of the Department is silent on the role of CBE, so the
      Committee recommends that a report be tabled in Parliament in this
      regard before the end of the third term of the 2006/2007 financial
      year.
    • Since this particular entity also failed to submit its annual report
      to Parliament, the Committee recommends that CEB should explain why it
      did not submit its annual report as required and further calls on it
      to do so within one month of the tabling of this report.

4.4 Construction Education and Training Authority (CETA)

    • The Department’s annual report is silent about the inputs and outputs
      of Construction CETA as an integral part of the Department’s
      developmental programmes (ie EPWP).
    • The Committee recommends that the Department must table a report
      before the end of the first quarter of the 2006/2007 financial year
      regarding the role played by Construction CETA during the 2005/2006
      financial year.

4.5 Comments and recommendations by civil societies

4.5.1 Submission by South African Women in Construction

    • Women and BEE process
    ➢ Equality and Equity are the cornerstones of our democracy, yet women
      have still not been major beneficiaries of the BEE process. Whilst
      there are signs of professional development amongst women, this should
      not be mistaken as an indication of women’s economic participation.
    ➢ Empowering women, and in particular black women, is an economic
      factor. By empowering a woman, government is including the whole
      family in the economic uplifting, resulting in an automatic multiplier
      effect.
    ➢ Women and infrastructure development (ie capacity building)


    • Women and State-owned Enterprises
    ➢ This will include sharing business plans of state-owned enterprises,
      indicating how they will ensure that a specific percentage of the
      allocated spending goes to women, and whether it is supplier
      development, enterprise development or skill development of women.


    • Women and Infrastructure National Training Programme
    ➢ Specifically targeting women in Construction, the programme will be
      aimed at producing artisans, from plumbers to painters and
      boilermakers - all the skills that women do not have - so that as the
      rollout occurs, women will be available with those skills. Project
      management skills will be a priority in partnership with international
      agencies through the exchange programmes.
    ➢ Build expertise of women in land and property acquisition and partner
      with academic institutions to bring in young architects. In addition,
      women’s sectors such as property, construction and housing must be
      targeted to play a major role in these sectors. The ministry of
      housing as well as the ministry of public works should facilitate the
      process as part of ASGI-SA together with relevant institutions.
    • Maximise Codes of Good Practise and the Sector Charter Benefits for
      Women
    ➢ Introduce an overall 30% quota as part of standardising women’s
      participation and representation in various ares of the scorecard and
      business sectors. This will strengthen the current policy and
      implementation process. This also means that the BEE Construction
      Charter must be revisited to introduce 30% quota and to focus mainly
      on tender acquisition.


    • Identify Government Procurement Areas that can be reserved for women
    ➢ This will include identifying government work areas where women’s
      services can be accessed. Coupled with this should be the introduction
      of the 30% quota as a national measure for national government’s
      overall procurement policy. This should be part of the urgent
      amendment of the preferential procurement act (PPPFA Act).


    • Introduce a national Procurement Training Course for Women
    ➢ As part of the National Skills Programme. SETA’s work with the
      National Committee of Business Women’s Organisations (NCBWO ) on how
      best to target women in business together with relevant government
      departments. This will also focus on the ABC’S of engaging in BEE
      deals.


    • Access to finance
    ➢ Facilitating easy access to finance remains the greatest challenge to
      those of the second economy; it is even worse with women.  ASGISA’s
      objective of mainstreaming women in all activities is also faced with
      this challenge. In fast-tracking women in construction, special
      interventions would be appreciated, as this is an integral issue for
      growing and sustaining women-owned and -managed enterprises in South
      Africa.


    • Skilled positions by black women characterise the financial sector.
      The following interventions are proposed:
    ➢ Introduction of the 30% quota
    ➢ This should be implemented immediately by revising the current
      criteria set for accessing all government finance institutions and
      programmes. These should include targeting the IDC, NEF, KHULA, APEX,
      MAFISA, the Land Bank and Business Partners.
    ➢ The committee on disposals needs to be established and civil society
      must be represented in that committee, with more emphasis on
      representation of the vulnerable groups.
    ➢ Introduce an overall 30% quota as part of standardising women’s
      participation and representation in various areas of the scorecard and
      business sectors. This will strengthen the current policy and
      implementation process. This also means that the BEE Construction
      Charter must be revisited to introduce 30% quota and this to focus
      mainly on tender acquisition.

4.5.2 Recommendations

    • The Committee recommends that the Department considers these
      recommendations made by SAWIC in consultation with women in
      construction.
    • The Committee further recommends that 30% quota as part of
      standardising women’s participation and representation in various
      areas of the scorecard and business sectors as proposed by SAWIC be
      increased to 35%.

Conclusion

The Committee recommends that in future IDT, CIDB and CBE submit to
Parliament their strategic plans at the beginning of each financial year.
This is to ensure that the achievements as detailed in the Annual Report
are benchmarked against the performance and outputs as stated in the
Strategic Plan.

The Committee expresses its gratitude to all South Africans, with specific
emphasis on organisations, entities, communities, associations and
individuals who sacrificed their time to come and make presentations before
the Committee.

Report to be considered.

-----------------------
[1] Transcript, p4


