---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 16 November 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2006-11-16
---

THURSDAY, 16 NOVEMBER 2006

                                    ____





              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:02.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Madam Deputy Chairperson, at the next sitting of House,
I shall move:

   That the Council -

   (1)      notes the despicable behaviour of the Democratic Alliance during
         the annual address of the President to the National Council of
         Provinces in Parys, thereby bringing the Council into disrepute;

   (2)      notes that this type of behaviour by members of the Democratic
         Alliance is not only disrespectful to the President of the
         Republic of South Africa, but disregards the thousands of people
         who came to listen to the President and Premier; and


   (3)      strongly condemns this type of behaviour and requests the
        presidium to urgently conduct an investigation into the behaviour
        of these members so as to avoid future embarrassing situations for
        the Council and to protect the decorum of the Council.

    GOOD WORK BY THE MINISTER AND DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Madam Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


     1) notes the sterling work done by the Minister and the Deputy Minister
        of Safety and Security, in particular in the Limpopo provincial
        deputy commissioner’s offices, and SAPS members of the SAPS Limpopo
        province for doing their utmost best to prevent, combat and
        investigate crime;
     2) further notes that the Limpopo province constituency registered
        lower crime rates; and


     3) extends a message of thanks and appreciation to all law-enforcement
        agencies for deepening a safe and secure environment for all people
        of South Africa.

I so move.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Is there any
objection? Hon Watson.

In light of the objection, the motion may not be proceeded with. The motion
without notice will now become a notice of motion.


                   REFINEMENT AND LAUNCH OF THE NEW EMBLEM


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Madam Deputy Chairperson, I move:

   That the Council –

   (1)      notes that -


        (a) the Joint Rules Committee in November 2006 approved a particular
              emblem, while identifying a need for a slight adjustment;


        (b)      a public involvement process and full consultation with
              parties have taken place in the development of this emblem;


        (c)      the Parliamentary Oversight Authority has considered the
              proposal and suggested further refinement; and


        (d)      the launch of the new emblem is planned for early 2007;
              and

     2) authorises the Presiding Officers to approve the emblem
        after consultation with parties, and to formally present it to the
        Houses in early 2007.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I shall now put the
question. The question is that the motion be agreed to. As this decision is
dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I need to ascertain
whether delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast their
provinces’ votes. Are all delegation heads present?

In accordance with Rule 71 I shall now also allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declarations of vote, if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour of or against or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: Eastern Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal in favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo ondersteun. [Limpopo supports.]
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke ya rona. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Mr C STALI (Special delegate): Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): All nine provinces
voted in favour. I therefore declare the motion agreed to in terms of
section 65 of the Constitution.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                PROVINCIAL WEEK VISIT BY PERMANENT DELEGATES

                             (Debate on Report)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon Chairperson, hon
members of this august House, there is a clear indication that we are on
course in implementing our programme 2009. Programme 2009 emphasises that
the National Council of Provinces must devote more time and resources to
the performance of oversight work as a mechanism for following up on the
implementation of laws it has passed and continues to pass, as well as
government policies and programmes.

As part of this, we have reinstated the provincial week to assist us in
monitoring and overseeing the work of government. The provincial week is
one of the mechanisms established to solicit provincial interest and ensure
that provincial delegates keep abreast with developments, as well as the
challenges that are facing their provinces.

After a period of looking at how to improve this mechanism, provincial
delegations carried out their work as part of the provincial week from 14
to 18 August this year.

During this period permanent delegates went to their respective provinces
where they visited various sites and projects and interacted with political
role-players. The objectives of the provincial week were to interact with
the provinces and report back on their activities in the National Council
of Provinces, which is what we are doing this afternoon in the form of this
debate; to provide a forum for the exchange and sharing of ideas on
progress made on service delivery; to meet with the Premiers, MECs and
departments, provincial legislatures and their Speakers, Chief Whips and
chairpersons of committees, and other stakeholders such as local government
leaders, including Salga; to undertake an oversight visit to communities in
order to ensure that they get information on the needs and challenges of
the people; and to visit projects that are implemented by both national and
provincial governments in the provinces and the local people.

Today, as we discuss the draft report on the provincial week, we must be
able to highlight the developments and those areas that still pose
challenges. Some of the challenges may perhaps be those that led us to halt
our provincial weeks for some time. We must also be able to indicate how we
have resolved and are resolving those challenges, more especially as we
experience them on the ground.

I am also keen to hear what practical steps we need to take to ensure that
we resolve some of the challenges that are mentioned in the report, such as
governance, especially at local government level, and service delivery
challenges.

Our utilisation of the provincial week allows us to have more penetration
in the provinces in order to understand and deal with issues that affect
our provinces, and be able to carry those back to this House for a national
debate.

As the Constitution states, the NCOP represents the provinces to ensure
that provincial interests are taken into account in the national sphere of
government. It does this mainly by participating in the national
legislative process and by providing a national forum for public
consideration of issues affecting provinces.

Certainly, we will not be able to carry out this important mandate if we
ourselves do not know the kind of challenges that are facing the very
provinces that we represent.

Last week Friday, during our sitting in Parys in the Free State, the
President further challenged the National Council of Provinces to advise
government with regard to the whole issue of implementation. I am confident
that our committees understand this challenge. I also understand that they
are capable of doing this and will do so. In fact, they have been doing
work in this area already.

The challenge of assisting government to speed up the delivery of services
is central to our goal of ensuring a better quality of life for all.

I would like to promise you that we are going to be alert to the issues
that you will be raising during this debate so that as presiding officers
we can see where we should assist to improve our provincial week.

Let me take this opportunity to thank you for the work that you did during
the provincial week. It is much appreciated. I also thank you for
displaying unity of purpose. As Karl Marx, a well-known social scientist
and revolutionary, once said: “Workers of the world unite; you have nothing
to lose but your chains.” As members of this unique House, we must unite
and face the challenges that are facing our new society. We have nothing to
lose. I thank you. Ke a leboga. Enkosi. [Applause.]

Mr B J TOLO: Chairperson, I was not aware that I was participating in the
debate today. It is the first time I hear of that. Be that as it may, I
will just say a few words because, as a delegate from Mpumalanga, we also
follow the ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, I am sorry. It is not my
mistake; all of you have seen it too. This is what I have on the table. It
has got hon B J Tolo on it. The other speaker listed here, which I hope is
the correct one, is F Nyanda.

Ms F NYANDA: Chairperson, like hon B J Tolo who was standing here, we were
supposed to have a delegate from Mpumalanga. Unfortunately, we were told at
the eleventh hour about it. Anyway, I don’t have a written speech before
me, but I will talk anyway. [Interjections.]

We went to Mpumalanga and when we arrived there, we met the Speaker, the
Deputy Speaker and the Chairperson of Committees and the Whippery. We met
the Premier and we went on site visits where we went to see the eradication
of the bucket system.

Of all the places we visited, we found only three where the eradication of
the bucket system had not yet taken place. Two of those were Ekulindeni and
Piet Retief.

On 29 October the MEC for Provincial and Local Government launched the
eradication of the bucket system at Mbalentle. So, in Mpumalanga, at least
there is something that we have done.

One other problem is that of housing. There were problems with the RDP
houses. The MEC reported that they are not using enough cement in those RDP
houses, because some of the houses are falling apart. He took the decision
that he is going to deal with these small contractors. That’s why they said
that they don’t want these small contractors. They want the main
contractors to deal with this issue of building RDP houses. I thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr A T MANYOSI: Madam Deputy Chairperson and hon members, I thank the hon
member Mrs Nyanda for taking only two minutes so that I can add her time to
mine. [Laughter.]

The report of the Eastern Cape NCOP permanent delegates to the Eastern Cape
dated 14 to 15 August is as follows. The terms of reference of the
delegation were to interact with and report back on its activities in the
NCOP to such role-players as the Premiers, the executive members and their
departments, the provincial legislature, the Speaker, the Chief Whip, the
Chairperson of Committees and other chairpersons, as well as local
government structures, the SA Local Government Association and community
projects.

The delegation conducted meetings with the structures of government at pre-
arranged venues and also conducted site visits to interact with
stakeholders.

Meetings took place with the following role-players: the provincial
government at a Cabinet lekgotla on 13 to 15 August 2006 at the Wild Coast.
It also met the Portfolio Committees on Local Government and Housing in
Bisho. It met stakeholders at the Nelson Mandela Metro and visited their
project.

The Cabinet lekgotla was aimed at receiving presentations from provincial
clusters on their performance and challenges, and strategies to deal with
those challenges. Clusters referred to above are the governance and
administration cluster, economic growth and infrastructure and economic
needs. We alos look at the utilisation of institutions of higher learning
in the province. We also met to look at the service delivery by
municipalities.
Let us now proceed to look at each cluster in terms of its activities and
challenges, starting with governance and administration. The presentation
by the governance and administration cluster pertained to the institutions
of higher learning in the province in relation to their contribution to
economic growth, capacity-building through skills development, facilitation
of research and rural development.

There were challenges that were raised by the institutions of higher
learning, and these are reflected in the consolidated report in front of
hon members.

Our findings and recommendations with regard to that are the following:
from the presentation, the vision and the mission of the institutions of
higher learning is quite rightly to develop democratic institutions. The
delegation feels, however, that it is not adequate or sufficient to develop
democratic institutions. They must be capable of capacitating learners and
communities to participate in their economic development and economic
growth through the development of appropriate skills. That is precisely
because these institutions have to strive to be of service to the
government and the people.

There has to be a continuous interaction with government in general and the
service delivery departments, municipalities, other service providers and
the communities within which they operate in particular.
Through these structures and continuous interaction, these institutions can
be kept abreast of the needs of the communities, and deliver relevant
academic services and curricula to address the vexing challenge of skills
development and capacity-building.

Critical issues raised by the economic growth and infrastructure cluster
are also reflected in the consolidated report, and I will not go through
them here. Their plans are also in the consolidated report in front of the
hon members, as are their challenges. I will jump to the findings and
recommendations.

The delegation found that generally the province had clear and objective
plans for implementation. Of interest and a giant step forward is the
employment of unemployed graduates by way of on-the-job training and skills
development. This is a major initiative that must receive all possible
support from the national government to create work and reduce
unemployment.

Also to be applauded is the promotion of communication and the breaking
down of bureaucracy, and also the removal of the wall between the ordinary
members of the public, other stakeholders on the one hand and the
government offices on the other through customer care units. However, such
units have to be strengthened and fully capacitated.
Accelerated economic growth as a challenge is addressed by the Accelerated
and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa as the government’s plan, and
all should put their shoulders to the wheel to ensure the success of the
initiative.

On the issue of the involvement of marginalised communities in economic
activities, without a doubt, this problem is growing in rural areas and can
only be addressed through government actively engaging rural communities in
public education on economic development. This should particularly be the
case with regard to the problem of communities not participating in
independent development plans.

On the issue of participation in state campaigns against crime, there is a
need to uniformly address the need of meeting community policing forums
halfway financially; that is, giving them travelling allowances, and
subsistence allowances, provision of which is a condition without which the
CPFs will always be there, but will be dysfunctional.

On social needs, the social needs cluster made its presentation on its
activities with regard to partners and stakeholders, its achievements on
the critical priorities with regard to the provincial growth and
development plan, PGDP, and the national government’s programme of action.
The objectives of the cluster are also contained in the consolidated
report. I can say that the cluster objectives on paper and, when
articulated, perfectly respond to the needs of the province and its people.
They need to be translated with maximum speed to address the extreme
underdevelopment and poverty in the province, especially in the rural
greater part of the province.

The delegation met with the Portfolio Committees on Local Government and
Housing and mainly discussed petitions that have been received from the
following municipalities, which are also reflected in the consolidated
report: Buffalo City, Mnquma and Qokobe.

In terms of the findings and the recommendations, the petitions relate to
the dismissal of a municipal manager in Buffalo City Municipality, the
community administrative and political crisis in Nguma Municipality, and an
exit package in Qokobe Municipality.

On the two labour-related matters, the delegation expresses its concern
that if these and similar situations elsewhere are not promptly,
adequately, efficiently and effectively addressed, the government will
always be dragged into unnecessarily expensive litigation, and steps have
to be taken to ensure that those who are responsible for human resource
management are indeed well equipped, fit and proper persons for the job.

On the continuing and persistent administrative and political crisis in
Mnquma, the delegation recommends and recognised that the ... [Time
expired.] Thank you.

Mrs E S MABE: Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, hon NCOP members, special
delegates, ladies and gentlemen, section 40(1) of the Constitution provides
that in the Republic government is constituted as national, provincial and
local spheres of government, which are distinctive, independent and
interrelated.

Section 40(1) of the Constitution also provides that all spheres of
government and all organs of state within each sphere are to co-operate
with one another in mutual trust and faith by assisting and supporting one
another, informing one another and consulting with one another on matters
of common interest.

The concept of the NCOP provincial week plays a vital role in adhering to
these principles. A further important purpose of the NCOP provincial week
is to ensure that provincial delegates keep abreast with the developments
as well as the challenges that are facing their provinces.

The Free State permanent delegates have always had a good working
relationship with both the legislature and the executive. This was recently
illustrated when the Free State permanent delegates were invited to
participate in consideration of the provincial and departmental annual
reports by the portfolio committees of the legislature.

The permanent delegates were also requested to assist the Chairperson of
Committees in compiling a template of the questions to be put to all
departments and their entities. The provincial week that took place during
14-18 August 2006 served to strengthen this relationship.

The permanent delegates met with the Chairperson of Committees in the
legislature to get a broader understanding of the activities of the
legislature in providing oversight to the executive. Various issues were
discussed during this meeting, including the need to do follow-up visits to
municipalities that were underperforming as well as participation of
special delegates in the activities of the NCOP.

The Premier also briefed the delegation on the Free State Development
Strategy. The Free State government is currently in the process of
reviewing the strategy and the overall programme for implementation is on
track.

During the provincial week the permanent delegates participated in the
activities of two portfolio committees in the legislature. The delegates
accompanied the portfolio committee on public works, roads and transport on
their site visits to the Malute Bus Services and the Government Garage in
Qwaqwa.
A meeting of the Portfolio Committee on Education, Sport, Arts and Culture
was also attended. The committee formulated its negotiating mandate on the
second Fifa Bill and met with the Free State Department of Education
regarding allegations about the granting of the information technology bid.


A further meeting was held with the South African Local Government
Association, Salga, and the National House of Traditional Leaders. The need
for the participation of Salga in the activities of the legislature was
emphasised, especially on matters affecting municipalities.

In overview, the provincial week was a resounding success. It was just
disappointing that the DA could again not see their way clear to
participating in the activities during the week.

Mr E M SOGONI: I am sorry, Deputy Chairperson. Hon Deputy Chairperson, the
provincial week visits gave the members the opportunity to liaise with the
provinces and in particular with the municipalities. This also afforded the
members the opportunity to evaluate what was happening on the ground.

As the Gauteng delegation, we met with the MEC for local government. From
the discussions with the MEC for local government, we found that a lot has
been done in terms of service delivery. If you look back from where we
started in 1994, however, there are still some challenges. Some of the
challenges that are faced by the municipalities are that municipalities in
Gauteng differ in terms of size. Therefore, the Gauteng province was
looking at absorbing some of the other municipalities into the remaining
metros so that service delivery can be made available to every citizen in
Gauteng.

The other challenge was the issue of other smaller municipalities that are
not able to deliver three basic needs, especially electricity, which is
sometimes delivered by Eskom. All in all, we discovered that life in
Gauteng is better than what it was 10 years ago, as far as municipal
services are concerned.

The other department that we met with was the department of safety and
security. This occurred immediately after eight thugs and four police
officers were killed, and the MEC then asked the people of Gauteng to give
him six months to address the problem of crime in Gauteng. We also find
that police stations have embarked on a project called Project Iron Fist in
order to deal with this issue. Many police stations have already started
seeing the results thereof, especially with the arrest of criminals who
were being sought.

We visited a number of police stations. There were best practices, but the
Moroka Police Station, for example, has its own challenges. One of the
challenges that was raised there was the issue of a time lag between when a
census is undertaken and when resources are allocated by government. They
thought that that led to some kind of underfunding.

There were also the worst police stations, like the Reiger Park Police
Station. In the case of the Reiger Park Police Station, it was clear that
it was no real police station. The Minister will have to pay attention to
Reiger Park. In fact, a new police station altogether needs to be built. On
that note, we thought that the visit by members was a very fruitful visit.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J M SIBIYA: Comrade Chairperson, colleagues, comrades, ladies and
gentlemen, our delegation fully agrees with the Chief Whip of the NCOP,
Comrade Windvoël - if I don’t pronounce your surname properly, please
forgive me - who characterised the provincial week ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon member, will you
please direct your comments through me.

Mr J M SIBIYA: I apologise. Comrade Windvoël characterised the provincial
week as a strategic mechanism for strengthening the representation of
provincial interests in the NCOP. These are strategic words: “strategic”,
“representation” and “strengthening”. We find these very befitting.

In the provincial week we met the provincial executive council as well as
the provincial legislature. We agreed in that meeting that the immediate
objectives were, firstly, to exchange views and opinions on the
functionality and effectiveness of the two; secondly, to assess progress on
the service delivery front; thirdly, to discuss and map out strategies to
deal with problems encountered; and fourthly, to get feedback from the
communities on the impact that government policies have had on their lives.

We understood these objectives to be part and parcel of the thrust the
government is making towards realising our slogan, “A better life for all”.
We took time to meet with community-based organisations, nongovernment
organisations and other organisations and institutions that are taking care
of the interests of our people.

At the end of the meetings with the legislature and the MECs, together with
the provincial executive committee we agreed that communication and co-
ordination need to be strengthened because they opened a gap where we were
not in a position to know exactly what it is that the provincial government
is doing at any given moment so that if we have a chance we could go and
participate since we obtained our mandate from the province.

At the end of the discussions we agreed on the following recommendations:
firstly, MECs should make an effort to attend the provincial caucus here in
the NCOP. Secondly, permanent delegates should receive briefings by
provincial committees on matters before Parliament, especially if such
matters impact directly on the province. Thirdly, basic documentation
should be made available timeously to enable relevant parties that are
available in the legislature to make comments and to answer questions when
they arise in the House.

On the service delivery front, we met NGOs such as Itshepeng Community
Health Care and Aids educators who are involved in rural regeneration,
empowerment, social skills development and the prevention of HIV/Aids,
while the Sentahle community home-based care organisation supports orphaned
and vulnerable children, as well as HIV/Aids affected people and child-
headed and poverty-stricken families.

In our discussions with NGOs, we realised that they have done very good
work and more still needs to be done. Nonetheless, there were some
shortages, which needed to be addressed so that their performance could be
more effective. One of these was, firstly, shortages of health care
professionals, medical supplies, and funding. The second was keeping pace
with the demand for services. The third was the training of new and current
staff, and the fourth was accommodation upgrades, as well as future
security for the programme.

The delegates also visited projects like the Lafata Agricultural Youth
Project, the Makumeke Integrated Enterprise at Vhembe district, the Murunwa
bakery projects, as well as the Nkumpi housing project. On the housing
project, we found that it aimed to build a further 200 units within the
2005-06 financial year. By the time we arrived we found that only 125 had
been built, and in our opinion more than that should have been built.

Nonetheless, there were some shortcomings, which we noted, namely poor
workmanship, shoddy materials used and cracks and openings in the walls.
Now based on those observations, we gave a very stern warning to the
authorities involved that it will pose a danger for our people, especially
the young and the elderly, to be allowed to occupy those houses unless the
detected pitfalls are addressed.

On the youth project, the delegations noted that there was a lack of
communication between beneficiaries and agricultural department officials.
Secondly, some beneficiaries were absent from the project and the same goes
for trustees. Then we asked the following question: If indeed this is the
situation, what then becomes of the people who work there, who do the
monitoring, and how are they being assisted so that the project proceeds on
well and achieves the desired results?

It was therefore recommended that extension officers from the department
should visit the project regularly. It was also indicated that since the
trustees were absent, and as far as we are concerned defunct, they had to
be dissolved and a new body put in place and a bank account opened in their
name.

We were very happy with the progress scored in the EPWP, Expanded Public
Works Programme, fencing projects, where 191 people are employed, and the
outstanding success story about Makemeke integrated enterprises, which
combines poultry farming and vegetable production. These to us were very,
very successful stories and we hope we can have some of our projects in the
province taking a leaf from their book.

However, the vegetable production project had a problem that perhaps might
need some long-term planning, namely that they do not have the skills and
the management knowledge to deal with soil fertility management. They will
need to be assisted in that regard because otherwise in the end their
vegetable plots might cease to be productive. We realised also that there
was no monitoring and assistance by the government to a certain level, as
would suit the people in the project.

We also detected that the government in some cases allowed the tender to
lapse, while they know that the tender will need to be renewed before it
lapses because if that happens, in our opinion, it will also mean the
collapse of the project itself.

The Lepellane catchments project, which covers 34 villages, has a problem
of silting, which up to now has affected 80% of the capacity of the dam,
which then tells us that only 20% of the capacity of that dam will be used
for the communities around it. [Time expired.] Thank you, Madam Chair.

Mnu D D GAMEDE: Sihlalo, umbiko mayelana nokuvakashela isifundazwe
wakhishwa, washicilelwa futhi uyatholakala kuma-ATC. Ngakho-ke ngizothi
nqampu nqampu.

Ukuvakasha kwamalungu esifundazweni ngesonto lokuvakashela izifundazwe
kwakunalezi zinjongo ezilandelayo: Okokuqala, kwakuwukuthola ukuthi
isifundazwe senzani ukwenza izimpilo zabantu zibe ngcono. Okwesibili,
kwakuwu kuqinisa ubudlelwano phakathi kwesishayamthetho noMkhandlu
Kazwelonke Wezifundazwe. Okwesithathu, kwakuwukubona ukuthi izinqumo
ezithathwa uhulumeni kazwelonke zinamiphi imithelela ezifundazweni.
Okwesine, kwakuwukuthola isimo samalungiselelo eNdebe Yomhlaba ngonyaka we
2010. Okokugcina, kwakuwukuzama ukuthola ukuthi isifundazwe sona
singalekelelwa kanjani ekuqhubeni umsebenzi waso.

Sibe nemihlangano-ke eminingi nezinhlaka ezahlukene ezinjengalezi
ezilandelayo. Sibe nomhlangano nehhovisi likaSomlomo, uSomlomo nePhini
lakhe, oSotswebhu bonke noSotswebhu bamanye amaqembu - umhlonishwa
uNgcolosi ungufakazi futhi nangu ukhona lapha eduze kwami njengoba
ngikhuluma nje.
Sahlangana noSihlalo Wosihlalo, ikomiti eliqondene noMkhandlu Kazwelonke
Wezifundazwe, abezemidlalo, abakwa-Kwanaloga, abaphethe ohulumeni
basekhaya, uMnyango Wohulumeni Basekhaya, ikomiti lezemidlalo, abaholi
bendabuko kanye noNdunankulu neKhabhinethi lakhe. Kuthe ekugcineni
sethamela nembizo eyayiseMondlo ngaphansi kukamasipala wasebaQulusini.

Nakhu-ke esakutholile ngendaba Yendebe Yomhlaba. Sitholile ukuthi kukhona
okwenziwayo ukulungiselela le midlalo. Ihhovisi likaNdunankulu umhlonishwa
uSbu Ndebele lasungula ikomidi eliqondene nezemidlalo. Leli komidi lifaka
yonke iMinyango efanele. Sithole futhi ukuthi isifundazwe sibe yingxenye
yokucubungula uMthethosivivinywa omaqondana neNdebe yoMhlaba ye-Fifa yange-
2010 kangangoba ngalezo zinsuku kwakuvakashelwa imiphakathi eminingi,
uMgungundlovu noGu, ngenkathi kuyolalelwa imibono yemiphakathi.

Ekwenzeni izimpilo zabantu zibe ngcono, sithole ukuthi isifundazwe sinazo
izinhlelo zokubhekana nobuphofu nokuntuleka kwemisebenzi, ezokulwa nesifo
seNgculaza kanye nesofuba, ezokudala amathuba emisebenzi nohlelo lokwenza
iKwaZulu-Natali ibe nokuthula nokuphepha. Sithole futhi ukuthi kukhona
uhlelo olusetshenziswayo olubizwa nge-Provincial Growth and Development
Strategy.

Ngasebudlelwaneni noMkhandlu Kazwelonke Wezifundazwe, sithole ukuthi
ubudlelwano nabo bunezinqginamba ezithize engizokhuluma ngazo maduze nje,
kodwa ukusebenzisana sekube ngcono kakhulu kanti noMkhandlu Kazwelonke
Wezifundazwe ususematheni esifundazweni.

Maqondana nezinqumo ezithathwa uhulumeni omkhulu, sithole ukuthi izinqumo
ziyahambisana nemigomo yesifundazwe. Yize noma abantu bengayi nganhlanye
kuhle kwamanzi kodwa iningi liyazamukela. Inselelo kuphela kuba amasiko
bese kwesinye isikhathi kuba yimigomo ngenxa yesimo, kwesinye isikhathi,
sezombusazwe.

Mayelana nokulekelelwa kwesifundazwe, sithole ukuthi isifundazwe sithi sona
siyingxenye yezwe laseNingizimu Afrika, ngakho-ke konke okwenziwa
nguhulumeni omkhulu kanye nezinye izifundazwe kuyenzeka KwaZulu-Natali.

Nazi izinselelo esizitholile - phela kuye kuthiwe alikho isoka
elingenasici. Nokho zikhona izinselelo nezinqinamba isifundazwe esibhekene
nazo. Mayelana neNdebe Yomhlaba, sikholelwa ekutheni kufanele zithinteke
zonke izinhlaka nezakhiwo, isibonelo: iMinyango efanele, ohulumeni
basekhaya, izinhlangano zebhola - singabala lapha eyejwayelekile okuthiwa u-
Safa, abaholi bendabuko nazo zonke ezinye izinhlaka ezikhona ukuze lo
mcimbi uhleleke kahle.

Kuye kwavela ukuthi kunezinqinamba ngokuthunyelwa kwezithunywa zesifundazwe
uma uMkhandlu Kazwelonke Wezifundazwe kufanele uhlangane lapha eCape Town.
Lokhu kudalwa ukuza sekusele isikhathi esifishane kanti kwesinye isikhathi
kubuye kudalwe nawukuthi sisuke sisincane kakhulu isikhathi abazofike
basikhulume, uma uqhathanisa nezindleko. Okunye ukungaphumeleli kokufika
kwabanye oNgqongqoshe besifundazwe ngenxa yokungatholi isimemo ngesikhathi
kanye nokungafiki kwabo ukuzobamba iqhaza kwizinkulumo mayelana
nesabiwomali.

Sengizogcina, imbizo yesifundazwe eyayiseMondlo, kuhulumeni wasekhaya
okuthiwa Abaqulusi, yahamba kahle nangempumelelo futhi yanika nezakhamuzi
ithuba lokuxhumana nohulumeni. Le mbizo yakhombisa isimo esihle phakathi
kwesifunda saseZululand nesifundazwe maqondana nokubambisana ekusizeni
abantu ngokuletha izidingo zabo nokubekezelelana.

Uhulumeni wesifundazwe wabuye wacela ukuthi uma amakomiti oMkhandlu
Kazwelonke nawoMkhandlu Kazwelonke Wezifundazwe ezoya kwisifundazwe, kuhle
asho kusenesikhathi ukuze alungiselelwe kahle ngoba naso isifundazwe sisuke
sinezinhlelo zaso.

Isonto lokuhambela isifundazwe lihambe kahle kakhulu noma savelelwa
umshophi wokushiwa umshayeli owayesisiza. Kulokho, sithi kwabakwaMsindazwe
abalale ngenxeba.

Sihlalo, siyabonga. Umsebenzi wamalungu ethu uhambe kahle. Ngiyabonga.
[Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Mr D D GAMEDE: Chairperson, the report on our oversight visit to the
province has bee tabled. The report is also available in the ATCs. And for
this reason I will be very brief and concise.

The follow-up visit to the province by members of this House had the
following objectives: Firstly, it was to find out what the province was
doing to make the people’s lives better. Secondly, it was to strengthen the
relationship between the legislature concerned and the National Council of
Provinces. Thirdly, it was to see the effect that decisions taken by the
national government have on the provincial governments. Fourthly, it was to
assess out the situation regarding the preparations for the 2010 Fifa World
Cup. And finally it was to try and find out how that particular province
could be helped in performing its core functions.

We had numerous meetings with the following different role-players. We had
a meeting with the office of the Speaker, the Speaker and his Deputy, all
the Whips and the Whips from other parties, and the hon Ngcolosi is a
witness to this, and he is just here next to me as I speak.

We also met the Chair of Chairs, the National Council of Provinces Matters
Standing Committee, the sports fraternity, Kwanaloga, officials from the
local government, the department of local government, housing and
traditional affairs, the sports committee, traditional leaders, the Premier
and his Cabinet. And after all this we then, attended an imbizo, which was
at Mondlo, which falls under AbaQulusi Municipality.

Regarding the 2010 Fifa World Cup, we found the following: We found that at
least something is being done to prepare for this tournament. The office of
the Premier, the hon Sbu Ndebele, formed a special committee for sports.
This committee comprises all relevant departments. We also learnt that the
province took part in the drafting of the 2010 Fifa World Cup South Africa
Special Measures Bill. They held public hearings in places like
Pietermaritzburg and Ugu.

On the aspect of making the people’s lives better, we found that the
province has programmes in place to fight poverty and joblessness, HIV and
Aids, and tuberculosis, and to create job opportunities so as to make
KwaZulu-Natal a haven for peace and security. We also learnt that there was
a programme in place called the provincial growth and development strategy.

In as far as the relationship with the National Council of Provinces is
concerned, we learnt that the relationship had certain hiccups, which I
will mention shortly. But of late the relationship has been very good and
the province in general is quite pleased with the National Council of
Provinces.

Regarding the decisions taken by the national government, we found that the
decisions are always in line with the policies of the province. Even though
it is common cause that, unlike water, people’s opinions do not always flow
into one direction, in general people accept these decisions. The only
challenge, though, was with the cultures and of course with certain
policies because of political diversity in the province.

In so far as helping the province is concerned, we learnt that the province
acknowledges that it is part of South Africa, and therefore, whatever the
national government and the other provinces do, the KwaZulu-Natal province
also takes part in.

There were challenges that we found there, and as we all know, to err is
human and, as the saying goes, even monkeys fall from the trees. There are
of course challenges and hindrances that the province is facing. Regarding
the 2010 FIFA World Cup, we believe that all relevant stakeholders should
be kept abreast of every development, for example the relevant government
departments, local government, sports organisations like Safa, traditional
leadership and all other relevant stakeholders who can make this whole
tournament a resounding success.

It also emerged that there are challenges with the provincial delegates
which the province has to send to the National Council of Provinces in Cape
Town. This is partly because of the short notice that the delegates receive
when they have to come to Cape Town and also the time allocated to these
delegates is often too short if you compare it with the expenses involved.
The other problem was the conspicuous absence of the MECs in our debates
because of the short notice that they receive, and their non-appearance
during the Budget Votes.

In conclusion, the provincial imbizo which was held at Mondlo, in AbaQulusi
Municipality, went very well and it even gave the people of Mondlo the
opportunity to directly communicate with government. This imbizo showcased
the smooth communication channels between the Zululand District and the
province as a whole and the dedication to working together in addressing
the people’s needs.

The provincial government also asked that if committees from the National
Council of Provinces intend visiting the province, they should announce
their intentions long beforehand so that proper arrangements could be made
for them, as the province also has its own programme of action.

The study tour to the province went smoothly, even though we were saddened
by the passing away of the driver who was helping us. On this sad note, we
say to the Msindazwes may they find comfort in the situation they are faced
with.

Chairperson, I thank you. The work of our members went smoothly. I thank
you. [Applause.]]

Rev P MOATSHE: Hon Deputy Chairperson, hon members, it is indeed an honour
and privilege to participate in this revered House today on the topic of
the National Council of Provinces’ provincial week, which was held from 14-
18 August 2006. As we all know, this oversight exercise - and future
provincial weeks - was not just undertaken for the sake of it, but in terms
of our constitutional obligations which mandate us, as public
representatives, to exercise oversight intervention in both the national
and local government spheres.

It is in the public interest that we pronounce ourselves on the objectives
of these visits. Among other things, we set out to determine the following:
assessment of the activities of the North West province; strengthening of
the relationship between the provincial legislature and the National
Council of Provinces; to listen to the people about problems needing
attention and to identify blockages in the implementation of policy areas
that may need review; to establish how decisions taken by national
government impact on provincial government; and to ascertain progress with
regard to preparations for the World Cup in 2010 in terms of the readiness
of municipalities and partnerships, if any, between the various
stakeholders in the provinces.

We kicked off our week with a meeting with the Chief Whip and the
leadership of the North West to engage and inform them about the strategic
objectives of our visit. Furthermore, we were all in accord that provincial
weeks were a valuable tool to harmonise provincial, national and local
interests. We also emphasised the role of traditional leadership in this
regard.

Our visit included the following areas and sectors: the Zeerust Police
Station, the Groot Marico Police Station management, the Lehurutshe
Magistrate Board, the chief and community of Shupingstad, the North West
Deputy Speaker, the Bophelong Hospital, and the Mmabatho Police Station.

Let me elaborate on our visit to the Zeerust Police Station. The Zeerust
Police Station is situated about 150 kilometres from Botswana in the
Ramotshere Moiloa Municipality. This is a predominantly rural area and
consists of farms and villages. It also experiences migration and
immigration like any other town in South Africa, although not on a large
scale. Like any other police station in the country, the station endeavours
to protect and serve the community around it.

The Zeerust Police Station faces the following challenges: a shortage of
police vehicles – this has to be looked into very seriously; a shortage of
police officers; insufficient and incompetent detective services, and
female holding cells. In addition, stock theft is a great problem and the
problem of ghost police officers is also experienced.

Among other things, the following criminal activities were mentioned, which
are of major concern to the community: armed robbery, common robbery,
housebreaking, common assault, car theft and theft in general. However,
during our discussions it also became clear that capacity constraints
severely hamper the noble efforts of the overwhelmingly committed police
corps in the area. As public representatives we made it clear to the SA
Police Service that we were there to support them and to experience for
ourselves these challenges.

Similarly, in terms of our visit to the Groot Marico Police Station, our
experience was also a refrain of what we hear in the media, public hearings
and our oversight visits in general. We are not insensitive to these
challenges.

We have given our inputs during discussions with the police management, and
we undertook that we would deepen our commitment. Alas, we are also not
oblivious to the impact of the socioeconomic conditions in the area and the
North West province in general.

We then proceeded with an engagement with the Lehurutshe Magistrate Board.
I will briefly outline to the House some of the pertinent issues that were
raised. The court building is in a dilapidated state despite recent
renovations. The public suffers the indignity of having to distinguish for
themselves between the criminal and the civil courts. There is a shortage
of courtrooms.

The issue of magisterial boundaries is still to be decided and, as a
consequence, the public must travel long distances. This stems from the
previous Bophuthatswana homeland. There is a lack of information and
communication technology capacity, and there is an absence of a place for
the safekeeping of cash. Maintenance money in particular should be kept in
a safe place.

There is a shortage of security personnel and an absence of social workers
to deal with social grants, etc. There is a security risk as holding cells
are adjacent to the magistrates’ offices. The list goes on, but I will stop
here.

Although we noted the concerns in their entirety and undertook to engage
with the provincial department of public works, we are concerned that there
is clearly a lack of an integrated approach to these challenges. We hope to
raise this once we convene as a cluster very soon.

Our engagement with the chief and community of Shupingstad was, in fact,
very constructive. Among other things, it highlighted the importance of co-
operation between the local authority and the traditional leaders,
particularly after this year’s local government elections. It must be said
that the chief was particularly supportive of this. Also, the lack of
capacity and skills among councillors needs urgent attention.

At a community level, the concerns are more serious and direct. A lack of
infrastructure, a water shortage, poor road conditions, unemployment,
poverty, crime and other social pathologies are the order of the day. The
community was also particularly concerned about the behaviour of the chief
himself.

Among the recommendations made were the following. The NCOP will engage
with the health department about the unavailability of an ambulance service
and the poor condition of hospitals. We will pay attention to the
challenges ... [Time expired.] Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mnr L H FIELDING: Voorsitter, lede van die Huis, besoekers, dames en here,
met die besoek aan die Noord-Kaap deur die NRVP-lede en lede van die
wetgewer in Kimberley, is besoeke afgelê by gemeenskappe, munisipaliteite,
skole, hospitale en die weermagbasis.

Tot ons teleurstelling het ons afgekom op ’n weermagammunisiebasis op Jan
Kempdorp waar ons slegs twee weermagoffisiere kon kry. Die teleurstellende
situasie daar was dat daar sedert 1941 ammunisie gestoor was en hierdie
ammunisie gaan oor ’n tydperk van 35 jaar eers uitgefaseer kan word. Die
ammunisie word gestoor in Ammunisiebasis Vastrap en Ammunisiebasis 93.

Hierdie offisiere was baie gefrustreerd en het onder baie spanning gely.
Offisier Van As het aan ons verduidelik dat hy ’n magtiging van R1 000 per
gebruikslag het en nie oor daardie begroting mag werk nie. Dit was baie
teleurstellend.

Ons het verder gegaan na die Primêre Skool Warrenton waar ons ’n
vergadering gehad het met die skoolkomiteelede en opvoeders en ook die
mense wat daar die kos voorberei. Daarna het ons vergadering gehou waar
mense vir ons verduidelik het dat hulle opleiding kry teen R500 per maand
na ’n 12-maande kursus. Daarna het ons gegaan en na sommige kinders
geluister, asook na ouers teenwoordig en hierdie ouers het aan ons
verduidelik dat hierdie kinders R1,00 per dag vir voedsel ontvang, waaroor
hulle ’n klagte ingedien het by ons en duidelik gesê het dat dit
onaanvaarbaar is om vir R1,00 per dag vir ’n kind kos te gee en daarom vra
hulle meer geld in hierdie opsig.

Van daar is ons na die Phokwane-munisipaliteit en hier het ons gevind dat
die werkloosheidsyfer onder die gemeenskap 43% is. Die behoeftebepaling wat
daar gemaak is, is dat 4 395 mense werkloos is; die agterstand per jaar vir
huise is 4 093; die tekort aan water per huisgesin is 3 708; sanitêre
dienste is 3 699; tekort aan elektrisiteit per huisgesin is 4 755;
verwydering van vullis per huisgesin is 4 382, en dan het hulle ’n gruispad
van 79km wat hulle moet gebruik.

Daarna het ons gegaan na ’n vergadering in Jan Kempdorp. Die agterstand met
die paaie daar is dat daar 2 013km gruispaaie is. Daar is ’n probleem
tussen die munisipaliteit en Eskom oor die kwessie van krag, want Eskom
skuld nog die munisipaliteit geld. Eskom is tans die kragvoorsiener.
Vullisverwydering in Hartswater is ’n probleem, en sodoende veroorsaak dit
onhigiëniese toestande in die gemeenskap.

Met betrekking tot behuising lewer sommige kontrakteurs swak werk met
goedkoop materiaal. Daar is ’n tekort aan grond vir behuising. Daar is
genoeg landelike grond, maar geen grond om huise te bou nie en die mense
het ’n probleem met landbougrond om huise daarop te bou.

Die mense skuld die munisipaliteit sowat R23 902 860. Die mense is
bekommerd, want uit die begroting van daardie munisipaliteit is maar 17,5%
vir infrastruktuur bewillig en van die res is sowat 30% bestee aan
salarisse.

As ons kyk na die Noord-Kaapse behuisingsprobleem, waar ons kry dat jy ’n
Noord-Kaap Behuisingsfederasie kry en die geaffilieerde Suid-Afrikaanse
Huislose Mensefederasie. Hierdie liggaam en die munisipaliteit is in
konflik met mekaar, want die mense wat op die federasie se waglys is, is
nie noodwendig dieselfde mense wat op die munisipaliteit se waglys is nie,
so daar is konflik tussen hierdie twee groepe.

Dan het ons gegaan na waar ons verneem dat sekere raadslede toestemming uit
hulle eie wil gee aan gemeenskappe sonder dat die munisipaliteit die
toelating of die magtiging gee om met hierdie mense te praat en dan wys hy
gronde of persele uit wat glad nie op die waglys is nie en dit skep ’n
probleem vir die gemeenskap daar.

Die Dumisane African Trading-verskaffers is geld vir materiaal vir
behuising uitbetaal, maar hulle het nooit die materiaal gelewer nie en
daarom is hierdie projek al geruime tyd agter.

Ons het ’n terrein besoek by die Sol Plaatje-munisipaliteit waar
veronderstel was om 960 huise gelewer te word. Tot op hede is daar maar 550
huise gelewer. Die kontrak is oor die termyn van 2003 tot 2006 gesluit,
maar daar is net 555 huise gebou. Die teleurstelling was, op die ter
plaatse ondersoek daar, dat die huise van ’n baie swak gehalte materiaal
gebou was. Die stene is swak, dis geperste sand en geperste klei waarmee
die huise gebou word, en daar is maar 2% sement bygevoeg. Dit skep ’n
probleem vir die mense en nie net dit nie, die stene is, “interblocks” nie
stene wat normaalweg mee gebou word nie, maar inmekaar gepak word.

Ek het foto’s geneem wat ek die een of ander tyd aan die Raad sal voorsien
om die krake uit te wys en die leemtes wat daar bestaan. [Tussenwerpsels.]
Ja ... Ja. [Tyd verstreke.] Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Mr L H FIELDING: Chairperson, members of the House, guests, ladies and
gentleman, during the visit to the Northern Cape by members of the NCOP and
members of the legislature in Kimberley, we visited communities,
municipalities, schools, hospitals and the Defence Force base.

To our disappointment we came across a Defence Force ammunition base in Jan
Kempdorp where only two Defence Force officers were present. It was
disappointing to find that ammunition has been stored there since 1941 and
would only be phased out over a period of 35 years. The ammunition is
stored at the Vastrap Weapons Range and 93 Ammunition Depot.

These officers were highly frustrated and suffered severe stress. Officer
Van As explained to us that he has authorisation up to R1 000 at a time and
is not allowed to exceed that budget, which was very disappointing.

We then travelled further to the Warrenton Primary School where we held a
meeting with members of the governing body and teachers, as well as the
catering staff. Thereafter we held another meeting where people revealed
that they received training at R500 per month after finishing a 12-month
course. Thereafter we left to listen to some of the children as well as
parents who were present. These parents explained to us that these children
are receiving R1,00 per day for food which led them to lodge a complaint
with us. They clearly stated that it was unacceptable to feed a child on
R1,00 per day; hence their request for more funds in this regard.

From there we proceeded to the Phokwane Municipality and here it came to
light that there was an unemployment rate of 43% among the community. The
needs assessment that was carried out there indicated that 4 395 people are
unemployed; there is an annual housing shortage of 4 093; the shortage of
water per household amounts to 3 708; a lack of sanitary services amounting
to 3 699; a shortage of electricity per household amounting to 4 755;
refuse disposal is 4 382 per household; and a gravel road of 79km is
servicing the community.

We then proceeded to a meeting in Jan Kempdorp. There is a shortage of
roads and the area has a 2 013km network of gravel roads. Currently there
is a dispute between Eskom and the municipality with regard to power
supply, as Eskom is financially indebted towards the municipality. Eskom is
supplying the power at the moment. Refuse removal in Hartswater is a
problem and consequently this results in unhygienic conditions in the
community.

With regard to housing, certain contractors have rendered work of inferior
quality by using cheaper materials. There is a shortage of land for
housing. However, there is enough agricultural land available but no land
to build houses on and the residents have a problem building houses on
agricultural land.

The residents owe the municipality approximately R23 902 860. They are
concerned as only 17,5% of the municipal budget has been allocated to
infrastructure and approximately 30% of the budget is spent on salaries.

If we have a look at the Northern Cape’s housing problem, we find that we
have two bodies to deal with, the Northern Cape Housing Federation and the
affiliated South African Homeless People’s Federation. This body and the
municipality are in conflict because the residents on the federation’s
waiting list are not necessarily the same as those on the municipalitiy’s
waiting list. This results in conflict between the two groups.

We then went to an area where we found that certain councillors want to
give permission to communities of their own accord without authorisation
from the municipality to speak to these people. They would then identify
land or plots that do not even appear on the waiting list and this creates
a problem for that community.

The Dumisane African Trading Suppliers were paid for housing material which
they never delivered; hence the project has been behind schedule for a long
while.

We visited a Sol Plaatje Municipality site where 960 houses were supposed
to have been delivered. To date, only 550 houses have been built. The
contract covered the period from 2003 to 2006 but only 555 houses have been
built. It was very disappointing, during an in loco inspection of the site,
to find that the houses were built with material of a very poor quality.
The bricks were of poor quality, compressed sand and compressed clay were
used to build these houses and only 2% cement was added. This creates a
problem for residents, and not only that, but also the fact that these
bricks are “interblocks”, not bricks that are normally used to build, which
mean they are stacked into one another.

I have taken photographs that I will show to the Council, at some stage or
another, to point out the cracks and flaws that exist. [Interjections.] Yes
... Yes. [Time expired.] Thank you.]

Mr L RAMATLAKANE (Western Cape): Deputy Chairperson, we are privileged to
participate in this NCOP debate on the NCOP week in the Western Cape. The
visit of the NCOP in the Western Cape mainly focused on vexing issues
around gangsterism - plans to deal with gangsterism in the province and of
course from there to deal with matters of local government such as roads
and freeway bypasses that create concern in our community.

The legislature in fact had a discussion on these matters at the end of the
visit of the members to all the areas to consider these issues that have
been raised and also to comment as to what constitutes the way forward in
dealing with some of those issues.

In my comment I would also be saying that, in terms of government
consideration on some of the issues that need to be dealt with, these are
the things that have been suggested. Firstly, on gangsterism, with regard
to the issue of the NCOP engaging with the management of the police, the
delegates have done that, in fact, in focusing on Mannenberg and
gangsterism and what is happening in Mannenberg.

You would know that the situation in the Western Cape, particularly when it
comes to the issues of gangsterism and drugs, is quite worrying and members
were quite concerned about whether the plans that have been put in place
are adequate to deal with the matters relating to gangsterism, and whether
the plans are not necessarily too general.

In the engagement, following the representation of the concern, we’ve been
able to demonstrate that indeed the plan that has been put in place to deal
with gangsterism is in fact quite detailed to deal with gangsterism,
particularly the issue of dealing with high-flyers – those who were
believed to be untouchable in the past – who don’t touch drugs but continue
to make money from drugs. That strategy is focusing on and dealing with
them as well as with the street gangs.

In that detail, we have been able to show that the movement in terms of the
conviction rate that has been increasing around that particular strategy is
beginning to pay dividends.

I may want to add that the issue about the continuing usage of houses as
outlets for drugs was another issue. As we speak today and having had an
engagement with the Mayor of the City of Cape Town today, some of those
houses that are used as outlets for drugs are a worrying issue. At least an
action is beginning to emerge that the first and foremost, local government
- as the legal owner of the houses - has to take action. Failure to take
action necessitates the assets forfeitures to intervene in terms of those
houses.

One of the issues that they have raised is the issue around infrastructure
in the form of police stations, where they are located and whether they
have proper resources, and the issues of personnel in general.

As you all know, the concern that we particularly all have is that the
inheritance of our 1994 democratic breakthrough has been the institution –
where the infrastructure of the police has been all the years. Therefore,
the police stations have been dislocated from where the major crime
happens, particularly with regard to violent crime areas. There would be
far more out in the city, not necessarily where they are.

Members were very concerned about the issues regarding Bongolethu in
Oudtshoorn, where the police station there is a contact point and not
necessarily a station that is well resourced. We have been able to indicate
that in the plans that we put in place in terms of dealing with it. It’s a
matter that we’re handling in terms of infrastructure but generally this is
a phenomenon that requires some attention all over the province. I guess
all other provinces are in the same league in terms of infrastructure - new
infrastructure that is closer in proximity to where crime happens.

The committee also raised issues about partnerships, particularly
partnerships that deal with other national departments located in the
provinces, and the concerns that are not necessarily addressed. In this
case Home Affairs was raised as an aspect around the issues of illegal
immigrants, their involvement in drugs or allegations that involve them in
more general terms.

Of course, the demonstration of the interdepartmental committee – an
intergovernmental arrangement that has already been established in the
provinces - demonstrated that we are handling those particular matters.

The issue of a witness protection programme has been raised as a key issue
in the province, particularly in dealing with gangsterism and drugs. That
programme needs closer attention. We agree with that. In fact, it does need
closer attention, particularly when we deal with that issue.

The other issues are associated with education, bail, drugs and people who
are habitual offenders in respect of gangsterism. It concerns communities
that those who commit crime go in and come out of jail.

Again, we have been able to say that what is most important is moving
forward. There has to be education, and empowering of communities to be
able to participate in those matters when they come before court, so that
they are able to oppose bail together with the police.

We therefore think that the recommendation that the NCOP delegation has
made in terms of dealing with gangs and gangsterism will in fact
continuously have to put us together as government in an intergovernmental
way in terms of dealing with the challenging issues. The sphere of
government in question, particularly where it relates to the other issues,
is in the national department. But I think this issue is an issue that the
members of the NCOP will probably have to deal with.

I will now address the last two issues. With regard to local government,
members were concerned about the abilities of local government in Project
Consolidate, and whether the necessary capacity exists.

One of the most burning issues that requires attention has been the issue
of bypasses, particularly the conduct or alleged conduct of Sanral in the
engagement of the province or engagement of the community around the issues
of consultation and factors that may affect, in the long term, future
public transport commuters.

I think that particular issue is a matter that requires attention. We said
it needs an intergovernmental approach. We have agreed that local economic
development is important and the provincial development strategy is
beginning to pay attention and deal with that.

All in all we think that the visit has been a good one – a good one that
must be continued to engage both the spheres of government around those
interests. I thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon Deputy Chairperson, I must
confess that most of the issues I intended to talk about have been covered
by members and have been raised from as early as 28 April 1994.

As one debates this report of the provincial week, one is most excited to
realise that it constitutes the evolving maturity of the National Council
of Provinces as a unique House within our parliamentary system, because the
NCOP is not a provincial legislature and the NCOP is not the National
Assembly. It is a very complex organism that, one must say, through the
collective wisdom and efforts of all of us assembled here today, we have
been able to define and for which we have been able to find a niche within
the broader spectrum of parliamentary politics within our country.

There is no doubt that the reintroduction of the provincial week is one of
the most critical programmes that finds a niche for the NCOP,
differentiating it from other Houses of Parliament. This is because it is
the only House that straddles, according to President Thabo Mbeki, the
three spheres of government. Accordingly, it cannot engage in and enquire
about issues in the manner in which provincial legislatures do. It cannot
enquire about and engage on issues in the manner in which the National
Assembly does or is supposed to. If we fail to grapple with that particular
challenge, we will have failed the test of our relevance and become open to
those critics who say that they don’t see the relevance of this House. I
don’t think we want to take that particular route.

Overall, we have been able to rise to a number of challenges, but they
continue to be challenges. I want to pick up on a few challenges. I think
out of all the speakers that have spoken, three spoke about an issue ...
I’m not oversimplifying this: In 1994 the African people in this country
had never been provided with housing. It was only after 27 April 1994 that
we had the programme of RDP houses.

When you build these houses - when you build 5 000 houses in a year – it’s
a victory for our people, it’s a victory for our government, and all of us
must celebrate. The problem is that when you build these 5 000 houses, only
100 are habitable. Human beings can see that. The hon Moatshe spoke about
the cracks; another member spoke about ...

What I am saying is that those are issues that the NCOP, in my view, must
focus on for future purposes as we engage in these types of programmes. I
have never, unless I am ignorant - and I must not be seen to be making any
judgments ... Hon Shiceka, I have never seen on our Order Paper regarding
committees, even of this House, that we pass the budget every year for the
Department of Housing and in terms of that budget we pass what we call the
National Home Builders Registration Council, the NHBRC – a quality
assurance mechanism to deal with the problem of the quality of houses.

One goes to the Free State and there is the Virginia problem. You know
about it, hon Mabe. The Virginia problem of 1996 is still unresolved. Every
time the President goes there that problem is still unresolved. In the
North West there are similar problems, where people have pocketed money and
built poor quality houses that our people cannot even inhabit. They say,
“It’s better to stay in my shack than to stay in this house.”

Now who can carry out this task except the National Council of Provinces,
and that by calling the NHBRC? This is because it has the legal mandate to
do quality checks on those houses. It can do quality checks, for example,
on a particular contractor who does a certain kind of work. There are legal
recourses.

Maybe I am ignorant. I’ve never read in the newspaper, neither have I been
provided with information, which says: These are the contractors whose
properties, houses and bank accounts have been frozen because of a failure
to comply with building regulations. I have never heard of that; maybe
other members are aware of that. So what I’m saying is that the NCOP in
terms of its excellent niche can actually be seized with that task.

Hon Shiceka, no doubt we are a unitary state despite the three spheres of
government. The people of Tumahole in Parys have spoken, and the people in
the North West have spoken through our programmes. They speak about the
same things, even if you were to go again the following week you would hear
the same things.

Now the challenge is: How do we as the NCOP begin to respond to those
expectations and aspirations of our people in our programmes, particularly
a programme like that of the provincial week, without being seen - I am
aware other hon members are afraid to talk about this - to be encroaching
on the role of provincial legislatures, without being seen to be conducting
oversight over the provincial executive, but ensuring in a very qualitative
way that we are actually positioned to do this work of representing
provincial interests in this House?

An hon member from the Northern Cape spoke about a hazard in an old army
base. I am not really sure whether this has been brought to the attention
of the Department of Defence and, if so, what steps are going to be taken.

I’m basically saying that we have done lots of excellent work, but we
really need an improvement and collective minds to improve on what we are
doing, because it is something else to listen to the people and make
observations, and then come back here and talk among ourselves. It’s
another thing, because the key test of a revolutionary people’s Parliament
– I want to emphasise revolutionary people’s Parliament – is about its
capacity to inspire the confidence of the masses.
This is so that when this Parliament, when these public representatives go
out on an outreach programme to interface with the electorate, the
electorate is confident that their lives will be better tomorrow, after we
have met our elected representatives, than they are today.

Overall, there are a whole range of issues. Planning is one of the key
issues confronting our government as a challenge. To what extent have we
checked whether, when we pass budgets at different levels for a school or
for housing, we are actually satisfied that all other due processes, like
environmental impact studies, have been undertaken? This is because it is
an oversimplification of reality to say that provinces are not spending.

There are real problems, not only of capacity. At times you find that
people budget for something when they have not done certain feasibility
studies to check whether where they want to establish infrastructure is
environmentally feasible to have that kind of project.

You find that when the feasibility study has been conducted, you already
have the money and you want to establish the infrastructure, but the
environmental study says you cannot. So how do we assist as the National
Council of Provinces in terms of addressing those challenges?

Lastly, I am sure most members here are aspirant BEE whatevers. We have the
Construction Industry Development Board, which falls under the Department
of Public Works, if I’m not mistaken. Have we looked at the challenges
facing that particular body, because in its grading, hon Shiceka, it
actually perpetuates ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon member, will you
please direct your questions through the Chair, not directly to the
members.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Thanks, hon Chairperson. We are
talking about broad-based black economic empowerment, and all companies
that are supposed to be undertaking business within the construction
industry are required by law - this CIDB - to register. But the experience
is that every new company that registers there, particularly those that
were historically disadvantaged, is graded at an entry level.

If you do audits across nine provinces, I am sure through you, Madam Deputy
Chairperson, that the hon Ramatlakane would agree with me that there is no
historically black empowerment company that could be awarded a contract of
more than R100 million because of those constraints. It is we who have
passed that particular law. And how do we address that, because it is a
challenge?

This delivery is in the provinces, but this legislation is national
legislation so it has direct bearing on the delivery capacity of our
provinces. So those are the issues that I thought were critical, and maybe
we need to engage more robustly amongst ourselves.

Finally, I want to say that our budgeting systems have improved and
matured, and I am sure that we are amongst the best in Africa and the
world. But how do we link these budgeting systems to the planning and
output of a particular budget? Have we been able to ensure that in our
planning for these provincial weeks we actually include those particular
issues that arise from the budget and the strategic plans of various
government departments as we go down and interface with our provincial
legislatures?

I have been trying to highlight some of the challenges, and these are my
modest thoughts aimed at improving our efficiency and our capacity in
fulfilling our constitutional mandate of being a House of provinces;
nothing more, nothing less. I thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Report noted.

                       CARRIAGE BY AIR AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mnr F ADAMS: Huisvoorsitter, kollegas en vriende, graag wil ek aan u voorlê
die verslag van die Gekose Komitee oor Openbare Dienste oor die
Wysigingswetsontwerp op Lugvervoer, soos vervat in die aankondigings en
tertafelleggings van die komitee op 3 November, vir die goedkeuring van die
Huis. Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr F ADAMS: Chairperson of the House, colleagues and friends, I would like
to submit the Select Committee on Public Services’s report on the Carriage
by Air Amendment Bill, as contained in the announcements and tablings of
the committee on 3 November, for the approval of the House. I thank you.
[Applause.]]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I shall put the question. The
question is that the Bill be agreed to. In accordance with Rule 63 I shall
first allow political parties the opportunity to make their declarations of
vote if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to the voting. Those in favour say “Aye”.

HON MEMBERS: Aye!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Those against say “No”. [Inaudible.]

The majority of members have voted in favour. I therefore declare the Bill
agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

                       ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL

                    (Consideration of Votes and Schedule)

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Chair, the Public Finance Management Act, Act 1 of 1999,
makes provision for a national adjustment budget. In terms of this Act the
Minister of Finance may table an adjustment budget in Parliament. The
Adjustments Appropriation Bill, Bill 32 of 2006, appropriates an
adjustments amount of money for the requirements of national departments
for the financial year ending on 31st March 2007.

The objective of this Bill is to appropriate an additional amount of money
from the National Revenue Fund for the requirements of the state for the
financial year ending on 31st March 2007.

State-owned enterprises have a strategic role to play in our efforts to
transform the economy. Some state-owned enterprises receive substantial
allocations. These include the following: Denel, R567 million; Infraco,
R627 million. This Infraco is a broad telecommunications company. This
additional amount will reduce the cost of broadband in South Africa and
thus give more people access to this technology. Alexkor has received
R80 million and the SA Rail Commuter Corporation has received R620 million.

The Bill also makes provision for the emergency funding of R674 million in
response to the flood damage. The allocation will cover repair costs of
roads, infrastructure and housing. The adjustments are offset against
contingency reserves, unallocated amounts, declared savings and projected
underspending. Actual underspending in this financial year ending on 31st
March 2006 is R5,6 billion, which is 2,4% of the Budget.

The provinces failed to spend R4,4 billion in the same financial year. That
is why, as the Select Committee on Finance, we urge this House to support
this money Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, I have been informed
that there will not be any questions.

I shall now put the Votes in the order in which they appear in the schedule
to the Bill.
Vote No 1 – The Presidency – put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution
(Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 2 – Parliament – put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 3 – Foreign Affairs – put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 4 – Home Affairs – put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.
Vote No 5 – Provincial and Local Government – put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 6 – Public Works – put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 7 – Government Communication and Information System – put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 8 – National Treasury – put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 9 – Public Enterprises – put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 10 - Public Service and Administration – put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 11 – Public Service Commission – put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 12 – South African Management Development Institute – put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 13 – Statistics South Africa – put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 14 – Arts and Culture – put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 15 – Education – put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 16 – Health – put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 17 – Labour – put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 18 – Social Development – put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 19 – Sport and Recreation South Africa – put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 20 – Correctional Services – put.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Chairperson, the DA would like to object, and also to
call for a division.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): How many seconds to that?
[Interjections.] I’ll make a ruling that we won’t go for a division,
because in terms of the Rules an individual member must be supported by
four members. [Interjections.] No, hon members - hon Mazibuko, I wouldn’t
like to call you by name – when I was asking, it was only Mr Fielding, Mr
Thetjeng and another member who seconded the call for a division.
[Interjections.] They are three, right? [Interjections.] Wait!
[Interjections.] Therefore I was making the ruling on the basis of that,
but now I do recognise that maybe some other members were not
concentrating, right? It’s only now that they are raising their hands. This
is the point that I want to clarify, okay?

Division demanded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T Setona): So the seconds have met the necessary
requirements, so, hon members, a division has been called on Vote No 20. I
have ascertained that four or more members are in favour of the division. I
would like to caution members that during a division no debate will be
allowed. Those in favour of the Vote will take their seats to my right. Any
delegate wishing to abstain from the voting must sit in the back corner to
my left. Hon Terblanche, can I request that this area should be reserved
for abstentions. You can sit this side. Are you abstaining?
[Interjections.]

As tellers to my right I appoint the Chief Whip of the Council and as
tellers to my left I appoint the hon Terblanche. When tellers have finished
counting they should hand the results to the Chairperson. Can I proceed to
call upon the tellers to do the counting and to forward the results to the
Chairperson?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I’m not opposing your ruling,
but I want to look at whether it’s procedural for a member who has called
for a division to also be referee at the same time while he or she’s a
player, because it would be good to have someone who is independent.

I’ll propose that we use some of the duty Whips who are here in the House
...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Chief Whip, what you are raising is
quite fundamental. Hon Watson, can you be the teller on this side?
[Interjections.]

The Council divided.

  AYES – 23: Botha, D J; Gamede, D D; Hendricks, N; Mabe, S E; Manyosi, A T;
  Madlala-Magubane, N M; Matlanyane, H; Mazibuko, N F; Mkhaliphi, B J;
  Moatshe, P; Mokoena, M L; Ntuli, Z C; Nyanda, F; Oliphant, M N; Ralane, T;
  Shiceka, S; Sibiya, J; Sogoni, E M; Themba, M P; Tolo, B J; Van Rooyen, C
  J; Vilakazi, J N; Windvoël, V V Z.

  NOES - 9: Chen, S S; Fielding, L H; Krumbock, G R; Le Roux, J W;
  Terblanche, J F; Thetjeng, O M; Van Heerden, F J; Watson, A; Worth, D A.

Vote accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the
Constitution.

Vote No 21 - Defence - put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 22 - Independent Complaints Directorate - put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 23 - Justice and Constitutional Development - put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 24 - Safety and Security - put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 25 - Agriculture - put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 26 - Communications - put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 27 - Environmental Affairs and Tourism - put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 28 - Housing - put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 29 - Land Affairs - put.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Chairperson, I would like the reservations of the FF
Plus to be noted.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Excuse me, hon member, I didn’t hear
what you said?

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Chairperson, I said we had reservations in the FF Plus.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Okay, I’m not sure whether we have
reservations as an option. Your reservation is noted.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Chairperson, I would like to note an objection and also
call for a division.

Division demanded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon Terblanche is objecting and is
calling for a division. Seconders? [Interjections.]

Hon members, the bells are being rung to alert those members who are
outside to come and vote, and fulfil their party-political mandates,
because this is a critical exercise of democracy. However ... Hon Watson,
you want to say something?

Mr A WATSON: Chair, I’m not in the Chair, so I don’t know, but what is the
quorum for this House?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): The quorum of the House, as far I’m
concerned, is one third of the House. I’m so used to the House that I don’t
have to count to see that we’re a quorum, but if hon members want to
satisfy themselves, we can do that.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I want to confirm that this
House is fully quorate, and any decision which it will take will be binding
even on those who are opposing it in voting.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Thanks your point is noted, hon
member.

Hon members, those in favour of the Vote will take their seats to my right
and those against to my left, and those who abstain must go to the far left
corner. I’ll appoint the hon Chief Whip of the Council as the teller to my
right, and as teller to my left I’ll appoint the hon Watson.
[Interjections.] Excuse me, Mr Krumbock, what’s your point?
[Interjections.]

Mr G R KRUMBOCK: [Inaudible.] ... I should be counted as voting against.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I want to assure you, you have been
counted.

The Council divided.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, the results are as
follows: Those who agreed, 24; those who objected, nine. [Interjections.]
The majority have voted in favour and the Vote is accordingly agreed to.
[Interjections.] Plus one reservation by the FF Plus, so that’s eight.
[Interjections.]

Mr A WATSON: No, no, Chair, objections and reservations are handled first.
When a division is called, even you can vote against it. Dr Van Heerden
voted against. He had a reservation, but when the division was called for
and the bells were rung he could vote. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon Dr Van Heerden, can you take
your seat. [Interjections.] I listened quite clearly and I wasn’t sure
whether we have such a thing as reservations. I know you either vote
against or in favour, or you abstain, and he said he had reservations, and
I recorded it procedurally, right? Can I hear from you, hon Van Heerden, or
have you appointed the hon Watson as your spokesperson? [Interjections.]

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Chairperson, no, I indeed indicated right at the
beginning the reservations of the FF Plus. After that a division was called
for and I was not aware that a division would be called for at that stage,
and I am quite entitled, after I had noted my reservations in this regard,
to change my mind and vote either for or against, thank you, and I voted
against.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, can you take your seat.
I don’t need a lecture on that. Hon members, please don’t make my work
difficult. When the hon member said he had reservations we were not voting
yet, and quite clearly, I ordered that those who vote against must sit this
side, and from my viewpoint and in my judgment it was clear that he was
part of the people who were objecting to the Vote.

  AYES – 24: Botha, D J; Gamede, D D; Hendricks, N; Mabe, S E; Manyosi, A T;
  Madlala-Magubane, N M; Matlanyane, H; Masilo, J; Mazibuko, N F; Mkhaliphi,
  B J; Moatshe, P; Mokoena, M L; Ntuli, Z C; Nyanda, F; Oliphant, M N;
  Ralane, T; Shiceka, S; Sibiya, J; Sogoni, E M; Themba, M P; Tolo, B J; Van
  Rooyen, C J; Vilakazi, J N; Windvoël, V V Z.

  NOES - 9: Chen, S S; Fielding, L H; Krumbock, G R; Le Roux, J W;
  Terblanche, J F; Thetjeng, O M; Van Heerden, F J; Watson, A; Worth, D A.

Can we proceed to ... Yes, hon Watson?

Mr A WATSON: May I just register my objection to the fact that you
appointed me as a teller, as you call it, and then you called my counting
into question without consulting me. [Interjections.] I don’t think that’s
parliamentary.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Excuse me, can I hear your point?
Mr A WATSON: My point is, the authority in this House is in that Chair and
you in that Chair appointed me as a teller. I gave you a count of nine on
the division that occurred. You then proceeded, because there was heckling
and whatever, to then count ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona) Hon member, can you sit ...

Mr A WATSON: Hang on, can I finish saying what I want to say?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Can you sit down.

Mr A WATSON: No, you asked me to explain!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona) Can you take your seat, please.

Mr A WATSON: But you asked me to explain my point, and I haven’t finished.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, can you take your seat.
[Interjections.] Hon Watson, can you take your seat? [Interjections.]

Hon Watson, you are quite correct that there was heckling. That is why I
wanted to hear from a member, who had earlier said he had reservations, how
he had voted, and my ruling is not contrary to what is ...

Mr A WATSON: That’s not the point.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): What is the point?

Mr A WATSON: The point is that you appointed me as a teller, and if my
counting was then called into question, you should have called me, not a
member from the floor. I’m the counter.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): No, you’re out of order, hon member.
Can you take your seat. [Interjections.] Can you take your seat.
[Interjections.] Can you take your seat.

Mr Krumbock, I think the decorum of this House and my integrity is very
important. I’ve never pointed a finger at you, right? I hope it’s an
omission on your part. We must proceed accordingly, right? You have called
for the division, the division is done, then the temperatures rise. What do
you expect me to do? [Interjections.] Fine.

Vote accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the
Constitution.

Vote No 30 - Minerals and Energy - put.
Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 31 – Science and Technology - put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 32 - Trade and Industry - put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 33 - Transport - put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 34 - Water Affairs and Forestry - put.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Schedule put and agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the
Constitution.


                         REVENUE LAWS AMENDMENT BILL


                     REVENUE LAWS SECOND AMENDMENT BILL


               (Consideration of Bills and of Reports thereon)


Mr E M SOGONI: House Chair, my initials are E M. I do not know an
E S Sogoni.

The attainment of democracy in 1994 presented the people of our country
with an opportunity to build a better life for all. Our government has
since embarked on a programme to accelerate growth, advance social
development and reduce the worst inequalities by adopting a fiscal policy
that has profoundly contributed to the sound overall microeconomic
environment.

Over the past decade we have succeeded in reducing interest rates and
lowering the debt inherited from the apartheid regime. In 1997, for every
rand of revenue collected, 24 cents was spent on servicing state debt. By
2004 debt cost was reduced to 14 cents. By 2009 it will be down to eight
cents. This implies that a platform is created for an expansionary fiscal
stance that is sustainable, predictable and growth enhancing.

The ANC government has created certainty through an efficient tax regime
that brought relief to the downtrodden and also simultaneously supported
the first economy.

The Revenue Laws Amendment Bill gives effect to the main tax proposals
announced by the Minister of Finance on Budget Day in February this year.
The Revenue Laws Amendment Bill refers to items that must be dealt with by
way of a money Bill, while the Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill refers to
the item relating to the administration of tax regime.

The highlights of the Bill are that research and development expenditure is
detachable by a taxpayer. In fact, the report is in the Announcements,
Tablings and Committee Reports. In 2005 the Department of Trade and
Industry enacted a new corporatives Act to facilitate the operation of
corporatives.

Thirdly, South Africa has maintained a special fiscal incentive regime for
oil and gas exploration and production for over 40 years. This special
incentive is to encourage potential investors to conduct oil and gas
exploration for deposits.

In 2001 government passed legislation, which required surplus to be
apportioned to ex-pension fund members. These ex-pension fund members will
now have a choice when receiving these post-retirement benefits. They can
withdraw benefits immediately but be subjected to tax, or roll over those
benefits into another retirement fund free of taxation until the incumbent
has reached the age of 35.

Government has also amended provisions relating to the income tax status of
public benefit organisations. The trading activities of PBOs will be
subjected to taxation. It must be recorded that the trading activities of
PBOs that compete with the private sector for market share only will be
taxed at a rate of 29% and not 34%.

With reference to subsistence allowance or travel allowance for members,
which is paid to members or employees to meet expenses when away from their
normal place of residence, an allowance of $190 is allowed as a tax
deduction. Members of this House should take note that this uniform rate
for all foreign travel will change because different countries have
different travel costs.

This Bill therefore allows foreign rates to be set on a per country or per
region basis. What this means is that when members travel to the United
States of America on work matters, they would be allowed to deduct $190 per
day. This is a deduction from their gross income.

This rate of deduction would be reduced if you travel to any other country
that is not mentioned here. The commissioner for SA Revenue Services will
set the travel allowance rate.

Lastly, the bid to host 2009 Confederations Cup and particularly the 2010
Fifa World Cup required bidding countries to sign a series of guarantees.
The Revenue Laws Amendment Bill includes the following: certain goods, for
example, broadcast and other media equipment imported specifically for
hosting the 2010 Fifa World Cup will be free of import taxes.

Secondly, certain consumables and semidurable goods such as t-shirts and
souvenirs sold within the confines of designated sites such as stadiums
during the event, and the profits of such sales, will not be subjected to
income tax or VAT.

Fifa officials who are nonresidents, for income purposes would be exempted
from income tax on income that is directly connected to the championship.
Fifa officials will pay income tax in countries in which they are resident,
which is a normal procedure.

This practice is consistent with our legislation on worldwide income passed
in this Parliament around 2001. This implies that Safa officials such as Mr
Irvin Khoza or Danny Jordaan, like any other citizen in this country, would
be eligible for income liability.

Fifa’s subsidiaries and participating national soccer associations will
also be exempt from South African taxes.

Therefore, the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill is a demonstration of our goal
to achieve equity. The Select Committee on Finance recommends that this
House passes both your section 75 Bill and your section 77 money Bill. I
thank you.

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, thank you very much.
You may note that we are dealing with the fifth and the sixth Order. The
table here has advised me that I have the wrong speakers’ list in front of
me. I have the wrong document.

In terms of the Order Paper we were supposed to deal with the Adjustments
Appropriation Bill by the hon Goeieman; however, because hon Sogoni has
already dealt with Orders five and six, I will beg hon members’ indulgence
that we proceed with the voting on that and then we will call hon Goeieman.
Will that be okay?

I shall now put the question in respect of the fifth Order. The question is
that the Bill be agreed to. In accordance with Rule 63 I shall first allow
political parties an opportunity to make their declarations of vote if they
so wish. In the absence of declarations of vote, we shall now proceed to
the voting. Those in favour say “Aye”.

HON MEMBERS: Aye.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Those against say “No”. [Inaudible.]
The majority of members have voted in favour and I therefore declare the
Bill agreed to in terms of section 75 of the Constitution.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I shall now put the question in
respect of the sixth Order. The question is that the Bill be agreed to. In
accordance with Rule 63 I shall first allow political parties an
opportunity to make their declarations of vote if they so wish. Any
declaration of vote? We shall now proceed to the voting. Those in favour
say “Aye”.

HON MEMBERS: Aye.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Those against say “No” [Inaudible.]
The majority of members have voted in favour and I therefore declare the
Bill agreed to in terms of section 75 of the Constitution.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S SETONA): I am told that we must deal with the
Adjustments Appropriation Bill and in terms of the order that has been
provided to me, hon C M Goeieman must make a statement on behalf of the
committee.


                       ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL


                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Thank you, Chair. I’m putting this Bill to a vote and I’m
asking this House to support it. Thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): That concludes the debate. I shall
now put the question. The question is that the Bill be agreed to. In
accordance with section 63 I shall first allow political parties the
opportunity to make their declarations of vote if they so wish. There is
none. In the absence of declarations, we shall now proceed to the voting.
Those in favour will say ``Aye’’.

HON MEMBERS: Aye.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Those against will say ``No’’.
[Inaudible.] The majority of members have voted in favour. I therefore
declare the Bill agreed to in terms of section 75 of the Constitution.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

                FURTHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING COLLEGES BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Ms N F MAZIBUKO: I’m on another report, Chair.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): What is this Order? Is it further
education and training?

Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Yes, there is no debate on that order. I’m on another
report and not on the FET.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, can somebody come and
verify the papers that I have here. They don’t speak to each other. The
staff have the correct papers, but I don’t. I’m not sure how I’m expected
to proceed. [Interjections.] No, it’s not sabotage. Is this the correct
one?

Order disposed of without debate.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I shall now put the question. The
question is that the Bill be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all delegation heads are present in the Chamber.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province
that wants to make a declaration? We shall proceed to the voting in
alphabetical order. Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: The Eastern Cape supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Ondersteun. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Gauteng ilethu. [Gauteng supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: KwaZulu-Natal rejects it.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Limpopo?

Mr D J BOTHA: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Noord-Kaap ondersteun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West in favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap ondersteun. [Western Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Eight provinces voted in favour. I
therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

Bill  accordingly  agreed  to  in  accordance  with  section   65   of   the
Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES - OVERSIGHT
                              VISIT TO GAUTENG

Nk N F MAZIBUKO: Sihlalo, ngizokwethula umbiko Wekomidi Lezemfundo lalapha
kule Ndlu yoMkhandlu Kazwelonke Wezifundazwe omaqondana ngenkathi
sivakashele isifundazwe saseGauteng kusukela ngomhla zinga-27 Agasti kuya
mhla wo-1 kuSeptemba. Inhloso yalokhu kuvakasha bekungukuthi siyozibonela
thina mathupha ukuthi ngabe imithetho esiyenzayo lapha ePhalamende kanye
neminye nje imithetho eyenziwa uMnyango isifundazwe siyayisebenzisa yini.

Ukuze sikwazi ukuthi sicwaninge kahle, siye sazipha isikhathi, sahlangana
ngqo noNgqongqoshe wezemfundo wakhona esifundazweni, uMama u-Angie
Motshekga, kanye nabasebenzi boMnyango. Kunjalo nje siye savakashela
nezikole eziyisishiyagalolunye. Inhloso yalokhu kuvakasha bekungukuthi
besingafune kubona okuhle kodwa, kepha besiqonde khona ukuthi sibheke zona
izikole ezisemaphandleni ngoba ikakhulukazi yizona ezinganakiwe.

Kuwo umhlangano wethu, ngenkathi sihlangene noNgqonqoshe nabasebenzi
behhovisi, siye sathola izinhlelo zoMnyango kanye nokuthi benza kanjani
ukuze ezemfundo zihambe phambili kulesi sifundazwe. Sizokhumbula ukuthi
yingenkathi lapho laba abashayela amabhasi athutha izingane zesikole kade
betoyiza, bethi abayitholanga imali yabo. Kodwa uNgqongqoshe wesifundazwe
ukwazile ukusicacisela ukuthi lokho kubangelwa yini.

Kuye kwacaca ukuthi abanye babashayeli bamabhasi baye bafake izimali
ezingekho, bese bethi bahambisa izingane zethu kepha bona bezihlalele
kwezabo izindawo. Maqondana nabanye, yebo, bekungamaphutha enziwe nguwo
uMnyango ngokuthi awubakhokhelanga abantu ngesikhathi, njengoba nazi ukuthi
abashayeli bamabhasi abasafufusa baye bahlupheke uma bengenayo imali.
Yilokho-ke okuye kwabangela ukuthi izingane eziningi zingahanjiswa
esikoleni.
Kulo lelo viki bekuyinkathi lapho kade kunesibhicongo, abasebenzi baka-
Sadtu betoyiza ngoba befuna omunye wabasebenzi osebenzela uMnyango
wesifundazwe asuswe emsebenzini ngenxa yemisebenzi eyenzeka ngesandla
semfene futhi ngobumnyama. Wacacisa naye uNgqongqoshe wesifundazwe ukuthi,
cha, empeleni yibona abathole ukuthi baningi abasebenzi abangaqashwanga
uMnyango kepha kukhona abantu abazenzela imali, bedla imali yoMnyango
Wezemfundo.

Siye sakwazi-ke ukuhlangabezana nezinye izinselelo eziye zabekwa uMnyango
ngenkathi sesivakashele izikole. Ngizozibeka lezi zinselelo ngolimi
lwesiNgisi ukuze abaningi abangaluzwa lolu limi engilukhulumayo bakwazi
ukuzizwela ngokwabo. Okokuqala, siye sabheka yona inqubomgomo yokuthi
abafundi abantulayo mabangakhokhiswa imali yesikole. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Chairperson, I am here to table the report by the Select
Committee on Education that deals with the oversight visit by the committee
to the Gauteng province from the 27th of August to the 1st of September.
The purpose of the visit was to see for ourselves if the legislation that
we pass here and the other legislation by the Department of Education in
general is enforced by the province.

In order for us to analyse the whole situation properly, we gave ourselves
enough opportunity, and met directly with the education MEC in Gauteng, the
hon Angie Motshekga and the department officials. We also visited at least
eight schools. The purpose of this visit was not just to see the glittering
schools, but also to visit the schools in rural areas because they are the
least taken care of.

In our meeting with the MEC and the officials from her department we learnt
about the programmes that the department has and the way they are working
to make education a priority in that province. We will all remember the
dispute between the bus operators and the provincial department of
education in which the bus operators were saying they had not received what
was due to them. The MEC clearly explained the reasons for all this.

It became clear then that some bus operators defrauded the system, claiming
that they were transporting the schoolchildren whereas they were not. But
as far as other bus operators are concerned, it became clear that the
department was to blame. Sometimes the bus operators were not paid on time,
and you all know that the emerging bus operators struggle a lot if they do
not have any money coming in. These are the reasons which led to many
learners not being transported to schools.

This all happened in a week when Sadtu members were on the rampage,
barricading the entrances to offices because they wanted one official
working for the Department of Education to be suspended on allegations of
fraud and corruption. The MEC also explained that it was the department
that managed to find out that there were ghost employees and thus certain
people were being paid by the Department of Education for nothing.

We also came face to face with certain challenges which were mentioned by
the department when we visited schools. For the record, I will mention
these challenges in English so that those who do not understand the
language that I am talking now may understand them as well. Firstly, we
looked at the policy of exempting poor learners from paying school fees.]

The policy of exempting poor learners from paying school fees in some of
the schools was not properly implemented at all. In the majority of the
schools, some of them knew about the policy but could not properly
understand it. It is our considered view that the departmental officials
are not doing enough to monitor and help the schools to implement this
policy.

Inselelo yesibili imaqondana nezinhlangano zokuphatha ezikoleni ezibizwa
ngama-SGB ezikoleni zasemaphandleni. Iningi labazali, ngenxa yokuthi
abahlali eduze kwesikole, kuba nzima uma ngabe kubizwe umhlangano ukuthi
beze kulowo mhlangano. Iningi labo kugcina sekufanele kusetshenziswe
amabhasi ukuze balandwe emakhaya balethwe emihlanganweni.

Inselelo yesithathu imaqondana nokulethwa kwamanzi kanye nezezindlu
zangasese. Ngempela inselelo inkulu ngoba nizokhumbula ukuthi izikole
zasemaphandleni azinazo izindlu zangasese lezi ezishaywa ngamanzi, kepha
zisebenzisa lokhu esikubiza ngokuthi amabhakede noma kube izindlu zangasese
zomgodi. Abanawo amanzi nompompi, kufuneka basebenzise amapitsi ukuze
bakwazi ukuthola amanzi. Kuthe-ke ngenkathi sixoxa noNgqongqoshe
wesifundazwe washo ukuthi, cha, bayazama ukuthi izingane eziningi zithole
amanzi. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The second challenge was concerned the school governing bodies in schools
in rural areas. Most parents in these schools do not attend school meetings
when they are called because they reside far away from schools. Sometimes
buses are even used to ferry them if there are school meetings.

The third challenge was concerned water and sanitation at schools. There is
indeed a huge challenge as far as these issues are concerned, because you
will remember that rural schools do not have flushing toilets, but use what
we call pit toilets and the bucket system. They do not have tap water and
they have to rely on boreholes to get water. When we were talking to the
MEC regarding this, she said they are trying very hard to make sure that
all learners get clean water.]

Regarding learner scholar transport, not all deserving children are
transported to school. In one school, about 17 learners had to stop
attending school owing to this problem.

When it comes to security, the department supplies almost all schools with
computers in Gauteng, through the programme called Gauteng Online. The
challenge is that there are a lot of burglaries and the schools lose their
valuable assets.

Njengoba sazi ukuthi ubugebengu budlangile, otsotsi noma izigebengu ziphuca
izingane zethu wona lawa makhompiyutha. [As we all know, crime is on
rampant and criminals steal the very computers that we install for our
learners.]

We also noticed that quite a lot of schools have multigrade classes. It is
our view that there cannot be proper learning in a situation in which one
teacher teaches two or three classes in one room. This is because the
government policy for teacher provision applies in a similar manner
everywhere, thus disadvantaging small farm schools. Our view is that the
MEC, together with the national department, must review this policy so that
farm schools can get enough teachers.

It is our opinion that the schools visited may not be a representative
sample of the schools in the province, but they provide us with some
insight into the state of education in the province, especially the rural
schools.

Despite these challenges mentioned above, we are of the view that the
department of education in Gauteng is hard at work to provide our learners
with an education. The MEC and the officials of the department have assured
the committee that they will stop at nothing to address these identified
challenges.

Thina njengekomidi sithanda ukubonga yena uNgqongqoshe wesifundazwe kanye
nabasebenzi. Yize noma kade bematasatasa kodwa baziphile isikhathi sokuthi
beze bazokuba nathi ukuze siqinisekise ukuthi umsebenzi wethu siwenza
kahle. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[We as a committee would like to thank the MEC and the officials of her
department. Despite their busy schedule, they managed to put some time
aside for us so that we could do our job well. I thank you [Applause.]]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): We shall now proceed to the vote. I
shall now put the question. The question is that the report be adopted. As
the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the
Chamber.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province
that wants to make a declaration? We shall proceed to the voting in
alphabetical order. Eastern Cape?
Mr A T MANYOSI: The Eastern Cape supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Gauteng ilethu. [Gauteng supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: KwaZulu-Natal in favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Limpopo?

Mr D J BOTHA: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Northern Cape supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West ke a rona. [North West supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap ondersteun. [Western Cape supports.]

Report  accordingly  adopted  in  accordance  with   section   65   of   the
Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
        AFFAIRS - WITHOLDING OF REMUNERATION OF MAGISTRATE M MATEREKE

Ms F NYANDA: Chairperson, this is a statement on the occasion of
consideration of the report of the Select Committee on Security and
Constitutional Affairs on withholding the remuneration of Magistrate
Matereke. Building a society in which all masses of the people, including
magistrates, enjoy a better life must never make us lose sight of the
significance of magistrates and judges in our constitutional democracy.
While we must build this society as representatives of all people of South
Africa, both black and white, we have a political responsibility to protect
the integrity of the judiciary process in our country, whose responsibility
must be discharged fully so as to promote public confidence in the courts
of our country.

Central to protecting the judiciary processes must be to ensure that those
who sit on the court benches are men and women of high moral standing in
society. Those who preside over cases would not be questioned and doubted
because of their unbecoming conduct in society. That is why we consider
issues of criminal behaviour, and other serious acts of misconduct on the
part of the magistrates in a very serious light. We must communicate an
unmistakable message to the masses of our people and the international
community that this House condemns any conduct which compromises the
integrity of the judiciary process.

Given the seriousness of misconduct on the part of the magistrate in this
case, I appeal to this august House to accept a recommendation of the
Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs to confirm the
withholding of the remuneration of Mr Matereke. However, we must understand
that more suspension of magistrates and withholding their salaries cannot
be sufficient on their own. We must ensure that magistrates are educated
about judiciary behaviour, which promotes integrity of judiciary processes
in our country. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Order! I shall now put the question
in respect of the ninth order. The question is that the report be adopted.
As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present.
In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make declarations of vote if they so wish. There are no declarations of
vote. We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this
in alphabetical order per province. Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: Eastern Cape supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON: (Mr T S Setona): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: We support.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: We support.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal in favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Limpopo?

Mr D J BOTHA: We support.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Northern Cape?

Mr M C SULLINAM: We support.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke a rona. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Die Wes-Kaap ondersteun. [Western Cape supports.]

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT BUDGET COMMITTEE - MEDIUM-TERM BUDGET
                              POLICY STATEMENT

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Thank you very much, hon Chairperson and hon colleagues.
This is the tenth Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement that this democratic
government has ever laid before the nation. We can equally state that South
African budgets, regardless of whether they are provincial or local, are no
longer made behind closed doors.
A recent coalition of international NGOs has recognised our strides in this
regard and has ranked this country as number four in the entire world in as
far as budget transparency is concerned. South Africans can also include
this recognition of budgetary transparency as one of our accomplishments in
the 12 years of our democracy.

The document continues to support an energetic interaction between
Parliament and the executive in reviewing our economic and social
priorities. It also provides citizens and taxpayers with information about
services they pay for and the data required to analyse and monitor
government and policy and spending choices. This allows the general
citizenry to engage with any other budgetary matter.

The Joint Budget Committee’s mandate, with reference to the MTBPS, requires
it to consider the distribution of available financial resources for
expenditure against government policy priorities. It also mandates the
Joint Budget Committee to review the impact of expenditure allocations in
the MTBPS on the effectiveness and efficiency with which departments can
respond to those government-stated policies and priorities. It also needs
to inform us whether departments are making tough decisions, tailoring
their planned expenditures to priorities, choosing effective strategies and
seeking efficiency in the implementation of their programmes.

During our interaction, we were able to interact with eight national
departments who made either written or oral submissions to the Joint Budget
Committee. The 2006 MTBPS, inter alia, does the following: Firstly, it
takes us up to another rung of the ladder of social and economic progress
and, secondly, it reinforces growth and investment over the period ahead.

Investment in roads and ports infrastructure, more efficient communication
and the acceleration of the pace of investment in housing will enjoy
priority during this period. General government investment is driven by the
need for improved public transport, and better education and health
services. Of course, our commitments to the 2010 Fifa World Cup also
require our considerable investment in stadiums and supporting
infrastructure that will continue to benefit future generations well beyond
this anticipated World Cup.

Against this backdrop, real economic growth is expected to rise to 4,4% in
2006 from 1,8% in 2003 and it will average about 5% over the next three
years.

The provincial equitable share grows by 7% in real terms over the MTEF
period and additional conditional grants are made. The additional
allocations to provinces are aimed at improving the quality of and access
to education, health and social development through a range of targeted
policy interventions. Municipalities are the first line of contact and it
is significant that the 2006 mid-term budget policy statement makes
reference to this very important sphere, that is local government.
Local government receives an additional allocation of R1,1 billion in the
current financial year which commenced on 1 April 2006. An additional R18,9
billion is proposed for local government over this period. The local
government equitable share grows by 11% in real terms over the same period.


This increased allocation to local government will supplement spending on
the following issues: firstly, the rollout of free basic services to the
disadvantaged communities. Secondly, it will replace the revenue that was
lost through the abolition of the Regional Services Council levies until a
suitable replacement is found. Thirdly, it will assist in accelerating
infrastructure investment in the underserviced areas of our communities;
and lastly, it will also see to the requirements of the cities that are
earmarked to host the 2010 Fifa World Cup.

The Joint Budget Committee, after its deliberations, made the following
recommendations, among others: Firstly, it wishes to reinforce and expedite
the resolutions it made in 2005 which concern the provision of adequate
resources and technical capacity to this committee. Secondly, it calls upon
this House and Parliament as a whole to review the time that has been
allocated in dealing with the MTBPS so that sufficient time is available to
engage with this process as well as stakeholders. Thirdly, the human
resource capacity within national departments should improve, noting the
high vacancy rate, which necessitates the need to shift funds. Invariably,
these funds are retained in their departments and reflected as savings,
thus misleading our oversight activities. Departments should take
appropriate measures to recruit and retain the necessary skilled personnel.
The present high turnover rate impacts negatively on service delivery.
Fourthly, national departments should be more vigilant when monitoring
conditional grants that are allocated to provincial and local government.
Lastly, systems should be put in place in order to ensure that the
objectives of the equitable share are not lost at provincial level.

Departments should in future, before appearing before us with regard to the
MTBPS, not only consider the budget of the current financial year but also
give attention to the budgets of two outer years.

We also have to implore the Department of Public Works to compile an
extensive report as to how it is updating its National Assets Register in
order to ensure that government’s assets are in safe hands.

The Joint Budget Committee recommends that this House accept this report as
it appears in the ATC of Wednesday, 8 November 2006. I thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T Setona): I shall now put the question. The
question is that the report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all delegation heads are present in the Chamber.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province that
wants to make a declaration? We shall proceed to the voting in alphabetical
order. Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: The Eastern Cape supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Ondersteun. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Gauteng supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Kwazulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal in favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Limpopo?

Mr D J BOTHA: Limpopo ondersteun. [Limpopo supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga ondersteun. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Noord-Kaap ondersteun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): North West?

Rev P MOATSHE: North West ke ya rona. [North West supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap ondersteun. [Western Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): All nine provinces have voted in
favour. I therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of
the Constitution.

Report  accordingly  adopted  in  accordance  with   section   65   of   the
Constitution.

     CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW COMMITTEE - ANNUAL
                     CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW REPORT, 2006



Mr S SHICEKA: House Chairperson, I want to lodge a grievance. My grievance
is that I have been harassed. The harassment has come from members who want
the House to adjourn quickly. [Laughter.] I understand that they are
fatigued, but at the same time the message that we are putting across here
must be understood so that no one can say they never heard what was spoken
about in the House, so that when we go to our constituencies, we are able
to put across what is happening in Parliament very clearly without any
ambiguity.

Regarding my task today, I had a 23-page typed document, but I managed to
reduce this document to one and a half pages to articulate the views that
are expressed here.

My task here is to present, on behalf of the committee called the
Constitutional Review Committee, the report of 2006. This committee derives
its mandate from section 45(1) of the Constitution, which provides that
this committee must be able to review the Constitution at least once a
year.

In giving effect to this constitutional provision, the committee, on 1 May
2006, called for submissions from the public in relation to the views that
they want to propose for the amendment of the Constitution. We focused
mainly on the equality clause, given the fact that we have said that this
year is the year of equality in terms of rights. At the same time, we
focused on the Chapter 9 institutions to ensure that these institutions
that support constitutional democracy are being looked at.

In that process, we received 11 submissions. These submissions were from
the public. Amongst these submissions, we received a submission from the
National Assembly Rules Committee and from the Free State provincial
legislature. I will focus on these two to give you the flavour of what has
been raised on these issues.

The National Assembly Rules Committee requested that the committee consider
the appropriateness of the recognition of the leader of the largest
opposition party in the Assembly as the Leader of the Opposition, as
contained in section 57, subsection 2(d) of the Constitution.

The committee deliberated on the matter, and took a decision. With regard
to its decision, it took its decision and referred it to the Rules
Committee to further deliberate on the matter. If you want to know what the
decision was, you can ask me in the passage.

The other issue was raised by the Free State legislature, which submitted
that section 105, subsection 2 of the Constitution be amended. The
amendment requested is with respect to the size of legislatures being
increased so that they are able to do efficient oversight, and ensure that
the public participates. I think you know that, in these small provinces,
everybody is a leader. There are no people who are doing the work.
Therefore, they must ensure that they have foot soldiers who are able to do
the work.

Our recommendation that we have made is that we are convening a workshop in
the first term of next year, 2007, where we are going to call on all
provinces to make submissions with regard to the issue at hand so that this
matter can be discussed in a holistic way, and can be discussed in a way
that is satisfying to all parties.

The rest of the report of 23 pages is in the ATCs. What it means is that
somebody must engage with that. I want to say that as the House of
provinces we are discussing the issue of provinces, whether provinces
should remain as they are, or whether they should be clustered or reduced
in terms of numbers and so on. I think by December 2007, we will be clear
on the answer. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I shall now put the question. The
question is that the report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all delegation heads are present. In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first
allow provinces the opportunity to make their declarations of vote if they
so wish. Since there are no declarations, we shall now proceed to the
voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per province.
Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: Eastern Cape supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: Iyalethu. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Limpopo?

Mr D J BOTHA: Ondersteun. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): North West?

Rev P MOATSHE: Ke a rona. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Ondersteun. [Supports.]

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.


           CONSIDERATION OF FIRST REPORT OF JOINT RULES COMMITTEE


Order disposed of without debate.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): As there is no speakers’ list, I
shall now put the question. The question is that the report be adopted.

As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the
Chamber. In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the
opportunity to make their declarations of vote if they so wish. We shall
now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical
order per province. Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: Eastern Cape supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Ke a rona. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Limpopo?

Mr D J BOTHA: Ondersteun. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Ke a rona. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): North West?

Rev P MOATSHE: Ke a rona. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Ondersteun. [Supports.]

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 16:38.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)     Bills passed by National Assembly on 16 November 2006:


          a) Firearms Control Amendment Bill [B 12D – 2006] (National
             Assembly – sec 75)


          b) South African Institute for Drug-Free Sport Amendment Bill [B
             7D – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75).


    (2)     Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 15 November
        2006:


          a) Postal Services Amendment Bill [B 22B – 2006] (National
             Assembly – sec 75)


          b) Measurement Units and Measurement Standards Bill [B 21B – 2006]
             (National Assembly – sec 75)

          c) Accreditation for Conformity Assessment, Calibration and Good
             Practice Bill [B 29B – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75).


    (3)     Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 16 November
        2006:


          a) Carriage by Air Amendment Bill [B 18 – 2006] (National
             Assembly – sec 75)


          b) Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 32 – 2006] (National
             Assembly – sec 77)

          c) Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 33 – 2006] (National Assembly –
             sec 77)


          d) Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 34 – 2006] (National
             Assembly – sec 75)


          e) Further Education and Training Colleges Bill [B 23D – 2006]
             (National Council of Provinces – sec 76).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
   Life and Status of Women on Special Report from the South African Women
   Entrepreneurs- A burgeoning force in our economy for 2005, dated 14
   November 2006:


    The Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and
    Status of Women, having considered the Special Report from the South
    African Women Entrepreneurs- A burgeoning force in our economy for
    2005, referred to it, reports that it has concluded its deliberations
    thereon.


2.    Report of the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
   Life and Status of Women on Report and Financial Statements of the
   Commission for Gender Equality (CGE) for 2004-2005, including the Report
   of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 120-
   2005], dated 14 November 2006:

    The Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and
    Status of Women, having considered the Report and Financial Statements
    of the Commission for Gender Equality (CGE) for 2004-2005, including
    the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-
    2005 [RP 120-2005], referred to it, reports that it has concluded its
    deliberations thereon.

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on
   the Annual Report and Financial Statements for 2005/2006 of the
   Department of Agriculture, dated 31 October 2006:

      The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having been
      briefed by the Department of Agriculture on its Annual Report and
      Financial Statements of Vote 26 for 2005-2006, including the Report of
      the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 26 for 2005-
      2006, referred to it, reports that it has concluded its deliberations
      thereon.


