---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 30 May 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2006-05-30
---

TUESDAY, 30 MAY 2006
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 10:00.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I would like to
welcome to this House this morning the hon national Minister for Provincial
and Local Government, hon Mufamadi and the hon Deputy Minister, hon
Hangana. You are welcome here this morning.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION



Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice, on behalf of the IFP, that
on the next sitting day of the NCOP, I shall move:

   That the NCOP –

     1) notes that violence and criminal activities on our trains,
        especially on the East Rand, has escalated out of control;


   (2)      further notes that the South African Police Service does not
        have the capacity to deal effectively with this situation, as they
        are kept very busy with their many other activities;


   (3)      calls upon on the relevant authorities to consider the option of
        using the SA National Defence Force at the various train stations
        and stops in order to bring this situation under control; and


     4) acknowledges that the use of the SANDF will then free up much-
        needed human resources within the SAPS.


So I shall move.

Me J F TERBLANCHE: Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek die volgende
voorstel tydens die volgende sitting van die Huis sal doen:

   Dat die Raad, in die lig van die handhawing van die waardigheid van die
   Raad en wedersydse respek tussen lede –


     1) met onsteltenis kennis neem van die onverantwoordelike, nydige en
        kwetsende stellings wat deur die Hoofsweep van die Raad oor agb
        Hilda Weber gemaak is;


   (2)      hierdie stellings van die Hoofsweep, wat klaarblyklik op ‘n
        ongeverifieerde koerantberig gebaseer is, en wat uitgesproke
        rassistiese en sterotiperende inhoud bevat, onvoorwaardelik
        verwerp;


   (3)      dit kategories stel dat hierdie optrede die pogings van
        verantwoordelike leiers om versoening in Suid-Afrika te bevorder,
        onberekenbare skade aandoen;


   (4)      ‘n beroep op die Hoofsweep doen om ‘n formele verskoning aan die
        agb Weber aan te bied en dat hy aangespreek word oor dié
        onverantwoordelike optrede, wat nie net die waardigheid van die
        Parlement nie, maar ook die waardigheid van elke verkose lid van
        dié liggaam aantas; en


   (5)      alle lede, in die belang van nasiebou en versoening, aanraai om
        hulle van hierdie tipe optrede te weerhou.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Ms J F Terblanche: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House, I shall move:

   That the Council in the light of upholding the dignity of the Council and
   mutual respect of members for fellow members -


   (1)      notes with dismay the irresponsible, spiteful and offensive
        remarks made by the Chief Whip of the Council regarding the hon
        Hilda Weber;


   (2)      rejects unconditionally these remarks by the Chief Whip, which
        are apparently based on an unverified newspaper report, which
        contains explicit racist and stereotypical content;


   (3)      states categorically that this behaviour causes incalculable
        damage to the attempts by responsible leaders to promote
        reconciliation in South Africa;


   (4)      calls upon the Chief Whip to make a formal apology to the hon
        Weber and that he be reprimanded regarding this irresponsible
        conduct which impairs not only the dignity of Parliament, but also
        the dignity of every elected member of this body; and


   (5)      recommends, in the interests of nation-building and
        reconciliation, that all members refrain from this type of
        conduct.]

Mnr J W LE ROUX: Agb Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag van die Raad sal voorstel:


   Dat die Raad –

   (1)      kennis neem dat die agb Watty Watson se beserings ernstiger is
        as wat aanvanklik vermoed was;


   (2)      hom ‘n spoedige herstel toewens; en


   (3)      verder vertrou dat hy eersdaags weer sy plek in die Raad sal kan
        inneem.


(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)


[Mr J W LE ROUX: Hon Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House, I shall move:

   That the Council -


   (1)      notes that the injuries sustained by the hon Watty Watson are
        more serious than was initially suspected;


   (2)      wishes him a speedy recovery; and


   (3)      further trusts that he will soon return to take his place in the
        Council.]



                EXCELLENT PROGRESS AT BELLA VISTA HIGH SCHOOL


                             (Draft Resolution)

Me H LAMOELA: Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:


   Dat die Raad –


   (1)      gelukwense aan die Bella Vista Hoërskool te Ceres in Witzenberg
        bring vir hul uitmuntende prestasie waarin die toekenning van Meeste
        Vordering in Afrikaans deur die agb Adjunkpresident, me Phumzile
        Mlambo-Ngcuka en die nasionale Minister van Onderwys, me Naledi
        Pandor, aan die skool toegeken is;


   (2)      sy trots uitspreek op hul voortbouende prestasie, soos verlede
        jaar toe die skool ook die toekenning vir Konstante Vordering in
        Matriek 2005 ontvang het;


   (3)      kennis neem dat die skool 1 306 leerlinge vanaf graad 8 tot
        graad 12 huisves en in ‘n seisoenale gebied geleë is, waar –


        (a) ouers όf vrugtefabriekwerkers is όf in die landboubedryf werk;
            en


        (b) bykans 90% van ouers vanaf April tot Oktober elke jaar werkloos
            is; en


   (4)      erken dat die skool, ten spyte  van  al  hierdie  tekortkominge,
        onder leiding van mnr Sarel Brown uitstekend presteer.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Ms H LAMOELA: Chaiperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

   (1)      congratulates Bella Vista High School in Ceres in Witzenberg on
        their excellent achievement of being awarded the Most Progress in
        Afrikaans award by the hon Deputy President, Ms Phumzile Mlambo-
        Ngcuka and the national Minister of Education, Ms Naledi Pandor;


   (2)      expresses its pride in their continuing achievement,  like  last
        year, when  the  school  also  received  the  award  for  Consistent
        Progress in Matric 2005;




   (3)      notes that the school accommodates 1 306 pupils, from Grade 8 to
        Grade 12, and is situated in a seasonal area where –


        (a)  parents  are  either  fruit  factory  workers  or  agricultural
            workers; and


        (b) about 90% of the parents are unemployed every  year  from  April
            until October; and


   (4)      acknowledges that the school, despite all these shortcomings, is
        performing excellently under the guidance of Mr Sarel Brown.]


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                     PROGRESS IN THE FREE STATE PROVINCE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Chaiperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

   (1)      notes that the Free State MEC for public works and roads
        announced during his budget speech that the Free State was the first
        province to align and implement the Construction Industry
        Development Board Regulations;


   (2)      notes that the Free State was the first province to issue route-
        based operating licences as part of the Taxi Recapitalisation
        Programme;


   (3)      also notes that the Free State has 40% of the maintenance,
        upgrading and capital budget for the current year for the promotion
        of broad-based black economic empowerment; and
   (4)      commends, in particular, our ANC-led Free State provincial
        government’s efforts to create opportunities for SMMEs to
        participate in the economy of the province.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL




                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 5 – Provincial and Local Government:

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, MECs
responsible for local government affairs, the leadership of Salga, hon
members, when the past generation of local councillors assumed office in
the year 2000, they found themselves on somewhat unfamiliar territory, a
territory with few landmarks to guide them. Many of those councillors had
responsibilities for areas which were previously marginal to developmental
considerations. That some of those areas underwent some degree of
transformation, is a crowning point of the endeavours of that pioneer
generation of councillors, a remarkable feat worthy of our collective
appreciation.

Hon members will recall that in the year 2001, 21 areas were designated as
nodes. This meant that these areas were targeted for intense priority
attention so that they could be extricated from the underdevelopment and
poverty trap. Just before the 2006 local government elections, we conducted
an impact analysis in those nodal municipalities.

Amongst the findings were the fact that access to basic and above-basic
levels of water services in the rural nodes has increased from 54% in 2001
to 58% in 2004. This improvement is higher than the average rate of
improvement in the country as a whole. A specific example of this is in the
Alfred Nzo District Municipality, where out of the 126 000 households, 72
000 households, constituting 57%, have benefitted from the water provision
initiative, which was undertaken in the context of the Integrated and
Sustainable Rural Development Programme.

Of the more than 2,4 million households that benefited from the provision
of houses, almost 900 000 households are located in the rural nodes.
Between September 2002 and September 2005 a total of 374 000 electricity
connections were made in the rural nodes, thereby giving the households
access to a quality life-enhancing service -electricity.

In order to reinforce these trends, 264 community development workers have
so far been deployed in the nodes. An additional 201 community development
workers are still in learnership, and upon completion they will also be
deployed to both urban and rural development nodes. An additional 201
community development workers are still in learnerships and upon completion
they will also be deployed to both urban and rural development nodes.

Similar trends are in evidence in the urban nodes. For instance, in the
Alexandra urban renewal node, 6 000 households have benefited from new
electricity connections, and 1 200 new houses have been built in the
township. In addition, 3 000 housing units were provided outside Alexandra
to accommodate relocated households. Furthermore, a new multipurpose
community centre is operational. The Department of Home Affairs now has new
offices in the multi-purpose centre, and at the Alexandra Clinic a new
central social welfare office has been made operational as well. The office
has become a point through which more than 12 000 beneficiaries are able to
access their monthly social grants.

Gratified as we are by these achievements, we do not see them as the
ultimate horizon. Our endeavour to remake South African society in
accordance with the ideals for which we went to war is ceaseless. In
response to the yearnings of our people as communicated to us during the
presidential and ministerial izimbizo and in the course of the election
campaigns we have undertaken to make the current term of local government
one during which unprecedented levels of progress shall be realised.

It is our intention to ensure that no community will still be using the
bucket system for sanitation by the end of 2007. We are also determined to
ensure that all communities will have access to clean water and decent
sanitation by 2010 and that all houses will have electricity by 2012.

Prior to the 2006 local government elections, we introduced a hands-on
programme of support for local government. Not only did that programme help
us to achieve the short-term goal of removing obstacles which stood in the
way of service and infrastructure delivery, but it also provided us as
government practitioners with the possibility to better understand and
navigate the governance and developmental landscape. Those achievements
must be assimilated by the current generation of practitioners, including
the newly elected councillors.

One of the lessons we derived from that experience is the necessity for the
Department of Provincial and Local Government and its counterparts in the
provinces to place themselves firmly at the centre of intergovernmental co-
ordinating processes. They must help to crystallise the relevance of
national and provincial departments to the mandate and work of our
municipalities.

We have already seen some of the benefits of intergovernmental
collaboration and support. For instance, by March 2006, 80% of all
municipalities in the country had draft integrated development plans. This
achievement followed on after an intensive process of interaction between
local government stakeholders in all the nine provinces. The process has
given us better insights into the resource and capacity-support
requirements of each municipality; and those resources, the capacity that
need to be deployed in order to respond to the requirements as identified
in the municipality, are in the process of being mobilised.

It is also our purpose this year to pay the closest attention to the full
implementation of the intergovernmental relations framework legislation.
The President’s Co-ordinating Council, whose establishment predates the
enactment of the legislation, is now fully operational. We used the
President’s Co-ordinating Council’s establishment and experimental
operationalisation as a model for future practice.

The provinces are now working closely with local government to facilitate
the establishment of district intergovernmental structures. National
government will also lend a hand to this process.

We have also come to realise that districts will require additional support
for them to assume their rightful role as developmental facilitators in the
municipalities that resort under their jurisdiction. In this regard, we
will need to define more clearly the district shared service model. This,
of course, goes hand in hand with clarifying distributional patterns of
powers and functions across government. It also extends to related matters
of assignment and devolution of functions to local government. Major
efforts are being undertaken in this regard and we aim to present a report
for consideration by the extended Cabinet Lekgotla in July 2006. The
report, together with the decisions which shall have been occasioned by it,
will form a basis for intense interaction between the executive and the
legislative branches of government across the three spheres.

The NCOP in particular will need to bring its own insights to bear on this
matter, given the constitutional responsibilities it has towards our
multisphered system of government. As we said in the National Assembly last
week, steps are being taken to increase the scope for a democratic check on
the performance of the political and the administrative leadership of local
government.

In addition to launching  a  handbook  for  ward  committees  and  the  ward
committee resource handbook, we are now working on a national  framework  on
public participation in local government.  And  we  are  also  finalising  a
submission to the South African Qualifications Authority for  an  accredited
training course for ward committees.  On the other hand, there is under  way
a parallel process of establishing district houses of  traditional  leaders,
as well as traditional councils  as  visualised  in  the  relevant  national
framework legislation. In the same way as  councillors  and  ward  committee
members are being trained throughout the country,  traditional  leaders  and
members of  traditional  councils  must  also  be  trained  in  the  art  of
improving the quality of interaction with the mechanisms  and  processes  of
governance. This matter is receiving attention, and the programme  shall  be
unveiled soon.

The demands of the moment are beckoning us to pay continuing and  unflagging
attention to the task of supporting those municipalities    who  still  lack
the indigenous capacity for discharging their constitutional mandates.  This
must be done within the context  of  more  co-ordinated  and  better-focused
intergovernmental mechanisms and processes.

On current trends, however, we are immensely hopeful and we are now able  to
contemplate in a manner never previously possible, the prospect of  ushering
in a glorious new age for all our people. And in all the endeavours that  we
are making going forward, we hope we can continue to count on  the  generous
demonstration of political will and support from this House.  I  thank  you.
[Applause.]

Mr  S  SHICEKA:  Deputy  Chairperson,  Minister  and  the  Deputy  Minister,
colleagues, MECs, officials  from  the  department  and  the  leadership  of
Salga, we are presenting this policy budget debate in the year in  which  we
are celebrating a decade of the adoption of our Constitution, nine years  of
the establishment of the NCOP, 50 years  since  the  women’s  march  and  30
years of the youth struggle; and almost three months  after  the  successful
South African local government elections that were pronounced free and  fair
by the IEC. The Republic of South Africa should pride itself on  registering
a voter turnout of more than the international average of 41% in  the  local
government elections. South Africa’s voter  turnout  and  participation  was
48,3%. The country should strive to improve on this result. We should  thank
the department for giving  leadership  and  other  associated  institutions,
especially the South African people who exercised their  hard-won  right  of
electing the leaders of their choice.

The outcome of local government elections gave the ANC the  majority  across
the length and breadth of our country. What does this  story  tells  us?  It
clearly conveys a message that says the ANC is an undisputed  champion  that
carries the aspirations of South Africans. It is the only party  that  grows
its support base as it participates in successive elections.

The people were moved by the plan, the manifesto of the  ANC  for  the  next
five years. Let’s remind ourselves of what the plan  was  saying.  The  plan
was saying that we should strive to accelerate service delivery so  that  no
community will still be using the bucket system for sanitation by 2007.  All
communities will have access to clean water, and decent sanitation by  2010.
All houses will have access to  electricity  by  2012.  There  is  universal
provision of free basic services across our country.

To implement this plan and ensure that  local  government  moves  in  tandem
with provincial and national structures, the  ANC  will  strengthen  popular
participation by making ward committees more  effective.  Immediately  after
the elections the ANC will put in place a turnaround programme to make  sure
that councillors are able to meet their mandate. It  will  resolutely  fight
laziness, arrogance and corruption. This is the benchmark and the  yardstick
that should be used to measure the contribution of this budget.

The department  presented  to  the  committee  that  local  government  will
receive R92 billion over the MTEF period from the national Fiscus;
R82 billion will be allocated to  municipalities  through  the  departmental
budget, whilst the remainder will be through the sister  departments  -  the
Departments of Transport, Minerals and Energy, Water  Affairs  and  Forestry
and National Treasury.

The  transfers  to  municipalities  were   categorised   in   three   areas:
infrastructure   development,   capacity    building    and    institutional
transformation and equitable share and related transfers. The  committee  is
impressed with the work being done by the department. We feel that there  is
an increasing  clarity,  horizontally  amongst  departments  and  vertically
amongst the spheres of  government,  on  what  needs  to  be  done  for  the
developmental local government with local government.

Project Consolidate in  particular  has  captured  the  imagination  of  our
people from all walks of life, and from all  sectors  of  our  society.  The
project is beginning to pull resources in an unprecedented way.  People  and
organisations are putting their shoulders to the wheel. The  ANC’s  Strategy
and Tactics document says:

   In order to ensure that government truly  serves  the  interests  of  the
   people, the ANC  will  strengthen  co-operative  governance  amongst  all
   spheres of government, national, provincial and local, for each level  to
   play its requisite role in serving the people. The allocation  of  powers
   and functions, in essence, the delegation of common labour amongst  these
   spheres should be driven by these objectives.

On the same point, the ANC Local Government Manifesto says that:

   The ANC is the better place to build a partnership between  national  and
   provincial government and  municipalities.  And  this  will  make  things
   happen faster and more effectively in the interest of the people.

The passing and the implementation of the  Intergovernmental  Relations  Act
of 1995, integrated development plans  across  all  spheres  of  government,
improving the quality of municipal  integrated  plans  and  enhancing  local
economic development and allocation of concomitant  resources  were  at  the
core of the President’s state of the nation address. These plans  are  being
translated into reality as we speak in this budget debate.

Minister, we think that the same commitment and vigour that you are  showing
should  also  be  extended  to   provinces   in   terms   of   institutional
configurations of the department,  capacity  building  in  the  interest  of
promoting good  intergovernmental  relations  with  similar  structures  and
systems of polic-making and implementation; although we understand  that  we
have inherited, as a  country,  an  uneven  development  geographically  and
therefore there is a need for different priorities and emphasis.

The allocations of powers and functions, as outlined above  from  the  ANC’s
Strategy and  Tactics  document,  as  a  matter  of  importance,  cannot  be
overemphasised. The area where we think, Minister, your assistance  and  co-
operation can be of value as the Minister  responsible  for  provincial  and
local government, is through the participation  of  some  various  executive
committee members and their commitment to this constitutionally  established
House.

I’m saying Minister, the participation of some premiers  and  some  MECs  in
this House leaves a lot to be desired. We believe that you must be  able  to
take up the issue  as  we  will  be  reflecting  on  the  10  years  of  the
establishment of the NCOP next year. We believe that  the  participation  of
the executives needs to be discussed, probably with the  leadership  of  the
leadership of the NCOP. Maybe this should be taken  to  the  provincial  co-
ordinating committee where they must be encouraged to ensure that they  make
this House function as it is supposed to. We believe that if  you  can  play
that role in assisting  this  House,  the  participation  of  the  executive
members from various provinces will greatly improve.

The  Strategy  and  Tactics  document  says  our  commitment  to  open   and
transparent government and ensuring an informed, active citizenry  are  more
than just high-sounding phrases. They are the lifeblood  of  our  democratic
governance, the core values of our people. We shall  therefore  continue  to
strengthen  relations  between  government  and  civil  society,   including
nongovernmental community-based organisations.

The committee commends  the  department  for  implementing  this  programme.
However, we believe that ward committee members should at least be paid  for
out-of-pocket expenses.  We  believe  that  a  national  policy  has  to  be
developed in this regard, so that our people don’t subsidise  government  by
going to government functions. They don’t borrow from their  neighbours  for
them to be able to go to meetings. Therefore, the Council must  be  able  to
play a role in giving them resources.

I want to conclude by saying that the ushering in of the  second  decade  of
freedom in South Africa affords government and the Department of  Provincial
and  Local  government  the  opportunity  to  further  build  on  the  solid
foundation and progress already being made. The age  of  hope  is  with  us.
Indeed, tomorrow will be better than yesterday. The  lives  of  millions  of
our people have already  changed  for  the  better.  As  the  committee,  we
recognise the important and central role played by the department to  enable
other departments in the government, the private sector and  the  public  at
large, to function effectively without hindrance. We do  indeed  take  pride
in your work. The committee supports the Budget Vote.

I also want to thank the committee members for their diligent  participation
and engagement with the department. At the same time we want  to  thank  the
department for taking us through in terms of this budget, so that all of  us
could be on the same wavelength in terms of our understanding. I  also  want
to thank everyone who made our discussions possible and  lively.  Thank  you
very much, Chair. [Applause.]

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Thank you, Chairperson. Chairperson and hon members,
when a man or woman works, he or she alters things and society. He or she
develops himself or herself. He or she learns much. He or she cultivates
his or her resources. He or she goes outside of himself or herself. He or
she goes beyond himself or herself.

I am saying all these things to show my appreciation to the department, the
director-general in particular and her team for the preparedness and
readiness whenever they are called to come and share any information with
the committee. Yes, it is true, no matter how deep the bottle is, the cream
will always be on top.

Hon Minister and Deputy Minister, the investment you have made to the
director-general and her team is bearing much-needed fruits. Who can deny
it when I say if work helps us to accomplish something noble, something to
be proud of, then work becomes a right and not a duty, a choice and not an
obligation, a delight and not a grief? The budget briefing was so
empowering - thanks to you director-general and your team.

O hlokomele ba se ke ba go loya. [Disego.] [Be careful that they do not
bewitch you. [Laughter.]]

Chapter 12 of our Constitution recognises the institution of traditional
leadership, its role and its functions. It also dictates that national
legislation is provided for the role of these traditional leaders to
participate in matters of development in their local communities. All
houses of traditional leaders in the six provinces and the national house
have been established.

It was disturbing however to learn from the department during our budget
briefing that the National House of Traditional Leaders was unable to use
its entire budget in the last financial year. Last year I was one of those
members who called upon the department to allocate more money to the
National House of Traditional Leaders to enable it to fulfil its mandate.

Traditional leaders have a big task ahead of them which amongst other
things are: to visit all provincial houses, to brief communities about
national legislation that affects those particular communities, to conduct
workshops with provincial houses, to have meetings with district and local
municipalities in order to harmonise their relationship and to assist and
advise traditional leaders on how to elect the new traditional councils.
These are but just few examples of things that the house needs to do.

I am raising this concern, Chairperson, because the budget of the National
House of Traditional Leaders is about R60 million. But all is not lost;
there is room for improvement. To the National House of Traditional Leaders
I can only say, please help us to help you.

It is sad to note that the tension between some traditional leaders and
some municipal councillors still exists. There are still some traditional
leaders who see municipal councils as a threat to their rule. Similarly,
there are councillors who think traditional leaders are not supposed to
play any meaningful role in the development of their communities. They do
not see any need to involve traditional leaders in whatever development
that must take place in their areas.
Maybe this is an opportune time for some of us to remind the two
structures, who deliberately decide to ignore one another, that by law
municipal councillors are expected to deliver services in the local sphere
of government. Traditional leaders as well are here to stay, whether we
love it or not. We cannot wish them away. The question however is: Why this
tension between the two structures?

Re a tseba gore a go na magoši ao a ka ganago tlhabologo ge etla dinageng
tša bona. Efela ba tla lwa ya maatlho-mahubedu ge e le gore go na le seo se
diregago nageng ya bona mola bona ba sa tsebe. Ka lehlakoreng le lengwe, a
mangwe a makhanselara a kgona go thoma ditirelo setšhabeng. Ba no bona
lefelo ba ya ba le kgetha gomme ba thoma go šoma go lona ba sa bontšhana le
kgoši ya naga yeo. Go ya ka nna seo ga se hlokagale ka gore ga o nyake
tumelelo go kgoši gore o tliše tlhabologo setšhabeng. E no ba fela go mo
tsebiša gore bjale re tlile re a bereka ke rena ba. Le yena Kgoši ga a na
tokelo ya gore ge mokhanselara a tla ka tlhabologo mo setšhabeng a e
thibele a re ka gore naga ke ya ka. Seo ga se kgonagale.

Maphakga a ka bobedi a swanetše go tseba gore mmatlaseromo o palega manga
le gore montshepetša bošego ke mo leboga bosele. Naa lena bahlomphegi
makhanselara, go pala kae gore le ye go kgoši go yo bontšhana le yena fela
ge le iša tlhabologo mo nageng ya gagwe? Ge le ka dira bjalo ga ke tshepe
gore kgoši yeo e ka ba le bothata. Le lena magoši, naa ke nnete gore le ka
napa la re setšhaba se hwe se bolaye ke tlala, ka lebaka la tshele ya gore
ga la ka la tsebišwa naa? A re tlogeleng magetla, re šomeleng setšhaba ka
moka ga rena ka gore histori e tla le ahlola gampe. (Translation of Sepedi
paragraphs follows.)

[We acknowledge that there is no chief who would be against development in
his or her area. But they would fight fiercely if anything was to happen in
the area without their knowledge. On the other hand, some councillors are
able to start providing services in the communities. They can just choose
an area and then start working on it without consulting the chief in that
area. In my opinion, that is not such a big deal. It is not really
necessary to ask the chief’s permission to bring development to the
communities. They can just inform him of what they intend to do there. The
chief has no right to stop the councillor by saying that the area is his.
That is not possible.

Both parties should know that nothing much will come out of pulling in
different directions and that people are always grateful to those who help
them where necessary. Honourable councillors, what makes it so difficult
for you to go to the chief and inform him of the developments you are
working on in his area? That way, I don’t think the chief will have any
problem at all. Honourable chiefs out there, is it possible that you would
rather have the people starve because of the simple issue that you were not
informed of what was going on? Let us not be pompous. Let us rather work
together for our people, otherwise our profiles will look bad.]
You gain or lose nothing by just consulting each other. I would like to
call upon these two structures, in the best interests of the very same
communities they are heading, to work together and forget about their
personal egos.

Mmušo wa rena wa temokrasi o phasišitše molao wo ka wona motho yo mongwe le
yo mongwe a nago le toka le tshwanelo tša go hlokomela segagabo le go
bolela polelo ya gabo. Motho yo mongwe le yo mongwe o na le tshwanelo ya
gore ge a dira tša segagabo a se ke a thibelwa. Efela go a swabiša go bona
gore go na le bao ba nyakago gore polelo ya bona e be yona e tšwelago pele
go phala tše dingwe. (Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[Our democratic government has passed this Act, in terms of which everyone
has a right to promote their culture and speak their language. Everyone has
a right to practise his or her own culture and should not to be stopped. It
is sad, though, that there are some who feel that their language should be
regarded as better than others.]

It pains me to see that some of the provinces, when they deal with the
question of circumcision schools in our areas, instead of correcting all
those wrongs in those initiation schools, they will even invite the media
and TV crews to go to those schools just to ridicule our initiation
schools. What a shame! That is done by people who know our culture and
tradition. Instead of correcting all those wrongs to avoid deaths, their
aim is only to ridicule our initiation schools. What a shame!

Chairperson, as I said that the House ... [Time expired.]

Mnr L H FIELDING: Adjunkvoorsitter, agb Minister, lede van die Huis,
besoekers, dames en here, die verkiesing van nuwe munisipale rade op 1
Maart bring hoop dat ’n beter vlak van dienslewering sal geskied. Dit sal
alleenlik moontlik wees as munisipaliteite die foute van die afgelope vyf
jaar vermy. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr L H FIELDING: Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister, members of the House,
visitors, ladies and gentlemen, the election of the new municipal councils
on 1 March brings hope that there will be an improved level of service
delivery. This will only be possible if municipalities steer clear of the
mistakes of the past five years.]

Many municipalities who need to appoint senior managers will have to
appoint people with relevant skills and expertise. I think that it is
common cause that the ANC-controlled municipalities all over the country,
in these five years, did not strive for and strike the adjustable balance
between affirmative action on the one hand, and skills and expertise on the
other hand. No wonder the department’s own reports on skills found that
employment equity and transformation will remain reasons for the lack of
skills in municipalities.

The DA believes that municipal managers and senior staff appointed with
correct qualifications should be paid market-related salaries and rewarded
according to performance. The fact that over 50 municipalities which are
under Project Consolidate award their municipal managers performance
bonuses begs the question whether the managers deserve those bonuses.

Dis skokkend, as ’n mens kyk na die gebeure verlede week toe ’n LUR van die
Noord-Kaap in hierdie Huis kom staan en verklaar dat ’n swak besluit agt
jaar gelede deur die wetgewer in Kimberley geneem is waarkragtens
R150 miljoen verloor is nadat dit aan kontrakteurs betaal is om huise te
bou, wat nooit daardie diens gelewer het nie.

Daarbenewens sit die Noord-Kaapse regering die afgelope vyf jaar al met ’n
agterstand van R150 miljoen, en ek kan getuig hiervan, want ek was destyds
van 1994 tot 2000 ’n uitvoerende burgemeester van die ANC-regering. Ek kan
dus getuig dat dit wel gebeur het. [Tussenwerpsels.] Hierdie agterstande
bestaan al die afgelope agt jaar in die Noord-Kaap, en dit kan nooit
reggesien word nie. Hierdie swakheid moet ek regstreeks voor die gewese LUR
mnr Pakes Dikgetsi se deur lê.

Agb Minister, dis skokkend dat die arm mense op die grond daaronder moet
ly. In Maart 1998 is ’n kontrak om 1 300 huise te bou aan kontrakteurs
toegeken. Ek kan dit met hulle name bewys. Agthonderd-vyf-en-vyftig van die
1 300 huise is gebou. Die ander 400 is nooit gebou nie. Die LUR het hier
verklaar ... (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[It is shocking, when one looks at the events of last week when an MEC from
the Northern Cape came to this House stating that a bad decision was taken
by die legislature in Kimberley eight years ago by virtue of which R150
million was wasted by paying it to contractors for the building of houses,
when they never delivered that service.

At the same time the Northern Cape government has had a backlog of R150
million for the past five years, and I can bear witness to this, because in
those days from 1994 to 2000 I was an executive mayor for the ANC
government. Therefore I can bear witness to the fact that it did happen.
[Interjections.] These backlogs have existed in the Northern Cape for the
past eight years, and they can never be rectified. This weakness I must
place squarely at the door of the former MEC, Mr Pakes Dikgetsi.

Hon Minister, it is shocking that the poor people at grassroots level
should suffer. In March 1998, contractors were awarded a contract to build
1 300 houses. I can prove this by showing their names. Of these 1 300
houses, only 855 were built. The other 400 were never built. The MEC has
explained here ...]

Mr B J TOLO: Chairperson, would the hon member be prepared to take a
question?

Mr L H FIELDING: Yes.

Mr B J TOLO: I would like the hon member to tell us which budget votes we
are debating here today. [Interjections.] Is it Provincial and Local
Government or Housing? Can he tell us whether he remembers that it is
Provincial and Local Government, and not Housing?

Mnr L H FIELDING: Voorsitter, ja. Dit is juis dít wat ons mense agterlaat.
Dis juis dít, Behuising ingesluit, daarom kan ons nooit Behuising losmaak
van plaaslike bestuur nie. Dit is ongelukkig in my 22 jaar in plaaslike
regering my ondervinding, dat alles daarby ingesluit is.

Dis jammer dat hierdie tipe besluite ons arm mense nou agterlaat, en dan sê
die LUR in hierdie Huis daardie maatskappye is bankrot. As die LUR dan
bewus is dat hulle bankrot is, hoekom gaan hy voort met hofsake teen
daardie tipe mense? Dis nóg ’n uitgawe, nóg ’n verkwisting van geld van die
belastingbetaler. Dis hierdie dinge wat ons ’n honderd maal in die wetgewer
in Kimberley gedebatteer het, maar daar word geen veranderings aangebring
nie. Dit is onaanvaarbaar. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Dit is ook baie duidelik dat plaaslike regering agtergelaat is omdat daar
te veel kamerade aangestel is en mense nooit op meriete aangestel is nie.
Dis dít wat die agterstand in plaaslike regering vandag baie duidelik kan
wys. [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr L H FIELDING: Chairperson, yes. It is exactly this that leaves our
people poorly off. It is exactly this, housing included, therefore we can
never separate housing from local government. Unfortunately it is my
experience, in local government for 22 years, that it covers everything.

It is a pity that these kinds of decisions are now leaving our poor people
behind, and then the MEC states here in this House that those companies are
bankrupt. If the MEC is aware that they are bankrupt, then why is he
continuing with court cases against this type of people? This is yet
another way of spending, of wasting, the taxpayer’s money. These are things
that we have discussed in the legislature in Kimberley umpteen times, but
nothing changes. This is unacceptable. [Interjections.]

It is also very evident that local government is being left behind, because
too many comrades have been appointed and people have not been appointed on
merit. This is clearly shown by the backlog in local government today.
[Interjections.]]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon members, order
please!

Mr L H FIELDING: We need broad public participation to make this form ...

Mr D J BOTHA: Chairperson, on a point of order: The speaker there made a
statement that people were appointed not on merit but because they were
comrades. Is he not misleading the House in regard to that? Does he have
any proof of that statement that he has made?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Would you correct
your statement, hon member?

Mnr L H FIELDING: Voorsitter, nee, ek gaan nie my stelling korrigeer nie,
want ek het soveel bewyse van sake wat aan die Openbare Beskermer voorgelê
is in verband daarmee. Ek het gister nog so ’n saak aangemeld, so ek gaan
dit nie terugtrek nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr L H FIELDING: Chairperson, no, I am not going to change my statement,
because I have so much evidence of cases that were put before the Public
Protector in that regard. Yesterday I reported another case like that, so I
am not going to withdraw it.]

Mr M O ROBERTSON: Chairperson, would the hon member be prepared to take a
question, please? [Interjections.]

Mr L H FIELDING: Yes, I don’t mind.

Mr M O ROBERTSON: I just want to know who wrote his speech for him, because
he doesn’t seem to know what he is reading. [Laughter.]

Mnr L H FIELDING: Voorsitter, as die lid dit nog nie weet nie, ’n mens sit
in hierdie Huis met ’n toespraak wat jy klaar geskryf het, en jy tel soveel
punte op dat jy jou toespraak van tyd tot tyd kan aanpas, en niks verhoed
dit nie. Ek dink ek sal daarmee volstaan. Baie dankie. [Tussenwerpsels.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr L H FIELDING: Chairperson, if the member does not know it yet, one
comes to this House with a speech that you have written already, and you
pick up on so many issues that you can adapt your speech from time to time,
and nothing prevents it. I think that I shall end with that. Thank you very
much. [Interjections.]]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I now call on hon Q
D Mahlangu, Gauteng MEC for provincial and local government to continue the
debate. [Interjections.] Hon Chief Whip?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Deputy Chairperson, I have accordingly
advised the Table staff that we should use the speakers’ list, which all
members have on the screen. I am not sure whether that was brought to your
attention.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: (Ms P M Hollander) I have L1 and L2.
Which one is the correct one, please? Is it L2? Then it is hon Mahlangu.

Ms Q D MAHLANGU (Gauteng): Deputy Chair, hon Minister and Deputy Minister,
hon MECs, my colleagues, hon members of this august House, comrades and
friends, ladies and gentlemen, it is good to be back in the NCOP.

We have entered the phase of consolidating the developmental local
government. During this phase, we must improve the way in which the three
spheres of government relate and co-ordinate. Over the past five years I
think we have tended to compete with each other, and I think that, during
this phase, we must make sure that the co-ordination is improved for the
better.

This is the phase where we must ensure that the municipalities are
supported financially and otherwise in order to make sure that the
Millennium Development Goals are realised in our country.

Gauteng’s election outcome was the second lowest in the country despite the
fact that the province had the highest number of registered voters in the
country, according to the IEC statistics.

As part of our objectives of deepening democracy and ensuring that
individual constitutional rights are realised, we have to make sure that we
improve voter turnout by making sure that citizens understand the
responsibility that voting is not only to put people in power, but also to
exercise your right and ability to question and to participate in
government processes.

Secondly, we must change the mindset of South African citizens to make sure
that the positive messages in relation to the local government sphere is
improved for the better, because in the past five years, in particular the
first term of local government, we tended to focus on negative things
rather than the positive things that the municipalities have done in the
country.

We must also make sure that we increase the civic education levels amongst
our citizens in order for them to appreciate and understand what local
government is all about, and what it is that the local government is doing.
Sometimes the communities do not understand that the road that is in front
of their homes, the water that they drink from their taps, and the
sanitation and removal of refuse by municipalities from time to time, are
services provided by the municipalities, not by the province or national
government. Therefore we have got to make sure of civic education and
understanding of local government. All of us should contribute to that
improved understanding.

Thirdly, we need to improve and modify the way in which our public
representatives are elected, so as to give the broader citizenry the right
to choose their public representatives, in order to avoid some of the
things that we tended to see, where people are contesting who their
representatives are. We did not participate in these processes while
respecting individual political parties’ right to choose their own
representative, based on the electoral system that we have chosen.

In the province, we had five municipalities belonging to Project
Consolidate. In some of those municipalities, we have registered positive
gains since Project Consolidate started. This has helped the local
government department in the province to give meaningful support to these
municipalities, both human and financial. By human, I mean that we have
been able to deploy some senior managers from the department of local
government in the province to municipalities to go and work there, either
as support officials or to some extent as acting municipal managers. Where
there has been a lapse of services, we have been able to do that.

Secondly, in terms of financial resources, we have been able to allocate
resources obviously provided by the provincial treasury to give meaningful
support in areas where municipals were lacking.

Thirdly, some of the municipalities have been able to reduce their deficit,
and the nonpayment of creditors where creditors were not paid on time.
Municipalities were using payment of creditors, the money with which they
were supposed to pay the creditors, as a balancing act in between them
trying to meet their obligations.
Fourthly, we have been able to reduce unaccounted-for water costs, working
together with the Department of Water Affairs, the DBSA and Rand Water in
particular around the issue. Because of the old infrastructure that we have
in relation to water pipes, we have been able to reduce costs in some
municipalities. Worthy of note is the municipality of Merafong, which is
now part of the North West province. We are continuing to support that
because the programme started before the cross-boundary issues were
resolved. A second example is Mogale City and Kungwini. In these areas we
have been able to register positive gains as part of the Project
Consolidate initiative.

We have also been able to deploy engineers in Kungwini and Mogale City, in
particular to focus on areas of project management units, where municipal
infrastructure grant projects were not being enabled and capital
expenditure was not spent accordingly, because there isn’t capacity in
those municipalities. I think, because of Project Consolidate, it has
helped the department to give impetus to its support programmes to the
municipalities.

Together with the provincial treasury, we are focusing on ensuring that the
municipalities in the province implement the Municipal Finance Management
Act and to make sure that whatever requirements there are are met. This is
also done to ensure that the municipalities, in accordance with the Act,
are able to do those things, particularly the submission of financial
statements on a monthly basis, the submission of quarterly reports and all
other processes and policies that are supposed to be developed as part of
implementing the Act.

We will soon complete the report on the work done by the Financial and
Fiscal Commission, chaired by Dr Iraj Abedian, that of studying issues
around financial management and the improvement of management of finances,
generally, in municipalities where the Auditor-General has identified such
a need. The report is going to help us on how to improve there.

We have an objective of making sure that in Gauteng, by the end of the
term, all municipalities should receive a clean audit report. At the
moment, we have difficulties because we do not have a clear support
programme.

The department, over the past year, has been able to do a five-year
performance review of all municipalities since 2000, and the report has
identified areas on which municipalities, in this term, should be focusing
in order to make sure that quality of service in our communities are
improved for the better.

Issues of transformation have been identified. Where some municipalities
have not been able to complete their organogram the report has identified
those, and accordingly, we are working with municipalities in making sure
that issues identified in the report are responded to. I think it helps us
to give impetus to the delivery of services.

The province, together with municipalities, is in the process again of
completing the plans with regard to the 20 identified townships, which is
the programme that the Premier announced when he opened the legislature.
The programme is mainly meant to improve the infrastructure in our
townships, with regard to storm water drainage and paving because most of
our townships do not have these. With regard to roads, community halls and
schools where there are schools in those old townships that are no longer
in good condition, the programme is aimed at improving those issues.
Clinics and any other community infrastructure is covered by this programme
also.
Again, firstly, on the municipal integrated development plan, all
municipalities in the province were able to submit their IDPs on time, in
line with national legislation. Secondly, there has been greater alignment
amongst municipalities in responding to the national spatial development
plans and the global city regions. As you know, Gauteng is pursuing this
vision of becoming a globally competitive city region.

Therefore municipalities, in their IDPs, have shown greater alignment. In
some areas, there have been some difficulties in ensuring that there is
alignment in particular between the budget and the IDP. Thirdly, we have to
ensure that the provincial and national government and the sector
department use the municipal IDP as an embodiment of all government
planning in the country as a whole.

I think this is an area that needs a lot of improvement and I think, when
we are supported by the Department of Provincial and Local Government, we
will be able to address some of those challenges which we continue to face.

Former cross-boundary municipalities have been integrated into the new
provinces. We are almost at the end of the process of signing service-level
agreements with North West province and Mpumalanga, both at the receiving
and at the handing over processes. Tomorrow, technical meetings will be
taking place. I think we are well on course in making sure that, in these
municipalities, there is no disturbance in service delivery but that
citizens continue to receive those services.

Lastly, let us give all new municipalities our support, and to the newly
elected councillors as well, because in some municipalities, if you have 30
councillors, 12 of them will be old hands, and 18 of them will be new. We
have to make sure that we give support, even to those councillors. We have
programmes, both at political level and at administrative level, to make
sure that those councillors are assisted with delivering services in the
areas of their jurisdiction. Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S SETONA): Hon members, I want to bring to your
attention that I have been informed that there was consultation amongst
various stakeholders to change the speakers’ list. The only speakers’ list
that we will use is the one that I have. Don’t use the one that has ``L1’’
on it. I am using ``L2’’. The previous one lists hon MEC Mafereka from the
Free State province, who is obviously not here.

Mr M A MZIZI: Sihlalo, Ngqongqoshe neSekela lakhe, noNgqongqoshe
bezifundazwe ngithi unwele oluthi. [Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy
Minister and Provincial MECs’, long live all of you.]

The most important function of the Department for Provincial and Local
Government is to develop and promote a national system of integrated and co-
operative governance. The budget allocated to the Department for Provincial
and Local Government amounts to R24,9 billion for 2006-07. That is 55% more
than what the department received last year. This is a very big increase,
and it is largely owing to the increases in the local government equitable
share and the municipal infrastructure grant. The IFP welcomes this
increase.

However, spending the municipal infrastructure grant is a big problem. We
note with the gravest concern that at least 22% of the MIG was not spent
last year. This means that 22% of the available funds could not be
translated into infrastructure projects and basic services. Minister, if
this problem of underspending is not taken seriously, the intended
beneficiaries of service delivery will suffer the consequences. They will
not receive clean water and basic sanitation as promised, although the
money is available to make their lives better.

We urgently need properly and accurately to audit municipal infrastructure
grant spending and projects to establish why all available funding is not
being spent and what the role of the developers is in using subsidies for
infrastructure purposes.

The IFP supports the idea that the provincial authorities should make more
periodic visits to local government to establish the true facts of service
delivery at grass-roots level. More monitoring and fact-finding missions
are clearly needed to find out exactly where the shortcomings and
weaknesses of delivery are located.

Finally, we know that more than R30 billion is owed to local government
throughout South Africa for services that were delivered. This will
probably not change until the problems of massive unemployment and poverty
have been addressed. Job creation is not strictly speaking the purview of
the DPLG but improved service delivery will, no doubt, have a positive
impact on people’s lives and reduce poverty.

Kule mizuzwana nje emincane esasele uma sikhuluma nge-MIG, sikhuluma
ngalolu hlelo olubizwa nge-Municipal Infrastructure Grant. Ngingasho nje
ngithi ubungozi esibubonayo lapha busekuthenini uma – angenze isibonelo
ngendawo elaphayana abayibiza ngokuthi kukwaMinanawe ngaseBenoni – izindlu
sezikhishelwe abantu sebeyofuna okhiye kuthiwa kubo kufanele bakhiphe imali
yentela. Abantu bakithi-ke abazi ukuthi imali yentela ikhishwa nini. Abanye
bayayikhokha kanti abanye abanayo. Ngakubamba-ke lokho ngase ngikubika
eMnyangweni wezaseKhaya. Ngingasho nje Ngqongqoshe ukuthi kuze kube manje
lolo daba angazi ukuthi lwaphelelaphi. Yilokho-ke esikushoyo ukuthi
kuyasibambezela ekwenzeni ukuthi uhulumeni enze isimo sibe ngcono kubantu.

Okunye-ke ukuthi umangabe le mali yengqalasizinda ingakhokhwa bese
isetshenziswa, uthola ukuthi abakhi bezindlu basebenzisa imali yomxhaso
kubantu bathi abakhokhe imali yengqalasizinda, bese kuthi le mali axhaswe
ngayo ingabe isenela ukuthi akhe le ndlu okufanele ayakhe. Ngingasho-ke
lapho Ngqongqoshe ukuthi uma singakuqapheli lokhu, sikumele impela futhi
sikusukumele ... (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[In the few minutes left, let me tell you that when we speak of MIG we
speak of a programme called the municipal infrastructure grant. I want to
mention that we foresee a danger. For example, in a place called Minanawe
next to Benoni, houses are being handed over and people are told to pay
tax. Our people do not know at what stage they are required to pay money.

Some do pay the money, but others do not have it. I discovered that
practice and reported it to the Department of Provincial and Local
Government. I must say, hon Minister, that up to now I do not know what
happened in that case. That really causes delays for the government in
improving the lives of our people. Another problem is that if the
infrastructure grant could be paid out, one would find that the contractors
would use the housing subsidy and charge the applicants the infrastructure
expenses. This leaves the contractor unable to build the house he has been
contracted to erect. Hon Minister, I must say that if we keep an eye on
this, monitor it and also take it seriously ...]
E tla nyanya ka mokokotwana mma yona a ntse a le teng. Ha e be khotso. [We
will speak on behalf of the people. Thank you.] [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, hon
Minister for Provincial and Local Government, the leadership of Salga, hon
MECs and hon members, I just want to briefly say to the hon Fielding: You
have been in local government for 22 years and that explains your mindset.
What has also happened is that this transformation of the past 11 years has
not managed to change that particular mindset.

There’s a by-election in Tafelsig that will be taking place, I think, a
week from now. It’s amazing that the DA is busy campaigning in Tafelsig. In
2000, the people of Tafelsig suffered when water was cut off and some were
evicted from their houses in winter by the DA ... [Interjections.] ...
until I had to intervene and call a moratorium on the evictions of poor
people. Now it’s very interesting that the DA was in control of the city in
2000 and they managed to achieve just that – to treat poor people in that
manner.

We present this Budget Vote before this House after having successfully
conducted the second local government elections, which were declared free
and fair. We also noted the large voter turnout compared to our first local
government elections. This could only mean our system of local government
is improving and that our people have clearly seen the relevance of this
sphere of government in their lives. We, of course, could not be
proclaiming this victory without the pivotal role that this House has
played in bringing about these local government elections.

Our system of local government is based on social dialogue wherein
communities and the public at large are required by legislation to
influence and direct policy and development within their municipalities.
Indeed, the last term of local government was marked by both achievements
and challenges.

The interactions with our communities and local governments, and local
ownership of local development processes - including participation in the
initiatives that are aimed at the identification and prioritisation of
developmental needs - form a critical cornerstone that defines our system
of social dialogue.

It is undeniable that more people share in the hope that our President
talked about and that is where we are headed as government. An improvement
in greater public participation through ward committees and ensuring that
each ward has a voice in how its municipality should be governed are going
to occupy centre stage in this term of local government.

South Africa recognises that culture, religion and language are central
factors in the holistic development of a nation. It was befitting therefore
that in 2004 we saw the commission for the promotion and protection of
these rights come into operation to entrench their role of facilitating
communication between communities and government in terms of these issues.

Whilst we learnt from the municipal izimbizo programme that most ward
committees have been established and members understand their critical role
as linkages between the municipality and communities, we equally noted
areas that inhibited the effective operation of these ward committees. We
continue to encourage communities to participate in these structures and
support our local government system to be responsive, transparent and
accountable to our communities.

We also recognise the role of traditional institutions in our development
path. We have finalised legislation that has transformed the composition of
traditional councils to provide the elements of democracy. We are
encouraged that the traditional leadership now plays a part in the
national, provincial and local spheres of government’s development agenda.
We envisage a partnership with the traditional leaders that must lend a
hand in uplifting the standards of living for an estimated 14 million
people living in the rural areas.

It is essential that we create conditions in which the local economy can
grow. The government’s framework for stimulating the local economy clearly
indicates the need for sustainable community investment programmes.
Municipalities have a responsibility to see that available opportunities
are properly utilised at local level. There is ample scope for innovative
ideas and practices in this regard, which can frequently be developed
through community stakeholder participation.

With regard to disaster management, the heavy rains that occurred in the
North West province between January and April this year resulted in
flooding and caused extensive damage to infrastructure in the Greater Taung
Municipal area. Even though we are confident that our National Disaster
Management Centre is gradually enhancing its capacity to detect and respond
timeously to these occurrences, we note that good governance is a
prerequisite for effective disaster management and, more broadly, for
sustainable development.

Significant advances have been made in this regard to keep up with
international standards in terms of a paradigm shift from response and
recovery to that of prevention and mitigation. We must ensure that natural
hazards, which are inevitable, do not necessarily turn into major economic
and social disasters.

In conclusion, the local government elections held on 1 March marked the
beginning of a second term of office for elected mayors and councillors
since the introduction of our new system of local government in 2000. This
is an important milestone in strengthening the democratic participation on
which our Constitution is founded.

If we all agree that poverty is not just a lack of physical resources for
development but also implies powerlessness or the inability to exert
influence on those forces which shape our livelihoods, then it is therefore
important to create opportunities for all our communities to participate
and contribute in structures of governance, including women and youth.
Local government plays a pivotal role in this realisation.

We have asked ourselves some key questions as we started this term of local
government that have led us as government to the same conclusion, and it is
that we cannot stand before you in 2011 without saying to you that we are
on a sustained path for better service delivery to our communities. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Chair, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, hon members of
the House, the Ministry has introduced some sound governance arrangements
related to performance-management contracts for mayors. Given the need for
stable local government, we cannot have a situation in which new political
parties gain control of some municipalities and municipal manager contracts
are terminated at huge cost to ratepayers. Often service delivery is
stymied by premature political appointments.

However, the issue of salaries for municipal managers is still problematic.
We cannot allow a municipal manager of a small municipality to earn an
excessive package way above that of managers of larger metros. A proper
remuneration grading system is required based on skills levels, experience
and successful outcomes.

The affairs of Salga need to be tightened up. This structure has been
plagued by inefficient financial management. This body plays a critical
linkage role in stakeholder relations amongst various constituencies and
must operate optimally. The implementation of the Intergovernmental
Relations Framework Act of 2005 is necessary, given the lack of policy
coherence especially between provincial and local tiers of government, and
the land issue is a question here.

The interventions of Project Consolidate must start showing results now in
targeted municipalities. More focus should be placed on full implementation
of the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act.

I think that we have reached a level at which corruption at the municipal
level has become systemic. As the President said, councillors should stop
treating municipalities as cash cows, gaining control of resource and using
their power to gain patronage. Hence, it seems the anticorruption strategy
has come far too late for the millions that have already been embezzled.
The UIF supports this budget. Thank you.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S SETONA): Thank you, hon member. I proceed to
call the hon S Kwelita, the Eastern Cape MEC for provincial and local
government.

Mr S KWELITA (Eastern Cape): Deputy Chair of Chairs, hon members of the
House, representatives of Salga, I stand here to support the budget
presented to this House by the Minister, and also to reflect on the actions
we are taking as a province in support of the budget and the objectives
that have been set by the hon Minister.

Firstly, we note that the first local government elections have laid a
strong foundation for the process of consolidating and building a strong
local government in our country. On an institutional level, we believe that
we have a foundation in political administration and also in the community-
participation sector. We also believe that there are witnesses that we
should strengthen in this term of local government to ensure that we
perform better than we have done in the past five years.

The second thing that we want to raise in relation to this term has to do
with the challenges that still face local government in the areas of
service delivery and capacity, in infrastructure and backlogs, and in
public participation. We believe that these areas are important as they
will ensure that we are able to do what we have promised our people - if we
concentrate and focus on these important areas - which is to build a better
life for all.
We have also decided to focus on particular areas as part of achieving the
objectives of this budget. One of those areas is around strengthening the
integrated development plan processes. We believe that we have improved
compliance in terms of the submission of these important documents, but if
you look at the quality of the documents you will discover that there are
gaps and a lot of work that we still need to do.

Also, in the area of sector department participation, we believe that that
area needs some attention to improve our participation. Our participation
should not be seen only in terms of our attendance at these meetings, but
also in line with our plans which will be reflected in these IDPs. This is
an area at the provincial level we are beginning to handle in terms of
ensuring that there is proper participation.

We are also trying to develop champions in the IDPs, both at community
level and at the municipality level and also with regard to the provincial
government. In this regard, we have undertaken a programme of training that
will train about 80 people for the first period of six months and also take
the 80 again for the second period. We believe that in this way we will be
contributing to development of champions at community level for this
process that is so important for our communities.

The other area of focus would be to ensure that we are receiving the
reports we should be receiving in terms of the legislation, and not only
receiving these reports but analysing them too because we believe that if
we perform this function properly, it will assist us to deal with the
problems that have been identified through the Project Consolidate process.
We believe that if we do that we will be able to get our early warnings and
will be able to make the necessary interventions that we need to be making.

The other area we feel is important at provincial level is that of focusing
on the budgets of municipalities. A brief analysis of the budgets of
municipalities has reflected that there might be gaps in the process of
developing these budgets that we will have to attend to.

We believe that if these gaps are not attended to properly, this could
result in the weaknesses that we see in financial management and in the
debts that municipalities accumulate from time to time.

We believe that these areas, together with other areas that will be areas
of focus, will help to strengthen and achieve the goals that have been set
through this process of developing this budget. We believe also that we
would be playing a meaningful role if we also focused internally in the
department. Internally, we believe, the department has weaknesses both at
the level of quantity and quality. We have developed a process to look at
how we can address the process or the problems around quantity and quality
issues by recruiting more people and ensuring that we have the people with
the requisite skills.

We also believe that we need to do an assessment of the staff we have. One
of the indications we have as a department is that in the process of
building provincial departments and absorbing some of the staff from
municipalities, we identify and absorb people at levels whom we’ll have to
consider in terms of whether they are appropriate for the work that we want
to achieve of strengthening local government. We believe that these should
be the areas of focus and that these areas of focus should help us to
achieve the objectives of this budget.

Together with this House we want to align ourselves with the requests that
have been made here to support the passing of this budget. Thank you very
much, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Cllr C JOHNSON (Salga): Chairperson, hon Minister for Provincial and Local
Government Sydney Mufamadi, hon Deputy Minister for Provincial and Local
Government Nomatyala Hangana and members of the NCOP, the President, in his
state of the nation address in February this year, remarked that, and I
quote:


   While we must indeed celebrate the high levels of optimism that inspire
   our people, who are convinced that our country has entered its age of
   hope, we must also focus on and pay particular attention to the
   implications of those high levels of optimism with regard to what we must
   do together to achieve the objective of a better life for all our people.
   We must ensure that the machinery of government, especially the local
   government sphere, discharges its responsibilities effectively and
   efficiently, honouring the precepts of Batho Pele.


Salga believes that, in order for local government to discharge its
developmental responsibilities in an effective way, national and provincial
government must at all times, as alluded to by Minister Mufamadi,
strengthen their role of support and of monitoring the policy outcomes of
municipal infrastructure investments. The efforts of these spheres of
government should focus on improving the capacity, efficiency,
effectiveness, sustainability and accountability of the local government
sphere, and making the integrated development plans the primary mechanisms
for intergovernmental co-ordination. Other spheres should also ensure that
their planning processes are aligned in order that we may have predictable
outcomes for our citizens, particularly the rural poor and marginalised
groupings.

Local government will receive R8,3 billion in 2006-07; R10,5 billion in
2007-08; and R13,9 billion in 2008-09 of the equitable share, which is an
upwards revision to the baselines by R1,6 billion over the next three
years. It is noted with appreciation that the revised equitable share also
makes provision for a revised remuneration framework for councillors and
environmental health care services. Government also provided R7 billion in
2006-07, R8 billion in 2007-08 and R9 billion to compensate local
government for removal of the Regional Services Council, RSC, levies. We
want to challenge the business sector to reinvest this windfall into local
economies to create not only more jobs but quality jobs.

Furthermore, Salga notes with appreciation the transfer to local government
regarding infrastructure, through the Municipal Infrastructure Grant, which
amounts to R21,4 billion over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, MTEF.

Although there is improvement in spending, as mentioned by the Minister,
the lack of capacity in municipalities to understand and respond correctly
to MIG conditions and sometimes unco-ordinated processes of transfer of
funds, particularly late transfers by provincial governments, still
contribute to underspending, especially by rural municipalities.

Joint efforts by the department and Salga to address the impediments which
impair the capacity of municipalities to effectively implement planned
projects will surely lead to improved spending of these funds in the next
financial year.

Salga welcomes the intergovernmental legislation; and we hope that its
implementation will further enhance the intergovernmental co-ordination and
implementation mechanism within the three spheres of government. Seamless
government will ensure that the oversight role of the different political
structures will be strengthened. Currently, Salga is in active engagement
with the NCOP around this. Citizens do not differentiate between various
powers and functions. We are one country and one government and as such,
our system of government did not create certain centres of power at local
government levels that can be abused, when people regard them as their own
fiefdom.

As mentioned above, capacities of municipalities are uneven across the
country. This is a result of competition for scarce skills, the inadequacy
of the systems and the complexity of the delivery environment. Salga, in
support of the Department of Provincial and Local Government’s five-year
strategic plan, has started to implement the following capacity-building
programmes.

A councillor induction programme was conducted in April. Its main objective
was to provide guidance for newly-elected municipal councillors in order
for them to be able to execute their responsibilities with utmost expertise
and values. An executive municipal leadership development programme has
been designed for key local government decision-makers, primarily senior
officials and also councillors who have management responsibilities.
The programme will, through accelerated interactive practical training,
capacitate local government practitioners with the necessary working
knowledge to carry out their duties effectively in pursuit of the vision
and mission of their respective municipalities. The training will be
conducted in partnership between Salga and the University of Pretoria’s
school of public management and administration and as such, participants
will be awarded university certificates at NQF level 6.

Ward committee training has started, and the programme will be conducted in
partnership with the Department of Provincial and Local Government and it
will focus on ward committee members to be trained in public participation.
It is local government Seta accredited at NQF level 2, and it is a
structured training course.


During 2004 Salga adopted a new Constitution and restructured itself. It
has become a unified body representing all nine provinces and 284
municipalities. This in itself caused a major shake-up, especially as far
as financial management of the various provincial bodies is concerned and
has therefore led to certain deficiencies being identified, as far as the
financial management of the different provincial bodies is concerned. It
has also led to a qualified audit report and we are currently addressing
this.

Salga would also like to call upon National Treasury and the Department of
Provincial and Local Government to discuss the developmental role of local
government outside the scope of the equitable share. Currently, the
equitable share factor is factored in as zero, because there is no common
agreement of what the developmental factor within that formula is. We
believe that this discussion should take place outside of the scope of the
equitable share.

We want to thank the director-general of the provincial department for hard
work and ensuring that we do have a plan to make local government work
better. Salga supports the Budget Vote on Provincial and Local Government.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr R DYANTYI (Western Cape): Sihlalo, uMphathiswa wezaMaphondo nooMasipala
ohloniphekileyo, neSekela lakhe, amalungu eNdlu, noogxa bam kwamanye
amaphondo ... [Chair, hon Minister for Provincial and Local Government and
his Deputy, members of the House, and my colleagues, fellow MECs in other
provinces ...]

... I rise to support this Budget, but also to take directives from both
the Minister and the Chair of the NCOP from what they have said, and
throughout therefore I proceed in terms of what I want to say.

I do want to remind members that as an MEC for Local Government Housing in
the Western Cape, the elections have left me with a particular challenge. I
have a scrambled egg in my hands, as out of 30 municipalities there are
only four that have been won outright, in 26 of those there are still going
to be negotiations, struck deals, and all of that. That is a recipe for
short-term measures. In a way many of those municipalities instead of
running a marathon prefer to run 100 m, because they do not know whether
tomorrow they will be there or not. [Laughter.] Therefore that is a
particular challenge that you are dealing with.

I do want to make the point that our relationship with the municipalities
is informed by our national programme of action, and the five-year
strategic agenda for local government. We have all of these coalitions
regardless of who controls or runs what, but all of them have to conform to
the national programme of action. Therefore the focus from the position
where I drive as an MEC, and my department, will be to ensure that all of
them are going to be focusing on those five key performance areas, which
include issues of provision of basic services, promotion of LED, financial
viability, good governance and public participation, institutional
development and transformation. This is going to be the hymn sung to all
municipalities in this province. And I must say that we have started doing
that already in this particular province.

I think I also need to stand here so that as part of sharing accountability
with the Minister - because he raised policy issues - my role is to tell
you what exactly we are doing in terms of actions. In relation to that key
performance area point one of institutional development and transformation
for example, there are already a number of issues that we are taking care
of. We have already agreed with all municipalities in this province that
come 1 July 2006 we will have no acting municipal managers, but all
municipal managers will be permanent. [Applause.] That is across the board
and it allows us to therefore go to the next level in terms of the capacity-
building of our municipalities, because if you cannot get it right at that
level you might as well just forget about proceeding and going anywhere.
That is the first area in terms of how we are moving forward in dealing
with those kinds of issues.

In terms of the second area on the programme, which is basic service
delivery, members would be aware that, at least as a province, Mr Fielding
and uBab’uMzizi, we have spent 100% of our MIG allocation in the province;
and because we want to do that continuously the municipalities have been
worked on so that by the end of March, which is the end of the provincial
financial year, we want all municipalities to have spent their MIG
allocation so that we don’t proceed to June. That is the only way that I am
able to interact with Mr Mufamadi and his department to say I need more,
when we are able to spend what we have been given.

Over and above that there is the issue of the eradication of the bucket
system. As a province we have already started the implementation of that
plan. The Premier is very hard on us on that issue. There are a number of
municipalities that have already started the implementation of the bucket
system eradication issue.

Linked to this issue of basic services is the fact that this province is
also known for disasters that are occurring on a daily basis. I was happy
that the Deputy Minister was raising this issue. In that regard we are
working hand in hand with municipalities in support of them, because you
will be aware that just a few months down the line we had fires, and on the
next day floods and all sorts of issues within one province.

The issue that we are picking up and driving here in giving support is that
we are saying to municipalities we have made a study of the capability of
fire fighting services, which are in dire straits in terms of whether it is
vehicles and in districts, and all of those kinds of issues. But we are
also picking up a few things. One is that amongst the causes of fire there
are two main issues where - maybe some of you members who are sitting here
- people would smoke and take the stompies en gooi hulle uit die vensters
uit. [cigarette butts and throw them out of the window].

We are stepping up law enforcement in terms of that. Firstly, all
municipalities are now going to have fire bylaws where we are going to have
penalties around those kinds of issues.

Secondly, as informal settlements have been set alight simply because a
lover was not happy with another lover, and therefore the entire human
settlement is set alight we are also going to be enforcing those kinds of
issues so that there are certain things that we can prevent in terms of
disasters, and we are focusing on those kinds of issues to see how we can
proceed.

Thirdly, in terms of financial viability and sustainability, we have met
twice already with the AG’s office in understanding the financial issues
around all municipalities in this province. Together with Treasury we have
stepped up a programme of how we are going to deal with issues of data
control, asset management, late submissions of financial statements and all
of those issues. In my Budget speech we have raised a plan for engaging
with those matters, because the purpose is for us to improve on those kinds
of issues, come the next financial year. Already in terms of the 30
municipalities we have a 20% improvement in their financial health and
status arising out of the AG’s report, and we want to keep that and improve
on that issue and never move back on those kinds of issues.

We have also begun a programme that we call the Local Government Medium
Term Committee together with Treasury and the Department of Environment and
Planning where we spent three weeks with municipalities. We utilised three
to five hours for each municipality, and we are dealing with issues like
IDP, LED and the financial health of municipalities in focused discussions.
We have just come out of that process. It has helped us a lot in terms of
how we need to move forward in working with all of these kinds of
municipalities.

Included in IDPs is that we are saying to municipalities amongst the
chapters that we are going to have there will be one on human settlement
strategy, as part of your IDP. Therefore it is neither an add-on issue nor
an isolated one, but it has to be part of that. Just this morning before I
came here I attended a course where I was addressing all the ten Project
Consolidate municipalities, because we were training them on human
settlement strategy. They are here today with their senior managers so that
we are able to inculcate this culture of moving away from issues of
quantity access to quality access beyond what we were able to do in the
last ten years.

Fourthly, we are also working very hard on issues of good governance and
public participation, and in that regard the key issue out of that from
this province is that of us driving the anticorruption drive in which we do
not care whether you are rich or poor, black or white, a woman or a man,
young or old. It is a programme that is going to be affecting all people
whether it is in municipalities or in relation to housing corruption.

We have a programme to unravel certain issues there, and we are succeeding.
A few people are appearing in court and others are behind bars, and that is
in terms of the importance of this. I think the Minister was raising this,
and all I am indicating is the kind of actions we are taking and the kind
of progress we are making in relation to those kinds of policy issues,
because we have got to talk about practical thinking in terms of how we are
moving and marching forward on those issues.

In relation to issues of public participation for example, our own
Community Development Worker Programme is getting results. I think the
Justice Department was very happy in January and February to utilise our
CDWs. For two weeks they were able to trace 800 beneficiaries of the
maintenance grant, and a successful programme that we were able to do with
our CDWs. Therefore the role they play becomes that one of reinforcing
government and ensuring that we strengthen our public participation arms
and all of those kinds of issues. I am raising this in relation to those
five key performance areas, because it is important for us to do all those
kinds of things.

The fifth issue is that of LEDs, which have to be aligned to your EPWPs,
but also linked to the Asgisa programmes that we have in all other
provinces. In that regard we are working in tandem in partnership with the
relevant departments, public works, transport, economic development and so
on.

In terms of Intergovernmental Relations Structures, in this province we
have been able to constitute all of those structures. We had a successful
Councillors’ Summit in terms of councillor training. Later this year we are
going to have training focused on women councillors. We are not just
celebrating the 50th anniversary. We know that more women councillors are
now in Local Government and therefore we have got to step up a gear in
terms of a focus on that. As a province we have identified and prioritised
that programme whether there will be mayors, Speakers, or Deputy Speakers
we want to proceed in that regard. I see that the Chair wants say my time
is up, but ... Thank you very much. [Time expired.][Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I am happy that the hon member was
able to look at the clock and see that he is actually consuming his time,
you know, because other members ignore it, and they will be suspicious
about the discretion of the Chair whilst the clock is there in front of
them.

Mr A L MOSEKI: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Minister, MECs,
colleagues, I think we should start by saying that we are very happy as
citizens and communities because the budget that we are debating today is
about service delivery to areas or residences where we reside.

We also want to say that in the past 12 years of our freedom we have
witnessed our democracy developing from strength to strength. This was
confirmed by the people of this country when they voted the ANC into power
again in the local sphere of our government. For that reason, we will
forever be grateful to our people and our communities. Quality service
delivery is what they deserve for having voted this government back into
power.

Chapter 12 of our Constitution outlines clearly or establishes the
municipalities or wall-to-wall municipalities in this country. That chapter
further outlines the authority of, and objectives, that must be achieved by
that sphere of government. We want to say that it is in that context that
the department made a presentation to the select committee. When that
presentation was made, regarding the strategic plan and budget, the
committee was overwhelmingly impressed with the achievements registered in
the past financial year, particularly around Project Consolidate.

As a select committee, we want to say that while that achievement was made,
we have also observed that there are a lot of challenges that remain to be
dealt with. For instance, we have discovered or observed that a number of
municipalities’ revenue collections that may assist the local government to
be financially viable and sustainable are not yet up to scratch.

I want to take as an example one municipality in Mpumalanga that had a very
serious problem, Thaba Chweu. The province was then forced to evoke section
139(1)(b) of the Constitution as a result of that crisis. Let me just give
you a brief report about the situation. Recently we received a report from
that municipality. The report was impressive and made us realise that the
situation has turned around. Regarding some of the important lessons that
might have been learnt there, we want to urge the department to take those
lessons and use them in attending to other municipalities that might be
having similar problems.

Some important achievements that were registered by this municipality were:
eradication of corruption; strengthening of the systems that existed in
that municipality that had made it not function properly; and stabilisation
of the relationship between the administration and political machinery. But
the most important achievement was the collection of outstanding revenue by
the municipality. We think this is a success that can be used in other
municipalities to improve service delivery.

The second important challenge remains infrastructure development,
particularly in the rural municipalities. It is very clear that, in
relation to this aspect, a number of municipalities are not able to achieve
very basic service delivery to the communities, such as the free basic
services and others. When you try to establish what the problem is, you
then discover that the infrastructure is the main problem. Some of these
municipalities do not have the infrastructure that can assist them to
deliver those free basic services.

The third challenge is to strengthen the interaction among the spheres of
government around the integrated development plans, IDPs. It has become
very clear that, whilst the department and the local municipalities are
working very hard to address this aspect, there is a lot that still needs
to be done to ensure that we strengthen our co-ordination in order to
deliver services timeously to our communities.

We, as the committee, say that the department has done a lot within the
limited resources that they have. There will be no fundamental reason for
us to say this budget should not be adopted. Therefore the committee moves
for the adoption of this budget. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, hon Deputy
Minister, MECs, the leadership of Salga, hon members, I cannot let this
opportunity pass without expressing the department’s and the Ministry
appreciation for the co-operation and support we have always received from
this House, especially from the Select Committee on Provincial and Local
Government and its chairperson. I also want to express a wish and a hope
that working together we shall become an even more effective instrument for
good governance and sustainable development.

Mhlekazi uShiceka, ungadinwa nangomso. [Mr Shiceka, keep up the good work.]

The hon Moseki spoke about the need for us to ensure that the successes
that are realised in the course of implementing Project Consolidate made
widely known. He gave the example of a municipality in Mpumalanga where,
following the intervention made in terms Project Consolidate, we were able
to put the finances of that particular municipality back to good health.
Indeed, it is our intention to make sure that all the lessons of experience
gathered in the course of implementing Project Consolidate – the good and
the bad - are shed so that the positives that come out of it can be held
out for emulation. The outstanding challenges can also be used to work out
how best we can improve our performance. This is an ongoing challenge that
we face and we are hopeful that things can only get better when we work
together.

The hon Chairperson of the Select Committee spoke about the need for us to
give the same focused attention that we are giving to local government to
the provincial sphere of government. We have chosen to start small with
respect to the provinces. We are presently looking at the capacity of
provincial departments who have responsibility for local government affairs
to look at their capacity, firstly to support municipalities but also to
mobilise province wide resources in order to ensure that there is proper co-
ordination across the three spheres of government. We think that the
lessons that will come out of that will help us to better position
ourselves to say what additional support do we need to give to provincial
government.

At the same time we are working closely with the provincial government
sphere looking at how can strengthen the provincial growth and development
strategies and create the necessary synergies between those strategies and
the integrated development plans of municipalities as well as with the
national spatial development perspective.

Hon Shiceka also spoke about the need for members of the ward committee to
be compensate for out of pocket resources that they have for out of pocket
expenses that they incur in the course of doing their work. In fact, one of
the reasons why the equitable share of local government has been improved
was to ensure that the institution-building component thereof could be used
to address this particular problem that he have raised. But of course there
many competing pressures at that level, which means that this is a matter
that all of will have to pay continuing attention to. We need to check to
what extent are the municipalities prioritising this need to allocate
recourses towards making sure that the ward committees can become even
better in terms of their functional capacity.

The hon Mzizi correctly spoke about the need for us to improve the spending
capacity of municipalities. He noted that, as he put it, last year the
spending rate was low – only 22% of the MIG was not spent last year. I
guess he is right to insist that the expenditure rate must be 100%. But,
you see, when we mention 28% we must then tell what the difference between
100% and 22% is, because then it will become clear that at least 78% of the
MIG allocation was spent as at the end of April. The financial year of
local government has not even ended yet. So we need to check on those
trends where we would possibly be standing at the end of June. Of course,
we intend to make sure that we continue to increase the spending rate. But
I think as I said that it is important for us to always try to agree
whether we are looking at a half-full glass or a half-empty glass so that
the it can be agreed about the exact nature of the challenges we face.

The hon Mokoena also spoke about the continuing tensions between some
traditional leaders and some councillors. I was happy that he emphasised
some councillors and some traditional leaders because the fact of the
matter is that we really have come a long way in terms of improving working
relations between the National House of Traditional Leaders and elected
public representatives, as well as between the provincial houses of
traditional leaders and their counterparts. There still are problems and it
is for this reason that all of us – the MECs, in particular - need to make
sure that they keep the situation under close watch for any manifestations
of hostilities so that such hostilities can be diffused.

I agree with the hon Mr Fielding when he said he refused to be drawn into
drawing a dichotomy between the housing and the local government function.
The only thing that I found astounding in what he had to say later was when
he drew a distinction between comrades and people. [Laughter.] He says that
one of the problems in local government has been that rather than employing
people with qualifications, preference was given to the employment of
comrades. But as he went on to talk about his own CV, it became clear what
kind of a person we are dealing with - 22 years of experience in local
government.

He also said that at one point he was an ANC executive mayor in the
Northern Cape and now he has bought into the intellectual scam of the DA,
which makes a distinction between people and comrades. [Laughter.] I
thought it is important to ask him at least in this day and age to wake up
and smell the coffee because it is these comrades who made it possible for
him to stand in this House and get away with saying things which do not
make sense. [Laughter.] Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Business suspended at 12:05 and resumed at 14:00.


                              Afternoon Sitting


The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon members, firstly, I would like
to welcome the Minister of Minerals and Energy, the hon L B Hendricks, and
the officials from her department. I also want to welcome the special
delegates who are present here today. I will call the Secretary to read the
Second Order of the Day.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 30 – Minerals and Energy:

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Chairperson, colleagues, hon members,
ladies and gentlemen, I stand before you today on my last day as the
Minister of Minerals and Energy. I’m also informed that this is the first
time the Department of Minerals and Energy Budget Vote has come to the
NCOP.

It has been an exciting and interesting 10 months for me, and I believe
that we have accomplished a great deal over this period. Some of the
highlights during the past year would include the following. On a macro
level we have seen a global commodity boom, which has dramatically
increased the prices of minerals mined in South Africa, in particular
platinum and gold. These high prices have favourably impacted on the South
African mining sector and our economy.

Secondly, the passing of the Diamonds Amendment Act and the Precious Metals
Act, that are set to contribute positively towards greater levels of
beneficiation in our country, herald a new dawn in beneficiation for our
country. We have also, as a department, been working closely with industry
in running commodity workshops in order to develop strategies with industry
players for the effective use and beneficiation of our minerals.

Okwesithathu, inhlangano ebhekela abasebenza ukumba umnotho abasebancane
abasafufusayo ebizwa phecelezi ngokuthi yi-Small Scale Mining Chamber
isunguliwe ngoJulayi walo nyaka odlulile. Izoba wusizo olukhulu
ekubathuthukiseni laba abafufusayo kwezezimayini. Umnyango wami-ke
uyakuthokozela kakhulu ukuba khona kwale nhlangano futhi uyakweseka lokho
okuhloswe yile nhlangano ye-Small Scale Mining Chamber. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Thirdly, the SA Small-scale Mining Chamber which aims at helping the small-
scale mining community was formed in July last year. This chamber will go a
long way in helping to develop the emerging industry players. My department
is pleased with the formation of this chamber and it fully supports its
cause.]

Fourthly, a number of broad-based black economic empowerment deals have
been announced, which were effected largely as a result of our legislation.
Our department has had to be vigilant to ensure that these deals were
indeed broad-based and that they, in fact, involved women from the very
beginning.

This is because experience has shown that with all the deals brought to the
Deputy Minister and me, we would ask where the women were in the deals and
they would say that the women were there. But where were they, because
physically we could not see them? Regarding the women that were mentioned,
when you asked them they didn’t even know they were in the deal. So, that
is a worrying factor as far as the deals that have come before us are
concerned. We have had to intervene decisively, and to all those men in
their jackets who came to ask for our support we would say that the women
must be involved. It is in that way that we have managed to get more women
involved in the empowerment deals.

South Africa hosted the Annual African Mining Partnership Forum, which
involves a number of my colleagues from other African mining countries
coming together to interact and collaborate on projects for the growth of
this sector in Africa.

We also held the first-ever World Petroleum Congress to be hosted on
African soil, which, I believe, was a huge success. In addition, we hosted
the first-ever African hydropower conference, which we co-hosted with the
Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, to look at improved regional
collaboration on the use of water for energy purposes. There have also been
a number of other bilateral and multilateral interactions between the
department and our African colleagues in order to promote economic
development in line with our Nepad programme.
Also, this past year saw the fatality rate on the mines drop by 16%, from
0,25 fatalities per million hours worked in 2004 to 0,21 in 2005. We have
also seen, likewise, the injury rate dropping by 8%. Obviously, our
aspiration is that we have fatality-free and injury-free places of work as
far as mining is concerned. So that’s what we must target.

Over the past year the department has increased the speed at which mining
licence applications are dealt with, and we are overcoming the backlog we
experienced by improving the administrative structures dealing with
applications.

Last year 6 785 applications for mining licences were received by the
department, of which 957 were rejected mainly because they were incomplete.
One hundred and ninety-one were withdrawn, 861 were refused for
noncompliance with the Act, and 912 were issued. The balance of these
applications is still in the system.

There has also been a great deal of progress over the past year with the
electrification programme, with 150 000 houses having been connected. Under
this programme, over 500 schools were electrified, and I was fortunate
enough to have officiated at “switch-ons” in the Taung District of the
North West province.

The Department of Minerals and Energy has also made a number of gains
during the past year in improving the environment. This saw us introducing
cleaner fuels, which have been remarkably well received by the consumers.

There were also a number of challenges that we experienced over the past
year, in particular the electricity outages here in the Western Cape and
the fuel shortages that we experienced in December last year.

Umnyango wami uzithathela phezulu lezi zinselelo zokushoda kogesi
eNtshonalanga Koloni kanye nokushoda kuka-petrol ezweni. Le nselelo
izosisiza ekuqhubekeleni phambili ukwenza ngcono isimo sokutholakala
kwamandla kagesi. [My department is taking up very seriously the challenges
regarding electricity outages in the Western Cape and the fuel shortages in
the country. These challenges will, however, help us to improve electricity
distribution.]

With regard to the Department of Minerals and Energy budget itself, this
budget of R2,548 billion I table today will go towards continuing the good
work that has been done over the past year and also towards addressing some
of the challenges I mentioned that are faced by the department. I would
like to outline some of the key issues for the DME during the 2006-07
financial year.

With regard to regional offices, my department has offices in each of the
nine provinces. In addition to receiving and processing mining rights
applications for their region, the functions of these offices include
assisting with small-scale mining operations, mine health and safety
inspections, as well as providing support on provincial energy issues.
These provincial offices are critical to the effective outreach of the
department, and the work they are doing in communities is to be commended.

In terms of SMME development, as a department we have committed ourselves
to paying special attention to supporting small and medium enterprises
through sustainable interventions. The department is in the process of
finalising our SMME strategy. In the past our approach to SMME support was
decentralised within the branches of the department. We believe that
consolidating the strategy at departmental level will enable us to monitor
and improve our performance.

The regulatory framework that is being developed will form the basis of
interventions that we will be making in our quest to support small and
medium enterprises. Internally, this will cover basic issues, such as
improving our turnaround time for the processing of payments that are
submitted by the SMMEs. This will ensure that our support initiatives are
sustainable and also create synergies with other government departments and
institutions.

Our SMME programme will focus on rehabilitation, small-scale mining,
jewellery fabrication, other forms of beneficiation and mineral value
addition, electricity and liquid fuels and, generally, on ensuring that we
procure more and more from small and medium enterprises. Our beneficiation
programme will be closely aligned with our small-business support
initiatives.

With regard to mine health and safety, a very important function of the
Department of the Minerals and Energy is the Mine Health and Safety
Inspectorate. They have been working closely with industry and worker
unions to reduce the incidence of mine accidents. There have been major
improvements over the years, and stakeholders have committed themselves
continually to reduce fatalities by at least 20% per annum.

The Mine Health and Safety Inspectorate has also embarked on a national
strategy to eliminate silicosis and noise-induced hearing loss or
occupational deafness by 2013. These efforts will help reduce the social
cost of disease and injuries, particularly to vulnerable communities.

As far as the environment is concerned, our long history of mining, as we
all know, has left a legacy of environmental degradation. We have a
situation in which there are what we call derelict and ownerless mines.
These ownerless and derelict mines now need to be rehabilitated, and the
department is to spend R71 million on these activities.

Members would recall that the new mining legislation requires existing
mines to make plans and provisions for the rehabilitation of their mines,
so that we do not perpetuate the mistakes of the past and are therefore
able to protect our environment for future generations.

There are also ongoing problems of mine water, particularly in the
Witwatersrand mines. These problems have necessitated the intervention of
the department, and R32 million has been allocated to the water-pumping
subsidies in this financial year.

Coming to electricity, the issue of the outages in the Western Cape has
thrown the electricity capacity of the country into the limelight. Whereas
in the past few people knew how many megawatts are needed by the country or
what our reserve capacity is, today we find that many people are debating
these important issues.

However, a concern from our side is that there is a great deal of
misinformation as well as inaccuracies that are being put forward as facts.
We recently held a workshop with the chairpersons and CEOs of all the
energy institutions, the energy regulator, government departments, research
institutions, and associated institutions as well as advisors, to discuss
the energy security issue of our country.

We agreed after that workshop that actually there is sufficient capacity in
the country at the moment, and there is no need to panic. However, we are
fully aware that the reserve margins are very tight and, going forward, new
infrastructure and plants will need to be built with speed.

The need to ensure that we have sufficient energy for our present
requirements and to meet our accelerated and shared growth initiative
target is now foremost on our agenda. As the department responsible for
energy policy, we are taking steps to ensure that there is sufficient
capacity and that whatever future forecasts we are making are correct.

New power plants are being planned for KwaZulu-Natal and the Eastern Cape.
These will be built by the independent power producers. These are in
addition to what Eskom is going to demothball, as well as the new power
plants that are being built by Eskom.

The one issue that I would like to talk to very strongly is energy
efficiency.

Ukongiwa kukagesi. Ukongiwa kukagesi kungenye yezinto ezimqoka ikakhulukazi
emva kwalezi zigigaba zase Koeberg lapho kuphehlwa khona ugesi
kusetshenziswa inuzi. Njengoba sikhuluma nje miningi imizamo yokonga ugesi
eseyenziwe khona lapha eNtshonalanga Kapa. Okusemqoka ukuthi kudingeka
sizifundise ukuthi ukonga ugesi, makube yingxenye yempilo yethu nsuku
zonke. Mphathisihlalo ngizocela ukuthi qaphu qaphu nje ngokwenziwa
izakhamuzi zalapha, ekubambeni iqhaza ekongeni ugesi. Okokuqala abaphathi
besifunda sase Ntshonalanga Kapa behlangene noMkhandlu weDolobha laseKapa u
Eskom kanye nezakhamuzi basibonisile ukubaluleka kokubambisana. Umkhankaso
wokushintsha ama globe asebenzisa ugesi omningi usuqalile ukubonakalisa
izithelo. Izigidi ezinhlanu zama globe adla ugesi omncane ziye zafakelwa
emizini engaphezu kwezinkulungwane ezingamakhulu amathathu, zifakelwa
mahhala.

Lo msebenzi ongaka uye waveza amathuba omsebenzi kubantu abangamakhulu
amathathu. Uma sihluleka kulokhu cha sesizoyibika nje  njengoba kusho
isiZulu. Okwesibili olunye uhlelo olusha lubizwa ngokuthi I Power Alert,
mina ke ngilibiza ngokuthi ama robot ngoba lukhombisa imibala ecishe ifane
neyama robot. Lolu hlelo lusebenza kanje, umabonakude ukhombisa isimo
sikagesi ngokubonisa umbala oluhlaza njengotshani, ophuzi, obomvu kanye
nonsundu. Le mibala ke ikhombisa ababukeli lokhu. Oluhlaza usho ukuthi
konke kumi ngomumo, ophuzi uthi qaphela, lungela ukucima ezinye izinto
ezisebenzisa ugesi. Onsundu wona usho ukuthi izinto ezidla ugesi omningi
azicinywe njengamanje, igiza ,izitofu, amaheater kanye namaketela
asebenzisa ugesi. Uma sekuvele lo mbala onsundu cima. Uma usubomvu usho
ukuthi wena lindela ngoba ugesi wakho uzocinywa nanini.

Olunye uhlelo olubaluleke kakhulu  kimi , olokukhuthaza abantu ukuthi
basebenzise igas. Mphathisihlalo, ngabe angiwenzanga umsebenzi wami uma
nginganitsheli ukuthi umsebenzi wokululeka umphakathi ngokusebenzisa Igas
ngendlela ephephile usemningi. Bakithi singakhohlisani Igas iyabiza.
Kungakho nje enye yezinto  ezimqoka ebesizimisele ukuzilungisa impela inani
lentengo yegas. Inani legas lingenye yezinto esivumelene ngayo
sinodadewethu uBuyelwa ukuthi uzoqhubeka ayibhekisise.

Ukufakelwa kukagesi. Engizokukhumbula kakhulu ngesikhathi sami
njengoNgqongqoshe wezokuMbiwa Phansi naMandla ukulethela abantu bakuleli
ukukhanya emizini yabo. Ukungabikho kukagesi emizini eminingi kungenye
yezinto ebezingilethela izinyembezi. Injabulo ebengiye ngiyibone ebusweni
babantu abaqalayo ukuthola ugesi ibingenza ngibe namahloni ngoba kimi ugesi
ungenye yezinto ebengingazihluphi nokuzihlupha ngayo. Sizokhumbula ukuthi
uMongameli uthe ngonyaka ka 2012 bonke abantu base Mzansi Afrika kufuneka
babe nogesi, igas kanye nezinye izinhlobo zokufudumeza zesimanjemanje.
Mphathisihlalo ukuze sikwazi ukufeza lesi sithembiso kudingeka sibe nemali.
Njengamanje imali esiyitholayo ebhekelele ugesi ingu 1.4 Billion kodwa
ukuze sifezekise lezi zithembiso sidinga u R2.5 wezigidigidi ngaphezulu.
Mphathisihlalo ugesi awulethi ukukhanya nje kuphela kodwa usiza
namabhizinisi asafufusayo, usiza abantwana besikole bakwazi ukutadisha
isikhathi eside kodwa okubaluleke kunakho konke usiza ekuletheni
imitholampilo eduze kwalapho sihlala khona. Ngakho-ke ngiyacela bakwethu
sizani masenze izimpilo zibe ngcono. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[Power conservation is one of the important things that we have to look at
after the Koeberg mishaps, whereby nuclear power is used to generate
electricity. As we speak, many efforts regarding electricity conservation
are being made here in the Western Cape. Of importance is that we need to
teach ourselves that electricity conservation is part of our daily lives.

Chairperson, I would like briefly to talk about what is done by the people
here in taking part in electricity conservation. Firstly, officials in the
province of the Western Cape together with the City Council of Cape Town,
including Eskom and the people, saw the importance of working together. The
campaign of substituting the globes that consume a lot of electricity has
started bearing fruit. About 5 million globes which do not use a lot of
energy were installed free of charge in more than 300 homes.

This programme created 300 job opportunities. If we also fail this time we
will have to admit failure, as the isiZulu put it.

Secondly, there is the other new programme, which is called Power Alert; I
personally call this programme “ the robot” because its colours are more or
less the same as those of the robots. This programme works in this way, the
television set shows the status of power supply in colours: green, amber,
red and brown. These colours are meant for the viewers to see the status of
power supply. The green colour means that all is well, amber means be
careful, be ready to switch off certain electrical appliances. The brown
colour means that the things that use a lot of electricity, like geysers,
stoves, heaters and electric kettles should be switched off at that very
time. When the brown colour appears, switch these off. When the red colour
appears, it means be ready for a power cut at any time.

The other programme, which is very important to me, is the one encouraging
people to use gas. Chairperson, I would be failing in my duty if I do not
tell you that there is still a lot to be done in advising people to use gas
wisely. Dear people, we do not have to fool one another, gas is very
expensive. It is for this very reason that one of the things that we intend
looking at is the price of gas. The price of gas is one of the things that
my sister Buyelwa and I have agreed that she would continue looking at very
closely.
With regard to electricity installations, what I will miss the most about
my position as the Minister of Minerals and Energy is bringing light to
people’s homes. The unavailability of electricity in many homes is one of
the things that moves me to tears. The happiness that I would always see on
the faces of first-time power receivers would cause me shame, because
before this I did not worry about electricity at all.

We will remember that the President said that by 2012 every person in South
Africa should have electricity, gas or any other newly invented heaters.
Chairperson, we need to have money so that we can keep all these promises.
Right now the allocation for power is R1,4 billion and we need at least
R2,5 billion and more.

Chairperson, electricity not only brings light, but also helps emerging
businesses. It helps schoolchildren to be able to study for a long time,
but most important of all, it helps bring clinics to where we stay. I
therefore plead with you: Let us make lives better.]

The people of South Africa have given us a mandate. Let’s try and fulfil
that mandate.

Very briefly, I would like to touch on the highlights of some of the
examples of the projects that are going to be executed over the next three
years.

An amount of R33 million will be spent at the Buffalo City local
municipality, under the King Sabata Dalingebo District Municipality. When
this project has been completed, 12 000 homes will have access to
electricity. In addition, the project at resting substations will not only
ensure 18 000 households have access to electricity, but it will ensure
access to cleaner and safe water by supplying a local pump station.

In Mpumalanga, again within the Gert Sibande District Municipality, another
R17,5 million is to be spent there; R15 million in the North West; and in
Enkandla, KwaZulu-Natal, it will be R25 million.

I want to say that on the issue of nuclear energy, I am aware that there is
a great deal of concern in this House about nuclear energy. The department
and the National Nuclear Regulator oversee the continued safe use of
nuclear energy and, of course, we look forward to constructive engagement
on this issue.

Members will remember that, last year, we reported on extensive reports and
workshops on radioactive waste management policy. I am glad to report that
that policy has now been approved by Cabinet and has been published. The
policy has created certainty and confidence among the South African public
that we do have a plan for nuclear waste management.

This year will see us realising the findings of the Moerane Task Team,
which, as we all know, was set up to look at the shortages of fuel in
December.

As this is my maiden and my final budget debate in this House, I would like
first to congratulate the Deputy Minister, who has now been elevated to the
position of Minister, a position that I think is very well deserved. We
congratulate her. [Applause.]

I would like to thank our Director-General and the senior management. I
have no doubt, DG, that you are going to miss both the Deputy Minister and
me in the department. I would like to thank members of the Select Committee
on Energy with whom I believe we worked very well together during my short
stint as Minister of Minerals and Energy. Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Thank you, hon Minister. Hon
Deputy Minister, I know that this is your last day as Deputy Minister, but
you are welcome here in the NCOP.

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: People always know what I am going to say. Chairperson,
hon Deputy Minister and Minister, I first want to congratulate you on your
redeployment and wish both of you well with your new areas of work.

We meet at the end of energy month, but maybe it shouldn’t be for a month
only; it should be a yearly programme to raise people’s
awareness.

In the past, as the Minister has said, we did not consider that our
committee should debate issues related to mining and energy. What is clear
though is that these two areas affect both provincial and local government.
An example of this is the power outages mentioned by the Minister that
happened here in the whole of the Western Cape. This affected many
municipalities. Also, the issue of mining contributes to the provincial
economy and also assists the local government.

We also want to thank Eskom, as somebody coming from Cape Town now, for the
energy-saving lights that have been distributed throughout the area. But I
must just say Minister, before you leave, that I didn’t get my geyser
blanket. I still have to get one.

Our committee is concerned about the occupation, or call it a sit-in, that
took place in the past weeks. An old woman died, not knowing whether she
was entitled to the claims or not. And also, we would like to know the role
played by Teba, particularly these days. We also want to congratulate Sasol
for having raised R24 million for the victims of mine deaths and injuries.

We also know that R120 million has been allocated for the rehabilitation of
ownerless and derelict mines. We know that the priorities are the cleaning-
up of abandoned and ownerless asbestos mines identified and the other
identified sites, which are mainly in the Northern Cape and Limpopo. So,
the cleaning-up of these ownerless mines is taking place in various
provinces, and this creates jobs and builds capacity for the people of our
land, particularly the young and women.

However, the concern lies with the neglect of those who have been injured
in mines. Programmes should be developed to ensure that they are able to
sustain themselves and be productive members of society.

Njengomntu okhulele ezilalini ke Mphathiswa, andiyazi ke ukuba ilali
yintoni ngesiZulu, kodwa uSekela Mphathiswa uyaku kunceda apho ecaleni
kwakho akutolikele. Ndiyazi ukuba kudala umntu oya ejoyinini wayewufumana
kwaTeba umsebenzi ze imali zakhe azifumane xa sele ebuyile ke apho
emgodini. Yiyo le nto ndibuza lo mbuzo.Enye into endiyaziyo kukuba umntu
ebebuya exwaye igumbagumba enkula apha emagxeni engenayo enye into.
Iseyingxaki ke nanamhlanje leyo ebantwini bethu.  Kukho izinto ezibizwa
ngokuba ziindunduma siyaqaphela ukuba kusasetyenzwa kuzo.

Ingaba isiwe iso na loo nto okanye isebe eli liyanxibelelana nelezendalo
malunga nothuli oludaleke phaya? Iyachulumancisa into yokubona ukuba ukuze
ube nomnqweno wokuba ngumrhwebi ayinamsebenzi into yokuba ukhanya
kangakanani kwezi ntsuku zethu. Uqabane uSteve Tshwete ongasekhoyo, - wanga
umoya wakhe ungalala ngoxolo -wayethanda ukuthi xa encoma, “noomofu
bayakhonya”. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[As a person who grew up in the rural areas, Minister, I don’t know the
word ”ilali” in isiZulu, but the Deputy Minister next to you will interpret
that for you. I know that a person who wanted to work in the mines would do
that through Teba and he would get his salary when he came back from the
mines. My question is based exactly on that. What I also know is that a
person would come back carrying just a very large portable tape recorder.
That is still a problem among our people. I also notice that work is still
in progress in what we call mine dumps.

That is why I’m asking this question. Secondly, what I know is that a
person would  come back just carrying a very large portable tape recorder.
That is still a problem among our people even today. There are what we call
mine dumps, but we can see that work is still in progress there.

Has this been considered or is this department co-ordinating with the
Department of Environment and Tourism about the dust that accumulates
there? It is exciting to note that one’s skin colour plays no part in
today’s trade links. Comrade Steve Tshwete - may his soul rest in peace -
used to pay compliments by saying: Noomofu bayakhonya. [Even the previously
marginalised can empower themselves.]]

Eyona nto isebuhlungu Mphathiswa, nekusafuneka kufundiswe kabanzi ngayo
ngumba kagawulayo. Sithetha ngabantu abangamasoka ixesha elininzi apha.
Kufuneka ibe ngathi iyaqina futhi loo mfundiso ngoba indlela abasweleka
ngayo abasebenzi basemgodini ixhomisa amehlo. Manditsho kwakhona ukuba
iyothusa nento yokuba uve inkokheli isithi abantu xa benxanelwe uthando
abafuni zidyasi, yaye abanakho ukuzibamba. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraph follows.)

[Minister, I am happy with the new conversion of hostels to family units.
It is critical that the scourge of HIV/Aids on the mines is addressed. We
need to look at that.

People need to be more educated about HIV/Aids. Here we are talking about
people who have led single lives for a long time. That education needs to
be intensified because the high volumes of deaths on the mines are
frightening. I would also like to mention that it comes as a surprise to
hear a leader saying that partners who are anxious to make love don’t want
to use a condom and they cannot control themselves.]

That’s a very irresponsible statement from a leader.

The demographics of ownership and the contribution of minerals to others
remain a challenge. This is so because of the “rent-a-black” programme.
Some people do not even know that they are as wealthy as the paperwork
says. They are given papers to sign, unaware that they are shareholders and
they are not even told about that.

An example of this would be the discovery of a certain mineral in the
Karoo/Beaufort West area. The owners of that farm are being bought out at
R20 million. Those buyers will make 100x20 profit.

Another thing is that people who claim their land and win are not trained
on how to mine or work. I think we need to make sure that each department
speaks to the others on these issues. As I always hear departments saying,
they have road shows. I think it is going to be very important that
departments involved in such activities speak together and make sure that
they go out together.

Iyabaluleka into yokuba amasebe karhulumente anxibelelane. Kwakhona apha
eNtshona Koloni kukho umba wokombiwa kwesanti, apho ungaboni namnye
kwabethu abantu. Sicela wena Mphathiswa ukuba ukhe uphandisise ukuba ingaba
akutyiswa abahluthiyo na. Kulapho nalo rent a black uza kumfumana khona.
Mandithi xa ndigqibezela Mphathiswa kunye nesebe, sisafuna uphando olunzulu
lokuba iza kuphumelela na le nto yokutsalwa kwamandla emoyeni “wind
energy”, namandla avela engqoloweni “wheat energy”, nokutsala emboneni
zonke ezo zinto zinje ngezo.

Kaloku ndaphuma emagaleni. Umntu ozaziyo eza ncwadi ze-Steward Xhosa
readers, ngoko ke zange ndide ndifike phaya kwamanye amagama amakhulu. Uya
kunceda ke Mphathiswa, nokuba akusekho kweli phondo ubone ukuba oza kungena
esikhundleni sakho uyasincedisa kule nto. Sisele sanela ngexa lokudibana
kwethu silisebe, kwaye sazikhankanya neendawo esinganelisekanga zizo. Ngoku
ndima ndixhasa olu Hlahlo-lwabiwo-mali egameni likaKhongolozi. Enkosi.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Co-operation among governmen departments is essential. Sand mining occurs
in the Western Cape but you cannot even find a single black person. We
appeal to you, Minister, to investigate whether they are benefiting those
who already have full stomachs. This is where you will find the “rent-a-
black”. In conclusion, I would like the Minister together with the
department, to conduct thorough research into whether there will be any
success in generating energy through wind energy, wheat energy, maize
energy and things like that.

I obtained my education at disadvantaged schools. I know those books called
Steward Xhosa readers; and therefore, I did not reach those standards of
learning. It would be good of you, Minister, even if you are no longer in
this province, to ensure that your successor helps us in this regard. We
have highlighted some issues of concern. I support the Budget Vote on
behalf of the ANC. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mrs E S MABE: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister, special
delegates and Members of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen, let me also take
this opportunity to congratulate both of you, Minister and Deputy Minister,
on your new appointments and to wish you well as you execute your new
mandates.

In 1955 the Freedom Charter was drawn up at the Congress of the People in
Soweto. The charter enunciated the principles of the struggle, binding the
movement to a culture of human rights and nonracialism over the following
decades. The Freedom Charter was elevated to an important symbol of the
freedom struggle. The Freedom Charter articulated the need for a mixed
economy, with the key sectors in mining and banking and with the
monopolised industries transferred to ownership by the people as a whole.

When the ANC National General Council met in Tshwane on 29 June to 3 July,
the general council of this glorious movement proceeded to say:

   The ANC’s vision has always been one of a prosperous, equitable, stable
   and democratic society. In the economy, our vision has been one of decent
   work and living standards for all, in the context of qualitatively
   improved equity in ownership, management skills and access to
   opportunities ... It is imperative that we mobilise the ANC’s core
   constituencies - the poor, workers, women, youth and black business -
   around our economic strategies.


Therefore my speech today will focus on the following: women in minerals
and BEE, Eskom and the outages, the building of new power stations, the
rehabilitation of abandoned mines and the proposal of shifting from
paraffin.

The only way for us to make sure that we see progress is by continually
referring back, looking at the present and thereby observing progress, and
anticipating the future, ensuring that the vision I alluded to earlier is
one that is implementable and, of course, noting the challenges with a view
to realising our noble objectives as the ANC-led government.

On the Eskom outages, from the start the ANC-led government emphasised
meeting basic needs through programmes for socioeconomic development such
as the provision of piped water and housing; and electricity was no
exception. The impact of these programmes is seen in the increased
proportion of South Africans who now have access to these basic services,
and for this we commend the department for a job well done.

However, the recent electricity outages in the Western Cape and
Johannesburg show that the department needs to increase its speed in
ensuring that there is adequate provision of energy supply, not only in the
Western Cape and Gauteng, but also in the country at large.

We also note that the Energy Efficient Strategy, which was approved in
March 2005, set a national target for energy efficiency improvement of 12%
by 2015, and that in his state of the nation address in 2004, the President
announced the intention to provide electricity to the majority of this
country by 2012, which is six years from now.

We also hope that the introduction of the electricity Bill will provide
regulatory clarity regarding the responsibilities of the Minister of
Minerals and Energy relative to the regulator and Eskom, as it will also
introduce penalties in the event of breach of the licensed norms and a
centralised plan for electricity capacity expansion so that the struggle in
terms of energy supply will be a thing of the past.

We also appeal to our communities, businesspeople and consumers of energy
to join hands with the department by becoming more energy efficient and to
use alternative energy forms to reduce consumption, particularly at peak
times.

Regarding the rehabilitation of abandoned mines, the rehabilitation
programme for 2005-06 included the following: R43 million has been
allocated to asbestos rehabilitation, which continues to be a priority as
asbestos is a serious health hazard. In the North West, the Western Cape
and Mpumalanga the CGS has identified about 490 abandoned shafts which pose
a severe safety risk to nearby communities, and some R18 million has been
allocated for the rehabilitation of abandoned uranium mines in the Karoo
and the Free State.

However, we also noted that there was R104 million worth of bids which were
expected to have been published as part of the rehabilitation programme in
2005-06. We are still looking forward to these as they will incorporate
dedicated enterprise development and they certainly will create jobs.

On the proposal of shifting from paraffin, the use of paraffin by our low-
income households is more widespread in rural and urban areas. Paraffin
has, however, associated health and safety problems. Therefore we urge the
department to look at this issue closely as it has a serious impact on the
physical, social and economic standing of our people.

Therefore this issue still needs robust discussions amongst stakeholders in
order to find an effective solution. However, we appreciate, in line with
the proposal of phasing out paraffin, that the department has worked out a
plan to phase in LPG gas, which is a better burning fuel for cooking and
heating as it generates less smoke, dust and choking fumes.

This move shows how caring and mindful our ANC-led government is in its
commitment to continuing to provide a cleaner, healthier and safer energy
source to improve the quality of life for the masses of our people.

On women in minerals and BEE - in terms of what we agreed to during the NGC
in Tshwane in that in the economy our vision as the ANC has been one of
decent work and living standards for all in the context of qualitatively
improved equity in ownership, management skills and access to opportunities
- we continue to see together with the department that the role of women in
the minerals and energy sector needs to receive greater prominence.

Therefore we commend the department for initiatives taken through bodies
such as the SA Women in Mining Association, Women in Oil and Energy SA and
Women in Nuclear SA to support the entry of women into this industry. We
are looking forward to seeing these organisations accessing deals that will
make sure that women are economically empowered.

Our country contains a variety of mineral deposits that are conducive to
small-scale mining activities, and programmes have been developed to this
effect. Of prime importance to these programmes is the empowerment of
women. In terms of the development of small-scale mining in South Africa,
the SA Small-Scale Mining Chamber was launched on July 2005 in Kimberley in
the Northern Cape.

According to estimations, about 1 000 jobs can be created out of every
seven to 10 sustainable small-scale mining projects - if nurtured they can
assist in job creation and skills development. These projects employ no
fewer than 740 people, and about 593 women in particular.

The department encourages access to funding for small-scale mining through
support for appropriate and target institutions, and these are the
Industrial Development Corporation of SA Ltd, the New Africa Mining Fund,
Khula Enterprise Finance Ltd and the Development Bank of Southern Africa.
In conclusion, the Minerals and Energy committee supports the Budget Vote.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S S CHEN: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, our future hon Minister, hon
members and distinguished guests, it is well known that South Africa is a
country rich in minerals and resources. These resources are no doubt a
great asset to our country and need our protection and management. It is
vital that we utilise our resources in the most efficient and effective
manner possible in order to provide for generations to come.

There is a global rush to gain access to nature, minerals and resources as
each nation becomes aware of the needs and requirements of their country.
South Africa is fortunate to be one of the countries that enjoys an
abundance of mineral and energy resources. Although they are not limited
these resources need to be managed wisely.

South Africa has always been an exporter of raw material and an importer of
processed products. This is not an efficient way to manage our natural
resources. We need to improve our skills and training as well as our
available technology so that we are able to manufacture and produce goods,
thus allowing our resources to directly benefit our people. This is and
will continue to be a challenging task.

We have heard the Minister of the Minerals and Energy quoting a lack of
funds as the main contributing factor for not achieving various goals and
targets. Although funding is important, it cannot be the only factor to
reaching objectives. Several concerns have been raised in the various
meetings regarding the management of minerals and energy, and some will be
discussed below to illustrate my point.

Firstly, the access and security of electricity has been a major focus
lately. The main explanation given for the nonattainment of connecting 500
000 households to electricity sources has been that of underfunding.
However, the 89 000 households that benefit from the underfunded budget
form only around 18% of the target of 500 000 and yet the budget allocated
was 56% of the required amount - meaning that the budget should have
allowed for the connection of 280 000 households. Clearly, underfunding was
not the only problem for the poor connection rate.

Secondly, a separate concern from funding is a lack of skills available to
fill the vacancies in the department. Staff retention and vacancies
remained a challenge due to the knowledge-intensive requirement of
positions. Credit must however be given to the department for the effort in
the implementation of various bursary and internship training programmes to
increase and improve their current skills base. The effective appointment
of the staff with appropriate knowledge and skills will greatly contribute
to the management of our minerals and energy issues such as the efficient
establishment of Regional Electricity Distributors.

Within the overall objective of prolonging the availability of our natural
resources for future generations, the welfare of our people must also be
considered. Attention must be given to providing access to energy and
ensuring a secure energy supply to all South Africans. The department’s
efforts to phase out paraffin usage and introduce safer and more
environment-friendly energy sources must be encouraged.

Another important concern is the safety and health standards of our mining
industry. Besides the fact that our current fatality numbers are not in
line with international standards, still we have an ethical responsibility
to protect our mineworkers. Other key issues of focus include service
delivery, supporting SMME strategy and commitment towards continuous
capacity-building in the minerals and energy sectors. There are additional
concerns that my colleagues in the National Assembly have already raised. I
am sure our Minister is fully aware of these issues. Therefore, I will not
discuss them any further.

Although funding is a necessary means to many ends, we need to take
appropriate responsibility and accountability for our actions. Embarrassing
occurrences such as the Oil-gate issue must not be permitted to recur as
this brings disrepute on the department as well as on our government. Our
country has many priorities and limited funding is available to be
appropriate to meet all demands. Therefore, even though the budget
allocated to the Department of Minerals and Energy may not be ideal for the
tasks that face us, we nevertheless have to take ownership for what can be
achieved. We hope that with the leadership of our future Minister of
Minerals and Energy, our country will be able to overcome the challenges
ahead.
[Applause.]

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Chairperson, hon Minister, the one who has been the Deputy
Minister, hon members in this House, an admission has to be made that the
implications of this department’s service delivery have been taken very
lightly. The closure of mines boomeranged with a high rate of unemployment
and affected particularly unskilled labour. Similarly, electricity was
taken for granted until outages occurred, affecting all levels of
communities particularly in Cape Town and Johannesburg.

Minerals are God-given gifts to our country, and if properly managed they
create jobs, contribute to the economic growth and alleviate poverty. Apart
from the world-renowned minerals like gold, iron, manganese, platinum,
zinc, vanadium and coal, simple substances like lime, ochre, anthills and
sand are mined by the peasantry in a crude way.

I am quite happy that our Minister has mentioned that training has to be
done for emerging miners. The mining charter has to be implemented or
monitored in order to promote involvement of those emerging miners who are
historically disadvantaged South Africans. Training of this category of
people is needed and it would help to know how much has been allocated for
this function.

The health and safety of miners has to be taken into consideration. The
work done in the mines necessitates a doubly healthy diet, good exercise
and healthy family relations to avoid stress and strained relations. For
this, R117,2 million has been allocated and an additional amount of R8,674
million. To me, this is not enough, in view of claims made following
accidents. Families of accident victims should be considered as dependants
of the victims too.

Mining in traditional areas calls for the restitution of land that was
taken for mining, particularly in rural areas. Consultations have to take
place. Communities should also be given a share of not less than 26% in the
mining enterprise. Women and youth involved in mining should have ongoing
training. Postmined areas should be used for income-generating projects
like forestry, housing or flats. Areas that are along the coast should be
used for promotion of hospitality and tourism.

Electricity capacity constraints experienced in some cities, as I have
mentioned, mean that electricity has to be saved. Our hon Minister has also
mentioned that. The unprecedented blackouts that occurred in the Western
Cape indicated that we have to build on what we have and not adopt the
culture of throwing away what is considered to be obsolete.

About 93,1% of our electricity is generated from coal; 5,5% comes from
nuclear power, whereas 1,3% comes from hydropower. This information is from
the South African Survey 2004-05 which was conducted by the South African
Institute of Race Relations. The garden projects that use electricity for
irrigation experience problems of paying for electricity. The use of
windmills instead of electricity for irrigation can ensure economic growth.
Institutions that are mainly used during the day should rather be assisted
with solar systems in order to save on electricity.

Biofuels, which are lately referred to as green heat, are taking great
strides in that a whole range of appliances are being made that use gel
fluid. Paraffin, coal and wood are also being used to save electricity. In
rural communities, people have to be encouraged to have woodlots for
firewood and to care for the environment.

A project close to this approach can be seen at Mthunzini, that is the Twin
Streams Indigenous Nursery, in KwaZulu-Natal. Whilst people get wood for
fire, the trees prevent soil erosion, the water table is maintained and the
presence of trees prevents the widening of the hole in the ozone layer.
People have to be taught about these cycles and that means a good budget.
The IFP supports the budget, but more money is needed because a lot of
training needs to be done. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Molweni! [I greet you!]

HON MEMBERS: Molo! [We greet you!]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Chairperson, hon members, my
colleagues from the industry in the gallery, ladies and gentlemen ...

Uthe uMphathiswa wam mandithi: gooi gooi okanye gram gram kancinci. [My
Minister said I must summarise or highlight here and there.]

As I present my first and last Budget Vote speech as the Deputy Minister of
Minerals and Energy to this House, I would like to acknowledge the support
of all stakeholders that I have had the privilege and opportunity to work
with. The last two years were a very special time for me.

Kodwa ke ndivile qabane uMani ukuba kukho abojayo, bebhiyoza njengokuba
sihamba nje noqabane uLindiwe. Kambe ze bose, basimeme nathi apho emosweni
ngoba kaloku baseza kuza kuthi. Le migodi bayomba emhlabeni, ngoko baza
kuwaswela amanzi phaya emigodini. [Kwahlekwa.] Ndifuna ukongeza ndithi,
asibashiyi bodwa. Sele ndivela eziplasini, ngoku ndithetha nesibhulu.
Sibashiya ne-skop-se-doner DG. [Kwahlekwa.] Xa usithi nantsi i-target uthi
yena kubo, xa usithi skop naye uthi, skop. Xa usithi left uthi, left ukanti
naxa usithi right uthi, right. Abaselanga bodwa, abazi kuba nesithukuthezi,
tu ke. Ndiza kuqala ke nge-mine health and safety [impilo nokhuseleko
emigodini]. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[However, I have heard, Comrade Mani, that there are those who are
rejoicing and celebrating my departure from Comrade Lindiwe. May they do so
and invite us to their celebrations, because they will come back to us.
They will need water as they dig minerals from the soil. [Laughter.] I want
to add to this by saying that we are not going to leave them alone – I even
went to the farms and I can even speak Afrikaans – therefore, we are
leaving them in the hands of a director-general who is a sharpshooter.
[Laughter.] If you say: Here is the target, he says “go for it”. If you say
“skop”, he also says, “skop”. When you say, “left” he also says “left” and
when you say “right”, he says  “right”. They are not alone; and they will
not be bored at all. Now, let me start with the issue of mine health and
safety.]

The mining industry’s safety performance continues to improve. In the 10
years of the existence of the Mine Health and Safety Act, we are starting
to see the positive impact of the implementation of the Act. The department
has recorded a significant decrease in terms of fatalities in all mines. In
1995, the fatality rate stood at 533 with injuries standing at 7 717. I am
pleased to announce that by the end of 2005, our fatality rate had
decreased to 2002 and the injury rate to 3 961.

The mine health and safety inspectorate has also embarked on a national
strategy to eliminate silicoses and noise-induced hearing loss or
occupational deafness by 2013. These efforts will help reduce the social
course of diseases and injuries particularly in vulnerable communities.
Overall, the 2005 rate was the lowest recorded in the history of South
African mining. Everyone concerned would agree with me that there is room
for improvement; one death is one too many. A lot more work needs to be
done for us to reach parity with international rates by 2013 as agreed at
the mine health and safety summit held in 2003.

Small-scale mining is one of the vehicles for stimulating rural economies
and job creation for poverty alleviation. My department has committed
itself to seeing to it that the small-scale mining sector receives the
necessary attention in order to become sustainable. One of the major
challenges facing my department in the area of small-scale mining is that
of illegal mining operations and the dangers associated with them. A number
of small–scale mining projects have been assisted either technically to
enable them to comply with the mining legislation, or financially to help
them get off the ground. Last year, we established a small-scale mining
board with the mandate to find and implement solutions to overcome the
identified limitations within the small-scale mining sector. This board
will give priority to good quality projects that will serve the poor as
well as contribute towards economic development.

We also assisted the small-scale mining community with the launch of the
South African Small-Scale Mining Chamber. Its mandate is to create one
representative for the small-scale mine operators under one umbrella body
that will represent their interests in various forums where representation
is required.

Since the promulgation of the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development
Act in 2002, we have received over 7 500 applications for all types of
rights. This is unprecedented in the history of the South African minerals
and mining sector. Over 80% of these applications are for new prospecting
rights. I am informed that under the old dispensation the department used
to receive around 400 applications per year. This means that since the
promulgation of the Act, applications have increased ten-fold. This is a
sign that the mining industry is growing and that there are a lot of
investors coming and interested in the country, contrary to the belief of
the prophets of doom who were fighting against transformation and whom we
had to pull, kicking and screaming, to come to the table.

We have increased our capacity with the mineral regulation branch to cope
with the workload, improved on our turnaround time and continued to assist
first-time entrants in the industry. More attention will be given to
ensuring the quality and broad-based nature of the deal supporting BEEs
within these applications.

A major thrust of the Minerals and Petroleum Resources Development Act, is
transformation. Since the promulgation of the Act, we have read and heard
about the biggest ever and the best ever BEE deals.
Andizi kubiza magama abantu. [I will not mention names.]

Notwithstanding these big deals, we still have a long way to go. These two
years have taught us to be aware of the optics of transformation. This a
concept where transactions are structured in such a way that they seem to
be BEE compliant whilst in reality they are not. This is why we have
resolved to look at each and every deal microscopically.

The direct beneficiaries of the empowerment policies of government are also
becoming a problem. We have experienced instances where BEEs are granted
licences and the next thing we hear is that they have sold their rights to
the highest bidder. This is sad and unacceptable. We did not pass this law
to create opportunistic licence traders. We want to have the historically
disadvantaged South African companies operating in the mining sector and we
are not going to allow the beneficiaries of government policy to undermine
our policies.

As we commemorate the 50 fighting years of the women’s march, it is
actually sad that our women, especially those in the mining areas where
mining operations are located, continue to be ignored and abused. We will
be working on changing this in the industry. We are going to facilitate the
creation of women-led and women-controlled operating companies. We want
companies that want to be operationally involved, not to be mere
shareholders or participants in management committees, but companies that
want to dirty their hands in the mines.

We have also experienced a lot of fronting and delusions. Last year in the
department, we conducted a high level audit to establish what happened to
women companies that were granted contracts or tenders within the
department. I must indicate to members in the House that the results were
shocking. The SMMEs that were granted contracts have disappeared and we
could not trace any of them, which is both sad and unfortunate.

A week before last, at the department’s presentation of its strategic plan
to the portfolio committee, an appeal was made, which I am now repeating to
you hon members, that public representatives must join in the fight against
fronting. The sad reality about fronting is the resultant effects of
compromising for the cause of personal and self-enrichment. I would also
like to make a special plea to the women out there not to allow themselves
to be used as fronts.

Ndifuna ukuthi ngaphezulu, asinga bamhlophe bodwa kodwa bakhona nootata
abamnyama abanezisu ezikhulu, abafika phaya batyikitye, behamba noomama
bebaqhuba ngaphambili okweenkomo, bathi bakugqiba ukutykitya aba mama
babangqinibele ngaphandle kwezi nkampani. Nabo ke torho sibajongile.
Ndithi, izisu zabo zibenkulu kakhulu kuna kuqala ke ngoku. (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[I want to add to that by saying that the white men are not alone in this
fronting, there are also black men who are pursuing personal interests and
self-enrichment, who go there to sign agreements, accompanied by women,
putting them forward as if they are a herd of cattle. After completing the
signing process, they push these women away from the companies. We are
keeping a close watch on them. I am saying they are filling their stomachs
more than they did before.]

In striving to achieve the objectives of the Accelerated and Shared Growth
Initiative of South Africa, the department will forge ahead with its plans
to ensure that the mineral resources that are produced in this country are
beneficiated locally.

Le nto intle endiyinxibileyo apha yenziwe ngoomama nootata baseNtshona
yeAfrika. Nathi sinegolide apha eMzantsi Afrika. Akukho mfuneko yokuba le
golide siyihambise ngentengo ephantsi. Masiyisebenzi boomama, sizenzele
into esiyifunayo, sisebenzisa ubugcisa nobuchule bethu baseAfrica, ukuze
sikwazi ukuvelisa ezi zinto ukwenzela ukuba nathi sizithengisele iMelika,
ne-Switzerland neYurophu, ukuze bayeke ukuza apha no-American Swiss baze
kusithengisela igolide yethu sebelonyusa kakhulu kuna kuqala ixabiso layo.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Men and women of western Africa have designed this beautiful dress that I
am wearing. Even here in South Africa we have gold at our disposal. There
is no need for us to export this gold at a lower price. As women we must
use it and do what pleases us, using the art and technology of Africa, in
order to process these things and sell them to countries like America,
Switzerland and Europe, so that they will stop coming up with jewellery
stores like American Swiss, who sell us our very own gold at a higher price
than it was before.]

Local and international players in the diamond cutting and polishing
industry as well as players in the gold and platinum metals
processing industry have shown serious interest in investing in South
Africa following the changes that we have put in place ...

Iinguqu enizaziyo ke, neMithetho esiyipasisileyo enje ngoMthetho
Olungisiweyo weZedayimane, Diamond Amendment Act, noMthetho Oyilwayo
weZimbiwa, Precious Metals Bill. [Those changes you already know, and the
laws that have been passed, like the Diamonds Amendment Act, and the
Precious Metals Bill.]

The department in conjunction with the local and provincial governments is
continuing with the jewellery manufacturing projects in Kimberly and at
Johannesburg International Airport, which have already been introduced to
Parliament. These will create a platform for the influx of investment,
which will bring with it new skills, technologies and funding mechanisms.

All investors that have held discussions with the department have indicated
their interest and commitment to transfer the knowledge and skills based on
their extensive expertise in this field and to come to South Africa and
build their factories and industries here.

In November 2005, we trained about five young South Africans in Belgium for
diamond jewellery management. We are planning to continue with this
programme; we have an agreement with the Belgian government that we will
continue to send South Africans every year to this programme. We also have,
in the department, continued to work on skills development. We have the
Gabane project, which is operating within Mintech and is training rural
women in jewellery manufacturing. We are also continuing with this project
in conjunction with our Seta, the mining qualification authority.

Last year we signed an agreement with a Chinese company where they are
going to train our young girls in diamond and jewellery manufacturing.
Already, we have sent 15 girls who started in February and will be coming
back in July after six months. We are supposed to send another batch of
girls in the next term and there is a contract of five years. Every year we
send two groups for training in China. That will help us to be able to
produce our own jewellery and beneficiate and add value to our minerals,
here, in South Africa. [Applause.]

We also have Petro SA that has been struggling to ensure that we get access
to oil and gas in Africa and other parts of the world. They are promising
and they are doing very well now. As the members have said we have, as part
of our work, established Sawusa and Woesa and other women formations. I
wish to take this opportunity to call on Sawima and Woesa to get their
houses in order. We hope that they will be able to address the concerns
around their accessibility in rural areas and create opportunities for
other disadvantaged women. We also salute Winsa, which is concentrating on
nuclear energy and women and ensuring that there is representivity for
women in the nuclear centre and awareness and education for our young girls
to come into this important industry.

I would like to thank the Minister for her dedication and commitment over
the last few months that she has been with us in the department. I have
learnt a great deal from her and I wish her all the best in her new
portfolio. A special thank you to the Director-General, Sandile Nogxina,
for being the pillar of strength at the centre of all the many changes in
the leadership of the department. Thank you to the staff of the Department
of Minerals and Energy for your support during my stay in the department.

In conclusion, I would like to inform you that I have already had a good
meeting with the farmers on Monday. [Laughter.] They have invited me to
their next hunting expedition at the end of June. Indeed, they love a woman
who can shoot straight and get her targets. [Laughter.] As a rural and a
country girl, I expect my Director-General for Land Affairs to make land
available and my Director-General for Agriculture to bring the seeds and
tractors, including seeds for energy crops to produce biofuels so that we
can go out there in the rural areas and begin to develop our country. I say
to the directors-general, ``You were warned that I shoot from the hip and
this is my first shot and a very good one.’’ [Laughter.]

I am sure the new Minister of Water Affairs will make water available while
the new Minister of Minerals and Energy will provide energy for irrigation
and dairy equipment so that we can go back and develop agriculture in the
rural areas.

Masiphumeni ematyotyombeni aseKapa naseGoli mawethu! Siyagodola apha, kwaye
siyalamba, ngoba akukho misebenzi. Masigodukeni siye kulima emakhaya,
umhlaba usekhona, nemvula inile. Masiyekeni ukutshipha eRhawutini naseKapa.
Ndiyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[People, let us evacuate the shacks of Cape Town and those in Johannesburg.
We are freezing and living in hunger, because there are no jobs. Let us go
back and cultivate the land in our places of origin. We have soil to work,
since it has been raining. Let us abandon our long stay in Cape Town and
Johannesburg. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Mme M P THEMBA: Modulasetilo yo o tlotlegang, Tona e e tlotlegang, Motlatsa
Tona yo o tlotlegang, baemedi ba ba tlotlegang le maloko a kokoano
peomolao, borre le bomme, Ke bona re tswanetse go fetola diane tsa
bogologolo. Fa re gola gone gotwe: ”Ya etelelwa ke e tshegadi kwa pele ya
wela ka lengope.” Re tshwanetse re lebelele jaanong re di busetse kwa
morago gore jaanong diane tse tsa bogologolo re bone gore re di baya jang
gonne fa e tshegadi e eteletse kwa pele, re namela thaba re fitlhelela ka
kwa ga yona.

Monongwaga ditirelo tsa diminirala le maatla di tla fitlhelela batho ba
rona mo maphateng otlhe. Matshwititshwiti a batho a tla bona ditšhono
segolo jang bomme le bašwa. O ke motheo wa kgololosego e re neng re e lwela
re e tlhabanela re le ba mokgatlo wa African National Congress mo nakong e
e fetileng. Ke ka moo Tautona Rre Thabo Mbeki a neng a tlhagisa le go
totobatsa dikgwetlo tse di lebaganeng puso, re akaretsa tlhaelo ya bokgoni,
botlhoka tiro le bohumanegi. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, hon representatives
and members of the House, ladies and gentlemen. I think we have to change
the old proverbs. When we grew up, it was said, “When it is led by a woman,
it encounters danger”. We have to look at these old proverbs and change
them because we climb the mountain and reach the other side when a woman
leads.

This year, the minerals and energy services have reached our people in all
sectors. Multitudes of people will have opportunities, especially women and
the youth. This is the foundation of the democracy that we, the African
National Congress, fought for in the past. That is why President Thabo
Mbeki has outlined and emphasised the challenges that are facing
government, including the lack of skills, unemployment and poverty.]

During their presentation of the Budget Vote to the select committee, the
Department of Minerals and Energy assured the committee that gender issues
in that department are at the top of their agenda. They even assured us
that they have a fully fledged functioning gender focal desk, but I call it
a focal point. On Thursday and Friday Sawima – South African Women in
Mining Association will be holding their annual general meeting.

Ngiyetsemba, Ndvuna, kutsi iSawima, South African Women in Mining
Association, kulekhomfa yabo yangaLesine bakuvile kutsi utsini, batawuvuma
kutsi batawukhona kuya nasemaphandleni kuze kutsi Litiko nalifika kitsi
sive kahle kutsi ngempela ... [I trust, Minister, that Sawima at their
conference on Thursday did hear and have understood what you have said and
that they will agree to visit the rural areas so that when the department
does come to us, we will be able to get some clarity ...]

Mokgolokwane o utlwagetse kgakala! [Ululations are heard from afar.]
In realigning and integrating the energy sector, the National Energy
Regulator Act, Nersa, has been created in line with the National Energy
Regulator Act of 2004. Nersa is the national energy regulator for South
Africa and its mandate is drawn from the following legislation: National
Electricity Act of 1987, the Regulator Act of 2001 and the Petroleum
Pipelines Act of 2003.

Central to Nersa’s mandate will be to take necessary actions in
anticipation and in response to changing circumstances in the energy
industry. As part of its responsibilities, Nersa performs these regulatory
functions, processes licences, sets tariffs, sets conditions of supply and
standards, investigates complaints and mediates or arbitrates in disputes.
It also promotes BEE and competition in the energy industry. Necsa or the
National Energy Co-operation for South Africa has as its mandate to develop
and use nuclear technology as part of the broader system of innovation and
to serve government’s nuclear institutional obligations. Its main units
includes nuclear technology, nuclear services, facilities management,
nuclear technology products and high technology products.

Siyeva kutsi labomake lababili laba basebenta ngethekniki. [We understand
therefore that these two ladies are using a specific technique.]

It should be noted that Safari 1, that is South African Fundamental Atomic
Research Installation 1, celebrated 30 years of safe and successful
operation in March 2005. It plays an important role in research and the
production of radioisotopes for medical applications. About 60 000 patients
from our country and the world at large benefit annually from the medicinal
use of isotopes originating from Safari 1. Safari 1 has provided products
to customers in more than 50 countries.
As part of its programme, Necsa has set the following targets: to upgrade
the Pelindaba and Vaalputs security systems; improve the health, safety and
environmental management system; and manufacture low-enriched uranium
prototype fuel for the conversion of the Safari reactor.

The minerals and energy sector would also play an important role in the
achievement of the objectives of Asgisa, particularly through the metals
and metallurgy sectors. This is linked to the progress that government made
last year in the areas of beneficiation and passage of various enabling
legislation.

In the 2006-07 financial year, the department has outlined seven programmes
in which it will deliver on the targets set out in the state of the nation
address and its strategic plan.

The department’s guiding fundamentals are premised in the following
strategic objectives: active contribution to sustainable development,
bridging the gap between the first and second economy, implementing
relevant regulatory and promotional policies and review of structures and
capacity so as to efficiently deliver on its mandate.

Key to the responsibility of the administration programme in order to
achieve the above is to manage the department and provide administrative
support, including policy formulation. The Administration Programme is
centrally located and very critical to the success of other programmes of
the department. In carrying out its mandate, the department and the
Ministry require proper management of all programmes and the development
and implementation of policies.

Fundamental to our support of the Budget Vote are good administrative
practices accompanied by principles of Batho Pele. At the core of our
governance is the proclamation contained in the Freedom Charter, as we
celebrate this year, the 50th anniversary of the women’s march, the people
shall govern.

The mechanisms such as Asgisa and Joint Initiative for Priority Skills
Acquisition, Jipsa, have been put in place to address the challenges faced
by our fledging democracy. The department is strategically positioned to
ensure that the objectives of Asgisa aimed at halving poverty, job creation
and skills development are attained. Primary to this will be the nurturing
of the SMMEs through training and development.

In conclusion, in order to succeed in delivering services to the masses,
the department has realigned and increased the number of programmes from
six to seven. This is in line with the goals set in the previous Budget
Vote. The Administration Programme supports the work of six other
programmes, namely, Mine Health and Safety, Hydrocarbon and Energy
Planning, Mineral Regulation, Mineral Policy and Promotion and Electricity
and Nuclear Energy. The select committee supports the Budget Vote. Thank
you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Ms N P MAGWAZA (Western Cape): Chairperson, Ministers, and members, thank
you for this opportunity to address you on the energy situation in the
Western Cape. I don’t think we have ever realised how dependent on energy
we have become. The situation in the Western Cape is indeed a wake-up call
and we should not be complacent about the issue.

The province faces a critical three months as temperatures drop with the
onset of winter and the demand for electricity rises. Against this backdrop
we face an electricity shortage, which has already cost the economy
billions of rands in lost revenue. Business, industry and residential
consumers have been urged to cut down on their usage of electricity.

As temperatures plummet, the risk of load shedding increases. We expect
this situation to continue until both reactor units at Koeberg are together
back on line, which will be at the end of July. Eskom has assured consumers
that the situation will then be back to normal.

Whilst we have been traditionally dependent on a carbon-based energy
economy, recent advances in renewable energy technologies is encouraging.
There is light at the end of the tunnel. There has been a worldwide
increase in energy generation from renewable energy sources like solar
energy and wind energy as large economies seek alternatives in the context
of an increasing oil price and the looming crisis of a global shortage of
oil.

According to PriceWaterhouseCoopers, the world’s energy demand is expected
to rise by two-thirds between 2003 and 2030. Energy security has become a
critical concern as demand outstrips supply. This is the result of the
increasing difficulty to balance power generation and transmission with
demand.

Energy consumption in South Africa measured against output is very high
compared to our global competitors, due, partly, to historically wasteful
and inefficient use based on the relatively low cost. The affordability and
accessibility issue of poorer communities in a developing country context
now takes a different turn, as supply becomes a major problem.

The surplus enjoyed 20 years ago is now a thing of the past. South
Africans, especially the citizens of Western Cape, have learned this the
hard way. We have been forced seriously to re-evaluate the way we consume
and conserve this important commodity.

We are at the threshold of an unprecedented moment in our economic history
when, for the first time in 25 years, consumers are enjoying the benefits
of low interest rates and a brighter outlook for the future. In this age of
hope, as our President calls it, our people are expected to participate in
this shared economy as we aspire to a 6% growth rate towards 2014.

Integral to achieving this target will be a sound energy generation and
supply system. Energy security will play a key role in the growth and
development trajectory of the country, especially the Western Cape, given
our unique location away from the electricity generation hub of the
country. In this regard, Eskom is playing a key role in ensuring that
government’s chances of setting the country on a 6% economic growth path
are significantly enhanced.
Against this backdrop, we are of the opinion that the Western Cape is in a
unique position to capitalise on the use of its natural attributes and
resource base in finding innovative solutions in order to meet the future
projected energy demand.

The South African economy is predominantly driven by fossil fuels with a
high carbon dioxide emissions profile. Relying on these generation sources
alone is problematic from an energy security point of view, as has been
highlighted in recent months.

The fossil fuel dependence presents an environmental challenge, which has
already been highlighted in the environmental fiscal reform position paper
that was recently developed by the National Treasury. The energy portfolio
has to be diversified to limit the risks of dependence on carbon-based
technologies.

Studies suggest that the Western Cape is highly vulnerable to the impacts
of climate change, with significant implications in particular for the
agricultural sector as well as for biodiversity, tourism and for the
availability of water supplies.

Electricity in the Western Cape is largely supplied through coal and
nuclear energy sources, with limited generation capacity in the Western
Cape resulting in high dependency on imported electricity into the
province.

Energy demand is characterised as follows: transport uses 59%, industry
uses 17%, residential use comes to 10%, agriculture uses 8%, and commerce,
public services and mining use 6%. The Western Cape has the significant
potential for development of a range of innovative energy efficiency and
supply-side initiatives.

The White Paper on the Energy Policy of the Republic of South Africa of
December 1998, has identified the following five key policy objectives:
increasing access to affordable energy services; improving energy
governance; stimulating economic development; managing energy related
environmental and health effects; and securing supply through diversity.

The integrated energy plan for the Republic of South Africa 2003 provides a
framework for taking decisions on energy policy and for the development of
different energy sources and energy technologies in the country.

The White Paper on Renewable Energy recognises the significant medium-and
long-term potential of renewable energy. The DME energy efficiency strategy
provides specific targets for reduction in energy demand by 2014 within the
given demand sectors, with an overall target of 12% reduction in
consumption.

The NER regulatory policy on energy efficiency and demand-side management
sets annual energy efficiency and demand-side management,  EEDSM, targets
and specifies the programmes that would qualify for EEDSM funding.

Currently, industry is the major user of electricity in the province.
Electricity is used mainly in the industrial, residential and commercial
sectors. Given this profile and the future projections for energy use in
the province based on current trends, some key issues need to be addressed.

The fundamental principles of a sustainable energy plan require a steady
move away from fossil fuels as the foundation for energy supply; the
introduction of cleaner alternatives; a steady increase in renewable energy
sources; greater focus on energy efficiency; attention to the welfare of
low-income households; and the development of an effective, efficient and
affordable public transport system.

The growing demand for energy will also require a focus on the use of
renewable energy and accelerated energy efficiency programmes. In South
Africa, approximately 10% of electricity generated is used for the heating
of water in the residential sector. So, the use of solar water heating, for
example, would make good business sense and could form the fundamentals of
catalysing a new industry sector for the manufacturing and assembly of
solar thermal and solar photovoltaic systems.

In the context of the energy crisis facing the province, Eskom together
with key stakeholders, have developed a Western Cape Integrated Recovery
Plan to address the continuity of electricity supply in the Western Cape in
response to the recent disruptions to power and the projected increase in
electricity demand. The electricity supply to the Western Cape is currently
constrained by the power. The Western Cape supports the Budget Vote. Thank
you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Chairperson, hon Minister and the rest of the team, one
feels a little bit lonely for it seems that the ladies have taken over
already. I am the first male to speak here. [Laughter.]

Whilst we recognise the policy objectives of establishing regional
electricity distributors, the first Red formed in Cape Town was mired in
controversy surrounding inflated remuneration packages not authorised and
approved by council, and luxury offices whilst there is plenty of office
space in the city centre council complex.

The BEE, in terms of the Mining Charter, is making progress but we need to
see more deal-making at a lower scale involving community and mine workers
and not the usual BEE suspects.

The question of mine safety has reared its ugly head again, and one is
happy to have heard from the Minister that that is being attended to and
that they are working hard on it because one death is one too many.

More qualified black diamond traders need access to the market, which is
still dominated by a few key players who buy the precious stones. Perhaps
we need to look at market structure in terms of assisting new entrants in
making a success of their ventures.

The state diamond trader that was established will go a long way to
develop sustainable beneficiation enabling historically excluded – not
disadvantaged – but excluded groups to benefit in the mineral wealth of the
country. We have been totally excluded and this is perhaps one of the most
exciting things that is happening in our country at the moment and we want
to compliment your department on doing that.

Finally, I am of the view that Eskom’s intention to substantially increase
their tariffs between the hours of 6 and 9 pm would have a drastic impact
on the life of the working class as this is the time they return from home
and that is the only time that they have to cook their food.

I think we have to look at that again. We also need to inform our public
nationally of nuclear power and its impact and the safety mechanisms that
we are putting in place especially with the pebble-bed reactor that we are
planning, as this is something new that is coming up and is not the normal
nuclear energy supplier.

I want to compliment the department on the way in which they have tackled
their problems particularly in the mining sector. I am sorry that all these
people ran away, but there are lots of men who will come up and make use of
those BEE opportunities! Thank you. We support the Budget. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr J M SIBIYA: Mutshami wa xitulu manana Hollander, tiholobye ta hina na
museketeri wakwe manana Hendrikse na manana Xingwana ha nkhensa, hina
macomrade.

Chairperson Mrs Hollander, hon Minister and her deputy, Mrs Hendriks and
Mrs Xingwana, we, the comrades, are thankful.]

Before I continue, as a matter of dignity, I must say something concerning
the former Oil-for-Food Programme in Iraq. That was the programme of the
UN. Some of the stakeholders and role-players are  alleged to have done
something through the programme. The UN has set up a commission of inquiry
and all those alleged to have done something have been and are being called
upon to answer some questions. Therefore there is no need for any of us to
make pronouncements before that commission of enquiry makes its findings
known.

It is for this reason, amongst other things, that I would refer to the
British progressive scientist of the 18th century, Sir Thomas Moore, who
dared to challenge the order of the day by saying the world is not flat and
that instead it is round. He was executed, but before he was executed, he
had the following words for his executors. He said, “The wise do not tread
where the foolish play.” I thank you.

Tsalwa ra hina ra nhlawulo leri hi ri tirhiseke eka nhlawulo lowu nga
hundza hi 2004, ri vula leswaku hulumende loyi a nga ta rhangeriwa hi ANC u
ta endla hinkwaswo leswaku hi lembe ra 2012 muti wun’wana na wun’wana wu
kota ku fikelela gezi etikweni ra hina hinkwaro. Hi ku landzelela
xitshembiso lexi, hulumende wa hina, hi ndzhawulo ya swicelwa ni ya
swipfurhi, wu kunguhatile leswi landzelaka, leswaku loko ku fika 2012 muti
wun’wana na wun’wana hakunene wu kuma gezi. Xosungula, ku kunguhatiwile
matirhisele ya swipfurhi leswi swi nga thyakiseki mbangu.

Xavumbirhi, va kunguhatile ku nyika vanhu mpfumelelo “layisense” ku va va
kota ku xavisa tipetroli loko kuri ku va swi kota. Va tlhela va veka milawu
ya makumele ni matirhisele ya malahla hi ndlela leya ku va vanhu va nga
tikumi va wela emakhombyeni. Hikuva ha swi tiva, khale ka kona vanhu va ka
hina a va tirhisa timbawula. Na sweswi va ha ti tirhisa van’wana. Va pfa va
etlela va rivala va nga timangi va pfuka mundzuku va lovile hi mhaka ya
musi lowu wu humaka laha ya eka mbhawula lowuya. Se, hulumende wa hina u
lava ku swi sivela kuri swi nga humeleli.

Nakona hulumende loyi u lava ku lulamisa makungu ya leswaku a kuma
swipfurhi leswi loko hi tirhisa swona hi nga tikumi hi ri makhombyeni na ku
va hi kuma hi lova ku fana na leswi timbhawula ti nga hi endla swona.
Hulumende wa hina loyi, wa swi tiva leswaku vanhu va hina le switandini le
handle le, hayi emadoropeni, va na rona gezi. Kambe nchumu lowu wu hi
karhataka hi lowu, lowu hi lavaka ku kombela Holobye wa hina Manana
Hendriekse leswaku va hi pfuna. Magezi lawa ya nga kona le, loko ko ba
moyanyana wuntsongo njhe! – even if there is soft wind- yo timeka. Ya ya
vuya endzhaku ka tiawara ta mune kumbe nthlanu, se a hi kombela ku va hi
pfuniwa kuri magezi lawa ya nga timeki hambi kuri rini a ya timeki loko swi
fanele ku fana na le doropeni. Ya timeka loko kuri na swihangu, kuri na
swihuhuri -hale wind. Kutani le ka hina le nkarhi wun’wana na wun’wana ya
timeka. A va hi pfune.

Nakona ku na makungu ya leswaku vanhu lava kotaka ku va va xavisa swipfurhi
swo fana na tipetroli na malahla va andza va nga vi lavantsongo. A va vi va
hlayile kuri vanhu va kota ku kuma vukorhoki services - lomu va tshamaka
kona.

Xin’wana lexi nga kona i mhaka ya kuri petroli i nchumu wun’wana lowu
kulukumba ngopfu lowu wu tirhisiwaka, se a hi lava leswaku Holobye wa hina
va hi pfuna ku va hi tswisisa swilo swingari swingani eka mhaka leyi ya
petroli. Xosungula, minxavo ya petroli yi ya ehenhla masiku hinkwavo swi
nga va swi vangiwa hi yini? Nakona minxavo leyi ya petroli yi tisa ku yini?
Hi vutisa leswi hi mhaka leyi, ha swi tiva leswaku tiko ra hina ra Afrika
Dzonga ra swi kota ku va ri cela ri cela oyili kumbe oyili leyimbisi yo
ringana kwalomu ka 45 000 wa tibarele. Se, leyin’wana oyili ya ku va yi
kota ku tiko ri tirha kahle ri nga khwiti hi yi kuma kwihi na swona hi yi
kumisa ku yini, leswaku loko hi ya le handle le vanh’wini hi ta kota ku va
hlamusela va swi twisisa.

Se ku na tindhawu tin’wana ta kufana na le ka va Mahatlani, mi nge ku tivi
a ti kona eka mepe tindhawu leti, va-Wayeni, va-Majozi, va-Xinyamana, vanhu
lavaya va nga lomuya i ntiyiso gezi va na rona, kambe gezi leri a ri
tshembisi. Mi nga pfuka nampundzu mi kuma ringari kona handle ka moya, loko
mi lumeka, mi kuma ku nga ri nga gezi. Xosungula a mi tivisiwanga eka radio
kuri ku ta va na swiphiqo swo karhi. Naswona a byeriwi kuri ri ta vuya
nkarhi muni ku fana na la, ha tivisiwa, va vula kuri ku suka hi awara
yatsevu ku ya fika hi nkarhi wo karhi tilunghiseni gezi ri tava ringari
kona. Swa twala va lava ku tirha, kambe le ro nthi! A va vuli. Ro tshuka ri
nyamalala ri ya riya vuya endzaku ka tiawara ta tsevu. Hi swin’wana swa
leswi swi vangaka kuri ku karhatekiwa hi matirhele ya lomuya makaya.

Loko hi twa lava va swi tivaka va hi byela leswaku tipetroli eBotswana na
le va Swaziland ta xaveka, hi marito man’wana tichipile kambe la ka hina ya
durha. Se swi nga va swi vangiwa hi yini? Hi lava ku kota ku hlamusela
vanhu loko hi ya le “constituency office”. Hi kombela ku lemukisiwa, hikuva
hi mativelo ya hina tiko leri ra hina ri fuwile hi swicelwa ku tlula matiko
laman’wana lawa ya nga exikarhi ka hina kambe loko swi ta eka minxavo, hina
swa durha vona a swi durhi ngopfu. Hayi! Swa hi phazamisanyana a va hi
hlamuseli. Eka tin’wana tindhawu leti mi nge ndzi vulavula hi xinghezi
laha. (Translation of Xitsonga paragraphs follows.)

[Our election manifesto in the recent elections in 2004 states that a
government that is led by the ANC will do everything in its power so that
every household in the country would have access to electricity by 2012. To
realise this dream our government, through the Department of Minerals and
Energy, has planned to ensure that every household indeed accesses
electricity by 2012. Firstly, there is a plan to use energy that will not
pollute the environment.

Secondly, there is a plan to grant licences to people to sell petrol where
possible and lay down ground rules for the acquisition and safe usage of
coal that will not endanger people’s lives, because we are aware that our
people used, and some still use, braziers. At times they go to sleep
forgetting to switch them off, and lose their lives as a result of the
smoke that is emitted by these braziers.

Now our government wants to prevent that from occurring and also devise
means for the acquisition of energy transmitters that when used do not
endanger us and cause our death, which the braziers are capable of doing.
This government is aware that our people in villages on the outskirts, not
in the locations, access electricity, but the challenge that faces this
power supply is the one that we request our Minister, Mrs Hendrickse, to
help us resolve. The electric power we have, no matter how swiftly the wind
blows, the current is cut. It is only restored after four or five hours;
now our request is assistance so that our electrical current will not go
off at just any time, but only when it is necessary, like in urban areas
when you experience disruptions only when there are hail storms, or a
whirlwind. At my place we experience these blackouts at any time; please
help us.

There are also proposals that the number of people who may sell energy like
petrol and coal should be increased. It should be a reasonable number so
that people could receive services in their respective areas.

The other thing is that petrol is a commodity that is largely used, so I
would like our Minister to highlight for us a few things in this regard.
Firstly, petrol price hikes take place frequently; what could be the cause
of this, how are hikes and petrol prices determined? How is the price
determined? We make these inquiries, because we know that our country,
South Africa, has the potential for producing about 45 000 barrels of crude
oil; now where does the oil that keeps the country running come from? How
is it acquired? We ask these questions to enable us to give a satisfactory
explanation to the people.

There are some areas like Mahatlani that you won’t know because they do not
appear on the map, as well as Wayeni, Majozi and Xinyamana. It is true that
those people access electricity, but it is unreliable. One morning you wake
up to find that there is none, except when the wind was blowing. Then, you
were not notified through the media that there would be problems or when it
would be restored either. Here we are notified that from six-until-such-
time there will be no electricity, therefore be ready for the blackout. It
is understandable because they are doing maintenance. In those areas it
just goes off and is restored after six hours. These are some of the
problems we experience in villages.

Learning from those with knowledge, we are told that petrol is cheaper in
Botswana and Swaziland, but here at home it is expensive. What is the
cause? We want to be able to explain it to our constituency, we want to be
enlightened because according to our knowledge we are rich in minerals,
more so than other countries around us, but when it comes to purchases, we
pay more and they pay less. No, it is disturbing. Let us have an
explanation. In other areas ... let me say this in English.]

In some places, you find a very big village of about 400 to 800 households.
While none of the people in that village have electricity, yet there are
power lines, which we do not know whether they are from Mozambique or
Camden. They pass through that village and take the electricity uphill
where a certain Mr Van Tonder stays while the people at the foot of the
hill do not have any electricity. We know these are the things we inherited
from the legacy of where we come from. Perhaps the government might try to
look at some of these things so that they can be corrected as well.

Another thing is that our government has introduced the regional
electricity distributors, a very big step forward. We want to thank the
Minister for this and also thank all those that work with her, ranging from
the lowest ranked official to herself and those above her. In our
understanding, that will make it easy to avoid having one centre for
electricity distribution which would mean that if it goes off everybody
will be affected. But, in this case, if it is only that particular region
that has a problem it will be that only region that is going to be affected
and the rest will be in a position to move on. It is a very brilliant move;
we want to thank you for that.

I now come to another area and, please, don’t become shocked because I will
explain why I say what I am saying. The hon Minister indicated to us that
the government has now in place nuclear waste management policy - if I am
not right please take me to task. Am I right madam? Very good. [Laughter]
This then means that it is about time that we began to think about the
possibility of resorting to nuclear power, and only for strictly civilian
use. If I don’t do that I know some people outside here will ask, “What is
he saying?”

I am talking about nuclear power strictly for civilian use only so that we
are able to cope with the demand of energy in our country, and we also
advance our techniques for both storage and disposal – if it comes to that
as a need. In that way we will avoid the situation we found in Ukraine in
1986, where the Chernobyl nuclear station exploded. I think more than 16
000 people were affected. Even today, some of them live with the effects of
that explosion. So we can have a way of looking at that.

I am saying this because I am aware that in 1994, when our new government
came into power, we found out that this country already had three light
water nuclear reactors. When former President Mandela came into power ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon member, your
time has expired.

Mr M J SIBIYA: In conclusion, that son, leader, teacher, pan-African, the
former Prime Minister of Congo who was captured by the reactionaries of
this world - the Moise Tshombes and the Kasavubus  - wrote a letter before
he died. The last paragraph read:

   Neither brutality nor violence nor cruelty will make me to ask for mercy.
   I prefer to die with my faith unshaken because I know that Congo and
   Africa will write their own history. That history will be glorious and
   dignified.

We are writing that history. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister,
special delegates, hon members, members of the industry in the public
gallery, this has been a very interesting debate. I would like to thank you
all for participating and supporting our Budget Vote.

So many important things have been said that I won’t be able to deal with
them in ten minutes. But the department is here and has taken note of
whatever I am not going to be able to touch on, because quite a lot of
issues that we actually do have answers for have been raised.

Let me start off by saying to the Chair of the Select Committee and say
indeed ...

... ukuba kucacile ukuba uyazazi izinto ezidla umzi, kuba zonke ezi zinto
azivezileyo zizinto esihleli phezu kwazo nesizama ukuzilungisa. Ngoko,
ndiza kuthetha ngezimbalwa kuzo. Ezinye andizi kukwazi ukufikelela kuzo.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[... that it is quite clear that he knows about these critical challenges
because all the things he has mentioned are challenges to us, and we are
trying to solve them. Therefore, I will only talk about a few of them I
will not be able to cover all of them.]

Firstly, we regret that some people lost their lives during the recent sit-
ins by ex-miners or their beneficiaries who were sitting in at the Union
Buildings. Unfortunately, this is an issue that is out of the hands of the
Department of Minerals and Energy. Hence, it is a matter that is under the
jurisdiction of the Department of Labour. They are dealing with it. They
have set processes in place, together with the province, the Chamber of
Mines and national government.

Kambe kukho umntu ogeza gqitha wangaphaya eTranskei, ekuthiwa nguNomazele,
oqhatha aba bantu ngenxa yokuhlupheka nobuhlwempu abakubo. Ubathembisa
ngokuba uza kufika apha abafumanele imali yabo. Yena ubafaka ezibhasini,
ebahlawulisile ke phofu, abazise apha, bashiyeke begodola, belambile,
balale engceni ngeli xesha yena elele kamnandi ehotele. Lo mba ubekwe
esweni liSebe lezaBasebenzi. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[There is this very mischievous person from the Transkei by the name of
Nomazele, who manipulates these people because of their poor and vulnerable
situation. She promises them that she is going to collect money on their
behalf. She puts them onto buses, charges them transport fees, brings them
here, leaves them freezing, hungry and sleeping on the grass, while she is
sleeping comfortably in a hotel. This matter, however, is being closely
monitored by the Department of Labour.]

In order for us to avoid a situation like this from arising in future, our
new mining law, the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act, makes
it peremptory for all companies to provide social plans when they apply for
their licences to ensure that we address issues of human resource
development and community development so that when mines are closed down
there is at least a plan for the people who are being retrenched that they
have alternative skills that they can go and use at home or that they can
do some other things like starting their own businesses. That is very well
noted.

I think the hon member raised the issue of mine-dumps, which was also
raised by the hon Mabe. The rehabilitation of derelict mines is currently
being addressed by the department. Currently, tenders for eight identified
sites have been assessed and finalised. We expect that work on this will be
finalised by the end of this financial year. It is also planned that SMME
opportunities will be made available, particularly in the area of
vegetation, after all the earthworks have been finalised and cleared. The
focus of this is currently in the Northern Cape.

New tenders are going to be issued during the course of the year for more
sites that are to be rehabilitated. What is important to say in this regard
is that we are targeting women and people who are unemployed, who do not
need a lot of skilling to do the work. So, we hope you will be watching
this space so that we can get as many women involved when we issue these
tenders.

Hon Mabe, I think we have dealt with the outages in the Western Cape and in
the country. Indeed, we agreed that better planning by Eskom is going to be
required for us to avoid a similar situation in future. But hon members
have been part of the debates in this House and know that the Electricity
Regulation Bill introduces stiff penalties for breach of licence conditions
which were not there before. So, that gives a bit of weight of power to the
regulator in the event of breaches.

Also, the regulatory framework prescribes norms and standards relating to
the quality of supply, including maintenance standards, levels of
investments, tariffs and their levels. There is also improved reporting
requirements on the part of the licensees. This, we believe, is going to
help us deal with and address the problems of unplanned shutdowns and
supply disruptions at generation, transmission and distribution.

Lastly, we will also be concluding the section 76 issues of the
Constitution that will be coming through this House relating to electricity
regulation as well as electricity reticulation. We believe that the
situation that we are in will in future be avoided by all these amendments
and also by better planning and the better focusing that I spoke about in
my speech.

I just want to address one issue that was raised by hon Chen. I think, hon
member, you misunderstand the way electricity infrastructure is rolled out,
particularly how the costing works because there is indeed no direct
correlation between what you said are 18% achieved connections and the 56%
budget spent. The cost is simply a function of the extent of the
infrastructure backbone that must be provided. I am sure members will
appreciate that as we electrify rural areas, the costs get higher because
those are areas that were neglected that we have to start from the very
bulk infrastructure in order to get electricity out to the people. We are
confident as a department that we are going to be able to reach universal
access if we get the budget that we say we need.

The hon Chairperson of the Select Committee raised a very important issue
of HIV/Aids in the mining industry. I want to assure her that there is
definitely a programme – a joint intervention between the Department of
Minerals and Energy and the industry in trying to address the impact of
HIV/Aids. We are working together and we hope to have an HIV/Aids summit in
September, where we will be looking at what companies are doing and what
more can be done both from the companies’ side as well as from our side.

With regard to the issue of skills retention in the Department of Minerals
and Energy, I must assure you hon member that that is an issue we are
dealing with. We have actually developed as a department a departmental
scarce skills recruitment and retention strategy within the national
framework that has been issued by the Department of Public Service and
Administration and we are busy working on that. But over and above that,
there is ongoing training of senior managers. It must be appreciated that
both we and the private sector are competing for the same skills that are
in the department, but I think this scarce skills recruitment and retention
strategy is going to assist us to retain staff.

With regard to a biofuel strategy, we are very advanced. Hon members will
recall that Cabinet gave us a mandate to go and develop a bio-fuel strategy
using some energy crops - sugar cane, maize and soya amongst other things.
Task teams are hard at work trying to finalise a strategy which we hope we
will bring to the Cabinet during the last quarter of this year. Indeed, we
are aware that there are some provinces that have already started with
their own small operations. We hope that once we present the strategy it
will ensure that there is interest from the private sector, that the
necessary incentives are put in place, and the necessary regulations to
ensure that whatever is produced gets on to the grid with the oil industry
that will also be in place.

Yes, we are phasing out paraffin and we are promoting LP gas because of the
problems that the hon members have raised.

Hon Hendrickse, I think my speech contains a lot on what we are doing on
nuclear energy, so I won’t deal with that. You said in your speech that
women have taken over. Not really; I don’t think women have taken over.
When we have a woman President, then we will have taken over! [Laughter.]
And that is sure to happen.

On other issues such as the petrol price, we’ve had responses for all of
those. But time is running out. The hon Deputy Minister did touch on
beneficiation.

I would like to thank all members for participating in the debate. The last
issue I want to raise and to agree on with the chairperson of the Select
Committee is around HIV/Aids. It is definitely irresponsible for our
leaders to distort information about HIV/Aids. We must be very clear: There
is no cure for Aids. Nothing will cure Aids. Not a shower. Not ARVs.
Nothing. What you must do is follow the ABC that government has set out. It
is still the best. You abstain. If you can’t, please be faithful and have
one partner and if you still can’t do that, you have to use a condom.
Nothing else will help you protect yourself from contracting the disease.
Obviously, those that are already affected and infected need to take care
of their health, body, watch their nutrition and take whatever will give
them a long lease on life. But we mustn’t fool ourselves and think that
there is a cure for this disease. It is always a pleasure to participate in
debates of this House. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon
Minister. I have an announcement from the Chief Whip. He says that you must
please ensure that before you leave you have your T-shirts, caps and
everything in your paperbags as gifts from the Department of Minerals and
Energy. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 15:56.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                             FRIDAY, 26 MAY 2006


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    The Minister of Safety and Security


       a) Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD) for
          January 2004 to December 2004, in terms of section 18(5)(c) of
          the Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act No 115 of 1998) [RP 209-
          2004].

2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism


   a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
      for 1 April 2005 to 31 March 2010, 2006/07 Review.


                             MONDAY, 29 MAY 2006


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government

     (a)    Medium-Term Performance Plan of the Department of Provincial and
        Local Government for 2006 to 2009.


2.    The Minister for Public Enterprises

     (a)    Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Enterprises for 2006.


                            TUESDAY, 30 MAY 2006


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


      Report and Financial Statements of Mineral Technology (Mintek) for
    2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
    Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 58-2005].


