---
title: 'National Assembly - 21 June 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-06-21
---

WEDNESDAY, 21 JUNE 2006

                                    ____





                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 15:02.

House Chairperson Ms C-S Botha took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

                             PEACE AND SECURITY
                                  Cluster 1
MINISTERS:

   Impact of restructuring of specialised SAPS units on combating of crime

58.   Ms M M Sotyu (ANC) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:


      What impact will the restructuring of specialised units within the SA
      Police Service have on the effectiveness of the combating of crime at
      station level, with specific reference to the crimes focused on by
      these units?                                 N655E



The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you very much, Chairperson and
the hon members of the House. The strategic thrust of the reconstruction is
to ensure that we shift better resources to the stations, meaning that we
are empowering the stations to ensure that they deliver better services to
the people; but more than that, that they form a foundation to act as a
springboard in order for them to prevent and combat crime.

There are a number of specialised units of the police. However, those units
are not deployed at the local police stations but in areas far away at
times from the relevant police stations and serve up to 20 stations per
unit.

In these circumstances, what we are trying to do is to ensure that we shift
those human resources closer to where the crime is happening - right at the
coalface of crime combating and prevention and therefore the specialised
units will be deployed to service four to five police stations. This means
that the response time is obviously going to be quicker than the case has
been and, more than that, those specialised units working together with
other police at local stations are going therefore to transfer the
experience that they have to a broader contingent of members of the South
African Police Service.
Members of the crime combating units will therefore be placed at the police
stations, in other words, out of four or five police stations a unit from
the crime combating forces will be placed in one of those stations. But it
is going to be easier for them to deal with matters of crime. In the end,
what we are doing is, to ensure that our police officers are best placed to
prevent or combat crime, they are brought directly in close proximity to
where crime is happening, which is at the local level.

Ms M M SOTYU: Thank you Chairperson, Ndi ya vulela Mphathiswa. Mphathiswa,
can you indicate how the restructuring will impact especially on management
at station level and what service delivery improvement can the public
expect after these changes?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: It was important for us to prepare the
human resources that we have for them to be able to fulfil this new command
that they have. Those human resources are placed at the senior level, in
other words, they are the commanders there and they therefore will assist
the foot soldiers at a given station. What we are doing is to train the
very commanders in order for them to be able to give command and control
over the forces that they have. In the end we will see the entire spectrum
of commanders or station commissioners receiving that training in order for
them to be able provide proper command and control. We have already given
that training to a number of them, but in the end at least 1 136 of them
will undergo this training.
This is not the only training that we are giving to ensure that in the end
we have people who will know what to do to command the forces that they
will have. But there is training that is also happening vis-à-vis the foot
soldiers, and this training is concentrating specially on our investigative
capacity. As a result the detectives are undergoing new and improved
training so as to do their investigative work better.

Mr M WATERS: Thank you, Chair. A violent crime against a child is reported
every six minutes in South Africa. Between 2002-03 and 2004-05 the number
of crimes committed against children increased by over 26 000 to 85 000 per
annum. It is an increase of 45%. In contrast to this, an Institute for
Security Studies briefing document recommended that in the light of the
budget constraints within SAPS the majority of the 2 800 bodyguards who are
placed at the disposal of politicians by the police’s VIP Protection Unit
should be redeployed to high crime areas.

The same suggestion is made in a document on rural safety on the SAPS’s
website currently. Despite this, the VIP Protection Unit has constantly
slipped out of the Minister’s view in his search for targets for
restructuring. How do you justify the closing of the FCS unit while you
continue to pour more resources into the VIP Protection unit to protect,
amongst others, you and your family?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you very much. We have an
unfortunate situation here, where some of the hon members are becoming very
personal and we will also respond in those ways. I do not know what is
going to happen to this House. What is unfortunate is that there is no way
it would seem that there is some control that is exercised with respect to
this. He is addressing my family here and I don’t take kindly to that. In
any event, the fact of the matter is - and we have been saying this over
and over again - that we are not closing down the Family Violence, Child
Protection or Sexual Offences Units. We are not doing that.

Of course, he is asking about bodyguards and there is a question that I
have to relate to these matters. I am going to come back to that, but I
want to repeat, if this House is going to indulge in a slanging match where
people become personal, it is not going to serve the interests of the
people who have brought us to this House. I think that an intervention must
be made so that we do not have that kind of situation in this honourable
House.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon members, there are still two
slots for supplementary questions. Is there now a speaker from the IFP?

Mr T E VEZI: Yes, Madam Chair, it is just a question to the hon Minister.
Is the hon Minister aware of any complaints of lack of co-operation between
the members of the intelligence section and the police when it comes to
matters of organised crime?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Vezi, a supplementary question
should be linked to the response from the Minister. So I would consider
that this isn’t the opportune moment to ask that particular question. Thank
you.

Mr M WATERS: Thank you, Chair. It won’t help if the Minister whinges and
whines until he is blue in the face; maybe he should leave the country.

In its 1999 election manifesto the ANC stated that the combating of violent
against women and children would be priority number one and in it is 2004
manifesto the ANC resurfaces with the series of promises to improve the
services that deal with abused women and children. [Interjections.]

There are currently – listen for once instead of shouting and heckling – 1
185 filled posts in the FCSs, of which only 729 of these officers have
actually passed a specialised training course. Given the fact that the ANC
government has failed to ensure that all FCS officers received specialised
training, which would have cost the taxpayer R797 000, the ANC’s repeated
promises of making ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, please ask your question.
I am giving you five seconds extra because you were interrupted.

Mr M WATERS: What assurance can the Minister give us before any FCS
officers are redeployed that they will all receive specialised training?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon members, I think that it is very
unfair to the Minister and you have drowned out the question. How is he to
respond? So please give him the opportunity of hearing the question and
then the opportunity of answering without being interrupting. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you very much, Chairperson. I
have given a response about this matter already. I am going to repeat it.
What we are doing is that we are taking people who have the necessary
training to the local police stations in order for them to respond quickly
to cries for help. That includes the Family Violence, Child Protection and
Sexual Offences Units. We are taking them, because redeployment is in the
interest of fighting against the scourge of abuse of women and children.
That is why we are taking them to the coalface of the fight against
criminals who indulge in such a scourge. These are people who continue to
receive specialised training in order for them to be able to do that work.
We are therefore doing exactly what hon Mr Waters is talking about:
ensuring that those men and women who are deployed in that particular
category of crime-fighting do that work better than was the case in the
past; and have better training. Then they will be right at the spot where
this happens, so that their response is immediate.

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: And you are not leaving the country?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Members, it is my view that since
the question from the IFP did not relate to this particular question on the
table that we have another slot. Is there any other party who would like to
ask a question?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I would like to find out from the
Minister - according to the replies he gave, it has become so common - now
that racists of the past are establishing track records of accusing
revolutionaries of racism, what threat does this pose to the security in
this country?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order! Hon Chief Whip, order! Please,
just one moment, I am dealing with this one hon member. The question does
not relate to the answer by the Minister and there cannot be two questions
put in a supplementary. Thank you.

    Prisons: public-private partnership; gender equality; and vetting of
                                  officials
82.   Mr D V Bloem (ANC) asked the Minister of Correctional Services:

      (a) At what stage is the review on the public-private partnership
      prison contract (b) what progress has been made regarding gender
      equality at senior management level in his department and (c) what is
      the current status in respect of the vetting of officials of his
      department?                             N819E

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Hon Chairperson, Chairperson of the
portfolio committee, the Department of Correctional Services decided not to
proceed with the review or renegotiations of the two existing public-
private partnership prisons contracts. This was after due consideration of
the report and the recommendations of the transaction adviser who was
appointed to assist the department to examine all possible options for
refinancing and renegotiating with the contractors in charge of managing
the two public-private partnership correctional centres. National Treasury
was also informed accordingly on 17 January 2006.

With regard to the second part of the question, the department’s employment
equity target for women was 30% out of a total of 168 departmental senior
management level members, but has currently been reviewed to 50%. The
percentage of women employed currently stands at 23% at the female senior
management level. These are members who are at the following levels: three
directors-general – we call them CDCs in Correctional Services - Chief
Deputy Commissioners; two CDCs – Chief Deputy Commissioners - at head
office and the Eastern Cape Regional Commissioner; eight DCs – Deputy
Commissioners - that is, at chief director level; 28 directors.

Women empowerment programmes the objectives of which are to assist women
with gender and health issues and gender-based violence are currently being
presented in our department. Dialogues are conducted at all levels for both
males and females to address stereotypes and provide a platform for
debating gender issues and how well this can be integrated in the
department.

With regard to the third part of the question, the correctional officials
covered so far with the vetting are those working at C-Max, Pretoria,
Kokstad and Durban-Westville. Their forms have been forwarded to the NIA
for further handling. The process of vetting was put on hold due to the new
regulations, which NIA has developed. The said regulations provide for the
establishment of vetting fieldwork units in various departments. This is
due to the capacity challenges that NIA was faced with.

Currently, the Department of Correctional Services has forwarded written
communication to NIA, requesting approval to establish a vetting fieldwork
unit within the department. This unit, once established, will carry on with
the task of vetting all senior managers and officials employed in critical
positions and at maximum security centres. Thank you, Chairperson.
Mr D V BLOEM: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Minister, on the
first part of the question I am very much sure that you will agree with me
that the current two contracts, namely Bloemfontein and Louis Trichardt,
are really counterproductive to the budget of the Correctional Services. It
is R559 million only for these two.

On the second part of the question, I want to congratulate you, Minister,
with the promotion of females in our senior management structure.

With regard to the third part of the question you are also doing well,
Minister, thank you very much. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Bloem, did I miss the question?
[Laughter.]

Mr D V BLOEM: Yes, the Minister has responded very, very positively to all
two questions. The last one was I agree fully ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Bloem, you are abusing question
time. You are abusing question time!

Mr J SELFE: Madam Chair, I’m sure we all want prisons where there are no
escapes and where there is no corruption. We all want prisons that
rehabilitate offenders rather than warehouse criminals. I’m sure the
Minister wants the same things, but one of the single biggest problems that
we have in our correctional centres is the large number of prison officials
who get involved in corruption. I’m very worried, unlike the hon Bloem, at
the progress that is been made towards the vetting of officials because
it’s through the process of vetting officials that we might be able to weed
out those people who are connected to the gangs and who are involved in
corruption.

When is it anticipated that the field vetting unit would be established and
when is it anticipated that the Minister would be able to get everybody who
works in our correctional centres properly vetted?

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, just a bit on the
comments made by Mr Bloem first. Hon Mr Bloem, thank you very much for
leading that portfolio committee quite well. [Laughter.]

Mr Selfe, here you come to Hollywood, and Hollywood will welcome you. You
did very well. I wish I had a camera and could give your picture to your
sons and daughters and they can watch you when you really are doing a wave
in the House.

Yes, it’s quite a lot of money that we’re spending on those two contracts
you spoke about. But as you well know and the portfolio committee members
know, we have come back with a hybrid project that we want to look at and
see whether we can save some money. But it doesn’t mean that we will change
whatever is there, we’ll keep on talking to Mangaung and to Makhado.

The promotion of women is something that is pivotal to the department, that
women are promoted and given their rightful positions within the
department. It’s something that my government and my political organisation
is pushing for and it’s something that we will do as well.

In terms of the vetting, I’m not worried, Mr Selfe, because work has been
going on and it’s not only unvetted officials who will be involved in
escapes, even the vetted ones will. But we are busy working on that and we
do hope that once NIA comes back to us, we’ll be able then to have that
field unit working within Correctional Services. So, do not worry that
much, hon member, nothing is going to happen yet.

Mr S N SWART: Hon Minister, arising from your response, we as the ACDP also
share concerns about the costs of R595 million as pointed out by the hon
Bloem. However, setting aside the financial implications, does the decision
that has been taken by the department also mean that the public-private
prisons will not be able to accept prisoners other than the categories
agreed upon? Can that aspect not be negotiated, as well as the issue of
overcrowding? We are aware those prisons cannot be overcrowded at all as
opposed to other prisons that are overcrowded. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: In terms of the costs, same as you,
we are all worried about the costs, but they say we’re busy talking about
some of those issues. In terms of accepting other prisoners, we do have a
contractual obligation on what categories of prisoners or offenders they
have to accept. But again we’re human beings, we are all working towards
one goal – that of rehabilitating and reintegrating offenders. So, we’ll
keep on talking to the two about that.

In terms of overcrowding, remember, contractually we’ve got to give them a
certain number of offenders; we can’t go beyond that. If we do, we would
have to pay penalties for that. So, again we are in quite a dilemma on that
one. But again with the help, as I said yesterday, of you hon members when
you participate in this kind of debate within Correctional Services, you’re
actually assisting us to look at the gaps and to promote project
Masibambisane.

                    Government fund for victims of crime

69.   Mr R Jankielsohn (DA) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:

     Whether he will support a government fund for victims of crime; if not,
     why not; if so, what are the relevant details?            N806E
The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, the South African Law
Reform Commission in its report on sentencing, in other words, their
Project 82, reported on its research regarding the issue of a victim’s
fund. The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development is in the
process of studying that report. Therefore, I am sure that when that
department is ready to recommend to government the way forward regarding
such a fund, those recommendations will be promoted through the justice,
crime prevention and security cluster of Cabinet. That being so I am not in
a position, at this time, to express an opinion on the matter. Thank you
very much.

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Chairperson, during the budget debate in this House,
Minister, you made a statement that whingers can complain about crime until
they are blue in the face or they can just leave the country. Your
explanation that the comments were targeting specific MPs is a weak attempt
to try and spin your way out of this predicament. Not since Jimmy Kruger
has a Minister for police made such comments and has a Minister in this
portfolio done such damage to his department.

Minister, MPs in this House represent constituencies, many of whom are
victims of crime and no matter how you try to explain your way out of this
predicament, the fact remains that many victims of crime were deeply
offended and hurt by your comments. Minister, whether you meant to be
unsympathetic or not, will you pocket your pride and use this opportunity
now to apologise, unconditionally, to victims of crime who were offended by
those comments? [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, I don’t know if what the
member has said is part of what we are talking about. Of course, I don’t
know the Jimmy Kruger he is referring to. I only know a Jimmy Kruger’s
signature on a banning order that was given to me. I don’t know if the hon
member also had a banning order that prevented him from doing work for an
income for his children and his family. I don’t know if that was the
question with the hon member as well. The fact of the matter is ...
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order!

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you very much for protecting me,
Chairperson. The point I was making is that I remember a Jimmy Kruger as
the person who signed a banning order that stopped me from earning a
salary. I was a senior journalist at the time but he stopped me from
earning a salary. [Interjections.] I don’t know if he did the same with the
hon member and, if he did, therefore it means ... [Interjections.] Shall I
be protected, Chairperson?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order! Hon Minister, can I take just
one minute of your time. Hon members, you asked a question and if you want
the answer to be heard, please keep your voices down.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, Jimmy Kruger did that
because I was part and parcel of the forces for change in this country that
brought about this dispensation that we are enjoying now; so that people
like the hon Jankielsohn can say whatever they like to without a Jimmy
Kruger banning them for the things that they say. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon members, can we continue? We have
another supplementary question by the hon Nogumla.

Mr R Z NOGUMLA: Chairperson, a fund for victims of crime is just one aspect
of restorative justice. Can the hon Minister indicate whether any further
measures for restorative justice are being looked at for possible
implementation by the justice, crime prevention and security cluster?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, the Department of Justice
and Constitutional Development is our lead department with respect to
matters of restorative justice and indeed in regard to our strategic
thrust, there are issues that we are addressing in terms of the justice,
crime prevention and security cluster of Cabinet to ensure that we do
address the matters relevant to the matter of victims of crime.
Of course, with respect to the broader suggestion that we are looking at
regarding this matter we are going to come back and indicate to the House
what we intend doing to address the matter of the victims of crime. Thank
you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, thank you, Minister, for your reply; it is very
encouraging to know that something will be done with regard to giving
funding to victims. Hon Minister, will you be able to tell the House what
type of crime would make a victim a potential recipient of such funding?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, I really do not want to
talk about a matter that, in the first instance, does not fall under my
department, and secondly, a matter that has not been discussed. However,
all victims of crime are indeed victims of crime. It does not matter
whether it’s a person who was walking in the street and has his cellphone
taken away from him. It does not matter whether it is the little child who
was assaulted in the street by whoever. It does not matter what type of
crime: Crime is crime.

It is the responsibility of members of the SA Police Service to ensure that
the rule of law is supreme in this country. Therefore whatever crime you
commit, we do not distinguish between big or small crimes. I am not
suggesting that our law enforcement must target people who are involved on
what is generally defined as petty crimes - I am not saying that. But there
are ways in which, after people have been apprehended for committing a
crime, our courts look at the gravity of that crime and make a decision.
But, the mandate of the police is to ensure that those who commit crime are
arrested and therefore they must answer in courts of law for their actions.
Thank you.

Mrs P DE LILLE: Hon Minister, I know that the report was submitted to the
Minister of Justice in March of 2004, two years ago, maybe in consultation
with the Minister. Can we find out when are we going to see the report as
Parliament? Two years is a long time but Parliament should also have a view
of the report that has been out there for two years.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, well, I am not really
competent to respond to that question. Thank you.

                   Case backlog in criminal appeal matters

61.   Mr G B Magwanishe (ANC) asked the Minister for Justice and
      Constitutional Development:



      (1)   Whether she has been informed of the backlog in criminal  appeal
           matters arising from the Steyn judgement; if so,  what  are  the
           relevant details;

      (2)   (a) what is the number of appeal case backlogs in each high
           court and (b) what steps are being taken in this regard in each
           case?                                              N658E

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Yes, we are aware
of the backlogs in criminal appeals. The Constitutional Court in Steyn 2000
found that the provisions of sections 309B and 309C of the Criminal
Procedure Act, Act 51 of 1977 are unconstitutional.

These provisions had sought to require an accused person to obtain leave to
appeal before appealing against his or her conviction and/or sentence to a
High Court.

I have, since the publication of the member’s question, called for detailed
statistics to show the trend of the increase or the fluctuation, for that
matter, since 1996, when the Constitutional Court for the first time in
State vs Ntuli 1996 considered the constitutionality of the appeal system
as it was then.

Unfortunately I am not in a position to provide the member with the
statistics yet. I will table them in the House as soon as possible. In the
meantime, the member may be interested to know what the position is with
some courts. Even this is not quite comprehensive. I would rather bring a
fuller report to the House.

Let me say that, on the assumption that since the Steyn judgment the
workload of the High Courts had increased, Parliament did enact the
Criminal Procedure Act of 2003, which came into operation in January 2004.

The main objective of the amending Act was to introduce a sifting mechanism
that is intended to prevent the High Courts from being overburdened by
unmeritorious appeals from the lower courts. The amending Act was intended
to achieve this object whilst at the same time taking care of the
constitutional pitfalls that invalidated the leave-to-appeal procedure,
which applied before the Steyn judgment.

The amending Act introduced leave to appeal and petition procedures in the
Criminal Procedure Act of 1977, the once Act 51 of 1977. This was done so
as to regulate appeals against decisions of the lower courts; to provide
that certain appeals against decisions by the lower courts and the High
Courts relating to children may be noted without having to apply for leave
to appeal; and to provide that certain appeals must be considered on the
written argument of the parties.

I think the next point I am making is very important and this is that the
various Judge Presidents have instituted measures to assist in dealing with
the backlogs in their respective divisions. In this regard, especially in
some of the larger centres such as Durban, Pretoria, Pietermaritzburg and
Cape Town, members of both the Bar and Side Bar have provided pro bono
services to hear criminal appeals.

It is also important for me to point out that we actually have had Judge
Presidents appointing acting judges from time to time. [Time expired.]

Mr G B MAGWANISHE: I would like to thank the Minister for her comprehensive
reply. I would like to know whether you are considering any other measures
to assist courts, like Pretoria and Johannesburg, where appeal backlogs are
too high, with measures like Saturday courts?

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: We are seized with
the whole issue of backlogs. In fact, it is not only a matter for the
Department of Justice alone, but it is one that we continuously discuss and
strategise around within the JCPS cluster.

Having said so, the Saturday courts are not necessarily the best response,
but we are looking at all measures that have worked in the past. We are
also looking at innovative ways of addressing backlogs.

I must say that we will soon bring to the public’s attention our efforts at
modernising courts and introducing information technology precisely to help
us, as one of the measures to address the whole question of backlogs in
courts. In other words, this is to increase the efficiency of courts.

Mrs S M CAMERER: Chairperson, the Minister has indicated that she is well
aware of the problems being experienced in the busier courts in our country
when dealing with these criminal appeals and how they clog up the courts.

I am advised that the backlogs in Johannesburg are perhaps ten times what
they are in other centres that she has mentioned. The figure of 2 000 cases
hanging around and waiting to be dealt with has been indicated, compared
with 200 in other large centres. It is truly a problem, and it would seem
that the 2004 amendments that we dealt with have had minimal effect on
these backlogs.

I was wondering whether the Minister has considered the proposals that have
been repeatedly made by the Judge President of the Transvaal, Bernard
Ngoepe, that the courts in Pretoria and Johannesburg need more judges.

He has indicated a figure of 18, and that the TPD is 18 judges short at
some point. Has that not been considered in order to deal with, not only
these backlogs, but also others? [Time expired.]

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I must correct the
hon member. I do not think you are correct when you say that Johannesburg
has a backlog of around 2 000. Be that as it may, it is true that the
metropolis has larger backlogs. I think we all know the procedures, hon
members, that it is at the instance of the Judge President that the
Minister of Justice appoints acting judges or judges at all.

I am mindful of the challenge. I do know. I have interacted with the Heads
of Courts around this particular matter, and I am aware that they are
concerned. Until I am asked to appoint acting judges, there is not much
that I can do, but we will continue talking.

Mr T E VEZI: Madam Chair, I think this time around my question will be
considered relevant, if I may be educated by the hon Minister. I belong to
the old school, hon Minister, if you will bear with me.

Is the old system of automatic review in criminal cases still in existence?
If it is, does it in any way assist with the backlogs? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I think we should
be careful. The reason why, at a policy level, a decision was taken,
endorsed by all persons within this sector, that there should be a review
of the criminal justice system is precisely to make it more modern,
efficient and also to deal with the challenges, the most important of which
are backlogs.

I am wary and very careful not to respond in a very narrow sense and to say
that the backlogs are as a result of one factor. As I have said, there are
multiplicities of factors that result in backlogs. I can say that there is
a lot of innovation that is coming up, and I just want you to trust that
the judges are as concerned as we politicians are about the challenge of
backlogs in courts.

Mr S N SWART: Deputy Chair, arising from your response, some time ago, we
spoke in the portfolio committee - in fact, it was a number of years ago -
on the possibility of binding, interdepartmental protocols relating to the
police, prosecutors, correctional services, social welfare and the
judiciary to assist alleviating the backlogs.

Yesterday, in Parliament, we heard that some positive developments had been
made with the communication in these various sectors. But obviously, as the
Chief Justice pointed out some time ago, each one of those forms a domino.
If one of the dominos falls over, the whole system falls, and of course,
one can have a backlog of cases.

Is there a possibility looking at such interdepartmental protocols that
would assist in dealing and preventing backlogs of cases? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: More than
protocols. I am pleased to announce that where pilot programmes were
established of an integrated approach, indications are that the workload
has diminished. Now, with our e-scheduling put into the equation, we should
be able to know which court at what particular time has a backlog, and feed
into this cluster working groups which, by the way, as you say, is the
whole chain of the police. It is the cluster, in fact, the JCPS cluster.

I am certain that in the course of this year, we will be able to put before
Parliament a working progress report that shows significant improvements in
addressing the challenge of work backlogs.

       Steps taken to prevent child rape victims from secondary trauma

79.    Rev  K  R  J  Meshoe  (ACDP)  asked  the  Minister  for  Justice  and
      Constitutional Development:



      (1)   Whether she has taken any steps to protect  child  rape  victims
           from the secondary trauma experienced when  they  have  to  face
           their perpetrators in court; if not, why not; if  so,  what  are
           the relevant details;


      (2)   whether she has put any measures in place to allow child rape
           victims the automatic right to testify in camera; if not, why
           not; if so, what measures?                               N816E

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Yes, steps are
being taken to protect child rape victims from secondary trauma. The
Criminal Procedure Act of 1977, specifically the sections mentioned here,
namely 170(a), 153, 158(2), have provisions that can be utilised to protect
child rape victims from secondary trauma.

I would like to highlight a number of initiatives in this regard. One of
the initiatives that the department has introduced to minimise the trauma
experienced by the child rape victim who is testifying, is the introduction
of court preparation officers in the sexual offences court. There are
currently 66 court preparation officials providing support to abused
children by preparing them for their court proceedings. To date, 50 000
victims have been assisted by the court preparation officers. The existence
of court preparation officers is but one of the measures that have been
introduced to assist child rape victims who are going to testify in court
in order to ensure that there isn’t any secondary victimisation.

The other matter is that of specialised training for prosecutors handling
sexual offences cases. You also know about the close-circuit television. I
will give more details later on, if I should be asked about it. There is
also the issue of intermediaries.

I think I must talk a bit about the National Project Oversight Committee.
This is an initiative that was introduced by the Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development to ensure the effective functioning of dedicated
courts, such as the sexual offences court. The NPOC is the formal mechanism
to deliberate and make decisions on strategic issues relating to dedicated
courts and the main-streaming process.

The NPOC was initiated through consultations between the departments, the
Sexual Offences and Community Affairs Unit and we all know - and are all
proud of - the good work of this unit. The NPOC is currently composed of
representatives from courts services, from Soca, the NPS and the lower
courts’ magistrates committee. I think this is an indication of how we are
beginning to cohere and we are having a cluster formation working together
on resolving problems.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson, hon Minister, the Criminal Procedure Act does
provide for children up to 18 years, automatic access to the CCTV system,
as well as a trained person in order to prevent them from having to be in
the courtroom. Child rights activists, however, have expressed concern at
the courts’ reluctance to afford these rights to children, particularly
when they are over 12 years old.

Of course, we have seen time and again that children fail to testify in
front of the perpetrator. What will be done to enforce the provisions in
the Criminal Procedure Act so as to prevent children from being subjected
to a secondary trauma by having to give testimony in front of the
perpetrator? Can the hon Minister tell us why was the category of
vulnerable witness removed from the Sexual Offences Bill, in the face of
overwhelming requests by victims and concerned groups?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, you may only ask one
supplementary question. I presume that you want an answer to the first one.

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I am not quite
aware that there are courts that exclude young people who should actually
be allowed to testify in private so as to avoid secondary victimisation.
You have, however, just shared that information with me and I will go and
follow up the matter. In fact, that should not be the case because it’s all
about protecting the victim and it is in the victim’s interest.

Well, the other question that you asked me refers to the Bill that is
before Parliament. [Interjections.] Yes, it’s before Parliament. Go and
look at it and interact with the Bill before you. Make your input. This is
a democratic country. Parliament invites submissions and I am sure that we
have a very efficient portfolio committee where people would be allowed to
make their inputs, comment and criticise what’s before them.

Ms N M MAHLAWE: Chairperson, the Minister has comprehensively responded to
the questions that I would have asked her.

Uvele wayitya yonke, Sihlalo. [She has replied to all my questions, Chair.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Chairperson, arising out of the Minister’s reply, if the
Minister and her department are so committed to assisting women and child
victims of sexual abuse, why did the Cabinet decide to water down the
provisions in the Sexual Offences Bill, dealing with special protection and
intermediaries for vulnerable witnesses, like child rape victims giving
evidence in court?

The 2004 version of the Bill, which she took over, contained much more
detailed protections, but we were briefed by her department this week that
the Cabinet omitted the provision dealing with this support because of
fears of a lack of funding. In fact, I could read to the Minister the
section that says the department was concerned that it would not be in a
position to fund such a service dealing with the appointment of support
persons, and Cabinet approved that the provision dealing with the
appointment of support persons should be omitted from the Bill. Surely we
should get our priorities right. We must put our money where are mouth is
when it comes to protecting the vulnerable.

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I can’t match your
tone, hon member, since I am not a street fighter. [Laughter.] I think it
is disingenuous to suggest in your question that we don’t care about
children and women - because you know that that is not true. That’s why I
say I can’t fight. I am not a street fighter.

Look, I have answered this question. It’s before Parliament. Engage with
the Bill. That is your job as a member of the portfolio committee.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you, Minister. I would like to
proceed to Question 84. But before I proceed to that question, there is an
opportunity for another supplementary question and I have omitted to
mention that it was in the name of the hon Oliphant. Is that a mistake or
did he actually want to ask a follow-up question? [Interjections.] Yes,
it’s the hon G G, but I imagine that it is that particular microphone that
is giving problems, that all these buttons are pressed inadvertently.
However, there is a space, hon Camerer, you may continue.

Mrs S M CAMERER: It was just a follow-up with the Minister. I was not
trying to be a street fighter. It’s a question I have often asked her. If
the problem is funding, and here we are looking at child victims of abuse,
we have the criminal assets recovery account, Car, which I gather has about
R100 million in it at this point. The Minister herself chairs the committee
that decides what to do with that account. Would it not be possible to use
the funds from this account to fund such a worthy exercise as providing
proper support for child victims in court?

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: You know, hon
member, you were on the executive once, you should know. Maybe you didn’t
do that. May be you were very ad hoc in your executive, but we cost our
legislation. If indeed the portfolio committee ... [Interjections.] ... you
don’t have to shout! What’s your problem, Mr Waters? Give me an opportunity
to talk. [Interjections.]

I see that on the other side of the bench we have very dedicated and very
child-conscious persons ... Don’t point a finger at me, young man. You are
so arrogant. Thirty years ago, children in this country had no rights. They
were killed for refusing to be forced to use Afrikaans. So, you shouldn’t
talk like that. You cannot sit there and be moralistic. You have baggage.
[Applause.]

 Issuing of firearms to SAPS members suffering from psychological illnesses

84.   Mr P J Groenewald (FF Plus) asked the Minister of Safety and
      Security:



      (1)   What is the policy of the SA Police Service with regard  to  the
           issuing of service revolvers to members who are  suffering  from
           depression and post-traumatic stress disturbance (PTSD);


      (2)   whether such members are placed in posts where they can work
           without firearms; if not, why not; if so, in what type of posts?
                                                                    N821E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you Chairperson. The South
African Police Service has adopted a policy ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order! Hon members, please give the
Minister an opportunity to respond.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: The South African Police Service has
adopted a policy, with regard to members who suffer from psychological
illnesses, to place them in low-stress environments in the police system.
Their firearms are withdrawn until such time as they are declared medically
fit. The rearrangement is conveyed in a letter addressed to the employee
concerned when he or she is advised of the new duties in the alternative
post – and those posts are usually administrative posts.

Mr S MAHOTE:  Minister, the implementation of the Firearms Control Act has
come under huge criticism, specifically from the opposition and the pro-gun
lobby. Can the Minister indicate whether the Firearms Control Act
contributed in any way to ensure a greater sensitivity in the management
structures within the South African Police Services in relation to the
issuing and controlling of service firearms; and if so, in what way?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, we are very cautious
every time we have to deal with an application for a license for the
possession of a firearm. This caution is influenced, among other things, by
at least two cases, High Court cases, that happened during my tenure of
office.

One of them is a case that came before the High Court and the Supreme Court
of Appeal in 2001 and was finalised in 2002. That is the case when Mr Van
Duivenboden litigated against the Minister of Safety and Security. The
issue of the fitness of a person to possess a firearm was raised in that
case. The hon judge, among other things, then went on to say the following:


  Had the police officials attested to an affidavit and launched an
  enquiry, the Court believes that Brooks, who was the person who was given
  a firearm’s licence, would have ultimately been declared unfit to possess
  a firearm. If Brooks had been deprived of his firearms, then the
  respondent who is the person he shot, would not have been shot.


The Court concluded that there was a direct, causal link between the police
officials’ failure to initiate an enquiry into Brooks’ fitness to possess a
firearm and therefore the shooting of the respondent.

It is the only case that is one of the decided cases of this nature. The
other one is the case involving Hamilton. That case is well known to people
because it was among cases where the police were rapped over the knuckles.
Again, the question related to the possession of a firearm licence and in
this case, the question that the honourable judge was asking was whether
the police authorities charged with considering, recommending and issuing
firearm licences are under a legal duty to investigate information
furnished to them by the applicant in order properly to assess such
applicants’ suitability and fitness to possess a firearm.

All the time, therefore, when we have to consider an application for a
firearm, we must follow the advice we got from judgements like these to
ensure that the person who is applying has the necessary temperament to
properly control the firearm that they will subsequently have and to
exercise such responsibility in terms of that ownership - that they will
not do anything that will amount to them using that firearm to kill.
Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Chairperson, it’s a pity that the Minister has refused to
use this opportunity that we have given him to get out of his “whinge”
throw-away-line predicament. Arising from the Minister’s reply, it is clear
that stress is a huge problem within the SA Police Service. Many police
officers are afraid to go for counselling because they do not want this
reflected on their records. Minister, we know that there is a shortage of
psychiatrists in the police service. Is it not perhaps time to employ more
psychiatrists and make regular counselling mandatory for all active police
members?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you very much. I am sure that
the hon Jankielsohn knows that we have a democratic country. You cannot
force anyone to do anything in this country that they themselves have not
initiated. You cannot force people to go on mandatory counselling. You
cannot do that. Counselling, in any event, works better when the persons
concerned themselves come forward and indicate that they require
counselling.

The fact of the matter indeed is that we are strengthening the section of
the police that deals with those matters. We have a programme, an Employee
Assistance Programme, that deals with all those matters, including the
traumas and the stresses under which our members function in terms of the
work and the experiences they have. But, there is no way in which we can
force anyone to make use of those services.
However, we engage with our workers. There are sessions where we sit and
talk to our people we have in our employ. We use people who have religious
training – they are therefore religious leaders; we have social workers and
psychologists that work within the realm of the Employee Assistance
Programme. And they therefore do interact with and tell our members of the
advantages of going for counselling and the advantages of interacting with
other people and learning what their own experiences are in order for them
to adapt to particular positions in their lives.

   Increase in SAPS budget for Protection and Security Services programme

60.   Ms A van Wyk (ANC) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:

      (a) What is the justification for the substantial increase in the SA
      Police Service’s budget for the protection services programme and (b)
      what do the responsibilities of the protection services entail?
                                              N657E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, the division: Protection
and Security Services is broader than just the VIP Protection Services. The
division is responsible for the security of, among other things, South
Africa’s national key points. Those include the Beit Bridge Border Post,
Johannesburg International Airport, all High Courts, Durban Harbour and
Cape Town’s Metrorail.
The division’s personnel numbers have grown from 3 302 members during the
2003-04 financial year to 11 480 members by the end of the current
financial year. Of those members, 8 504 - or 74% - secure the national key
points and that is where, in the main, the increases have been, and not on
bodyguards.

As indicated in my Budget Vote speech, there is going to be an expansion
within the railway and port of entry environments. In the port of entry
environment, additional resources were allocated for all land ports,
seaports and airports. The Protection and Security Services division is
responsible for VIP protection in transit and static; railway police, which
includes Metrorail services and main-line services; port of entry security,
which includes land ports, seaports and airports; and the division also
serves as a governance security regulator that provides a physical security
advisory service. It also administers the National Key Points Act. Thank
you very much.

Ms A VAN WYK: Thank you, Chairperson. Minister, sometimes one needs to use
this opportunity also to educate members who seem not to understand, as the
hon Waters clearly demonstrated when he confused, in the first question,
the issue of the VIP Protection Unit and this protection unit.

In the light of South Africa hosting the 2010 Soccer World Cup, does the
Minister foresee the SAPS Protection Services’ duty extending to include
aspects of this event; and, if so, what planning, if any, has already taken
place regarding the security of the event?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Minister, please decide whether
you think this is linked to your original response.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: It is, yes. The Protection and
Security Services division has always participated in the big events that
we have held in South Africa, from the summits of the Commonwealth to the
United Nations ones. It will be involved in this big sporting event as we
were in the Rugby World Cup played in our country, the African soccer
championships played in our country, the international cricket championship
which took place in our country, and the same will apply to the 2010 Fifa
Soccer World Cup.

What we do in those circumstances is exactly what I’ve indicated - that
there will be members of the division that will provide static protection.
Those will be bodyguards to all the VIPs. The term “VIP” does not only
refer to South African Cabinet members. It refers to everybody who is a VIP
– heads of state - and many of the VIPs that come to South Africa as the
guests of this government and this country. It will be equal with respect
to the Soccer World Cup as well. All those who come will receive the
protection that they deserve in terms of the work of this division. Thank
you.

Mnr R J KING: Minister, ons verstaan dit sluit natuurlik vir Jean-Bertrand
Aristide ook in. Ek verstaan die vraag van die agb lid Van Wyk, aangesien
beskermingsdienste opvallend, persentasiegewys, die grootste styging toon,
en toegewys is aan –

      ... for the protection of local and foreign prominent people as
      well as the provision of security at key government
      installations and, among others, ministerial homes.


In die lig van u uitsprake tydens die begrotingsdebat, Minister, val dit u
nie op as absoluut hiper-onsensitief nie? (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr R J KING: Minister, we understand that that includes Jean-Bertrand
Aristide, of course. I understand the question by the hon Van Wyk, because
protection services conspicuously show the sharpest increase percentage
wise, and these have been allocated –

      ... for the protection of local and foreign prominent people as
      well as the provision of security at key government
      installations and, among others, ministerial homes.

In the light of your statements in the course of the budget debate,
Minister, doesn’t this strike you as absolutely hyperinsensitive?]

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: I missed that. What is not
particularly sensitive or insensitive? I’m sorry, I could not understand.
Could he repeat the question for me, please?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Yes, please, and for my edification,
just tell me how it links to the original question. Thank you.

Mnr R J KING: Ek het gesê ek verstaan die agb lid se vraag dat hierdie
betrokke program hierdie groot styging toon en dan waarvoor die program
gebruik word – en het vir u gelees waarvoor dit gebruik word – “among
others, ministerial homes”. Ek het toe vir die Minister gevra of dit reeds
hiervoor gebruik word en of sy opmerkings oor misdaad tydens die
Begrotingsdebat nie onsettend onsensitief was die vermeerdering van geld
vir die oppas van ministeriële huise was nie. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[Mr R J KING: I said that I understand the hon member’s question that this
particular programme shows such a great increase, and then what this
programme is being used for – and I read out to you what it is being used
for – “among others, ministerial homes”. I then asked the Minister whether
it was already being used for this purpose, and whether his remarks about
crime in the budget debate weren’t terribly insensitive, whilst the
increased allocation was for guarding ministerial homes.]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Minister, I am sorry that I am
also battling. I am trying to see whether I must justify this question on
the basis of relating to the previous one and I find it difficult; but
sometimes when I’m in that position, I leave the choice to the Minister to
respond.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: I am going to respond, Chairperson.
Thank you very much. I want to repeat that this division has a number of
projects that it handles. It protects people of all kinds who have been in
the past members of this House, presidents and vice presidents. We are
protecting people like the hon Schlebusch, former President P W Botha,
former President F W de Klerk - all those people. We protect some justices
– judges, in other words - in this country. Those are people who provide
protection and necessarily so. Some of them will do static duties at the
homes of those VIPs. We also transfer that service to hotels that have been
indicated and defined – as we do our work - as venues for the accommodation
of people, which is what we will do when the 2010 Soccer World Cup
championship is played in South Africa.

There will be designated areas. This particular hotel is a venue that
accommodates these VIPs. There will be static protection for those people.
That is how it is; that’s how it has been for years in South Africa. This
is not a new thing. It’s just that we are improving on what has been
happening. Thank you very much.

                   Search of home of former PAC President

7.    Dr S E M Pheko (PAC) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:



      (1)   Whether he has investigated why  the  home  of  the  former  PAC
           President, Mr Clarence  Mlamli  Makwetu,  at  Cofimvaba  in  the
           Eastern Cape was raided and searched by 20 armed police members;
           if not, why not; if so, what did the police find;


      (2)   whether an apology has been made to Mr Makwetu; if not, why not?
                                                              N415E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, on 13 April this year
members of SAPS followed up an attempted cash-in-transit robbery in the
Cofimvaba area. Information was received that the perpetrators were
planning to rob small businesses in and around Cofimvaba and indicated that
their vehicles were spotted travelling in the direction of Mr Makwetu’s
farm.

On arrival at Mr Makwetu’s farm, Superintendent Maqashalala, the officer
who was leading the operation, introduced himself to Mr Makwetu and
explained the police’s presence on his farm and requested that they be
allowed to search the premises. Mr Makwetu consented and the search
started, but it only concentrated on one outside room. Property was not
damaged and no person was treated in any disrespectful manner. Mr Makwetu,
the farm owner, did not logdge complaints after that. The reason for the
search, as I indicated, was explained to him and he co-operated fully.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Thank you very much, Minister, but your version of events
is not the same as the one we had from Mr Makwetu. I want, however, to
remind the Minister that it is the second time that the PAC has been
raided. In 2002 the PAC’s constituency office in Botshabelo, in the Free
State, was raided without any search warrant by heavily armed police. They
opened the ceiling and searched it and found nothing illegal.

As you, yourself, Minister, have admitted, equally, a number of police
searched Mr Makwetu and they found nothing wrong. Minister, I want to point
out that about the time the police raided the PAC’s constituency office in
the Free State, the Boeremag was dropping bombs on Soweto undetected.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Your question please, hon member,
time is expiring.

Dr S E M PHEKO: I am not sure, but I have two questions. I have two minutes
here.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): No, hon member, I regret not.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Anyway, we want to know why the PAC is always a target.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, the only thing I can
offer Mr Makwetu is that I will write a letter to him to indicate exactly
what happened, because I can’t imagine any members of the SAPS, at this
time of the development of our democracy, wanting to chase up any of our
political organisations with the intention to cause harm to those political
organisations. It would be completely unlawful and illegal to do that. But
I am going to communicate with Dr Pheko on this matter.

Ms J E SOSIBO: Minister, do you believe that members of SAPS, in pursuit of
suspects in a crime, should interrupt such a pursuit because the chase
might lead to damage to the property of a person of public stature, or
should they pursue such suspects without fear or favour? And, do you
encourage South Africans to co-operate with SAPS and provide them with the
necessary assistance in circumstances like these?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, let me put it this way,
that in the first instance, we expect members of SAPS to do their work
within the parameters of the law in South Africa. That is the first thing
we expect from them.

Secondly, all investigations they conduct must be conducted in a manner
where no fear or favour is thrown into the equation. They must do their
work irrespective of who might be the suspect in any investigation. But, as
I say, the operative phrase is that they must do that within the ambit of
the law.

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Chair, irrespective of the PAC’s paranoia, Minister,
excess does appear to be a growing problem in the SAPS. Over the weekend
five police officers arrived at the home of a journalist in Cape Town,
handcuffed her, threw her into their van and jailed her for 18 hours - this
for a minor traffic offence.

There are many other examples of such excesses, which come down to the
abuse of power and resources. Minister, would you inquire into the
frequency of such instances and take action to prevent them from
continuing, and can we get a firm commitment in this regard?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, as the hon member would
know, we have safety valves for these sorts of things. We have the
Independent Complaints Directorate and when any member of the public feels
that he or she has been treated in ways that are contrary to our law, he or
she can then lodge a complaint with the Independent Complaints Directorate
so that that matter is investigated.

There is a system, therefore, that allows for the lodging of complaints,
such as the one hon Jankielsohn has referred to.

      Amount paid annually to Chief Director-General: Communications of
                                 department

66.   Mr M Diko (UIF) asked the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
      Development:



      (1)   What amount is paid  annually  to  the  Chief  Director-General:
           Communications (name furnished) of her department;




      (2)   whether this payment is in line with what other chief  director-
           generals are paid; if so, what are the relevant details; if not,




      (3)   whether there is any justification for such high payment; if so,
           what are the relevant details; if not,


      (4)   whether such unjustified high payment is contributing to the low
           morale of personnel within the Ministry; if so, (a) what
           remedies will she employ to rectify the situation and (b) when?
                                                                    N734E
The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chair, the salary
package for the Chief Director: Communications of my department is at R740
583 per month, and chief directors usually earn about R558 601 per annum.
The official referred to, by the hon member, was offered a remuneration
package outside of band (c) as an incentive to ensure that he accepts the
justice department and constitutional department’s offer. This was due to
the fact that he had received a counter-offer from the Department of Home
Affairs to work overseas on a five-year renewable contract.

The official has extensive experience and rare skills that are needed by
the department. He is employed at the Justice Department on a three-year
contract that ends in October 2008. He is on probation for a period of one
year after which his contract will be assessed. It is not correct that this
salary package is unjustified. It is not uncommon for some officials to be
remunerated at levels different to their counterparts where justified.
Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, Minister. I don’t see hon
Diko, I am not sure if there is anybody from the UIF to make a follow up.
Hon Mlangeni, is it a point of order?

Mr A MLANGENI: Chairperson, on a point of correction, the Minister said the
salary was R740 583 per month; I think she wanted to say per annum.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Ok, I don’t see anybody from the
UIF, hon Diko is not here. Hon Solomons from the ANC: Hon Solomons is on
the list to make a follow up. Not? Any other supplementary follow up?

Mrs S M CAMERER: Thank you, Chairperson. Madam Minister, it appears as
though your department makes a habit of these exceptions. I understand that
your chief operations officer receives a remuneration compared to that of a
director-general or the same as that of the director-general. How many
other officers receive such exceptional salaries? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: It is not an
exception to the Department of Justice. The level of an operational officer
is a new level that has been approved by Cabinet and it is intended to
bring greater efficiency, especially to large departments or departments
that have special challenges. Justice is not the only department in
government that has a COO.

 United Kingdom: Assistance to African Development Agenda; and strategy for
                            Middle-Eastern region

62.   Ms F Hajaig (ANC) asked the Minister of Foreign Affairs:

      In view of the bilateral talks between President Mbeki and Prime
      Minister Tony Blair, what (a) assistance is the United Kingdom
      prepared to offer Africa’s Development Agenda and (b) strategy is the
      UK prepared to bring to the whole Middle-Eastern region?
                                                               N659E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Ms S C van der Merwe): Chair, the
reply to the question is as follows: Yes, indeed, one of the principal
objectives of our President’s meeting with Prime Minister Blair was to
advance the African agenda. Support for development in Africa is a major
foreign policy theme of the government of the United Kingdom, and in 2004
the United Kingdom established the Commission for Africa, of which our
Minister Finance, Minister Manuel, was a member.

The commission published its report in March last year, and set out a
comprehensive plan to reduce poverty and achieve sustainable development.
In 2005 the United Kingdom, as we all know, hosted the G8 summit at
Gleneagles and also held the presidency of the European Union.

The government of Prime Minister Blair emphasised the importance of
Africa’s development agenda by designating 2005 as the year of Africa.
African development, therefore, was a primary item on the agenda of the G8
summit in Gleneagles, and many of the recommendations of the Commission for
Africa were taken up by the Gleneagles summit, building on the G8 Africa
action plan that was launched at Kananaskis in Canada in 2002. And a lot of
this was incorporated into an agreed, detailed set of commitments by the G8
to tackle areas of poverty, covering aspects such as peace and security,
good governance, human development and growth.

These commitments include the doubling of aid by 2010, an extra US$50
billion globally, including, in that amount, $25 billion for Africa, and
providing 100% debt cancellation for up to 38 of the so-called Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries Initiative, HIPC, countries, mostly in Africa,
worth US$50 billion.

The United Kingdom announced a number of programmes in support of Africa’s
development agenda since the publication of the Commission for Africa, and
these are too detailed for me to mention here, but will be printed in the
reply.

In response to point (b) of the hon member’s question, I think I could just
say that certainly, in our understanding, the UK’s stated policy objective
is that it supports a peaceful and negotiated resolution of the various
conflicts in the Middle East. Thank you, Chair.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Before I call on hon Hajaig, may I
remind hon members that there is too much noise in the House, and I thought
that question time is an oversight instrument, there to educate us and the
voters out there. However, the level of noise, unfortunately, is now
drowning out the people who are responding or asking follow-up questions.

Ms F HAJAIG: Thank you for your comprehensive reply, Deputy Minister Van
Der Merwe. The chaired meeting, the Commission for Africa and the bilateral
talks, recently, have consistently promised various measures to assist in
the Renaissance of Africa, as you have mentioned. However, we have yet to
see the promises come to fruition.

Could the Deputy Minister kindly tell the House what concrete assistance is
being made available to African states to eradicate poverty and to assist
in the sustainable development of African states? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Ms S C van der Merwe): Thank you
very much for that follow-up question. Yes, indeed, it is of concern that
the implementation of those decisions should in fact take place. I think
that we, in the Department of Foreign Affairs, could agree with the
questioner in this regard.

In that regard, there is something called the Africa Partnership Forum,
which has been established. It consists of representatives of the G8
countries, representatives from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development, OECD, countries and from African countries. The purpose of
such a forum is to provide for the implementation of those decisions.

Their last meeting was in Maputo in May this year, where a detailed set of
programmes identifying priority areas was set out, including such matters
as infrastructure development and support for programmes with regard to
HIV/Aids. So there is some progress that is being achieved.

I might just add that the next G8 summit, to be held next month in Russia,
is what is called a review year in terms of the implementation of the
African agenda issues. It was decided by the G8 parties that they would in
fact take a two-year period to ensure that the full implementation of the
decisions of Gleneagles happened.

So the way they have approached it is to look at a two-year period for
implementation. But we will continue to watch and monitor those decisions
to the extent that we can, and ensure their full implementation. Thank you.

Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE: Thank you for your reply, Deputy Minister. You know, in
the same context of the bilateral talks between President Mbeki and Prime
Minister Blair, (a) what expectations, in terms of assistance, does Africa
have for her development agenda; and (b) what mechanisms are in place in
the Middle Eastern region to utilise and/or respond to whatever strategies
the UK will bring to this region, that is the Middle East? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Ms S C van der Merwe): Chair, yes,
in response to the question, I think that Africa has quite high
expectations of the outcomes of the Gleneagles deliberations. Chief among
these is the point I mentioned about the cancellation of debt.

As hon members would know, debt remains a very grinding issue for many
countries on the African continent, and the undertaking, on the British
government’s side, to cancel debt to 100% was certainly well-received, and
it is something the implementation of which we will pursue.

Of course, one of all the other things that I have mentioned, namely the
raising of assistance in terms of AODA to the 0,7% of GDP, which has been
promised by the G8 countries, is a further expectation of the African
countries. I think, once again, that we need to reiterate that the devil
will be in the details of the implementation of some of what we regarded as
very positive decisions at Gleneagles.

In terms of the mechanisms that exist in the Middle East, I think there’s a
range of opportunities, not least of which, of course, would be the
partnership of the quartet that is designed to look at the issues in the
Middle East, particularly between Palestine and Israel.

I think that there are a number of multilateral mechanisms that can be used
by the international community to work on diplomatic solutions to what are
clearly dire and difficult problems in a very volatile area. So I believe
that as long as we continue to use those multilateral instruments, we
should be able to work towards a solution. Thank you.

  Policy review iro claims for post-traumatic stress disorder among members
                                   of SAPS

70.   Dr J T Delport (DA) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:



      (1)    Whether  his   Ministry,   department   or   the   Compensation
           Commissioner is currently reviewing the policies which are  used
           in the adjudication of claims for post-traumatic stress disorder
           amongst members of the SA Police Service; if not,  why  not;  if
           so, (a) when did the review commence, (b) what  is  the  current
           status of the review and  (c)  what  is  the  expected  date  of
           completion;




      (2)   whether a moratorium has been placed on claims; if so, (a) until
           what date, (b) when are claims expected to be finalised and  (c)
           what number of claims are currently affected or pending;


      (3)   whether he will make a statement on the matter?
      N807E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, policies which are used
in the adjudication of claims are not being reviewed. There is no
moratorium on claims. There are currently 1 808 claims, which include a
small number of post-traumatic stress disorder claims, which are currently
before the compensation commissioner. Thank you.

Dr J T DELPORT: I am now really at a loss, hon Minister. I have a letter
written by the chief of staff that says:

   Kindly note that the office of the compensation commissioner is currently
   reviewing the policies which are used in the adjudication of claims for
   post-traumatic stress disorder, and therefore has put a moratorium on all
   PTSD claims until 31 March 2006.

So, I do not understand the hon Minister’s reply. But, in any event, sir,
here is the story of a captain. There is no doubt about it. Look at all the
reports. The man has been off for post-traumatic stress disorder. He was
traumatised, and he is now, at this point in time, forced to come back to
do office work. This man is going to land up in an institution if the hon
Minister does not show any compassion for his own staff and personnel who
were traumatised during and in the course of their work. There is no doubt
at all. I ask the Minister at least to show compassion to his own people,
if he has no compassion for victims of crime.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Minister, there was no question,
but if you want to comment, you can.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: These are very, very strange
observations that member has made. They are very, very strange. The
Minister acts on the basis of information that the Minister has. There is
nothing that relates ... I don’t even know the case he is talking about.
How I become ... I don’t know about it. You say I must be compassionate. I
don’t even know the case.

Will you do the most reasonable thing, hon Delport, that any reasonable
person would do, and make that information available to the Minister, and
test the Minister on the basis of the Minister’s response. If the Minister
has not responded, then you can show me all those sheets of paper that you
have.

The Minister does not know what you are raising. Please place that
information at my disposal, and I will respond to it. Then, judge me on the
basis of the response that I will give you, not on anybody else’s response.
If you want to judge the Minister, judge the Minister on the basis of the
Minister’s actions, not on anybody else’s actions. Please do that, hon
Delport. You want to assist, and I also want to assist. Let’s come together
and unite so that we can change the circumstances of the people who work
with us in developing our country. Thank you. [Applause.]

         Steps taken by SAPS to address farming community conflicts

63.   Mr M S Booi (ANC) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:

      Whether the SA Police Service has taken any steps to address the
      conflicts among and within farming communities in the policing area of
      Utrecht and Utugela; if not, why not; if so, what steps?
                                                         N660E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, the South African Police
Service has established a provincial task team reporting to a senior
officer with the rank of a director, to address conflicts among and within
farming communities. The task team functions directly under the command of
a senior superintendent. This task team’s initiatives, as well as progress
in the investigations, are being closely monitored at national level by an
assistant commissioner.

All case dockets related to the conflicts were reinvestigated by the task
team. Case dockets, in this regard, with finalised investigations, have
been submitted to the KwaZulu-Natal Director of Public Prosecutions for a
decision. The task team is still in the area, continuing with
investigations as they are reported. Thank you.

Mr M S BOOI: Chairperson, could the Minister just highlight for the House
the nature of the source of conflict in this particular area? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: The problem in Utrecht, and a number
of other areas in those parts of KwaZulu-Natal, relate to the matter of
land. The question, which has seen previous conflicts being exacerbated,
has to do with the passing of the Land Tenure Act and the extension of the
security of Tenure Act. The white farmers in those areas remain highly
suspicious of the intentions of those Acts and therefore strenuously oppose
their implementation.

The Acts, of course, are designed to advance the matter of land restitution
to people whose land was taken away from them, and to provide security to
labour tenants who are working on those farms. There have been interactions
by some of my colleagues, the Ministers, for instance, of Agriculture and
Land Affairs as well as Labour to try to mediate the conflict in the area.
There have been others who were also engaged in doing exactly the same.
I was in the area last year, accompanied by other Ministers, including the
Minister of Health. We went into the area. The other problem that has come
into the picture is to do with investigations of the conflicts. Both sides
allege that the police are tardy in their investigations and our courts of
law are not applying the law favourably and, of course, within the ambit of
the government’s intentions.

What we are trying to do in that area, because it does not help to try to
force any of the parties with regard to the matter, is to try
to continue to negotiate an understanding, in the first instance, of the
law as it stands and therefore to get all parties concerned to accept the
bona fides of government, in order for us to address that tricky issue of
land. Thank you.

Mnr R J KING: Minister, volgens die antwoord wat u departement aan die agb
Jankielsohn op sy vraag aan u verskaf het, het die spesiale taakmag opdrag
om alle sake en klagtes van beide die boere en die plaaswerkers te
ondersoek. Hulle het ’n lang lys klagtes ondersoek en in alle gevalle was
die boere in die beskuldigdebank.

Die Utrecht Boerevereniging ontken dat die taakmag enige kontak met hulle
gehad het. Ek wil van u weet, Minister, watter kriteria is gebruik om te
besluit wie die slagoffer en wie die verdagte sou wees? Of het u, soos die
gebruik blykbaar nou is, maar net op die vanne geoordeel? Hoekom is net die
boere as verdagtes ondersoek? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr R J KING: Minister, according to the answer supplied by your department
to the hon Jankielsohn regarding the question he put to you, the special
task team has instructions to investigate all cases and complaints reported
by both the farmers and the farm workers. They investigated a long list of
complaints, and in all cases the farmers found themselves in the dock.

The Utrecht Farmers Association denies that the task team had any contact
with them whatsoever. I would like to hear from you, Minister, what
criteria were used to determine who would be the victims, and who the
suspects? Or did you, as seems to be the practice nowadays, simply judge on
the basis of surnames? Why have only the farmers been investigated as
suspects?]

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: That is precisely the point in regard
to the conflict in that area. When we were there, together with the
Minister of Health and others, we were taken to places, where among other
things, there was a homestead of an African farmer that had been burnt
down. That person sustained serious injuries. There was a black farmer who
showed us a small dam where his cattle had to drink. He alleged that his
cattle were killed because that water was poisoned and he pointed a finger
at the farmers.

There are white farmers who complained about their land being taken by some
of the blacks who live around the area. There are complaints from both
sides. What the police are doing, which is the work of this task team, is
to collect all the evidence and in the end that evidence goes before court.
It is the courts of law that will therefore apportion culpability. It is
not the police. It is not the Minister. It is not anyone else. That matter
goes to court and this is the information I have laid before this House.
There are investigations, there are dockets and those dockets have been
submitted to the prosecuting authorities in the country.

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Thank you, Chairperson. Minister, the farmers in that
area informed me that they were not even consulted by this task team. I
would just like to ask you: Will you instruct this task team to go back and
make sure that the allegations of hate speech that were made by the farmers
are investigated and that they, at least, consult the farmers concerned and
the farmers’ union in that area?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: An investigation was mounted and that
investigation produced dockets. Those dockets are going to be before the
court. The allegations are huge from both sides, including the fact that
there are farmers who allege that hate speech was made on the part of some
of the black dwellers in that area.

There are also black people who also allege that those farmers perpetrated
atrocities against them. The best adjudicator with regards to this matter
is the court of law, where all these dockets will be taken. It is not going
to help us within the confines of this House to try and apportion blame on
anyone. Let us not apportion blame on the black dwellers in those areas.
Let us not apportion blame on the white farmers in those areas. Let us
allow the law to take its course.

    Consequences of nonrecognition of Hamas government and withholding of
                         monies due to Palestinians

65.   Dr A N Luthuli (ANC) asked the Minister of Foreign Affairs:

       (a) What is the situation in the Palestinian territories and (b) what
       will be the consequences of (i) the European Union, the United States
       of America and Israel not recognising the democratically-elected
       Hamas government and (ii) withholding monies due to Palestinians from
       Israel?                          N662E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Ms S C van der Merwe): Thank you,
Chair. The response to the question is as follows: On part one of the
question regarding the situation in the Palestinian territories, the South
African government is of course extremely concerned about the continuing
deterioration of the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
especially in the Gaza Strip, as a result of the escalation of violence and
the unfolding humanitarian crisis in the area. The unprecedented military
attacks on Palestinians by Israel, which is the stronger party, including
its continued campaign of extra-judicial assassination, has resulted in
extensive human casualties and the destruction of much-needed
infrastructure.

In response to parts two and three of the question, there have been a
number of developments since the outcome of the democratic election that
took place in Palestine on 25 January this year that have contributed to
this dire situation. Key among these are that the outcome of the elections
has resulted in a cessation of aid, from the key donor countries within the
international community, upon which the Palestinian government and society
are heavily reliant. This has led to the near collapse of the Palestinian
economy and infrastructure.

Secondly, the decision of the quartet, that is, the European Union, Russia,
the United States and the United Nations, not to provide financial
assistance to the Palestinian people through the new Hamas-led government
till the latter complies with the quartet’s conditions, has contributed
substantially, we believe, to the hardship of the Palestinian people.

Thirdly, the withholding of monies also due to the Palestinians from Israel
has exacerbated the humanitarian crisis in Gaza, which is already dire, and
it is imminent in the rest of the occupied territories. This measure has a
potential to seriously damage all economic and social infrastructure that
the Palestinian people have been able to maintain in difficult
circumstances over the past years. Such a collapse is not in the interests,
we believe, of any party and could contribute to further violence resulting
from a feeling of despair.

South Africa as a proponent of democracy could not and would not challenge
the consequences of a democratic process. The South African government
therefore welcomes the democratic process that took place in Palestine in
January, as it was a clear expression of the will of the people of
Palestine.

The South African government is furthermore of the opinion that the
elections in Palestine and Israel offer a new opportunity for the
leadership of both sides to take forward the Middle East process, and we
have and will continue to urge all interested parties in turn to recognise
the democratically elected government of Palestine.

Dr A N LUTHULI: Thank you very much, Deputy Minister, for your
comprehensive answer. You have answered comprehensively, but it is just the
last bit perhaps where I would like further clarification. The question I
will put forward is that you mentioned, which is what happened there, that
there is a result of a democratic election. And, we know very well that the
US and the Western allies have the idea of spreading democracy all round
the world. What therefore will be the consequences of what is happening in
the Middle East, where a democratically elected government does not seem to
be recognised?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Ms S C van der Merwe): Yes indeed,
it is a very worrying situation and we believe that the reaction of the
international community has further exacerbated the problem - because what
has occurred is, there has been a dramatic increase in the rivalry between
the Hamas and the Fatah parties. This has caused an escalation in clashes
and indeed these clashes have been exacerbated, we think, by the lack of
payments of salaries of the people. So, we do not think that it is in
anybody’s interests to place conditions on the government of Hamas seeing
that the election was properly observed even by the Americans and was
declared to have been free and fair. The conditionality, as you might be
aware, involves the recognition of Israel as a country and various other
conditions that the quartet has placed on people. But the situation now is
that all the negative activities that are going on in the region have been
exacerbated and made worse by the withdrawal of the donor funding by the
international community.

Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE: Thank you, Minister. Minister, you have made much about
the aspect of free elections and democracy. And the test of democracy is,
of course, when a free and open election is won, for the losing party,
particularly if it had previously been ruling, to accept electoral defeat.
I must compliment you on that. Of course, I am not referring to the Cape
Town Metro where this does not seem to be the case. Fatah did accept
defeat. Now, Hamas’ track record does cause concern, particularly in
refusing to recognise the existence of Israel, which South Africa, of
course, does recognise. Now, what therefore, Minister, will be the
consequences for the Middle Eastern region of this stance of Hamas and the
consequences for South Africa’s relations with both Israel and Palestine?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Ms S C van der Merwe): Thank you
very much. Yes, indeed we do recognise the democracy that took place there,
the democracy that exists and the fact that the elections were free and
fair. But we still maintain that the two-states solution is the way in
which the two countries should go. We will therefore bring to bear on the
situation all our diplomatic efforts in an attempt to persuade both parties
that the road-map that was established through a very long and complex
process is a process that we should go back to - to get people back to the
peace tables to talk about a solution in the area.

The consequences of what is happening now are very evident on the streets
of Gaza and in the Middle East generally. We do not think that it is a
sustainable situation and we believe that we should return to the
multilaterally agreed road-map process that was conceived and finalised in
Oslo.

Mr S N SWART: Thank you, Deputy Chair. Hon Deputy Minister, you did point
out that it is the South African government’s policy to recognise the right
of Israel to exist within secure boundaries as well as to support the road-
map to peace; and you did point out that the Hamas-led government has
refused to even accept the right of Israel to exist and that this has been
a condition that has been placed on it by the international community. This
appears to be the reason for the withholding of funds. Must we share your
concerns about the humanitarian crisis that this results in? What steps do
you think the South African government can take to persuade the Hamas
government to recognise this right of the state of Israel to exist within
secure borders? Whilst we appreciate your belief that it should not be a
condition, surely in diplomatic terms one should try to move this process
forward because, clearly, it is a severe threat to peace in the Middle
East.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Ms S C van der Merwe): Thank you,
Chair. Yes indeed, we do believe that the diplomatic solution is the one.
We believe that we should talk to all parties, both the government of
Palestine as well as the government of Israel to move forward and try and
find a solution to these problems. As I have stated in our position on the
matter, we are often criticised for talking to all sorts of people. But our
belief is, unless you talk to people you can never persuade them of your
point of view. So, our diplomatic efforts will be levelled at attempting to
persuade the parties that exist there that the road to peace there must be
found through dialogue and must be achieved through dialogue and must
follow the path, as I have mentioned, that the road-map sets out.

Mr M B SKOSANA: Thank you, Chairperson, I think I am very much covered
because I was going to say that we agree with the Minister that the
sanctions really do not help because they generate some kind of radicalism
in the Middle East. And this also relates to what is happening in Iran. My
question was going to be on the final position of Hamas on the Oslo
Accords, but I hear the Minister has already answered that.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Ms S C van der Merwe): Thank you
very much. I am glad that I have answered the question.  [Laughter.]

            Remuneration of serving judges for extrajudicial work

64.   Ms V Meruti (ANC) asked the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
      Development:

       Whether she has been informed of any serving Judge who is currently
       receiving remuneration other than a judge’s salary; if so, (a) who
       are the judges and (b) what is the nature of their extrajudicial
       work?                                                   N661E

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Allow me, by way
of introduction, to make some general remarks. The issue of judges
receiving additional remuneration for performing functions outside the
framework of their office is a matter of grave concern.

Since the legislature has entrusted the function to decide whether judges
may engage in other work for remuneration to me in my capacity as Minister
for Justice and Constitutional Development, I am in the process of
developing guidelines and criteria in this regard. By the way, here I am
referring both to serving judges and judges discharged from active service.

The principle, in my view, is quite clear. The judges, whether active or
discharged from active service, remain judges and as such they are
remunerated by the state. To allow judges to occupy other offices of profit
or to receive remuneration for services rendered outside the scope of their
office as judges, should, in my view, be limited to exceptional cases. I
have already raised this matter with heads of court.

I have, so far, refrained from giving judges applying for permission under
the particular provision open-ended authority. Instead, I have limited my
consent to those applications submitted on a case-by-case basis.

Having looked at the scenario since 1994, there are cases in which judges
have been allowed in terms of this provision to retain or enter
directorships in companies and to involve themselves in other similar kinds
of activities. Accordingly, as I have indicated, I am in the process of
interacting with the Chief Justice to really look at the details of the
guidelines that I am referring to.

However, let me come back to the actual question that has been posed by the
hon member. I have not been informed of any serving judge currently
receiving remuneration other than a judge’s salary, except for those
serving judges who have applied for and obtained permission to perform
outside work in terms of section 26 of the Act. As you all know, hon
members, we are also preparing legislation that will, inter alia, include a
section on financial disclosures. Thank you.

Ms V MERUTI: Thank you, Deputy Chair, Minister ...

Potso ya ka e ke neng ke tlile go e botsa, o setse o e arabile. Ka jalo ke
a go leboga. [The question which I was going to ask, you have already
answered. Therefore, I thank you.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Thank you, Chair. Yes, what the Minister has told the
House really corresponds with what she indicated to me when I posed the
question. I think she once, last year, indicated that she had given
permission to eight retired judges to do remunerative work and she has now
reiterated her main criteria, although she apparently is going to deal with
further criteria that this must be under exceptional circumstances, which
makes sense.

But could the Minister tell us what the actual method of applying is? Does
the application have to be in writing from the judge concerned? What is the
method the Minister uses to convey her decision, yes or no? And this has
become relevant, as a certain Judge President has claimed that he actually
had verbal permission to take on remunerative work from one of the
Minister’s predecessors. Would this be possible in terms of this system?
Thank you, Chair. [Time expired.]

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: What I did when I
took office was to actually, through the heads of courts, communicate to
the judiciary that I would want them to justify the request that they put
across. This is because what would happen is that the judges would just
give a line and say, “I have been approached for this and that, and I would
like to do it.” So, I can say that my sense is that there has been a level
of ad hoc-ism. I’m not sure whether, in all cases, there has been written
requests, but I have made it clear that I would want them even to give
rational reasons why they would want to do certain work.

Let me say that there is an indication also that some of the judges were
allowed as serving judges - and I think it is good practice - to go on
lectureships. But I actually think that we do need to formalise the system
beyond what the Act provides, to make sure that, in fact, we do have the
correct procedures. That is why I have asked for that.

You asked: What then? It is very difficult. I think one would be guided by
principles of administrative fairness in making the decision, but I
actually think it is not enough. So, we need to open up the discussion, and
I am hoping that when Parliament deals with the complaints mechanism, it
will engage this matter thoroughly. But, on my part, I do need to have
interim measures, because many retired judges ask to do arbitrations.

            Foreign commitment of Minister of Safety and Security

68.   Mr R Jankielsohn (DA) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:

      Whether he will request to be relieved from his foreign commitment to
      concentrate on local issues; if not (a) why not and (b) for how long
      does he envisage this foreign commitment to continue; if so, when?
                                              N805E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, the answer is: I will not
ask to be released from any task that the President allocates to me. I will
continue to work at such tasks until they are concluded or the President
withdraws the given mandate. [Applause.]

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Minister, a total of 51 people in South Africa is
murdered every day. Violence has become a norm in South Africa. Peace in
Burundi is important, but for South Africa preventing murder, rape, robbery
and even torture by criminals is more important. South Africans are living
in constant fear. Will you commit to us that you will put the safety and
security of all South Africans before any other commitments, including
foreign commitments?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: In South Africa we have a huge
contingent of members of the SA Police Service. They have detectives who do
investigative work. They have people who deal with all types of crime in
South Africa. That is their operational function. They do the actual work.
I have confidence that they discharge those obligations in terms of the
principles defined, as well as strategies and tactics, in which the police
have been trained. The Minister heads the Ministry and therefore is the
executing officer in that establishment. The police do policing and the
Minister is in charge of the Ministry. The Minister is not a police person
who goes and does police work on the ground. The hon members know this,
otherwise we would have a situation where all the executives in politics
and business would have to sit down and do the work that those who are
under them are supposed to do.
See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr L J MODISENYANE: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move:

  That the House should debate the importance of strengthening the
  progressive movement for peace, democracy and development on the African
  continent.

Mr G G OLIPHANT: Chairperson, this year being the 60th anniversary of the
African Mineworkers’ Strike of 1946, I give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:

  That the House debates the significance and the role of the working class
  movement in the transformation of our country.

Ms F HAJAIG: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move:

  That the House debates the contribution we can make as a country in the
  effort for a just resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Chairperson, recalling that 100 years ago here in our
country, Mahatma Gandhi launched Satyagraha, which is now not only the
heritage of our country but the entire world, I give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House I shall move:

  That the House debates the contributions and relevance of Satyagrah to our
  political, economic and social values.


[Applause.]

Mr A MLANGENI: Noting the fact that this year marks the 45th anniversary of
the Nobel Peace Prize being awarded to Chief Albert John Mvumbi Luthuli,
Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the House I
shall move:

  That the House debates the progress that we have made in the struggle to
  eradicate the demon of racism in our country.

[Applause.]


                           NATIONAL EPILEPSY WEEK


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr H J BEKKER (IFP): Chairperson, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the IFP, I
move without notice:
  That the House-


      1) takes cognisance that –


       (a)  this week is National Epilepsy Week; and


       (b)  epilepsy is a silent illness that is suffered by at least one
            person per every 100 of our population;


    2) recognises the importance of this week, which is dedicated to raising
       awareness of the illness;


    3) commends the important role being played by the South African
       National Epilepsy League, Sanel, and all affiliated and associated
       epilepsy organisations;

    4) in particular salutes the outstanding achievements of epilepsy
       sufferers in the professional world of employment and even in sport;


    5) remembers that people like Leonardo da Vinci, Vincent Van Gogh and
       even Napoleon and our own cricketer Jonty Rhodes are among the
       epilepsy sufferers;


    6) believes that epilepsy should be recognised as a disability and that
       it indeed presents obstacles to employment; and
    7) also firmly believes that epilepsy sufferers need to receive similar
       protection of their rights and recognition for employment as our
       citizens with general disabilities and handicaps.


Agreed to.


                           CONSIDERATION OF ORDERS


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without
notice:

   That the House, after dealing with the Business on the Order Paper today,
   considers Orders No 2 and 3 under Further Business.


Agreed to.


                           STANDING OVER OF ORDER


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without
notice:

   That Order No 6 on the Order Paper stand over.

Agreed to.


                       BILL REFERRED BACK TO COMMITTEE


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without notice
the first motion on the Order Paper:

   That the House, subject to the concurrence of the National Council of
   Provinces, refer the Report of the Joint Monitoring Committee on
   Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled
   Persons on the filling of vacancies on the National Youth Commission
   (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 5 June 2006, p 1152) back
   to the Committee for further consideration.

Agreed to.

                  EXTENSION OF DEADLINE OF AD HOC COMMITTEE


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without notice
the second motion on the Order Paper:
   That the House extend the deadline by which the Ad Hoc Committee on
   appointment of the Auditor General must report to House from 21 June 2006
   to 28 July 2006.

Agreed to.


                     MONITORING OF ELECTIONS IN THE DRC


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without notice
the third motion on the Order Paper:

   That the House, noting that the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
   holding elections on 30 July 2006, resolves, subject to the concurrence
   of the National Council of Provinces, that –

   (1)      the South African Parliament send a 30-member multiparty
        delegation to observe these elections;


   (2)      the delegation form part of the South African National Observer
        Mission;

   (3)      the delegation observe the campaign in the run-up to the
        elections, the casting of votes and subsequently the counting of
        the votes;
   (4)      the delegation comply with the attached Code of Conduct
        governing Parliamentary Observer Missions;

   (5)      the delegation comply with the Code and Rules governing the
        conduct of the National Observer Mission and recognise the overall
        leadership of that Mission’s leader; and

   (6)      the delegation table for consideration and debate the report of
        the National Observer Mission to Parliament on its return.

   Principles and rules governing observer missions

   1. General

       (1)  Observer missions must be conducted on the basis of the highest
           standards of impartiality concerning political processes in the
           host country and must be free from any bilateral or multilateral
           consideration that could conflict with impartiality.
       (2)  Observer missions must be conducted with respect for the
           sovereignty of the host country, including adherence to domestic
           laws, and with respect for the rights of the people of the
           country.

       (3)  Observer missions must not interfere with, obstruct or hamper
           the processes being observed.
       (4)  An observer mission must strive to gather information
           systematically and comprehensively, to analyse the information
           within the overall context of the event, even if the observer
           mission focuses on only a sector of the event, and to draw
           conclusions based on the highest standards of accuracy of
           information and impartiality of analysis.

       (5)  Observer missions must submit a report to Parliament or the
           House that mandated it within a reasonable time, presenting
           their findings, conclusions and, where appropriate,
           recommendations they determine could help improve the observed
           processes.

       (6)  All statements of the observer Mission to the public or the news
           media must be authorised by the Mission.

   2. Conduct of members


       Members of the observer mission must respect the integrity of the
       mission, including:

       (1)  following any reasonable written or verbal instructions from the
           observer mission’s leadership;

       (2)  attending all of the observer mission’s required briefings,
           trainings and debriefings if reasonably possible;

       (3)  reporting to the leadership of the observer mission any
           conflicts of interest they may have and any improper behaviour
           they see conducted by other members of the observer mission;

       (4)  maintaining strict impartiality at all times, including leisure
           time in the host country, and not conducting any activity that
           could be reasonably perceived as favouring or providing partisan
           gain for any political competitor in the host country, such as
           wearing or displaying partisan symbols;

       (5)  maintaining proper personal behaviour and respect towards
           others, including exhibiting sensitivity for host-country
           cultures and customs, exercising sound judgment in personal
           interactions and observe the highest level of professional
           conduct at all times, including leisure time; and

       (6)  not making personal comments about the observations or
           conclusions of the observer mission to the news media or members
           of the public prior to the observer mission reporting to
           Parliament or the House that mandated it, unless authorised by
           the observer mission.

   3. Violations of the Code


       If a member violates this Code the observer mission may, through its
       leadership, suspend the participation of the member in the observer
       mission and must in that event report the circumstances to the
       relevant House.

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, I rise on a point of order. Yesterday the Chief
Whip of the Majority Party went to great trouble to pat the Chief Whips’
Forum on the back on two occasions, talking about the great sense of co-
operation that exists in that forum. He did this at the Chief Whips’ Forum
itself; he did it again yesterday when the forum met with the Deputy
President.

Yet, today, sir, unfortunately we have a situation where the draft rules
for this observer mission have been brought before the House without any
opportunity whatsoever for the Chief Whips’ Forum, the Joint Rules
Committee or any other body whatsoever, to debate them, to look at them and
study them and to come to a consensus conclusion on them – if that was
possible. I think quite frankly that this is a complete breach of good
faith that exists in the Chief Whips’ Forum and consequently I would urge
that the ANC withdraw this resolution today and give the House a complete
and proper opportunity to debate this matter properly.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Thank you, Chairperson. This matter
was raised and we didn’t seek any consensus about it. I want really to
table it so that we will not be blackmailed into consensus, when the issues
that we are raising are crystal clear. Parliament cannot pay for people to
go under its name, when such people will abuse ... [Interjections.] Can you
keep quiet, Mr Leon?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O BAPELA): Order, hon members. Hon Chief Whip,
just a minute. Hon members, can we please be orderly. A request was put
before the House. There is a response to it. Let us listen to the response.
We still don’t know what the response is going to be, whether you like it
or not.

Mr M J ELLIS: Chair, I want to rise on a point of order against what the
hon Chief Whip of the ANC has said. He is referring to the fact that the DA
– and he used the word – is blackmailing them. He will not be brow-beaten
in any way by blackmail. I believe that that is unparliamentary and I ask
you to rule on that matter.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Well, I didn’t hear the word. Hon
Chief Whip, did you use the word? If not, we will then refer the matter to
a later ruling.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I did not call them by name. If the
shoe fits, it is unfortunate.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O BAPELA): Can we leave the matter and I will
give a ruling at a later stage. Please continue, hon Chief Whip, in terms
of the request.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I said, Chairperson, that we would
expect the so-called watchdogs of the taxpayers’ money to show the same
passion. What we are asking here is reasonable. Observer missions of
Parliament must be governed by a particular code of conduct. Mr Leon, can
you please keep quiet. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O BAPELA): Order, Hon members! Hon Chief Whip,
please shorten your response.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: We are tabling the motion for
consideration. The people must respond according to their conscience.

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, honestly, the Rules that have been produced here
have not been passed by anybody, any group or any organisation or any
committee within Parliament. It is a total breach of the general convention
that exists in this Parliament. I urge the ANC to accept this. This is
going to be a very bad precedent for the future. It is unacceptable.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon members, as you know, if there
is no agreement then we will just have to follow the guidelines in terms of
parliamentary procedures. Your request has been given to them and they have
received it.

Mr M J ELLIS: These guidelines that are before the House are far more
restrictive than SADC and they are for one reason only and that is to try
and muffle the voice of the opposition in any way whatsoever. They are
absolutely unreasonable.

Mr D K MALULEKE: On a point of order: The issue is that those Rules have to
do with Parliament. If political parties feel that they want to have
minority reports, then they need to send their own delegation at their own
expense. Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): It was not a point of order. I won’t
rule on that. There was an objection noted from the DA. I will now put the
question.

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

Mr M J ELLIS: This is actually the point I was making. We have no option
but to call for a division on this matter.

Division demanded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): A division being called, the bells
will be rung for five minutes.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon members, order please! Hon
members, please take your seats. There has been a request for declarations
of vote, which I will allow. Each member will have three minutes to use for
the declaration of vote, if he or she wishes to use it. Members must use
the floor mikes, to save time.

Declarations of vote:

The LEADER OF THE OFFICIAL OPPOSITION: Madam Chair, I would like to address
you on this motion that we have to vote on, which, with great diffidence
and disappointment, the DA has to vote against. We are very much in favour
of free democratic elections in the Democratic Republic of Congo.

We’re very much in favour of South Africa having the highest-level
multiparty delegation to attend during those elections and to help guide
that country to democracy; that’s not in contest. What is in contest is the
unilateral imposition of a set of rules to gag and bind our observer
members in a way that falls completely outside, from the documents that we
were provided with, of the SADC principles and guidelines governing
democratic elections.

There are a few provisions in here that have been added in, and I draw your
attention, Madam Chair, to paragraph 3(5), that the delegation has to
comply with a code of rules governing the conduct of the national observer
mission and recognise the overall leadership of that mission’s leader.

Paragraph 1(6) states that “all statements by the observer mission, to the
public or the news media, must be authorised by the mission”; and 2(6)
states, “... not making personal comments about the observations or
conclusions of the observer mission to the news media, etc.”

These have been added in at the express instruction, we believe, of the
Chief Whip of the ANC, because what he wants to avoid is a situation
similar to what happened in Zimbabwe, where he had a predetermined view
that those elections were free and fair, when they weren’t.
[Interjections.]

When members of the opposition, from several opposition parties, came to a
different conclusion, he tried to gag and bind them to something that he
couldn’t do. So what he’s done now is to add in these additional
provisions, which, frankly, are an abuse, Madam Chair, and they completely
go against the good work being done by the government to try and get a
democratic process on the road in the DRC, which we would like to be part
of.

You can’t have your cake and eat it. If there’s nothing to hide; if there’s
no one to be muzzled, why put those provisions in? Putting them in
unilaterally, as he has done – because they weren’t discussed at the Chief
Whips’ Forum, they weren’t the product of any discussion or negotiation –
can only mean that there are some ulterior motives at play here, Madam
Chair.

Unfortunately, if this thing goes through as it is now, the DA will have no
choice except not to be part of this mission. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs S A SEATON: Madam Speaker, the IFP is, on principle, concerned about
the fact that we have not had the opportunity as a party to discuss these
issues before they were brought onto the Order Paper.

We were given to understand, at the Chief Whips’ Forum yesterday, that the
matter would be placed before the Joint Rules Committee, which it was this
morning. However, there was a decision taken at the Joint Rules Committee
that the matter would go before the parties and, therefore, we would have
the opportunity to discuss the issue.

The IFP will not be opposing the motion. However, we want our concerns to
be taken note of. We do not believe that this is the way members should be
treated. We do believe that an opportunity should have been given to
parties to debate the issue, and on that basis we are going to abstain.
Thank you.

Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, the fact of the matter is that what we are
doing at this moment is bad and it is wrong. The fact of the matter is, and
it’s not uncommon and it’s not in dispute, that unlike all other procedures
in the past, this is suddenly thrust upon the House.

We’ve never done it in this fashion; we’ve always tried to reach consensus
among the parties. This is due, specifically, to the very important issue,
namely the mandate of the delegation that we are sending on behalf of South
Africa to the DRC to monitor those elections.

What we are doing in this process, basically, is that we are placing the
delegation under suspicion even before it leaves. How do we expect the
public out there to have sufficient confidence in and respect for what this
mission is going to do? We are really trying to force something through
here today - I don’t know why – in a completely wrong manner. Never mind
the procedure that was not, technically speaking, correctly followed; as
far as I’m concerned, the principle underlying this is completely wrong. We
are sending a wrong signal.

I’m appealing to the ANC to rethink what they are doing now and to withdraw
this motion in the interest of what we have been doing for the past 12
years in Parliament. The FF Plus cannot vote for this. We oppose this very
strongly.

Mr V C GORE: Madam Chair, the ID believes that when we go to a foreign
country we should respect the cultures and the processes involved there.
However, we have serious concerns about the current process in the passing
of this motion, and we believe that there should have been more
consultation.

In addition, we have some serious concerns about some of the clauses within
the motion, and therefore we are not in a position to support this motion.
Thank you.

Mrs S A SEATON: Madam Chair, the hon member there says that the IFP has no
guts. I want him to withdraw that, please.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, that is really not a
point of order; it was a private exchange. Please allow us to proceed.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Chair, we have not had a chance to go through the
document. The only time we came to know about it as the UCDP was during the
Joint Programme Committee meeting and as such, we shall be hard put to find
ourselves supporting a document on which we have not had a very strong
influence. Thank you very much.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Chair, I’m not involved with the document and I don’t
want to prejudice anything. So I’m afraid the PAC will have to abstain
because we don’t have information on this matter. Izwe lethu! [Our
country!]

Mr M V NGEMA: House Chair, Nadeco has not had any information on this
matter. As has been indicated, we were hoping that the matter would serve
before us, so that we could be well-informed and take a decision. In view
of the fact that this matter deals with promoting democracy in Africa,
Nadeco pleads with the ANC to stick to this principle and ensure that all
parties are taken on board on this matter.

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, I cannot see how we can promote democracy on the
African continent and then try to undermine it at home. [Interjections.]
And I think this is exactly what the motion is doing. There wasn’t
sufficient time for us to study the motion.

There are issues in this motion that are of concern to us, and for this
reason the FD will not support the motion.
Ms N M MDAKA: Chairperson, although the UIF received the information very
late, we do not oppose this motion. We are with the ANC. [interjections.]
Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Chair, the UDM is concerned about the procedural
principle of not consulting the other parties. However, for the sake of the
bigger picture, we will go along with it. But then the ANC must put its
house in order. Thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I think we are persuaded
by this request from Nadeco because there are these parties that don’t
attend the Chief Whips’ Forum. For the sake of the record, we have placed
this matter before the Chief Whips’ Forum on two occasions. Clearly, the
Chief Whips’ Forum cannot punch above its weight. There is no prerequisite
for any rules here that says there should be an agreement of the Chief
Whips’ Forum. Such a structure is not there. But we did table this matter
and we were clear that it’s not a matter that we would agree on.

However, having said that, we think that we have to maintain the unity of
the House. We have to provide an opportunity for us as parties to discuss
this matter in a mature manner and withdraw the motion now for
consideration later. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you, hon Chief Whip. There is
thus no need for us to continue with the question. There will be no voting
and we will proceed to the fourth motion on the Order Paper.

Motion, with leave, withdrawn.
     THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE BHAMBATHA UPRISING IN LAND RESTITUTION AND
     DISTRIBUTION AND IN THE ECONOMIC EMANCIPATION OF THE AFRICAN PEOPLE

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Mr S L TSENOLI: Thank you, Chairperson. A hundred years on the spirit of
Bhambatha is at large in our country, thanks to the undying commitment of
the ANC to the struggles of the people of our country for democratic and
legitimate governance, for land, economic and social wellbeing.

The centenary celebration occurs properly under the auspices of a
legitimate government that is actively engaged in initiatives to restore
the dignity of the people of our country. The respect accorded traditional
leaders in our Constitution, in legislation and in practices of co-
operative governance today, is a far cry from the insulting, whimsical and
downright oppressive manner the colonisers and their local collaborators
visited upon them.

The posthumous reinstatement of Bhambatha to his chieftainship is not just
significant symbolically, but it conveys a message of respect to our
people’s traditional institutions of governance.

In the broad struggle against subjugation and colonisation, the Bhambatha
Rebellion stands at the boundary of what became empty victory on the one
hand and a beginning of reassessment of strategies for resistance in the
country by the oppressed.

The rebellion signified a resistance to imposition of measures that caused
further economic, political and social pain, especially through the
systematic alienation of people from their land and what they considered
arbitrary taxation.

The brutality of the repression of that rebellion paradoxically motivated
the subsequent ANC’s revolutionary commitment to higher human values than
was displayed by those who, gloating with triumph, beheaded Bhambatha in an
act of despicable barbarism.

Summary execution of the rebels by hastily convened martial courts approved
explicitly by Britain, the coloniser, remains a big stain on the history of
our country. The crushing of this rebellion never meant any acceptance of
defeat by our people. The resistance instead served to inspire many that no
sacrifice could be big enough to bring a just, legitimate and democratic
government into being.

The ANC, which emerged in 1912, was a crowning step for united action
against oppression. The Bhambatha Rebellion and other brave acts by other
groups in the country served as important lessons to unite, mobilise and
organise for success against unjust rule.

The formation of the ANC was itself a sign of the firm rejection by those
who gathered there of isolated, fragmented, tribally based battles - Zulu,
Xhosa. Mosotho hlanganani became the founding song of the congress, a clear
indication of lessons learnt from previous battles.

No one then was surprised when in the 90s, 800 wars later, with the
Bhambatha Rebellion one of the principal battles, sense finally prevailed
and the people chose their own representatives, thereby dramatically ending
imposed rule on the majority of the population.

This victory, this breakthrough in 1994, was a telling tribute to those
who, like Bhambatha, heroically resisted unjust rule. This victory’s key
values remain encoded in our world-class Constitution.

Earlier in the mid-50s delegates at a people’s congress approved a clause
in the Freedom Charter that said it even more eloquently and in so doing
restated in words what many felt - that no government can justly claim
authority unless it is based on the will of the people.

In these words the Freedom Charter was echoing a perspective that drove the
rebellion and the struggle for liberation in general. As we commemorate 50
years of the adoption of the Freedom Charter by the ANC, and the centenary
of the Bhambatha Rebellion, let us recognise the huge progress made in 12
years to build legitimate state institutions and to lay the foundation for
a better life for all in our country who are poor.

The many successful claims for land forcefully taken from people, including
continuing efforts to speed up further land restitution, are key elements
to the economic wellbeing of the majority.  The Bhambatha Rebellion
therefore stands as a beacon for continuing struggles in the decade ahead.
[Applause.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Much has been said and written
by way of paying homage, deservedly so, to Nkosi Bhambatha kaMancinza on
the occasion of the centenary anniversary of the historical Bhambatha
Rebellion in the then Natal in 1906.

The Bhambatha Rebellion has, I strongly believe, very pertinent lessons  for
South Africa and perhaps the world at large.  It should be so  because  when
nations do not take note of historic events then they – these nations -  are
prone to repeat mistakes and injustices of the past.

To name a few of the factors or mistakes that gave  rise  to  the  Bhambatha
Rebellion  I  cite  the  following:  the  imposition  of  taxation   without
representation and consultation by British rule.  There  was  an  additional
one pound poll tax added to the existing unjust hut tax.

You will note that these taxes were designed to subtly  coerce  the  menfolk
to enter the labour market resulting in forcing people  off  the  land  that
they relied on for subsistence and sustenance.  Dispossessing  a  people  of
their land is indeed tantamount to disempowerment of a people.

Another factor is that Bhambatha was deposed as chief or nkosi by the  Natal
government thus committing the gross injustice of interference in the  right
of tribes to run their own affairs – to appoint, or even to anoint if  needs
be, leaders according to their custom and culture.

Yet another point is the arbitrary decision to  charge  King  Dinizulu  with
treason and sentencing him to four years’ imprisonment, as  he  was  accused
of giving Bhambatha tacit support and  asylum.  This  showed  disregard  for
their affinity and even flouted the communal responsibilities of members  to
be each others’ keepers, so to say,  especially  in  times  of  trouble  and
need.

The worst atrocity that could have been committed was  to  behead  Bhambatha
after he was killed during the battle – the worst insult one can hurl  at  a
warrior.

These actions, amongst many, do point to the age-old practice of  the  abuse
of power and a disregard for human rights; and  such  injustices  are  still
perhaps prevalent  in  contemporary  society.  Consultation,  taxation  with
representation,  citizens’  participation  and  consent  are  valuable   and
cardinal  beacons  of  justice  and  democracy.   The   question   of   land
dispossession in this sad episode of our history  also  points  directly  to
the issues of land restitution and distribution in the emancipation  of  the
African people, as the title of this debate states.

I do believe that we are  aware  of  the  critical  and  emotive  nature  of
matters relating  to  land  ownership.   We  in  South  Africa  should  give
ourselves a little pat on the back for having come up with our  land  reform
programme, albeit not 100% perfect. We are aware  of  its  shortcomings  but
great emphasis is placed on  dialogue,  participation  and  consultation  to
deal with the programme’s shortcomings.

What is also of cardinal importance  is  the  fact  that,  underpinning  the
implementation of this programme, in general, and land restitution,  is  the
notion of equity or justice, consultation and interaction of the  landowners
and the dispossessed, landless people. Whether or not  it  is  done  to  the
letter is another debate.

Furthermore, I am of the firm belief that restitution was never intended  to
be  retribution,  that  is,  settling  old  scores  rather  than  redressing
imbalances and fair and  equitable  distribution  of  this  scarce  resource
called land, within the parameters of our Constitution.

In a diverse society espousing nonracialism we cannot but  be  very  careful
of falling into the trap of disregarding part of the  population  as  though
they are not citizens.  The  Constitution  of  our  country,  South  Africa,
makes no provision for people to be willy-nilly  stripped  of  their  rights
and property.  It does not even give any space for people to be  swept  into
the sea or sending them away to some unknown Siberian destination when  they
seek to interact and engage in dialogue.  That  was  the  folly  of  British
rule, apartheid and all authoritarian systems through the ages.

The significance of the Bhambatha Rebellion is firstly that in  implementing
whatever  sociopolitical  and  economic  development   programme,   consent,
participation, consultation, equity or fairness and justice  must  be  taken
note of and be uppermost in the mind lest  we  repeat  these  very  mistakes
perpetrated by British rule in the era of Bhambatha.

Our former President Mandela – to paraphrase him - teaches us that  we  have
to be very careful not to be tainted by the evil we fight; in short,  unjust
systems must not leave imprints  on  the  minds  of  those  who  fight  such
systems.

Last but not least, economic emancipation cannot be solely  linked  to  land
restitution and the distribution of land even though land  is  a  factor  of
economic activity.  In the light of global economic activity much has  still
to be done to realise economic emancipation not only of  Africans  but  also
of all South African citizens in our diversity and splendour.

Lest we forget, national heroes are national heroes. Therefore, they  should
not be depicted as sectarian  or  sectional  leaders  because  we  would  be
degrading them and removing the honour that they deserve.

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Hon Chairperson, hon Members of the national
Parliament, I think it’s really wonderful for members of this House to pay
tribute to the freedom fighters who blazed the trail of the liberation
struggle – especially those of us who waged the struggle more recently.

On 11 June, our President, President Mbeki, addressed iNkosi Bhambatha’s
centenary function at KwaMpanza, in the Greytown district, where it all
began. This was in the presence of His Majesty, King Goodwill Zwelithini,
kaBhekuzulu, kaSolomoni, kaDinuzulu. Both His Majesty the King and I were
privileged to address the function as descendants of King Dinuzulu before
President Mbeki delivered the keynote address at the function.

We all paid tribute to iNkosi Bhambatha Zondi and other amakhosi who
participated in the uprising against the colonial Natal government in 1906
such as the following amakhosi: Sigananda Shezi, Meseni Qwabe, Ndlovu
kaThimuni Zulu and several others. I, however, raised the point, in my
address, of the important role that King Dinuzulu played in the uprising.
He was the grandfather of Prince Nhlanhla kaNojombo kaDinuzulu, a Member of
this Parliament. And he was also my maternal grandfather, the father of
Princess Magogo kaDinuzulu, my mother.

King Dinuzulu was the very kingpin of the uprising. In fact, when iNkosi
Bhambatha revolted against the imposition of poll tax, his very first port
of call was Osuthu, King Dinuzulu’s royal residence. Inkosi Bhambatha
approached the king with the request to give sanctuary to his better half,
Siyekiwe – uMaZuma, and his daughter, Kholekile. My late mother often told
me of the times when she and her siblings played with iNkosi Bhambatha’s
daughter, Kholekile, at the Osuthu royal residence.

It was King Dinuzulu’s giving of sanctuary to iNkosi Bhambatha’s family
which resulted in my grandfather being charged and convicted of high
treason. He was sentenced to life imprisonment. It was only in 1910, after
the political marriage of convenience when the British and Boers formed the
Union of South Africa, after the Anglo-Boer war, that the first Prime
Minister of South Africa, General Louis Botha - who had also been King
Dinuzulu’s friend - released King Dinuzulu from prison in Newcastle.

I remember, as a former member of Cabinet, that I explained to my then
colleague, the late hon Steve Tshwete, when he suggested that the statute
of General Louis Botha which is at the gates of Parliament be removed, that
General Botha was also a friend of King Dinuzulu. I was not canonising
General Botha by my observation, I was merely making the point that he was
also part of our history.

General Botha, however, did not allow the king to return to his home. He,
instead, exiled him to Uitkyk farm in Middleburg, where King Dinuzulu died
in the year 1913. This was not the first time that King Dinuzulu had been
banished from his kingdom. In 1888 he had been exiled to the island of St
Helena - where Napoleon had been banished to - after the civil war between
the uSuthu and Mandlakazi sections of the Zulu nation.

It was on the island of St Helena where my mother’s two brothers, King
Solomon KaDinuzulu and Prince Mshiyeni kaDinuzulu were born. My mother was
born after King Dinuzulu’s return, during the Anglo-Boer war. The king
returned in 1897. Less than 10 years after returning he was then implicated
in the uprising of 1906, known as the
Bhambatha Rebellion.

I think it is important to state on record that King Dinuzulu’s eldest
daughter, Princess Phikisile Harriet kaDinuzulu married Dr Pixley kaIsaka
Seme. As most of you know, Dr Pixley Seme was the founder of the African
Native Congress in 1912, which later became the ANC. Dr Seme was not a
legend to me as I knew him very closely as my uncle.

It was in fact Dr Seme, my uncle, who wrote a letter in September 1950 to
Prof Zachariah Keodireleng Mathews, “ZK” - the father of Mr Joe Mathews,
our former Deputy Minister of Safety and Security, and grandfather of our
Minister of Education, Ms Naledi Pandor - when I was rusticated from the
University of Fort Hare, after being involved in a student demonstration
against the Governor-General, the hon G Brand van Zyl. This demonstration
was organised by those of us who were members then of the ANC Youth League
at the University of Fort Hare.

INkosi Bhambatha was indeed a great hero in starting the uprising. But even
he realised that he could not hope to be successful in that venture without
getting the king’s support. One of the great heroes of that uprising was
Shiyanja, uSukabekhuluma Sithole, popularly known as Chakijana. He acted as
a go-between between the King, iNkosi Bhambatha and other amakhosi. This
was further used as evidence against the king in the treason trial.

In honouring iNkosi Bhambatha, we humbly acknowledge those who waged the
liberation struggle many decades before the present generation. Indeed,
they laid the foundation on which our generation - and the generations
before us – made our contributions to the liberation of South Africa.

I think that it is very unfortunate that in the areas where iNkosi
Bhambatha started the uprising the communal land has not been restored to
the various traditional authorities. It will be recalled that, in this very
Parliament, we debated the ingonyama Act which was amended, and which I
actually piloted through KwaZulu as the then chief Minister to protect
traditional areas.

These areas were surveyed with the intention of passing them on to the
various traditional authorities by giving titles. But, after 10 years,
those titles have not been given to the various traditional authorities. So
on this day, on which we pay tribute to iNkosi Bhambatha, I felt it was
important to put that on record.

UShiyanja wayeyindoda enesibindi. Ngiyakhumbula ukuthi, suku lumbe,
ngenkathi amasotsha emfuna emzini lapho ayesezwile ukuthi ukhona futhi
esewukakile lowo muzi, kwathiwa bonke abantu abaphume ezindlini.
UChakijana, njengoba yena wayengenaso isilevu, wadumela ingane eyayilele
lapho, washuqula ekhanda. Wayibeletha emhlane ingane, wabe eseyincweba.

Amasotsha abe esethi, “Phuma! Phuma wena mfazi!” Waphuma nempela nayo
ingane. Wathi uma esengaphandle wayithi dinsi wabaleka. Ngisho
uSukabekhuluma:

  USigilamkhuba zonke izigila mikhuba
  Ziyivuma imikhuba yazo,
  Othetha yedwa njengenina
  Ovungama njengophiyano.
  Imbedle eyabhedla eSithwishili izalwa nguMnqandi ...

AMALUNGU AHLONIPHEKILE: Musho!

UMntwana M G BUTHELEZI: Uzibongo zindawonye nezikaNkulunkulu!
[Ubuwelewele.] Usuthu!

AMALUNGU AHLONIPHEKILE: Usuthu!

UMntwana M G BUTHELEZI: Hebe!

AMALUNGU AHLONIPHEKILE: Usuthu!

UMntwana M G BUTHELEZI: Hebe!

AMALUNGU AHLONIPHEKILE: Usuthu!

UMntwana M G BUTHELEZI: Heeebe!

AMALUNGU AHLONIPHEKILE: Usuuuthu! [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Shiyanja was a brave man. I recall that at one stage when the British
soldiers were looking for him, they surrounded the kraal in which they were
told he was staying, and they ordered everyone to come out of each hut.
Since Chakijana did not have a beard, he simply grabbed a baby that was
asleep inside that hut and put a kerchief on his heard like a woman. He
then carried the baby on his back and went out.

The soldiers saw him and thinking that he was a woman, they shouted at him,
saying: “You, woman, come out! Come out of there! He indeed came out with
the baby. And when he was outside, he dropped the baby and ran away. I am
talking here about Sukabekhuluma:

  USigilamkhuba zonke izigila mikhuba
  Ziyivuma imikhuba yazo,
  Othetha yedwa njengenina
  Ovungama njengophiyano.
  Imbedle eyabhedla eSithwishili izalwa nguMnqandi ...

HON MEMBERS: Praise him!

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Whose praises share the same status as those of God!
[Interjections.] Usuthu!

HON MEMBERS: Usuthu!

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Hebe!

HON MEMBERS: Usuthu!

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Hebe!

HON MEMBERS: Usuthu!

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Heeebe!

HON MEMBERS: Usuuuthu! [Applause.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon members, the following member is
going to make his maiden speech.

Mnu J P PHUNGULA: Ngiyabonga, Sihlalo. Ngiyabonga naseNdlini yonke, ngize
ngibheke nangapha kulolu hlangothi. Kodwa ngiyahlupheka ngoba seyihambile
le genge engapha, iyona obekufunakala izwe kakhulu ukuthi uBhambatha lo
asinaye nje kwenziwa yini.

UBhambatha wafa egameni layo le genge engalapha. Iyona le eyabulala
uBhambatha. [Ubuwelewele.] Cha, uBhambatha ufele lapha. Nakhu lapha kufele
khona uBambatha. Ufele kunina madoda njengoba nihleli nje lapha. Kufuneka
nikwazi lokho ukuthi uSomtsewu uyena owathi akufe uBambatha, imikhuba
yakhe.

UBhambatha akekho nje, uyena uSomtsewu owenza ukuba uBhambatha angabi bikho
ngoba kwakuliwa nokuthi kukhishwe abantu emizini yabo. Lokho kufana nendoda
uma isizihambela nje, kuthiwa ayigaqe njengengane. Sagaqiswa thina.
Ngenkathi kuthiwa asikhokhe le mali yamakhanda kwakwenziwela ukuthi siphume
emizini yethu siye kosebenza, khona sizofunda ukusebenza komunye umuntu
hhayi lokho esikwenza emizini yethu. Yilokho-ke okwasenza saba yile nto
esiyiyona kuze kube manje.

Njengamanje uye uthole abantu bemasha bethi, “sifuna umsebenzi” ube ukhona
umsebenzi okungabe bayawenza emakhaya. Basuke bemasha ngoba bafundiswa yile
ngqondo yamaNgisi ukuthi bangazisebenzeli bona. [Uhleko.] [Ihlombe.]
Bayaphuma-ke manje bemashe bethi “Siyayigxoba, sifuna umsebenzi. Lo
hulumeni akasinikezi imisebenzi.” Abasho ukuthi “Lo hulumeni akasinikezi
indawo yokuthi thina silime, siziphilise, sibe nezinkomo nemfuyo yethu.”
Kodwa baye bathi bafuna umsebenzi lapha konkosana.

Indaba yonkosana-ke ibuchithile ubendle. UBhambatha walwiswa yilokho ngoba
kwathiwa akuthelelwe amakhanda kade kuthelelwa izindlu. Kwathi uma
sekuthiwa akuthelwe ukhandampondo, futhi uthelwe yinoma ubani – ngoba
kwakuthelelwa izindlu futhi iyinye indoda ethelela umuzi - kwabe
sekubonakala ukuthi hhayi, la madoda amaningi ahlezi lapha endlini
awatheli, kufuneka indoda ngayinye ithelele inhloko yayo. Kwafika lapho
kugcina khona-ke kulo wakaZondi, kaNondaba. Kwafika lapho kugcina khona
kuMsongi wensimbi ize ibe yinkatha, ayibeke ekhanda agijime nayo.

Sithi-ke siyakhuleka kuBhambatha namhlanje. Sithi into ayenzile
siyayibonga. [Ihlombe.] Sithi mukhulu u-ANC ngoba uke wenza lolu suku
lukaBhambatha, uyisigonyagonya. [Ihlombe.] Siyayibonga into eyenziwe u-ANC.
Mhlawumbe usazozenza ezinye futhi esizozibonga. Siyazibona-ke nje lezi
ezinye ezincane kodwa le ayenzile yokubuyisa ubukhosi bakwaZondi obathathwa
uSomtsewu ngobuqili bokusigqilaza, siyibonga kakhulu.

Masikusho-ke ukuthi uBhambatha waba yisosha laKwaZulu elinenhlonipho,
phecelezi: discipline. Wathi uma esebona ukuthi izinto sezizimbi kakhulu,
wahamba waya kokwembula ingubo enkosini uDinuzulu. Wafike wathi, “Hhayi,
angisaboni kahle, isiyangena.” Wambheka wambheka uDinuzulu, asizwa ukuthi
wamphendula wathini kodwa wabe esethi kwenye indoda ayehlala nayo, “Ake
uthathe le ndoda yakwaZondi uyise kuChakijana, iye kokhuluma noChakijana
lezi zindaba ezikhulumayo.”

Yamthatha leyo ndoda yamusa kuChakijana. Babengazani emehlweni, kodwa kwaba
yilo wezwa ukuthi kukhona “uphas’fo” ngale nomunye wezwa ukuthi kukhona
“uphas’fo” ngala. [Ubuwelewele.] Kwathi uma leyo ndoda ifika laphaya
kuChakijana yafike yathi, “Inkosi ithe angize lapha kuwena ngilethe le
ndoda. Niyazana?” Hhayi, uChakijana akayazanga leyo ndoda. Akamazanga lowo
“phas’fo”. Wabe esethi lowo mnumzane, “UBhambatha kaMancinza lo.”

Bathi yasukuma leya nto ewuChakijana. Yabe seyithi le ndoda
eyayibahlanganisa “uChakijana-ke lo, Bhambatha.” Bathi zabambana leziya
zinto zathula zabukana emehlweni. Yathi enye, “Uwena wethu?” Yathi nenye,
“Uwena wethu?” Zabhekana emehlweni. Yabe seyithi leyo ndoda, “Sengiwuqedile
umsebenzi wami.” Yabe seyiphuma yahamba. Zasala zombili leziya zinsizwa.
Kwakuyizinsizwa zangempela lezo, hhayi njengani esenidla amabhiya nje;
zazingawadli amabhiya. [Uhleko.] [Ihlombe.]

Zama zabukana lezo zinsizwa. Wathi uChakijana, “Woza nendaba noNdaba.”
Wayibeka-ke indaba uNondaba wathi, “La madoda asedelele kakhulu. Sengike
ngafika ngakhuluma nawo. Awezwa la madoda.” Phela bafika amahlandla amabili
emzini wakhe. Kwathi ngaleli lesithathu ihlandla kade befikile bangamthola,
waqonda khona esiteshini samaphoyisa. Wafike wathi, “Ngizwa kuthiwa
niyangifuna laphaya emzini wami?” Bathi kuye, “Hhayi, manje uma sibheka
lapha, Nondaba, asilitholi igama lakho kulabo asebethelile.” Wathi
uBhambatha, “Heyi, we belungu, umuntu omnyama yinhlobo elunge ngempela
kodwa uma ulokhu umfaka umunwe ehlweni, ngelinye ilanga uzokuvuna okade
ukutshalile.” Bathi watsaka amathe, waphuma wahamba. Bambona ukuthi, hawu,
uyalwa.

Bebethi-ke uma bezobopha umuntu bafike ebusuku. Wazi-ke ukuthi bayeza
ebusuku bazombopha, wabe eselungisa isigejana samabutho akhe. Nangempela
beza ngamahhashi. Bazithela. Wafike wathi ukuyaluyaluzisa nje. Oyihlomkhulu
abafika lapho balimala. Kwakungalunganga lapho. [Ubuwelewele.]

Wasuka wahamba-ke uBhambatha waya kotshela inkosi ukuthi, cha ngeke,
sekuyaliwa. Inkosi yamusa kuChakijana. UChakijana wafike wathi, “Hheyi we
Bhambatha, uthi akushaywe laba bantu?” Waphendula wathi, “Abashaywe
beqedwe. Abantu benkathazo laba; abantu ongeke wahlala ngokuthula nabo.”
Nangempela kwaleli Phalamende alinakuthula ngendaba yenu madoda. [Uhleko.]
Ngiyamangala nje ukubona sekukhona nabantu bakaBhambatha abahleli lapho.
[Ubuwelewele.]

Ake nilalele kahle-ke manje. Wathi uChakijana, “Bhambatha, izibhamu
sezikhona ngoba laba bantu baqhoshe ngezibhamu.” UBhambatha wathi, “Hhayi
izibhamu. Bazohlatshwa ngalo iklwa leli.” Wathi uChakijana, “Hheyi we
Bhambatha, wawukhona yini mhla uSomtsewu eyibiza ngegama inkosi yaKwaZulu,
uCetshwayo, eze ayibize amahlandla amathathu?”

Phela wake wathi ngelinye ilanga uSomtsewu: We Cetshwayo! We Cetshwayo! We
Cetshwayo, uzongibulala mina kodwa ziyofika izimbila ezimhlophe zifuna
ithambo le mbila emhlophe! Ziyolifuna zize zilithole. Into eyashiwo
uChakijana leyo kuBhambatha. Kwabonakala ukuthi uBhambatha wayengasezwa
makhambi, ethi ayihlasele. Yahlasela-ke.

Naye okaMancinza base bemphoxile laba bantu. Bayaphoxa. We madoda, ake
niyeke ukuphoxa! Noma nenza izinto ezimbi kangaka, sinibekezelele,
asizibali, siyaziyeka kodwa nisenathi qho. Hhayi bo! Yini kanti umthetho
wenu? UJesu nambulala; uVerwoed nambulala lapha ePhalamende. UMacmillan
wathi: “winds of change” kodwa nina anizwanga. Namhlanje nihlezi nathi,
singama-gentlemen. Anibufuni ubu-gentleman? [Ubuwewele.] Sifuna ukuthula,
anifuni ukuthula kuleli lizwe?

Ake nibasize nibatshele laba abangangizwa ukuthi ngithini. Sifuna ukuthula
kuleli lizwe. Into esiyifuna kuleli lizwe ukuthula nokuhlalisana kahle.

ILUNGU ELIHLONIPHEKILE: Nina anifuni.

Mnu J P PHUNGULA: Nina anifuni. Kwamanje nafika nabulala obabamkhulu lapha
nathatha ilizwe. Anikhulumi ngendaba yalelo lizwe. Sisanibuka nje.
Anikhulumi ngalo, elenu nje, zonke lezi zintaba. Siyanibuka nje. Kanti nina
nifuna kube njani?

Sithi-ke kinina, leli lizwe sifuna libe nokuthula. Leli lizwe sifuna libe
noxolo. Lezi zingane esizizele nalezi zingane enizizele sifuna zibe umuntu
oyedwa. Uma nizobe nilokhu nikhombisa ukuthi nina ningenye inhlobo, anibona
abalapha, nizovuma enikutshalile. Ngiyanitshela ... (Translation of isiZulu
speech follows.)

[Mr J P PHUNGULA: Thank you, Chairperson. I greet the entire House as well
as the opposition. However, I am a bit worried that the people from this
side of the House have already left. They are the ones who should have
heard clearly why Bhambatha is no longer with us.
The demise of Bhambatha was as a result of the people on this side of the
House. These are the very people who killed Bhambatha. [Interjections.] In
fact, Bhambatha was killed right here. This is where Bhambatha died. To you
fellow countrymen seated over there, Bhambatha died in your hands. You
should know that it was through Sir Theophilus Shepstone’s sinister
instructions that Bhambatha was killed.

Sir Theophilus Shepstone caused Bhambatha to die in the fight to evict
people from their homes. That eviction can be associated with a situation
in which an adult man who knows how to walk around on his own, gets ordered
to crawl like a child. We were made to crawl. When they told us to pay poll
tax, they were just using that strategy to force us to look for employment
so that we could learn to serve another person instead of working in our
own households. That was the cause of what we are today.

Nowadays we see people marching and saying, “We want jobs,” when there are
many jobs which they can do in their homes. They march because they have
adopted the British mentality which discouraged people from working for
themselves. [Laughter.] [Applause.] They go outside, to march and say, “We
are marching. We want jobs. This government is not providing jobs for us.”
They do not say, “This government is not giving us land to work on and earn
a living, to practice cattle farming and have other livestock farming.”
Instead, they say they want jobs from the white bosses.
The question of white bosses has spoilt many things. Bhambatha revolted
because it was ordered that people had to pay poll tax and they were by
then already paying hut tax. When people were then ordered to pay poll tax,
Bhambatha could no longer stomach it. Initially, only hut tax was imposed
and this was paid by one man per household. When the authorities later
realised that only one man paid hut tax for a household with many men
staying together, they immediately ordered that all men had to pay poll
tax. And that was the last straw for the son of Zondi, who was the son of
Nondaba. That meant a dead end to the man whose praises say he is as the
folder of a strong iron rod, who makes it into a load-supporting strut, and
caries it on his head and runs with it.

We therefore say we salute Bhambatha today. We say, we thank him for what
he did. [Applause.] We praise the ANC for organising today’s debate about
Bhambatha; the ANC is a giant organisation. [Applause.] We are very
grateful to the ANC for what it did. I hope the ANC is still going to do
more things that we shall appreciate. The ANC has done many things, but
this one of reviving the Zondi chieftainship, which was taken away by Sir
Theophilus Shepstone through the trickeries of the colonial system, is
highly appreciated.

We must also indicate that Bhambatha was a disciplined Zulu warrior. When
he realised that things were getting worse, he went to hide at King
Dinuzulu’s Royal house. When he arrived there, he said, “I sense that the
war is imminent.” King Dinuzulu looked at him again and again. We are not
told how the king responded to Bhambatha’s statement, but he then turned to
a man he was with and said to him: “Take this Zondi man to Chakijana, and
he will then tell Chakijana the news that he has told me.”

This man took Bhambatha to Chakijana. Both Bhambatha and Chakijana did not
know each other personally, although one of them had heard that there was a
valiant warrior on that side and another had heard that there was also a
valiant warrior from that other side. [Interjections.] When they reached
Chakijana’s place, the king’s messenger then said: “The king instructed me
to bring this man to you. Do you know each other?” Chakijana did not know
Bhambatha. He did not know that valiant warrior in front of him. The king’s
messenger then said, “By the way, this is Bhambatha the son of Mancinza.”

Legend has it that Chakijana stood up. The king’s messenger then said:
“Bhambatha, this is Chakijana.” And the word goes that the two valiant
warriors firmly shook hands and stared into each other’s eyes. The one
asked, “Is it you, my pal?” And the other responded questioningly, “Is it
really you, my pal?” They stared into each other’s eyes again. The king’s
messenger then immediately said: “My job is done.” He got out and left. The
two valiant warriors were left alone. Those were the true warriors, who did
not drink beer, as you do these days. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The two warriors firmly stood and looked at each other. Then Chakijana
said, “Nondaba, tell me the tale.” Bhambatha then told his story and said,
“These men have shown too much scorn and disrespect towards us. I have
since spoken to them and they do not want to listen.” You will remember
that these men had come to Bhambatha’s kraal twice. And on the third
occasion when they came, he was again, not at home but once he learnt that
they had come looking for him, he immediately rushed to the police station.
When he got there, he said, “I hear that you came to my home looking for
me.” They then said to him, “No, man, look here, Nondaba, in fact, when we
look at our records we do not see your name on the list of those who have
paid their taxes.” Bhambatha then said to them, “Hey, you white men, you
must know that a black man is a very kind human being, but if you
continually poke your finger into his or her eye, you will then reap what
you sow.” The word goes that he spat and left. The white men immediately
realised that he was in a fighting mood.

The white men’s modus operandi when they had to arrest someone was that
they would come at night. Bhambatha therefore was aware that they would
come at night to arrest him. He then summoned a few of his regiments.
Indeed the white men came on horseback to his house.  They found Bhambatha
and his regiments waiting for them. Bhambatha and his warriors simply made
a few moves. I am telling you that your great-grandparents who were there
were severely injured. It was not a walk in the park for them.
[Interjections.]

Bhambatha then immediately left and went to the king to report. He told the
king that the war had started. The king sent him to Chakijana again.
Chakijana then asked him, “Hey Bhambatha, are you sure you want us to fight
these people?” Bhambatha answered and said, “You heard me well, let them be
finished off. These people are troublesome; one cannot live in harmony with
them.” And there is nothing more truthful. Even this very Parliament too is
not peaceful because of you gentlemen. [Laughter.] I am shocked to see that
there are Bhambatha’s people sitting on this side of the House.
[Interjections.]

Just lend me your ears for the time being. And then Chakijana quizzed him,
“Bhambatha, do you have the guns ready because these people always have
theirs ready?” Bhambatha then said, “Forget about guns. We will sort them
out with these spears and assegais.” And then Chakijana immediately asked,
“Hey, Bhambatha, tell me, by the way, were you present when Sir Theophilus
Shepstone called the Zulu king, Cetshwayo, by his first name three times?”

Sir Theophilus Shepstone had one day simply called out, “Cetshwayo!
Cetshwayo! Cetshwayo! You will kill me but I can assure you that one day
the white coneys will come looking for the bones of another white coney!
They will look for them until they find them! All this was narrated to
Bhambatha by Chakijana. It was clear by then that Bhambatha did not want to
waste time. He wanted to go on the offensive. And the war started.
These people had disappointed Mancinza’s son. It’s typical of them, they
are fond of disappointing people. You people on that side of the House,
please stop disappointing us! You did very dreadful things, and we forgave
you. We do not mention all these, but you still bay for our blood. What is
it with you? You killed Jesus; and you also killed Verwoerd here in
Parliament. Macmillan spoke about the winds of change and you did not want
to listen. Today you are with us here, you are with gentlemen. Don’t you
want to be gentlemen? [Interjections.] We want peace. Don’t you want peace
in this country?

Please interpret for those who do not understand what I am saying. We want
peace in this country. The only thing we want in this country is peace.
Peace and stability.

An HON MEMBER: And they do not want that.

Mr J P PHUNGULA: And you really do not want that. You came to this country
and killed our great-grandfathers and took their land. You no longer talk
about that land anymore. We are just watching you. You no longer talk about
it anymore; it is now yours, all these mountains are now yours. We are
watching you. How do you really want things to be?

We say to you we want peace in this country. We want our country to have
harmony. We want unity between our children and your children. But if you
keep on showing us that you are another type and that you were not born and
bred here, you will reap what you sow. I am telling you ...]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Mhlonishwa, [Hon member] your time
has expired.

Mr J P PHUNGULA: Bathi angiyeke, madoda. Sengiyekile. [Ihlombe.]
[Ubuwelewele.] [They say I must stop. I have stopped.] [Interjections.]
[Applause.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you.

Mr J BICI: Madam Chair, hon members, the Bhambatha uprising is one of
several historical examples of South Africans resisting oppression and
dispossession. The history of South Africa over the past three centuries is
one of conflict and resistance in which the possession and dispossession of
land was a constant outcome and often the motivation for future conflicts.

The value of land for the individual and the group cannot be
underestimated. Losing land meant losing economic, social and political
control. Thus we have examples, such as the Bambatha uprising and others,
in which South Africans rose up, despite overwhelming odds, against those
who were dispossessing them of land. But the questions are: Are we doing
justice to these heroes and heroines if we do not at least start
restitution and land claims as far back as 1913? Are we doing justice to
these heroines if, in events of this nature, we give some parties only one
minute to speak? [Time expired.] Thank you, Chair. [Laughter.]

Ms J L FUBBS: Hon Speaker, hon members of this House, comrades and
compatriots ...

Bayede, Bhambatha! [Hail to the king, Bhambatha!]

Your famous call “usuthu” as you and your people fought for social and
economic justice continues to echo throughout our land, South Africa.

Namanje, sisathi usuthu! [Even now we still say, “usuthu”!]

The SA Revenue Service has reaffirmed this cry for social and economic
justice in its rolling reform initiatives. We have benefited from more than
a decade of comprehensive economic and institutional reform, sound
financial management, solid credit ratings and cuts in capital costs. Even
the IMF had to concede that South Africa was doing so well. It commended
South Africa on its relatively rapid economic growth compared to previous
decades.

We had cut the budget deficit from more than 5% to just over 1% of GDP,
largely due to the SA Revenue Service’s collection. May I remind members
that the source of revenue windfall was not simply more efficient
collection of taxes, but was also due to the economic performance of the
country as a whole.

Today we recall the centenary of one of South Africa’s greatest heroes,
Bambatha, and we are very fortunate in this House that we have people like
Comrade Phungula and also the great-grandson of King Cetshwayo, the hon
Chief Buthelezi.

At a time when it seemed that so many black Africans would succumb to
colonial oppression, there rose up a man, a chief of conviction and
courage, whose name is forever carved in the hearts of South African
compatriots - yes, Bhambatha, the people’s chief.

INkosi yabantu yatshala imbewu yombuso wentando yeningi ... [The people’s
chief ploughed seeds of democracy ...]

... and paved the way for the democratisation of the taxation system in
South Africa. Bhambatha will be forever remembered for paving that route.
Bhambatha will be remembered as the person who refused to comply with his
designated colonial duties to suppress his people by digging their economic
donga even deeper because of an unjust poll tax. Such a tax was not the
result of a mere whim, but rather designed to ensure that in the absence of
revenue from many men who travelled to the goldfields of now Gauteng, the
remaining men over the age of 18 would carry the full burden of a poll tax
over and above the hut tax.

Yes, it was a tax designed to rob the poor, to pave the way for the
generation of wealth for the rich. It is this that is the genesis of the
structural poverty that pervades our country. The poverty that challenges
South Africa today had its origin in a policy designed to remove people
from the land and force them to work in the towns so that, through their
earnings, they could pay the £1 sterling poll tax. This paved the way for
the even greater penetration of poverty. It changed our structural
relations, the structural relations of Africans from a land-owning people
to a landless people dependent on urban earnings and the occasional
generosity of the white men.

Ubuhlobo bethu nomhlaba wonke. [It is our relationship with the whole
world.]

In this way, our humanity - our kinship with the world, the soil, the
streams and the sky - was sorely split asunder. Daughters and sons of the
soil ...

... madodakazi namadodana ... [... daughters and sons ...]

The ANC government, through the democratisation of tax, has persistently
pursued reconciliation, reconstruction and redistribution. As part of this
paradigm shift in taxation, Sars embarked on a revolutionary journey, which
would ensure that no longer would tax be used to abuse people. Instead, it
would be used as an instrument to overcome poverty and to develop the
potential of our people.

Indeed, tax seeks to harness the economic energies of our people so that
together we can generate an accelerated increase in the gross domestic
product. Many factors called for tax reform but, perhaps, more than
anything, the most important was the socioeconomic policies of the ANC
government. It was also globalisation, governance and the Constitution.

Some of us may recall that in 1994 we faced not only a fiscal deficit but,
more importantly, a socioeconomic deficit that manifested itself in the
chasm between the haves, with an asset base, and the have-nots, whose
physical assets had been systematically eroded so that it was almost
impossible for the black man to leverage and to acquire assets,
notwithstanding so-called new earnings. The measures were to eradicate
poverty, fast-track skills development within a fledgling democracy and
newfound peace form the backbone of the Reconstruction and Development
Programme.

In 1997 the ANC government recognised the need to ensure a sound
macroeconomic platform from which to launch and create sustainable jobs.
The tax system has played an important role in government’s fiscal
stabilisation programme. Therefore, efficient and equitable tax collection
has assisted us in closing the tax gap but, more importantly, Sars has
generated a culture of compliance.

The economic isolation of South Africa, prior to the democratically elected
government in 1994, led to what can only be described as a closed economy
of a special nature. This called for far fewer exchange controls, because
the previous regime only taxed institutions within our own geographical
boundaries. But when South Africa rejoined the international community, it
actually had to compete for investment. So, this called for tax reforms to
be acceptable, accessible, equitable and competitive.

South Africa has been a constitutional democracy since 1994, which was
ushered in with the interim constitution and then our Constitution under
which we have been working and celebrating since 1996. But what some of us
may forget is that there are a number of fiscal provisions in the
Constitution and, indeed, a clause also insists that all legislation must
comply with the Bill of Rights. Had Bhambatha enjoyed our Constitution and
our Bill of Rights, it would have been the British colonial masters who
would be standing trial.

As an organ of state, Sars is also bound by the Bill of Rights, rights that
Bhambatha never enjoyed, rights that generations of black South Africans
did not enjoy. Good fiscal governance is at the heart of democracy.
Ibambe ngakho kwezomnotho. [Our economy is on the right track.]

Our ANC government has implemented a phalanx of legislation. To mention a
few that we are familiar with: there is the Public Finance Management Act,
the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act and the
Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act. Tax measures, contrary to what my
hon colleague Seremane was saying, are designed not just to relieve
distress but also to democratise the economy and develop the potential of
our people in this developmental state of ours.

In fact, the latest development happened only yesterday with the small
business amnesty, which is designed to democratise the tax regime even
further. We will also come to the issue of what we know as long-term
retirement savings, which is going to benefit so many people in South
Africa. Currently, we are also listening to hearings of bulking, again a
further step in the direction of the democratisation of the financial
regime. These are but a few of the tax reform initiatives that have been
undertaken.

In 2002 Sars published its client charter that sets out the rights and
service levels taxpayers can expect - very much along the lines of Batho
Pele. Tax reform has taken place in two phases. The first phase was an
audit of tax legislation to ensure that there were no areas such as the
poll tax, and to ensure that through amendments and the necessary repeals
the tax laws complied with the Constitution.

The second phase involved reforms that would broaden the tax base and also
ensure it complied with international norms. There has been an expansion of
trade treaties, from 10 before 1994 to more than 50 today, and this is all
the result of an open economy and a relationship that we enjoy with both
the grass roots and the international community.

Bhambatha’s resistance forced by his rejected attempts at dialogue with the
colonists marks not only a fight for land, but a fight for economic
freedom.

Wayelwela inkululeko yezomnotho. [He was fighting for economic freedom.]

The Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa, Asgisa, has
launched a new battalion for economic freedom and human dignity.

Bayede! Vukuzenzele! [I salute the Vukuzenzele project!]

Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M V NGEMA: Thank you Chairperson, the current legislation on land
restitution in South Africa completely contradicts and undermines the
legacy of Nkosi Bhambatha, who bravely staged an uprising for land in 1906.

Although he left behind an honourable legacy, he would not have been
entitled to his land today, because the current Restitution Act only gives
people rights to restitution if they were dispossessed of a right to land
after June 1913. This definitely does not honour the legacy of Nkosi
Bhambatha and completely disregards a critical part of our history, upon
which our democracy is built.

The government departments concerned need urgently to fast-track the
distribution of land, which will ease the burden of poverty and create jobs
for land beneficiaries. Beneficiaries have received currently only 4% of
the 30% of the land that has to be redistributed. The snail’s pace of land
... Thank you, Chairperson. [Time expired.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Chair, our heroic kings were the first to wage wars of
national resistance against colonialism, but the significance of the
Bhambatha war against colonialism is that it was the last war of national
resistance against colonialism until the Poqo uprising in 1962.

The Azanian People Liberation Army of the PAC was deeply inspired by the
bravery and patriotism of iNkosi Bhambatha. The interesting thing about
Bhambatha today, of course, is that he fought for the same thing, which is
today ridiculed because it comes from the PAC, and that is the equitable
redistribution of land.

There will never be economic liberation and social emancipation for as long
as land is claimed from 1913, according to this present Constitution.
Because of my limited time let me simply, in honour of iNkosi Bhambatha,
invoke the spirit of the architect of iSandlwana:

   UPhaqa njengelanga,
   Inyathi yasenhlakanhlakeni,
   UNokuzul’ukudla kwamagwala,
   Ulanga phuma endlini yendlovu,
   Nyankambe liyophuma kweyengonyama.
   Inkunzi kaNdaba!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member, your time has expired.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Izwe lethu! [Our land!]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you Chairperson, the MF honours leaders such as iNkosi
Bhambatha Zondi who fearlessly fought for his people. Colonialism left
Africa ruined and the wrath of the apartheid regime’s impact continues to
echo in our people’s suffering, poverty and starvation. Both eras raped
South African land and coerced its people into hardship.

Our people need to remember our past in order to understand our present.
Today’s democracy did not plant the seeds of inequality and poverty; it has
planted the seeds of equality, unity, poverty alleviation, development and
growth. It is our action now that shall nourish this growth into a stronger
South Africa.

Land restitution and redistribution is the means to give back and to offer
opportunity. Today we are sure Nkosi Bhambatha is proud of our achievements
and as we move South Africa into the light, may our success always be
remembered in the tradition of great people like Bhambatha.

The MF pays respect to all African traditional leaders and their ancestors
whose strength has outlived the evils of colonialism and apartheid. Bayete
iNkosi Bhambatha. [Hail, iNkosi Bhambatha!]

Mr L J MODISENYANE: This is my second maiden address since I came to this
parliament. Why do I say so? It is because I stopped speaking in January
2004. Many people think I am a modified clerk of this Parliament but I am
actually a politician.

May I start by expressing my appreciation to the iNkosi Bhambatha Centenary
Committee, especially my friend Mr Oscar Zondi, for having invited my
spouse and I, to attend the public launch of the iNkosi Bhambatha Centenary
Commemoration held on the 8 April 2006 at Greytown. I wish that most
members could have attended to enrich their knowledge of the culture of the
amaZulu.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms S-C Botha): Hon Modisenyane, there is a ... Is it
a point of order or a question?

Mr D V BLOEM: It is not a question but a point of order. Is it
parliamentary to ask the hon Modisenyane to which spouse he is referring?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms S-C Botha): I will not rule on that one; hon
Modisenyane proceed. Hon Bloem, is it a point of order?

Mr D V BLOEM: Yes, Chairperson. It was Cindy Chikunga who asked: “Which one
of his spouses?”

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms S-C Botha): I did not rule on the matter so I
will allow Mr Modisenyane to continue. Thank you. If you want to answer,
you may do it in your speech, Mr Modisenyane.

Mr L J MODISENYANE: No, that shows that I have been listened to and I am
happy. I say that the rich amaZulu culture is an inspiring culture indeed.
It is worth fighting and even dying for in order to preserve it, if it is
tampered with. It is the pride of the nation. One could therefore
understand why our hero, iNkosi Bhambatha kaMancinza, acted in the manner
in which he did:

    UMagaduzela owabonela empunzini,
    Umhlane obelethe amagwala!

The iNkosi Bhambatha uprising cannot be treated in isolation because
similar uprisings took place in many parts of KwaZulu-Natal and even
elsewhere in the country. The hon iNkosi Buthelezi mentioned a number of
the heroes who participated in this uprising.

The main reason for the uprising according to me, as a history student, was
the land question. That is the main reason. No nation can fold its arms
when dispossessed of its land. Land rights and ownership are symbols of
self-determination.

We can therefore not cite poll tax as the sole reason for the Bhambatha
uprising. It was but the final straw that led to the uprising. This
distortion also manifested itself in the student uprising against the
system of Bantu education when it was said students were against the usage
of Afrikaans as a medium of instruction whereas it was merely a trigger for
the uprising.

Kgweletso e ipetsang hangata ho tloha ho ba hananang le ditholwana tsa
tokoloho ke hore re se phele mehleng e fetileng. Ho hanana le taba eo, ke
tshwantsha ka kaho ya ntlo e hlokang motheo. O keke wa rulela moyeng ho
sena se tsheheditseng marulelo. (Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[A frequent call from those who are against the outcomes of freedom is that
we should not live in the past. To oppose that, I would compare it with
building a house without a foundation. No one can do the roofing without
supporting structures.]

There is a strong link between the wars of resistance and the struggle
waged by liberation movements in this country. In the past, the aim was to
defend freedom and fight for freedom in the future.

Our policies on land are answering the quest of our elders to own their
land again. Our citizens owe their allegiance to the congress of the
people, the ANC in particular, for saying: South Africa belongs to those
who live in it, both black and white.

Ntjhafatso ya mobu eo kajeno re e latetseng pusong ena ya rona, hare
hopola, re re ke ho kgutlisetsa mobu o nkilweng ka mahahapa ho beng ba ona.
Hape ke ho batla botsitso bodulong, hape ke kabo ya mobu ho abela ba
hlokang.

Ho ntshetsa mananeo ana pele, ke karabelo ho tseo baholo ba rona ba neng ba
di  tseka. Ba ile ba mpa ba ruthuthwa ka dithunya ho kwalwa melomo. Kaha
naha le moruo ke bophelo ba mpa ba ile ba tjhetjhella morao ho ya nka
matla. Ditabatabelo tsa rona re le setjhaba ke hore seo Molaotheo wa rona o
leng sona, se phethahatswe ka bohohlehohle. Ke kahoo, ho latela puo ya
Mopresidente, leano lena la mobu la ha o tshwanelwa ho rekisetsanwa -
hothwe thato ya moreki le thato ya morekisi - le tshwanelwa hore le
fetolwe.

Tshepo ya rona ke hore leano lena le tla fediswa ntle le ho qeaqea. Ho
fetolwa ha leano lena ho tla hlahisa kgotso le botsitso, ebang kutlwisiso e
ka ba teng lehlakoreng la borapolasi ba nang le dipolas i tse ngata tseo ba
sitwang le ho di sebetsa.

Ke rata ho hopotsa Ntlo ena ya rona seo Lengolo la Tokoloho le se bolelang
ka tsa naha. Lere naha e tla arolelwa ba e sebetsang, ho phael la taba ena
tjama ke re, borapolasi hare sebetseng hammoho ho fedisa pharela ena. Kabo
ya mobu e tshwanela ho potlakiswa haholo, etswe tiehiso ya yona e ka baka
hore setjhaba se be nkgwana tsa madi.

Ke tshepa hore ntate Pheko o tla dumelana le nna mona. Ke rata ho hopotsa
ntlo ena hore ba lemang, ba hlaolang, ba kotulang, ba thotang, ke basebetsi
ba mapolasi. Empa ba latang chelete ke borapolasi. Tokoloho hae dumellane
le hore ha elale makwala re none empa setjhaba se otla nta ka koto. Dimpa
tsa rona di le putswa ha ba bang ba ntse ba tshwehlela. (Translation of
Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[The land reform policy that we follow in this Government includes giving
back the land that was taken from the owners by force. We also want to have
stability and to give a share of land to those who are the have-nots.

Land redistribution is a solution to what our elders fought for. It is
unfortunate that they were attacked by machine guns in order to be
silenced. As the land and economy are the source of food, they had to go
back and strategise. Our wish, as a nation, is to see our Constitution’s
stipulations completely adhered to. According to the speech made by the
President, the policy that is used when selling and purchasing land, called
the willing buyer, willing seller principle, should be amended.

We hope that it will be stopped without any hesitation. A change in this
programme will bring peace and stability, only if farmers with unused
pieces of land can have an understanding on the matter.

I would like to remind the House about what the Freedom Charter says about
the land. It says that the land will be shared among those who make use of
it. To add more to this I would like to say to all farmers: “Let us work
together to overcome this problem.” Land redistribution should be speeded
up because any delay can lead to bloodshed. I hope Mr Pheko will agree with
me on this.

I would like to remind this House that people who are ploughing,
eradicating weeds, harvesting and transporting products, are farmworkers;
but people who collect the money are farm owners. Freedom does not mean let
it be, so that we can live in peace. As long as there are people who are
starving, while others are enjoying the wealth, the nation will stand up
and fight.]

May I take this opportunity to congratulate the KwaZulu Natal government
for restoring the dignity of our heroes, iNkosi Bhambatha and Mahatma
Gandhi, because we will always regard them as dignified freedom fighters.

Ka ha kgomo ha enye bolokwe kaofela, ke re ha di be mohatla wa kgwiti. [As
you should not wear your heart on your sleeve, I will therefore cut a long
story short.] [Applause.]

Ms N M MDAKA: Chairperson, there are moments in time when we as South
Africans should ponder and reflect on where we were and where we are today.
When we do so we discover that systematic and critical research on our past
reveals an unusual wealth of information; as we do so we discover knowledge
and deep revolutionary heroism that inspires us to do more.

The year 2006 provides us with an opportunity to commemorate a number of
significant anniversaries. Even after 100 years the Bhambatha uprising
against politics springs back to our memory. The UIF recently observed with
great delight the posthumous reinstatement of iNkosi Bhambatha Zondi to the
chieftainship of the Zondi clan 100 years after he had been deposed by the
then Natal government. The 1906 ambush of British security forces by Chief
Bhambatha and his group of 150 warriors proves that the culture of
voluntary service and defiance of unjust laws is not new in South Africa.

Mr S L TSENOLI: Chairperson, thank you very much. Hon members, the message
that rings through our debate and discussion today is the spirit of
courage, bravery and commitment to just rule, which is signified by the
Bhambatha Rebellion. The refrain that, “... uBhambata kaMacinza ayiyeke
isesokeni umhalane wokubeletha amagwala ..” is a powerful reminder of what
is required of us going ahead in the decade ahead.

The challenges of land reform, land transformation, is a powerful one and
requires people who are not cowards especially to acknowledge the wrongs of
the past but, also most importantly, Ntate Pheko, not to keep looking back
because you will keep falling down. Keep your eyes ahead of you because
this is where the country wants to go, Ntate. And so we appreciate the
significant historical linkages and continuity pointed out by other
speakers because our struggle continues apace, inspired by heroes such as
Bhambatha.

We also need to remind Ntate Seremane that our Constitution that was
stewarded through the Constitutional Assembly is what makes us stand out
amongst many in the world today. When we speak about the things we need to
do today we must not also want to rewrite history. The inspiration that
Bhambatha gave to the many cadres who ended up in the ranks of the ANC in
fact, including its founding inspirations, comes from the ranks of
Bhambatha. To stage the platform appropriately, it is correct that these
anniversaries must convey an important message to us that we will not
forget the brutality of the past. We are committed to undoing the effects
of that progressively as we are required to, and the commitment of all of
us in this House is required in those areas.

When material conditions are appropriate, a man and a woman will rise and
the people around them that usually form the backdrop depend on them for
the success of his or her pursuits. In the struggle for liberation of this
country we have seen such men and women, including Bhambatha. So in going
ahead, let’s remember that our linkages with the people and land are the
crucial task that we must never forget.

Debate concluded

                            DELEGATION TO THE DRC

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.
With the leave of the House I move without notice:

    That the House, noting that the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
    holding elections on 30 July 2006, resolves, subject to the concurrence
    of the National Council of Provinces, that –

    (1)     the South African Parliament send a 30-member, multiparty
           delegation to observe these elections;

    (2)     the delegation form part of the South African National Observer
           Mission;

     (3)    the delegation observe the campaign in the run-up to the
           elections, the casting of votes and subsequently the counting of
           the votes; and

      4) the delegation table for consideration and debate the report of
         the National Observer Mission to Parliament on its return.


Agreed to.
         CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF THE MEDIATION COMMITTEE - OLDER
                                PERSONS BILL

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I was distracted and strong-armed by
Mike Ellis.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I am sitting here quietly minding my own
business. If I am so fearsome to him that is not my fault.

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move that the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

                             OLDER PERSONS BILL

                           (Consideration of Bill)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I hereby move that the
Bill be passed.

Motion agreed to.
Bill accordingly passed.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
    CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT ON PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION FROM OFFICE AND
 WITHHOLDING OF REMUNERATION OF MR M S MAKAMU, SENIOR MAGISTRATE AND HEAD OF
                            THE OFFICE AT BENONI

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move that the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
  CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT ON PRACTICAL GUIDELINES IN TERMS OF SECTION 10
                      OF THE PROTECTED DISCLOSURES ACT

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move that the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.
Report accordingly adopted.

                     BUDGET VOTE 30: MINERALS AND ENERGY

              (Consideration of Report of Portfolio Committee)

Mr E N MTHETHWA: Thank you, Speaker. Well, having received the Department
of Minerals and Energy’s presented strategic plan and budget for the
financial year 2006-07, the committee acknowledges the open manner in which
this was done by the department. The presentation highlighted both the
strengths and challenges. The committee then resolved to follow up on
issues it raised and those raised by the department. It is against this
backdrop that we present our report to Parliament today. It is imperative
to locate Budget Votes within the context of the transformation and
developmental agenda advanced by our democratic Parliament.

Consistent with the constitutional mandate of Parliament, Budget Vote
hearings are a tool that is utilised, firstly, to establish how allocated
funds were to be spent. Secondly, it is to monitor the achievement of
targets and thirdly, to check whether funds allocated meet those targets
and monitor progress made. It serves to determine whether policy
development takes place in accordance with the government’s priorities of
poverty eradication, job creation, black economic empowerment, human
resource development and our growing economy.
In the fulfilment of our mandate, we have identified a number of areas that
need attention. These areas relates to issues pertaining to universal
access to electricity by 2012.

Regarding the establishment of the seventh national electricity distributor
and the location of the pebble bed modular reactor in connection with
universal access to electricity by 2012, we are unhappy as the programme is
behind schedule due to alleged inadequate financial allocation. The
Integrated National Electricity Programme, Inep, which is premised on the
roll-out of 500 000 households per annum for electrification is compromised
by inadequate budget allocation. The current budget of 2006/07 caters for
only 89 525 households per annum for electrification.

We seek to engage with the National Treasury in order to get clarity on
whether we will at this current pace reach the target as set out by the
President. The other area relates to the lack of a consultative process
regarding the establishment of a seventh national electricity distributor.
As the committee we then resolved to invite the relevant stakeholders to be
part of a public participatory process, which is a public hearing, and it
started today. It will also be held on 23 June 2006.

Furthermore, we have resolved to seek clarity on the PBMR projects
locations and, in particular, the role of Minerals and Energy. We are
inviting both the Minister of Minerals and Energy and the Minister of
Public Enterprises in order to start a process of discussions on this
matter. The committee is also concerned about the minimal role of the state
utility on nuclear issues, namely the the Nuclear Energy Corporation of
South Africa, Necsa, and the role it has to play in the PBMR process.

The committee recommends that the executive gives a much more meaningful
role to Necsa in the PBMR. This emanates from our belief that such role
clarification is necessary to ensure accountability.

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move that the Report
be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

 RATIFICATION OF DECISION TAKEN BY SUBCOMMITTEE OF JOINT PROGRAMME COMMITTEE
     ON 20 JUNE 2006 - 2010 WORLD CUP SOUTH AFRICA SPECIAL MEASURES BILL

That -

(1)   noting South Africa’s international commitment to adopt special
      legislative measures regarding the 2010 FIFA World Cup within
      specified timeframes;

(2)   further noting that the 2010 World Cup South Africa Special Measures
      Bill [B13-2006] which was introduced on 6 June 2006 is to be split
      into separate section 75 and section 76 Bills;

(3)   in accordance with Joint Rule 216 (2), the two Bills upon receipt be
      fast-tracked by shortening any period within which any step in the
      legislative process relating to the Bills has to be completed, but
      subject to public participation in the process of the consideration of
      the Bills, in order for the Bills to be passed by both Houses before
      31 August 2006;

(4)   for this purpose the relevant NA and NCOP committees confer on the
      Bills; and

(5)   the Assembly committee finalises its consideration of the Bills by 31
      July 2006 and the NCOP committee reports formally on both Bills in
      time for the approved deadline to be met by Parliament.

There was no debate.

Decision taken by the Subcommittee of the Joint Programme Committee to fast-
track the section and section 76, 2010 World Cup South Africa Special
Measures Bills ratified.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SAFETY AND SECURITY -
     PROCLAMATIONS BY THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 25 OF THE
    PROTECTION OF CONSTITUTIONAL DEMOCRACY AGAINST TERRORIST AND RELATED
                        ACTIVITIES ACT NO 33 OF 2004


There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move that the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

  CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF FINAL ACTS OF THE
       PLENIPOTENTIARY CONFERENCE IN MARRAKESH, MOROCCO IN 2002 OF THE
    INTERNATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS UNION IN TERMS OF SECTION 231(2) OF THE
                                CONSTITUTION

There was no debate.

Final Acts of the Plenipotentiary Conference in Marrakesh, Morocco in 2002
of the International Telecommunications Union approved.

The SPEAKER: That concludes the business of the day and the business of the
session. I would like to wish hon members some good times during the break.
Do take some time to rest, because we do have a very heavy schedule. Good
luck!

I know that some of the hon members have to come back and have meetings
because there’s the Fifa Bill; there are also the steering committees
preparing for us hosting certain international conferences. However, even
those members will be coming for just a day and going back.

So, I really hope that political parties won’t be too harsh on the hon
members until we see you.

The House adjourned at 18:56.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

     (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly and National Council of
     Provinces on 21 June 2006:


            a) Older Persons Bill [B 68F – 2003 (Reprint)] (National
               Council of Provinces – sec 76).


     (2)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 21 June 2006:


            a) Deeds Registries Amendment Bill [B 5 – 2006] (National
               Assembly – sec 75)


            b) Sectional Titles Amendment Bill [B 8 – 2006] (National
               Assembly – sec 75)


            c) Repeal of Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain
               Laws Amendment Bill [B 11B – 2006] (National Assembly – sec
               75)

            d) Small Business Tax Amnesty and Amendment of Taxation Laws
               Bill [B 14 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 77)
            e) Second Small Business Tax Amnesty and Amendment of Taxation
               Laws Bill [B 15 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75)

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees

      (1)   The following members have been appointed to serve on the
           Standing Committee on Auditor-General, viz:

           African National Congress
           Asiya, Mr S E
           Fubbs, Mr J L
           Gumede, Mr D M
           Hogan, Ms B A
           Johnson, Mr M
           Smith, Mr V G
           Zitha, Mr L


           Democratic Alliance
           Stephens, Mr M
           Trent, Mr E W


           Inkatha Freedom Party
           Vezi, Mr E T


           United Party of South Africa
           Simmons, Mr S


           National Democratic Convention
           Woods, Dr G G

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (1)     Report of the South African delegation to the 114th Inter-
        Parliamentary Union (IPU) Assembly in Nairobi, Kenya 7-14 May 2006.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1. Report of the Constitutional Review Committee on Public Submission,
   dated 9 June 2006:

   During the 2005 Constitutional review period, the  Constitutional  Review
   Committee  received  a  submission  concerning  the  convergence  of  the
   electronic media and its relevance to section 192 of the Constitution.


   Section 192 of the Constitution states that legislation must establish an
   independent authority to regulate broadcasting in the public interest and
   to ensure fairness and a diversity of views  broadly  representing  South
   African society.  In  pursuance  of  this  instruction,  the  Independent
   Broadcasting Authority was established.


   Due  to  technological  developments,  the  differentiation  within   the
   electronic media has  not  only  become  blurred,  but  has  in  practice
   disappeared.   This  fact  has  been  recognized  and  consequently,  the
   Electronic Communication Act (36 of 2005) and the  ICASA  Bill  (B32F  of
   2005) were introduced and approved by Parliament.


   In its report to Parliament, the Committee acknowledged that the issue of
   electronic convergence and the implication thereof on  the  Constitution,
   was deserving and needed further investigation (ATC  Report,  1  November
   2005, pg 2418).


   Having received submissions from both academics  and  the  Department  of
   Communication, the Committee recommends that:


a) Section 192 of the Constitution (Act 108 of 1996) be amended.

   b) Possible consequential amendments be made to Section  181(1),  Section
      193(1), Section 193(4), Sections 194(1) and 194(2)(b)

   c) The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development be  requested
      to introduce the relevant Constitutional amendments.

Report to be considered.

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works (National Assembly)
      on the study tour to Manila and London, dated 28 March 2006:

      The Portfolio Committee on Public Works (National Assembly) having
      undertaken a study tour to Manila in Philippines and London and Wales
      in Britain on 21-27 November 2005, reports as follows:

      (i)   The structure of the Report

           Glossary
           Introduction
           Background
           Findings
           Social responsibilities of M&J
           Comparative analysis
           Recommendations
           Conclusions

      (ii)  Glossary

           BMSF        Bevil Mabey Study Foundation
           C100        Compact 100
           C200        Compact 200
           EPWP        Expanded Public Works Programme
           M&J         Mabey and Johnson
           PBP         Presidential Bridging Programme
           UK          United Kingdom

1.    Introduction

      The Committee concerned by the disaster caused by floods in the
      country and an analysis of inhibiting factors and  distances travelled
      by people of all ages  to visit socio and economic centres to access
      services and benefits rendered to them  by government, invited Eagles
      Ring, a South African Partner of the Mabey Group of Companies for a
      presentation. Eagles Ring, had an interaction with the now disbanded
      Disaster Management Section of the Department of Defence and the
      Department of Provincial and Local Government (DPLG). The briefing as
      requested by the Committee was on investigation done and concepts that
      would address the challenge. It must be noted that the Committee at
      this initial stage did not invite other stakeholders.

      1.    The Committee wanted to establish how the Mabey Bridge Programme
           could be integrated in the Expanded Public Works Programme. ie:


            • Infrastructure development (cost effective)
            • Learnership and skills transfer,
            • Job creation and
            • Poverty alleviation

      2.    The Committee further wanted to investigate the social
           responsibilities that are imparted to benefit communities as
           beneficiaries.

      3.    The report provides an analysis of each country and the lessons
           learned in the countries visited and recommends adoption thereof
           by parliament. Pursuant to the briefing, the Committee undertook
           a study tour on a fact-finding quest to the Philippines, London
           and Wales from the 19 to 29 November 2005, mission. The
           delegation was comprised of the following committee members:-

           -     Mr. F Bhengu (ANC), Chairperson of the Committee
           -     Ms CMP Kotsi (ANC)
           -     Mr. L Maduma (ANC)
           -     Mr. JPI Blanche (DA) and
           -     Mr. J Leburu - Committee Secretary


2.    Background

      The briefing to the joint Portfolio Committees on Public Works,
      Environmental Affairs and Tourism as well as Provincial and Local
      Government took place on 26 October 2005. The presenters were Mr. Buys
      from the Department of Provincial and Local Government and the Mabey
      Group of Companies and South African partners. -Report attached as
      annexure A.

         • The briefing further encompassed the Rural Bridging Programme in
           Philippines and how the Mabey Bridging programme is assisting
           the Filipino government with the installations of bridges.

         • The briefing also included the benefits of the Mabey bridging to
           the developing countries.

3.    Findings

      3.1   Visit to Philippines, Manila on 21-22 November 2005

           3.1.1 Briefing about the Presidential Bridging Programme in
           Philippines

                 The Committee met with Mr. D Mabey, Chairperson of the
                 Mabey Group in UK;
                 Mr. David Watson, General Manager of the Special Project
                 Management of the Philippines President’s Bridge Program
                 and Project Manager; Mr. Ben Power, an Engineer.


                 The briefing by the Chairperson of Mabey included the
                 Philippines Presidential Bridging Programme. The programme
                 has been in progress for the past eight (8) years. The
                 Tsunami disaster occurred whilst the programme was in its
                 implementation stage and was therefore easy to rehabilitate
                 the damage infrastructure and bridges. The Presidential
                 Bridging Programme (PBP) was meant to improve the
                 infrastructure of the country and access of the rural
                 communities to the main economic centres.


                The Mabey bridges have provided the following economic and
                social benefits to communities:

               • Lowering of environmental impact when construction is
                 undertaken.
               • Poverty alleviation programmes.
               • Access of rural communities to economic centres.
               • Access to health and educational facilities, especially in
                 rural areas.
               • Short and long-term base job opportunities.
               • Skills transfer.

           3.1.2 Briefing about the Mabey and Johnson Company in
           Philippines


                 3.1.2.1     Background


                       The Mabey and Johnson Company designs and
                       manufacture a range of pre-fabricated modular steel
                       bridges. The steel manufactured by this company is
                       used to build bridges in rural areas as well as in
                       any other area that requires emergency bridges.
                       These bridges have unique features unlike the usual
                       steel bridges, for example:

                         • The bridges are easy to construct or install and
                           this could be done within a week.
                         • The bridges could be used as permanent and
                           versatile in most remote areas or for immediate
                           provision of emergency bridges.
                         • Due to its galvanisation the bridges are
                           sustainable and need less maintenance.
                         • The size of the bridge varies from one way to
                           multiple ways including footbridges.
                         • The substructure of the bridge can be built
                           quickly with less expense on consultation fees.
                         • The construction of the bridges is labour
                           intensive.
                         • The special grade steel used for building the
                           bridges is fully galvanised and designed to
                           carry in excess of normal highway loading.
                         • The bridge could be constructed for up to 60
                           metres without a pier.


                       M&J Bridges evolves from the Bailey bridges in 1942
                       to Mabey bridges Compact 200 (C200), which was
                       introduced in 1986 and is continuously developed
                       through intensive research. The M&J put the C200 on
                       an on-going test for fatigue, deck and anti-slid
                       tests. ISO 9001 certifies the bridges for quality
                       assurance. M&J is supplying the C200 bridges to both
                       the developed and developing countries. These
                       bridges have been installed in areas that have been
                       hit by the natural disasters.
           3.1.3 Site visits

                 3.1.3.1     Visit to Coviten Province


                         • A 45,720-metre bridge has been constructed for
                           the past 18 months in Magellan Municipality,
                           which is a rural municipality.


                         • Adjacent to this bridge was another 30-metre
                           bridge built four years ago.


                         • There was also 30 metre bridge constructed
                           within the same locality and has been there for
                           the past five years.


                 3.1.3.2     Visit to Queson Aliaga multi-span Delta Bridge
                       on 22 November 2005


                         • A 65-metre bridge was in a construction at
                           Queson Aliaga using labour intensive methods.


                         • Women are involved in the construction of the
                           bridge.


                         • 12 people are employed to construct the bridge
                           using a crane to lift the piers and the other
                           work was done manually.


                         • The cranes that are used for the lifting piers
                           belonged to the Department of Public Works,
                           which is responsible for the implementation of
                           the PBP.


                         • The bridge joins the two municipalities and
                           serves as a shortcut to the urban centres.


                         • A community member has attested to the fact that
                           these bridges have not only provided them with
                           jobs but they have also shortened the distance
                           and hours of travelling. It has also provided
                           access to main social services.



      3.2   Visit to London and Wales 24-25 November 2005

              1. Briefing at the Mabey and Johnson Head Office in Twyford
                 - London:


                     • Mabey Group of Companies was established in 1923 and
                       has built bridges in 80 countries.
                     • The company specialises in the design and
                       manufacturing of steel panel bridges.
                     • The main factory is located in the United Kingdom,
                       which produces up to 60,000 tones of steel per
                       annum.
                     • The company let out bridges for temporary work.
                     • The company supply spares to support its building
                       programme.
                     • The Mabey group keeps its close working relationship
                       with its customers.
                     • The company observe the environmental impacts when
                       doing feasibility study prior to the construction of
                       the bridges.
                     • It specialises in shipping and transportation of
                       galvanised steel.
                     • The company has 24 locations with over 1000
                       engineering personnel.
                     • The Mabey and Johnson have received six Queens’
                       awards.


           3.2.2 Site visit


                 3.2.2.1     Visit to Fairfield Factory


                         • The Fairfield Mabey plant was established in
                           1849 and is based in Chepstow in Wales.
                         • It produces high quality plated steelwork for
                           highway bridges.
                         • It is plate girder specialist.
                         • The Mabey and Johnson share the technological
                           expertise at this plant.
                         • The factory is fitted with advanced automated
                           fabrication techniques, which includes robots
                           operated machines.

                 3.2.2.2     Visit to Lydney Factory


                         • This factory is responsible for the
                           manufacturing of C200 steel.
                         • The ISO 9001 quality assurance and testing is
                           done at the factory.
                         • The quality system includes welding, inspection
                           and trace ability of personnel involved on the
                           final inspection and date of production.


                 3.2.2.3     Galvanising factory
                         • Final steel work produced is galvanised at a
                           factory that is separate from the M&J.
                         • The galvanising assists the steel to be rust
                           resistive and result in low maintenance of the
                           M&J bridges.

      3.3   Social responsibilities of Mabey and Johnson
                         • As part of its social responsibility a Bevil
                           Mabey Study Foundation (BMSF) was established in
                           2000.
                         • The foundation provides books to selected
                           schools in the Philippines.
                         • The chosen schools are provided with the books
                           depending on their needs and proximity to Mabey
                           bridges.
                         • The BMSF has successfully implemented a book-
                           giving programme and provided some of the
                           impoverished and neglected schools in
                           Philippines with education materials.

4.    Recommendations

     It is recommended that: -
       • That this bridging program be established as a subprogram of
         infrastructure development and be located in the office of the
         Deputy President in line with ASGISA, as it will:


        a. Expedite infrastructure development
        b. Contribute to improved universal access to basic services
        c. Contribute to improved service delivery
        d. Improve local economic development, job creation and skills
           development


       • A committee be established constituted from the Departments of
         Transport, Public Works, Defence, Environmental Affairs and
         Tourism, Provincial and Local Government and National Treasury,
         to:


            • Investigate and report on the progress made by the disbanded
              Disaster Management Section of the Department of Defense
              about the bridges (see annexure A attached.)
            • Investigate and report on the progress made thus far by the
              Department of Provincial and Local Government, regarding the
              bridge infrastructure program.
            • Conduct a feasibility study and needs and cost analysis
              nationally in relation to the various incidences of floods
              and other disaster related occurrences and their impact in
              Taung, North West as well as other areas in the country.
            • Call for inputs and written submissions from key bridge
              constructors, engineers, civil society and other related
              professionals and expects.
            • Ensuring that every infrastructure development programme meet
              our procurement policies, transfer of skills, job creation,
              poverty alleviation and social responsibilities.


5.    Conclusions


     The Committee recognises all organisations, institutions and
     individuals who have made an input in this report.


Report to be considered.


