---
title: 'National Assembly - 16 November 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-11-16
---

THURSDAY, 16 NOVEMBER 2006
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall
move:

   That the House considers the means of establishing, as approved by the
   hon President during oral question time yesterday, a multiparty
   commission to drive the revival of our Police Service, our courts and our
   prisons as a means of ensuring the safety of South Africans across the
   length and breadth of this country, safety they do not currently enjoy.

                       INTERNATIONAL DAY FOR TOLERANCE
                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House —

   (1)      notes that —


        (a)      today, 16 November, is International Day for Tolerance,
             focusing the attention of the global community on tolerance as
             an essential condition for peace, democracy and sustainable
             development; and


        (b)      tolerance entails respect, acceptance and appreciation of
             the rich diversity of our world’s and society’s cultures, our
             forms of expression and ways of being human;


   (2)      acknowledges that —


        (a)      the principles of coexistence and tolerance are important
             as bases for building mutually acceptable relationships
             between diverse communities within the larger society; and


        (b)      it is people’s character rather than their skin colour
             which must be judged, and that we as South Africans should
             lead the way in ensuring that we celebrate our unity in
             diversity;


   (3)      believes that the current rise in acts of intolerance, violence,
        terrorism, xenophobia, aggressive nationalism, racism, anti-
        Semitism, exclusion, marginalisation and discrimination directed
        against national, ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities,
        refugees, migrant workers, immigrants and vulnerable groups within
        societies threaten our efforts towards building peaceful and
        democratic societies and are obstacles to development; and


   (4)      calls on all countries and peoples to practice tolerance and
        live together in peace with one another as good neighbours to unite
        their strength to maintain international peace and security.


Agreed to.

                    TRAFFIC SAFETY DURING FESTIVE SEASON

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, we move
without notice:

   That the House —

   (1)      notes that —


        (a)      the next few weeks will mark the beginning of the festive
              season, when people will spend quality time with families and
              friends; and


        (b)      it is the same period that brings about joy and happiness
              amongst our people, whilst it also brings pain to other
              families;


   (2)      observes that the pain is caused in the majority of instances by
        driver negligence and disregard for road regulations, resulting in
        road fatalities, and that abuse of alcohol contributes
        significantly to accidents; and


   (3)      calls on all our road users to observe speed limits, not to
        drink and drive and to take regular rests along the road, and calls
        on pedestrians to wear visible clothes.

Agreed to.

             ISSUES PERTAINING TO PAROLE AND VIOLATION OF PAROLE

                                 (Statement)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, I wish to bring to the attention of the
House that I have approved a request by the Minister of Correctional
Services to make a statement on issues pertaining to parole.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Deputy Chairperson, thank you very
much ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: It’s still Deputy Speaker!

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Deputy Speaker! [Laughter.] I will
not forget that, Deputy Speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: OK, please don’t.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Thank you very much. Honourable
Deputy Speaker, baie dankie [thank you very much]. [Laughter.]

Honourable Deputy Speaker and hon members, as I said during the ministerial
responses on Tuesday, about 80 to 90 offenders during the past week
benefited from the implementation of section 44 of the Correctional
Services Act and departmental regulations, chapter 5(3)(f) and (4)(dd) to
(ee). These offenders’ date for placement under correctional supervision
has been determined by the independent correctional supervision and parole
boards.

In terms of this legislation and regulations, a qualifying offender gets
released at 11h00 on Friday morning under conditions determined by the area
commissioner as an operational matter, and returns to the centre at 15h00
on Sunday.

These concessions are implemented only twice during the last six months of
an offender’s incarceration, with a minimum of three months in between the
two weekend passes, so any offender who benefited from a weekend pass this
past weekend will not benefit for at least three months. Generally,
hundreds of offenders benefit from these concessions each year.

Given that offender Tony Yengeni had served one sixth of his sentence, and
therefore qualifies for placement under correctional supervision after 13
January 2007 in line with section 276(1) of the Criminal Procedures Act,
there will be no other weekend pass for him. He has already appeared before
the correctional supervision and parole board on 20 October, which
confirmed the recommendations of the case management committee for
correctional supervision.

I’ve taken serious note of the allegations of the violation of the weekend
pass or parole conditions by offender Tony Yengeni and subsequently wish to
announce in this House that in view of the allegations that offender Tony
Yengeni violated his parole conditions during the past weekend parole, we
have, as the department, instituted the following interim measures: one,
that, pending the investigation of these allegations, Tony Yengeni will
forfeit all privileges related to visitations by his spouse, children and
any other close associates for a period of two weeks whilst the
investigation is continuing; two, that he will also forfeit the privilege
of using the telephone to communicate with family, friends and colleagues
for the same duration as stated or alluded to above.

Hon members, it should be noted that this is not a punitive measure, but
conditions that will ensure the investigation is not hindered. After the
finalisation of the investigation the recommendations made from the probe
will be considered and appropriate steps or action will be implemented.

The department deplores and condemns any breach of parole conditions by any
offender, and would ensure that parole conditions are respected and
observed at all times by every offender and by every family member. There
is one policy regarding the conduct and treatment of all offenders in this
department, and this has to be enforced and respected, and its integrity
protected at all times. These are measures that the ANC government has put
in place as a way of moving away from a punitive system to this new
rehabilitative and corrective system.

I therefore appeal once again to members of this House and the public at
large to respect these remedial and interim measures. We shall not tolerate
any deviation from or breach of these conditions at any given stage. Let us
therefore allow the due processes to be followed with regard to this matter
and let offender Yengeni serve the last months of his sentence without any
more public pressure exerted on him or any of my officials.

I’m appealing to relatives and family members of offenders, as well as
close friends and associates, to assist offenders inside and outside our
facilities to adhere to all regulations stipulated by the Department of
Correctional Services. Madam hon Deputy Speaker, I thank you for this
opportunity. [Applause.]

Mr J SELFE: Speaker, we are obviously glad that the Minister made this
statement, and about the assurances that he has given to the House this
afternoon.

The real pity is that he had to make this statement at all. There is a
perception that the government is not serious about fighting crime and
about punishing criminals. That perception is fuelled by the fact that
inmates who are rich or well connected tend to have a better and more
comfortable stay in prison than the average inmate.

It is a fact that bribery is rife in the department, and that inmates can
obtain special privileges by paying officials. This is not only my own
observation, but has recently been confirmed by the findings of the Jali
Commission.

In Mr Yengeni’s case, there is another dynamic at work. Because the ANC has
blurred the distinction between party and state, many officials in the
Department of Correctional Services are redeployed ANC cadres. Thus, the
outgoing national commissioner and his deputy, Jenny Schreiner, are both
former ANC MPs, as is the regional commissioner from KwaZulu-Natal, Nathi
Nhleko, who was one of Mr Yengeni’s successors as the ANC’s Chief Whip.

Mr Yengeni was carried into prison, shoulder high, by, amongst others,
correctional officers. He was treated to a send-off attended by the ANC’s
high and mighty, including the Speaker of the National Assembly. It is
small wonder then that Mr Yengeni believed that he was untouchable and
above the law. His former colleagues run the department, and many hon
members here don’t believe that he did anything particularly wrong.

We will only break the cycle when we take to heart the statement that there
is, before the law, no rich, no poor, no high, no low, no black, no white,
but one law that applies equally to everyone.

The Minister’s statement was also instructive for what it did not say. A
morning newspaper reports at length about how contracts were improperly
awarded, and the links that exist between the company they were awarded to
and the outgoing national commissioner. If even remotely true, this is a
scandalous situation that must be fully and comprehensively investigated if
the integrity of the tender process is to be restored. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I agree with most of what Mr
Selfe has said, and I think there is a lot for the Department of
Correctional Services and the Minister, in particular, to consider with
regard to rectifying the perception that exists in respect of prisoners.

The manner in which Mr Yengeni went on weekend leave, shoulder high, taken
away by a waiting crowd, and all that was published in the newspapers makes
a laughing stock of him being in prison. No matter what the Minister says,
the perception remains that the rules are being bent for senior ANC
persons, and that perception is not rebutted.

A much deeper investigation is needed to put this matter to rest.
[Applause.]

Mr A HARDING: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.

Ek het so pas met gevangene nommer 95151291 gepraat en hy het my gevra om
’n boodskap aan u oor te dra. Hy was vir agt jaar in Helderstroom-
gevangenis. Hy was ’n modelgevangene en was selfs ’n monitor. Wat hierdie
gevangene sê, is: wat u aan die nasie sê, is verleidelik maar dis nie
doelgerig nie. U word ’n klomp leuens deur u amptenary gevoer. Die skending
van menseregte by Helderstroom is aan die orde van die dag, ten spyte van
die teenwoordigheid van regter Erasmus se mense.

In sy dag des lewens is mnr Yengeni die eerste gevangene wat so gou op ’n
naweekpas gegaan het. As ’n monitor het hy self honderde van hierdie
aansoeke ingevul en almal is afgekeur. Daar was selfs gevalle waar
gevangenes gevra het om net vir een dag uit te kom om ’n begrafnis by te
woon en selfs dit is afgekeur. Hy vra dat u sy lêer trek om die feite vas
te stel. Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[I have just spoken to prisoner number 95151291 and he asked me to convey
the following message to you. He was in Helderstroom prison for eight
years. He was a model prisoner and was even a monitor. What this prisoner
is saying, is: What you are telling the nation is appealing, but not
purposeful. You are being fed a pack of lies by your officials. The
violation of human rights at Helderstroom is the order of the day despite
the presence of Justice Erasmus’s people.

In his lifetime Mr Yengeni is the first prisoner to be granted a weekend
pass so quickly. As a monitor he has filled in hundreds of applications
himself and all were turned down. There have even been cases where
prisoners have requested to be allowed out for one day to attend a funeral
and even that has been turned down. He asked that you retrieve his file to
determine the facts. Thank you.]

Mr S N SWART: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, the ACDP shared the
concerns regarding the perception that Mr Yengeni was receiving
preferential treatment, particularly following his hero’s send-off.

We therefore welcome your announcement today, Minister, that you have taken
serious note of the allegations of parole violations, and that privileges
have been withdrawn as an interim measure, pending the finalisation of the
investigation.

It is very important that all citizens are considered equal before and
subject to the same law, and that all offenders are subject to the same
parole regulations. If one breaches those conditions, sanctions must
follow, no matter who is involved, to protect, as you pointed out, the
integrity of the parole policy.

We must at all times be careful of sending out the wrong message that if
you’re politically connected, you enjoy special privileges, and are better
treated than other offenders. I thank you.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Adjunkspeaker, die agb Minister doen ’n beroep op
die media en vra dat hulle tog nou die gevangene met rus moet laat en
bietjie respek toon, sodat hy ook sy privaatheid in die gevangenis kan
geniet. Die vraag is: as die media nie aan die hele aangeleentheid rondom
Toni Yengeni soveel aandag gegee het nie, sou u as Minister dan nog
opgetree het? Sou daar opgetree gewees het, as dit nie in die media bekend
geword het dat hy sy paroolvoorwaardes oortree het nie? U doen skadebeheer
op hierdie stadium.

Met hierdie aangeleentheid oor Toni Yengeni is die boodskap na buite en die
sein wat die regering uitstuur dat as jy ’n ANC-lidmaatskapkaartjie het,
sal jy bevoorregting en bevoordeling kry as jy in die gevangenis is. Toni
Yengeni het nog nie eens tyd gehad om aan te pas in die gevangenis nie, toe
moet hy alweer uitgaan om by die burgerlike lewe aan te pas. Dit is
onaanvaarbaar. Dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Deputy Speaker, the hon Minister is appealing to
the media and asking them to please leave the prisoner in peace and to show
a modicum of respect, so that he can also enjoy his privacy in prison. The
question is: If the media had not paid so much attention to the whole
matter concerning Toni Yengeni, would you - as the Minister - still have
acted. Would steps have been taken if the contravention of his parole
regulations had not been known in the media? You are doing damage control
at this stage.

With this matter concerning Toni Yengeni the message and signal being sent
out there by government is that if you have an ANC membership card you will
receive preferential and favourable treatment if you are in prison. Toni
Yengeni did not even have time to acclimatise to life in prison before he
had to leave again to adjust to civilian life. It is unacceptable. Thank
you. [Applause.]]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members, we note with
interest that, in keeping with international best practice in terms of
prisons, the prisons in South Africa also make room for people to visit
their families over a period of time. We have also noted what the Minister
said, namely that the prisoner concerned would forfeit some of the
privileges offered to him.

It is equally important to note that, yes, there is the perception out
there that once you belong either to the ANC or to some other party, there
is a feeling of entitlement, that people feel that they are entitled to
some of these rights, whether this is the case or not. This has to be
looked into and set right.

Another important thing is that it is also incumbent upon the offender
himself to get out of the mode of denying that there is some wrong in what
he has done. Until he has come to accept that, it will always be very
difficult for him to know that he doesn’t have the freedom that he
supposedly deserves. I thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, the MF wants to make it clear that,
when a crime is committed, punishment needs to be served to restore the
balance to society.

This punishment cannot be picked and chosen, but needs to be enforced in
respect of the crime committed. While it is correct that circumstances may
influence such judgments, it should not prejudice justice from being
served.

We stand here today saying that all criminals need to receive the same
treatment, and that no special treatment be awarded according to status.

We are, however, pleased that the department assures us that out of the 243
prisons in South Africa, “a prison is a prison”.

We need to assure the public that the criminal justice system in South
Africa is being maintained in a most effective manner to ensure the
rehabilitation of offenders and to deter crimes.

To the Minister, I want to say: We thank you for your proactive action.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]
Mr S SIMMONS: Deputy Speaker, the UPSA again calls for the hon Minister to
resign. [Interjections.] The hon Minister has been occupying all his time
doing damage control after ill-disciplined officials messed up.

The South African public has to hear constantly of one crisis after another
in the department. This is a clear indication that the hon Minister is not
hands-on and proactive. The PR exercises of the Minister that have now
become an institution in this department, like this statement made here
today, will no longer suffice. This lack of a hands-on approach by the hon
Minister is supported by his apparent ignorance of matters surrounding
offender Tony Yengeni and the suspicious tender procedures involving the
outgoing commissioner, Linda Mti.

There is now an urgent need for a drastic cleanup in the management of this
Ministry and its department. The first step is for the hon Minister to
resign. I thank you. [Interjections.] [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr D V BLOEM: Deputy Speaker, let me first start by saying that I am
aligning myself with what the Minister has said. [Interjections.] We have a
charter and it is the Freedom Charter. The Freedom Charter states that all
shall be equal before the law, and no one - no one - is above the law.
[Interjections.] That is exactly what the Minister is saying here today. He
has been guided by the Freedom Charter and not by anything else, not by an
agenda or by any other thing.

Minister, we as a portfolio committee, as a study group, will support you
in that. [Interjections.] [Applause.] You see, when we say that nobody is
above the law, we mean it. We are saying that if Tony Yengeni has
contravened his parole regulations and privileges, he must be punished.
That is what we are saying, and not what you are saying.

The Minister is saying that he is going to wait for a report - we are not
judges here – to say yes or no as to whether he is guilty. We are saying,
“Let us wait for the parole board to finish their work.” Mr Selfe was part
and parcel of appointing ...

An HON MEMBER: Honourable Selfe.

Mr D V BLOEM: “Honourable” ... independent parole board chairpersons. Those
chairpersons are not part and parcel of Correctional Services; they are
civilians. We trust what they are going to do. We trust them. I don’t have
any reason to doubt them.

I can say here and now that the Portfolio Committee on Correctional
Services will follow this whole thing of what has happened, but I must tell
you that we can’t stand here and say that he is already guilty of an
offence. It would be wrong of us. It would be totally wrong of us. We will
wait, and I hope that the Minister will give us the outcome of the
investigation by the regional commissioner or area commissioner and the
parole board.

Minister, we are fully behind your decision that if a person, no matter ...
They are saying... Mr Mfundisi was saying, “When you are well connected to
the ANC ... ” and whatever else. [Interjections.] That is not the truth!
The ANC ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Please, let’s give the hon member
an opportunity to address us.

Mr D V BLOEM: The ANC is the only, only honest party in this country.
[Interjections.] [Applause.] The ANC Minister comes here ...

Mr M J ELLIS: On a point of order, Madam Deputy Speaker: I suspect that the
hon member is telling a lie, and I wonder if that is parliamentary. He said
that the ANC is the only honest party.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually your language is unparliamentary; an hon
member is never ...

Mr M J ELLIS: I’m unparliamentary?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes.
Mr M J ELLIS: I know I am, but I had to try to keep him quiet, Madam Deputy
Speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you did that deliberately? Take your seat.

Mr M J ELLIS: Well ... certainly.

Mr D V BLOEM: You see, we are busy with a very serious issue here, and they
are making jokes out of it.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Adjunkspeaker, is die agb lid bereid om ’n vraag te
beantwoord?

Mnr D V BLOEM: Jy kan maar vra, agb lid.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Adjunkspeaker, ek wil net vir die agb lid vra: Is
hy regtig eerlik as hy sê die ANC is die enigste eerlike party?
[Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Deputy Speaker, is the hon member prepared to take
a question?

Mr D V BLOEM: You may ask, hon member.

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Deputy Speaker, I just want to ask the hon member:
Is he really being honest when he says that the ANC is the only honest
party? [Interjections.]]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, please answer the question.

Mnr D V BLOEM: Die rede waarom ek so sê, is dat daar altyd dinge vir ons
weggesteek was. [Tussenwerpsels.] Hier kom ’n Minister van die ANC met ’n
senior lid van die ANC – Tony Yengeni is ’n senior lid van die ANC – en die
Minister sê: Ek neem hierdie en hierdie weg van jou.

Waar sal jy ooit eerlikheid soos dit kry? [Tussenwerpsels.] Waar gaan jy
eerlikheid kry? Hy steek dit nie weg nie. [Applous.] Die Minister steek dit
nie weg nie. Hy sê dat ons ’n ondersoek gaan doen. Ek sê dat niemand ...
Die ANC steek dit nie weg nie! (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr D V BLOEM: My reason for saying this is is that things were always
hidden from us. [Interjections.] Here we have a Minister from the ANC with
a senior member of the ANC – Toni Yengeni is a senior member of the ANC -
and the Minister says: “I am taking this and that away from you.

Where are you ever going to find this kind of honesty? [Interjections.]
Where are you going to find honesty? He does not hide it. [Applause.] The
Minister does not hide it. He says that we are going to conduct an
investigation. I am saying that no one ... The ANC is not hiding it!]

We will never defend any corruption. We will never defend anyone within
prison. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon member! Hon members, please rise on a point
of order and stop screaming. Anyone who wants to address us, rise on a
point of order and let’s get that addressed, please.

Mr D V BLOEM: Deputy Speaker, they don’t have people in prison. They don’t
know what is going on in prison. [Interjections.] That’s why they can howl
like this. I am saying that I respect what Minister Balfour has done today.
It shows that Minister Balfour is serious about rooting out this
perception. I am saying “this perception”. Minister Balfour shows you today
that, no, we are not going to defend anybody - anybody who has committed a
crime and who is in prison. That is the message that Minister Balfour is
giving all of us here today.

I don’t know why you are howling and howling. Are you not satisfied with
what the Minister has done today? [Interjections.] You are not, because you
don’t know what the rules and regulations are of our country. The Minister
is following exactly that, to say that Mr Yengeni has done “one, two,
three, four, five” and that, in the interim, “I am going to do: one, two,
three.” Minister, thank you very much and congratulations on your stand.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.


                          UNIVERSAL CHILDREN’S DAY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B M SOLO (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, we have entered a period in which
we are reminded daily that our children are under siege. They are victims
of phantom criminals, of family violence and sexual abuse. It is a matter
of urgency that we share the collective responsibility of ensuring that
their right to be protected is fiercely guarded.

Unicef reports that there are 246 million children engaged in exploitative
child labour; 140 million children who have never been to school; 300 000
soldiers - some child soldiers as young as eight years old.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I think it is very clear that there are people
who are committed to disrupting the sitting this afternoon. Just be warned
that we are not going to allow that. Even if we remain with very few people
who are committed to the proceedings, we will do so.
We are not going to be derailed by anyone who has an agenda that this House
should not continue with its business. You have Rules, hon members, and I
really beg you to use them. If you feel that a hon member is out of order,
you should rise on a point of order and refer us to a specific Rule and we
will then take it from there.

But, we are not going to allow people to just scream at speakers who are
making statements here. Sometimes, before a person has even completed a
statement, people already start howling. We are not going to allow that. We
have a very, very long day ahead of us, hon members, and we want to be with
people who are committed to this day.

Those who would like to take an early holiday, if they do not want to leave
on their own, they will be made to leave. I hope that is clear, hon
members. Mr Solo, I missed everything that you said from the beginning, so
would you please start that statement again?

Mr H P CHAUKE: Madam Deputy Speaker ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are rising on what point, Mr Chauke?

Mr H P CHAUKE: Last time I raised a point on the closing of the bar in that
area.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are out of order. Please sit down. [Laughter.] He
actually refers to a bar of advocates. [Laughter.]

Mr B M SOLO: Madam Deputy Speaker, once more we have entered a period in
which we are reminded daily that our children are under siege. They are
victims of phantom criminals, of family violence and sexual abuse. It is a
matter of urgency that we share the collective responsibility of ensuring
that their right to be protected is fiercely guarded.

Unicef reports that there are 246 million children engaged in exploitative
child labour; 140 million children who have never been to school; 300 000
soldiers, and some child soldiers are as young as eight years old. Since
1994, the ANC-led government has made significant progress in realising
children’s rights. These include the ratification of numerous international
instruments dealing with the protection of children’s rights.

The ANC takes a rights-based approach to children, which implies the
acknowledgment and honouring of the full scope of their rights, namely
political, social and economic. That must be promoted and protected to
achieve the wellbeing of all children.

We believe it is only by locating children firmly within the national,
social and economic development framework that we can address children’s
concerns in a comprehensive and holistic way. The ANC calls on all South
Africans to take responsibility for providing a supportive environment in
which children can fully enjoy their rights. Thank you, Madam Deputy
Speaker. [Time expired.]

Hon Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I just want to know
whether it is parliamentary that when you have served in Parliament for 30
years you have the authority to put on a hat. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, it is and it has nothing to do with how long you
have served. [Laughter.] If an hon member is as handsome as Mr Van der
Merwe, and so well dressed, we should say so. [Laughter.] [Applause.]


            POLICE COMMISSIONER’S RELATIONSHIP WITH GLEN AGLIOTTI


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, according to news reports,
Glen Agliotti has just been identified as the man arrested today in
connection with the murder of Brett Kebble. Mr Agliotti is a close friend
of Police Commissioner Selebi, and as such the commissioner must now either
step down or be suspended pending an investigation into the links he has
with the man. Glen Agliotti was arrested by the Scorpions and will appear
in court this afternoon.

Commissioner Selebi has admitted that Agliotti is a friend of his and there
have been claims that Agliotti telephoned Selebi immediately after the
murder. The cloud hanging over the commissioner is now so big that there is
no option but to remove him should he not step down voluntarily, and to
begin a full investigation into the nature of their relationship.

The commissioner, despite earlier attempts by the President to clear his
name on this front, is closely connected with someone who has been arrested
in connection with a felony. Surely, the man tasked with leading the fight
against crime should be above reproach when it comes to the people he
associates with.

The question has to be asked whether an objective investigation can be
undertaken, if the SAPS is run by Selebi in the driving seat. My answer to
that is: No! Immediate action must be taken to investigate the nature of
Commissioner Selebi’s relationship with Glen...  [Interjections.]

Prof A K ASMAL: Madam Deputy Speaker, I do not wish to interrupt the hon
member, but I would like you to rule, not necessarily now, but to impute
particular criminality to a senior officer is to interfere with a
prosecution before the courts. [Interjections.] No, no, don’t bray like
donkeys, it is a serious matter. [Laughter.] [Interjections.] I would like
you to rule, please, as to whether or not the hone member’s statement is an
interference with justice and contempt of court in a case which is sub
judice. I would like you to rule in future, not necessarily today.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you please complete your statement, hon member?

Mrs S V KALYAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order, may I address
you? You just referred a little earlier to the fact that we should try to
maintain the decorum in the House and the hon Kader Asmal refers to persons
who are heckling as donkeys. A little earlier other members were shouting
at us to shut up. May I ask that you rule on that and it is
unparliamentary?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are actually right. Hon Asmal, please withdraw
the last part of your statement.

Prof A K ASMAL: I withdraw any asinine allusions to members of this House.
[Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, I did not understand that. What did you
say?

Prof A K ASMAL: I withdraw any imputations about asinine behaviour by
members of this House.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon member, I would like you to withdraw the words
referring to hon members as donkeys. Full stop!

Prof A K ASMAL: I withdraw the word “asinine”, which is related to donkeys.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no!

Prof A K ASMAL: I withdraw the word “donkeys”.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, may we know what the word
“asinine” means?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, because the hon member decided not to use that word
after all because I also did not understand it. So, for the benefit of the
House, I made sure that he doesn’t use it, and he didn’t. Are you now
satisfied? I shouldn’t have praised you so much because I am going to get
trouble from you. [Applause.]

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Madam Deputy Speaker, my final sentence, if I may
complete it, is that immediate action must be taken to investigate the
nature of commissioner Selebi’s relationship with Glen Agliotti. May I
suggest that the members read the newspapers and listen to the radio.
[Applause.] [Interjections.]

                         ACCESS TO BASIC FACILITIES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M B SKOSANA (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the IFP has noted the report of
the UNDP of 2006, which states that our country has made important strides
in providing basic services to our people; for instance access to safe
water. Likewise, President Mbeki expressed a positive acceptance of the
report and its assessment of South Africa.

However, the report also states that these advances have been negated by
backward steps in some of the critical areas. At least 16 million South
Africans are still without access to basic sanitation and we therefore need
to reappraise some of our national policies to meet these challenges.

The report also emphasises the formidable challenges of HIV/Aids for South
Africa and the African region. The standard life expectancy pattern between
men and women has been reversed. Women are more likely to be infected and
are more likely to die of Aids earlier than men.

The IFP therefore calls on the government to create and implement a clear
national plan with well-defined targets, a strong regulatory framework with
devolution of relevant powers to local authorities and constant monitoring
of progress as recommended by the UN. I thank you.


         INTERNATIONAL DAY OF SOLIDARITY WITH THE PALESTINIAN PEOPLE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P A C HENDRICKSE (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the International Day of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People is observed by the UN and the
international community on 29 November each year. The date of 29 November
was chosen because of its significance to the Palestinian people as it was
on this day, some 59 years ago, that UN General Assembly Resolution 181 was
adopted that provided for the establishment in Palestine of a Jewish state
and an Arab state. Of the two states to be created under this resolution,
only one, Israel, has so far come into being.

The International Day of Solidarity has traditionally provided an
opportunity for the international community to highlight the fact that the
question of Palestine is still unresolved.

As South Africans, we have endured and experienced the atrocities of
apartheid and we therefore understand the plight of the Palestinian people.
We support the Palestinian people in their fight to attain their
inalienable rights as defined by the UN General Assembly, namely the right
to self-determination without external interference and the right to
national independence and sovereignty.

We call on the Israeli government to create conditions for the
implementation of the Hebron and Oslo accords. [Applause.]


        EXTREME DRUG-RESISTANT TUBERCULOSIS OUTBREAK IN EASTERN CAPE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S N SIGCAU (UDM): Madam Deputy Speaker, the UDM notes that extreme drug-
resistant tuberculosis has now been confirmed in the Eastern Cape as well
and that a dozen potential cases are also under investigation in the
Western Cape. What this means is that this deadly disease has now been
confirmed in nearly every province.

We appeal to the Department of Health to heed the dire warnings that
medical experts are making with regard to XDR-TB.

The President of the Southern African HIV Clinicians Society says that
hospital clinics are among the best places to catch TB because of the long
queues and limited air circulation. It is important to remember that the
HIV/Aids patients who visit hospitals and clinics for ARVs and other
treatments are highly susceptible to TB. It is for this reason that prior
to the appearance of XDR-TB South Africa already had one of the highest TB
infection and mortality rates in the world.

This new outbreak has already claimed the lives of 52 of the 53 people
infected in Tugela Ferry, KwaZulu-Natal. All of them died within 25 days of
contracting this disease. I thank you, Deputy Speaker.


                     ROAD SAFETY OVER THE HOLIDAY SEASON


                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr C P MULDER (VF Plus): Mevrou die Adjunkspeaker, navorsing en
padveiligheidstatistiek bevestig dat die meeste ernstige motorongelukke
tussen 18h00 en 06h00 in die nag plaasvind. Terselfdertyd word
padveiligheidswetstoepassing in die meeste provinsies nie na 18h00 in die
aand gedoen nie. Die groot aantal onpadwaardige voertuie, motors, taxi’s en
vragmotors wat in die nag sonder ligte ry of net met een lig ry, bevestig
die totale gebrek aan wetstoepassing na sonsondergang.

Die VF Plus doen ’n beroep op die betrokke Minister en op die provinsiale
owerhede om in die lig van die vakansieseisoen en jaarlikse hoë
sterftesyfer toe te sien dat padveiligheidswetstoepassing op ’n gelyke
basis, 24 uur per dag toegepas sal word in die tyd wat voorlê. Dankie.
(Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER (FF PLUS): Madam Deputy Speaker, research and road safety
statistics confirm that the most serious motor vehicle accidents happen
between 18h00 at night and 06h00 in the morning. At the same time road
safety law enforcement is not applied in most provinces after 18h00 in the
evening. The large number of unroadworthy vehicles, cars, taxis and trucks
that drive around at night without lights or with only one light, confirms
the total lack of law enforcement after sundown.

The FF Plus is appealing to the relevant Minister and the provincial
authorities, in the light of the holiday season and the high annual death-
toll, to see to it that road safety law enforcement is applied on an equal
basis, 24 hours per day during the time that lies ahead. Thank you.]


                      CALL TO END BLOCKADE AGAINST CUBA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms D M RAMODIBE (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, for over four decades the
Cuban people have been subjected to a cruel, unjust and inhuman blockade
that has cost countless human and material losses.
The blockade on Cuba is an act of economic war for which there is no legal
justification other than an expression of the United States’ hostile and
aggressive policies towards the Cuban people.

Since 1992, the UN General Assembly has approved a resolution that demands
the end of the blockade imposed on Cuba, with 183 countries voting that
year in favour of the resolution. The South African government supports the
UN resolution and has worked actively to strengthen bilateral relations
with Cuba, including co-operation in the economic, commercial and financial
spheres.

The ANC has consistently called for the blockade to be lifted, and in its
1994 conference resolutions, which have been reaffirmed in subsequent ANC
conferences, the ANC described the blockade as a gross violation of the
right of the Cuban people to choose their own social system. We do so not
only in defence of the rights of the Cuban people but also in defence of
the rights of the people of the international community. [Applause.]


                                 CAPE CORPS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L M GREEN (FD): Madam Deputy Speaker, the South African Cape Corps has
had a long, proud and illustrious history of active combat in both the
First and Second World Wars. Members of the Cape Corps proved themselves in
battles like Square Hill, the Battle of El Alamein and Tobruk.

Many Cape Corps members left Cape Town for El Alamein as truck drivers,
medical assistants and stretcher-bearers but returned to Cape Town after
the war as experienced fighters. However, on their return they were not
recognized by the government of the day. They were demobilised, given
medals for their bravery and bicycles for transport, but they were left
largely unemployed and unrecognised.

The Cape Corps is the only regiment of the City of Cape Town which has
never received the official recognition due to it despite service of valour
on the African continent and overseas during the two world wars. They
received no vote, no employment, no land and no social welfare.

Today there are many former members of the Cape Corps who feel
disillusioned with the present integration process. They feel marginalised
and excluded. Those who have been included in the SANDF are also
dissatisfied with their treatment. Many of them feel that members of the
liberation forces like MK, Apla and others have been more than adequately
compensated and accommodated while members of the Cape Corps are being
sidelined for being part of the former SADF. They are often overlooked when
promotions are handed out and are repeatedly marginalised. Every year there
is one group or another of the Cape Corps that marches to Parliament to
demonstrate their unhappiness.

I therefore call upon the Minister of Defence, hon Lekota, to meet and
consult with senior members of the former Cape Corps to provide an
opportunity for them to air their grievances. Thank you, Madam Speaker.
[Time expired.]

                       MINISTER OF HOUSING AS BUILDER

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A C STEYN (DA): Deputy Speaker, in a statement by an ANC member on
Tuesday, this House was wrongly led to believe that the Minister of Housing
single-handedly built six houses in Delft last week. The hon Minister in
her response tried to correct the member by giving acknowledgement to a
group of ANC members from the portfolio committee, who accompanied her to
the building site last Thursday.

What the Minister failed to do, however, was to acknowledge that the
project was initiated and driven by Cape Talk Radio and that the Minister
and her entourage abused this initiative for their own political purposes.
What she also failed to say was that other members of the committee were
only informed of this impromptu visit to the site on Wednesday afternoon,
knowing very well that political parties have caucus meetings on a Thursday
morning.
What the Minister further failed to say was that some of the ANC members
who did visit the site last Thursday returned to attend the afternoon
session of Parliament. Therefore, if the Minister and a handful of members
did indeed complete six houses in barely two days, I respectfully suggest
that the Minister be relieved of her Ministerial duties and that she be
permanently deployed to construct all future RDP houses.

Ironically, to date the Minister has chosen not to acknowledge the fact
that the Gauteng MPs and MPLs, together with DA councillors from the
Johannesburg Metro, financed and built a house through Habitat for Humanity
last year. Instead, the Minister plays politics and challenges the hon Tony
Leon to go out and build houses. Could this possibly be an unconscious
acknowledgement by the Minister that she and her department have failed to
carry out their mandate to house the people? [Applause.]




                               CHILD MURDERER


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs T L P NWAMITWA-SHILUBANA (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, on Saturday 11
November 2006 the Letsitele Police received information from the community
at Nkambako village at Nwamitwa that a lady was alleging that her two-year-
old daughter had gone missing on Monday 6 November 2006.
After the report was received, members of the SAPS proceeded to the village
where they interviewed a young lady, Pinky Malatji, who is 19 years old.
During the interview, the young lady admitted to the police that she had
strangled her two-year-old daughter on Monday 6 November 2006 and buried
her, still alive, in a shallow grave at the Shilovola River near the
Nkambako village. The lady then accompanied the police to the alleged scene
of the crime where the body was found in a decomposed stage. The young
mother, Pinky Malatji, was arrested for murder and will appear in the
Ritavi Magistrate’s Court on 13 November 2006.

This indeed is a sad occurrence. It should never have happened. It
highlights the difficult choices many of our young mothers face. It speaks
of the need to disseminate the message that the ANC government cares and is
prepared to assist our people and has programmes in this regard. For our
poor people there are support grants. [Time expired.]




                  ABALONE POACHING IN SOUTH AFRICAN WATERS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the poaching of abalone as
well as our other natural resources is a very serious problem that we are
faced with. If we do not put a stop to this unscrupulous practice and bring
the perpetrators of these crimes to book, including the syndicates that
purchase these illegal gains from the poachers, then we will be faced with
a situation in which our natural resources will get depleted at a very fast
pace.

We were very encouraged by the arrest of two men earlier this week in
Bruma, Johannesburg, for smuggling abalone worth R1,2 million. We do
understand that there are many obstacles and hurdles that the environmental
as well as other authorities have to overcome in their fight against
poaching, including limited resources. We therefore congratulate them for
the progress and the arrests that they have made thus far and for theie
dedication to stop poaching. We do, however, believe that efforts to put a
stop to this illegal practice have to be stepped up and additional
resources need to be allocated to the fight against poaching, if we are to
save our natural resources. I thank you.




                       CRITICISM OF SANDF IN THE MEDIA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr G W KOORNHOF (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC has noted that the
SANDF has recently been subjected to attacks by certain sections of the
media. Some of these attacks, especially on the role played by the SANDF in
promoting peace and security on the African continent, were totally
unsubstantiated and based on speculation. Unfortunately, some political
parties represented in this House saw fit to jump on the same bandwagon,
with uncalled-for attacks on the SANDF, its leadership cadre and our
soldiers. The result of such attacks is that it may have a demoralising
effect on the SANDF and its men and women in uniform.

When the SANDF is deployed in a foreign country for peace support
operations, it is not met with a ready-made situation. It is often faced
with challenging conditions in the host country. This places a massive
strain on the capabilities of our soldiers, our equipment and our
logistical systems.

Due to the vast areas in which our soldiers are deployed, and which stretch
over thousands of kilometres, discrepancies in logistical systems are bound
to be experienced. Internationally, the role played by the SANDF to promote
peace and security in Africa is widely acclaimed. This achievement and
other successes are not reported in the media and are often ignored by the
opposition parties.

The ANC is proud of the SANDF and its men and women in uniform and their
efforts to bring peace, security and progress on our continent. The ANC
salutes the SANDF for the fabulous job that they perform. I thank you.
[Applause.]




               PUBLICATION OF PETROSA DOCUMENTS ON DA WEBSITE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Adv H C SCHMIDT (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, the DA has uploaded onto its
website all the documents handed to us by PetroSA, in response to the DA’s
application in terms of the Promotion of Access to Information Act. The
documents can be found by logging onto the DA’s website, www.da.org.za.

The purpose of the DA’s application was to bring into the public domain
information about the manner in which public money was being misspent and
to hold PetroSA to account for its actions. By making these documents
public, we believe that we are fulfilling this commitment. We invite the
public and the media to read the documents and scrutinise the contents.

PetroSA fought us for the information for more than a year, but in the end
common sense and justice prevailed. It remains to be seen, though, to what
extent PetroSA actually complied with the court’s order. I thank you.
[Applause.]


                             FIGHT AGAINST CRIME


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S MAHOTE (ANC): Thank you, Deputy Speaker. The ANC is committed to
intensifying the campaign at all levels to reduce crime, especially the
proliferation of illegal weapons and drugs, corruption and fraudulent
activities, the abuse of women, children and the elderly and family
violence.

Yesterday morning the SA Institute of Race Relations released a report on
crime in the country. The report indicates serious crimes have declined by
10% since the advent of democracy in 1994. The murder rate has declined by
42% over the past 12 years. The rate of aggravated robbery has also
declined by 11% over the same period. The findings are in many respects
consistent with the official crime statistics recently released by the
Minister of Safety and Security.

The ANC calls on the people, civil society and the business community to
work hand in hand with the police to eradicate the curse of crime that
continues to afflict our society. I thank you.


                           VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms Z N NAWA (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC echoes that violence
against women is unacceptable in any society and must not be tolerated. It
is one of the most widespread violations of human rights, with one in three
women being subjected to some form of violence in their lifetime.

On 25 November 2006, the International Day for the Elimination of Violence
Against Women, we should say with one voice that enough is enough. Women
who seek redress for abuse sometimes do not receive adequate support from
the institutions that are supposed to assist them.

Government’s initiatives to eradicate the scourge of violence against women
and children are encouraging. There have been initiatives to reform the
criminal justice system and improve the state’s response to violence
against women, including a specialised sexual offences court and rape
reporting centres in some local police stations.

The rights of women to equality, freedom and security of person and other
freedoms contained in the Bill of Rights need to be asserted and defended.
I thank you. [Applause.]

                          NEW EMBLEM FOR PARLIAMENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, on
behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party, I move the draft resolution
printed in his name on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That the House—

      1) notes that—


         a) the Joint Rules Committee in November 2006 approved a
            particular Emblem for Parliament, while identifying a need for
            a slight adjustment;


         b) a public involvement process and full consultation with parties
            have taken place in the development of this emblem;


         c) the Parliament Oversight Authority had considered the proposal
            and suggested further refinement; and


         d) the launch of the new emblem is planned for early 2007; and

     2) authorises the Presiding Officers to approve the emblem, after
        consultation with parties, and to formally present it to the Houses
        in early 2007.

Agreed to.


           CRIMINAL LAW (SEXUAL OFFENCES AND RELATED MATTERS) BILL

                          (Consideration of Report)
There was no debate.

The Deputy Chief Whip of the Majority Party moved: That the Report be
noted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly noted.


CRIMINAL LAW (SEXUAL OFFENCES AND RELATED MATTERS) AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Speaker,
indeed, for many a democrat in our country, for all in my party, all those
who work for the wellbeing of our people in general, our women, our
children, for the promotion and protection of their rights, I am here to
lead in the debate around the Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Related
Matters) Amendment Bill - a very important piece of legislation for the
promotion of the human rights of all our people, women and children in
particular, the most vulnerable.

This legislation has been in the making for many years now. I had, earlier
on in the day, during the media briefings of the JCPS cluster by my
colleague the Deputy Minister, indicated that it has been in the making for
12 years. I would like to say, as a follow-up on that very remark, it may
well be not exactly 12 years, that over the past years a lot of work has
been done at tertiary institutions by my party, by NGOs and CBOs interested
in the promotion of human rights, and in particular in the protection of
women and children against violence. A body of knowledge has therefore been
gathered and developed over this period of time, and it is submissions
bearing this kind of detail relating to the safety of such persons that
have been presented as submissions before the Portfolio Committee on
Justice.

This Bill is informed by a lot of contributions from the parties that are
participating in the portfolio committee or have participated over the
years, CBOs and NGOs and other experts who made their submissions to the
portfolio committee. The assumption one has to draw is that it is therefore
as comprehensive as a Bill of this nature can be.

If one looks at the explanatory notes of the Bill, one realises the broad
spectrum of coverage by the Bill from institutional arrangements to
determining penalties related to sexual offences. It even includes new,
modern notions such as having a national register for sex offenders, and
also deals with issues related to post-exposure prophylaxis in cases where
one is infected with HIV/Aids. It is therefore very wide.

My task today is twofold. As I introduce this legislation, I would firstly
want to use the occasion to commend all those who have been involved over
the years. Most importantly, I want to commend the Deputy Minister for
Justice and Constitutional Development, my colleague adv De Lange, who was
involved in the steering of the drafting of this Bill over many years until
the current Chairperson, Fatima Chohan-Khota, took over and, of course, led
very efficiently the process of consultation and drafting of this Bill. I,
then in the same spirit, have to acknowledge the role played by my
predecessors, both the late Dullah Omar and Penuel Maduna. In the time left
I want to thank members of the department for the work that they have done.

The second part of my task is an undertaking that, as the Bill comes to
pass, I should then use this occasion today to say that we will do our best
to implement or lead in the implementation of this Bill. In parts, the Bill
requires the setting up of very intricate and complex institutional
arrangements and, obviously and correctly so, requires that there be a very
close collaboration between interlinked departments.

Without much ado, I would like to make that commitment, that we will do our
best, but then to say laws can only be enabling. If we are to eradicate
violence in our society, we really need to do more. We must address those
cultural practices in our society that lead to or exacerbate or cause the
abuse of women. In other words, we must enjoin all those who fight for the
promotion and advancement of women’s human rights. We must also work hard
towards the protection of our children. We must even work equally hard for
stable family units, because, dear friends, as you may know, it is in the
area of contact crime that we record higher levels of criminality and thus
we must work towards strengthened and strong family units.

We have a lot to do, so whilst we do have enabling legislation, which
prescribes punitive measures as well, we have to take the struggle to the
streets, to our people. We have to enjoin all our people to be part of the
fight against criminality in general and against the abuse of women and
children in particular.

It is indeed opportune for us to advocate for elements of this Bill at this
particular time, because, as we all know, we recognise in this month in
particular, moving into December, the 16 Days of Activism for No Violence
against Women and Children. The President always says this is a 365-day
campaign and so perhaps we will pick on elements of this Bill to further
educate our people on the advancement of the security of women and children
and indeed all vulnerable persons in our country. Thank you, Madam Deputy
Speaker, for the opportunity to address the House. [Applause.]

Ms F I CHOHAN-KHOTA: Hon members, I dedicate this speech this afternoon to
all mothers who teach their sons to treasure girls, to all the wonderful
South African men, fathers and husbands who love and protect their wives
and daughters, and to rape victims everywhere who, having been violated in
the most demeaning way, show amazing resilience to us all and who choose to
live in dignity, thereby giving us all hope; hope for the boundlessness of
the human spirit and hope for a world without violence. [Applause.]

While we do what we can in the legislation before us, there is, as the
Minister says, a limitation to what legislation can achieve. By itself the
Bill is not going to completely halt the high incidence of sexual violence
reported every day at our police stations. If we hope to prevent sexual
violence, we will have to look very deeply within ourselves, within our
communities, and trace our historic path to this space in time.

Given our previous intimate relationship with violence, we might have
failed to teach our children healthy alternatives to violence. Perhaps we
have underestimated the devastating role played by alcohol and drugs, and
we might even have misunderstood the effect of the permissive influences of
images, films and advertisements so glaring in our daily lives. How else,
members, do we explain the rape of an 18-month-old baby by a 15-year-old
boy a few days ago in Limpopo province? How else do we explain the rape and
setting alight of a seven-year-old not 20 kilometres away from this House?
These are amongst the issues that, I think, need serious and committed
thought from all of us. [Inaudible.] ... it really is very disturbing.
Madam Deputy Speaker, I can’t hear myself.

It is time, perhaps, that we became more vigilant as to the kinds of things
that we feed into our children’s minds, and in order for us to rescue our
souls it is important that we try to find some time, perhaps, in this House
to focus our thoughts more keenly in this regard.

The Bill before us aims in a single piece of legislation to deal with the
law on sexual offences and related matters. Having said that, it is
important to note that parts of the old Sexual Offences Act of 1957 that
criminalised prostitution still remain, although it bears noting that the
SA Law Commission is reviewing the legal aspects relating to adult
prostitution and its implications in our new democracy.

We therefore, in this Bill, do not deal with adult prostitution, except as
it pertains to the decision of the Constitutional Court in the Jordan case
in which the hiring of the sexual services of prostitutes was found to be
as much a crime as the crime of prostitution itself.

The Sexual Offences Act of 1957 is silent on the matter of the clients of
prostitutes, and a grave inequality exists in how the criminal justice
system treats the crime of prostitution. Currently in our country only
prostitutes, who are mostly women, and not their clients, who are mostly
men, are arrested, charged and prosecuted.

In a constitutional democracy it is an affront to treat women who are
prostitutes as criminals, but not their clients as well. These clients in
any case, for all intents and purposes, seem to go on blissfully with their
otherwise model lives, completely unaffected.

The last prosecution in this country of a person who hired the services of
a prostitute was in 1987 - gender bias in its most blatant form, I would
say. Unless and until there is a comprehensive review of the law on
prostitution and while such unequal practices exist, we in this House are
compelled to act in a manner that accords with what is just and what is
proper, and in accordance with the decision of the Constitutional Court.

The Bill is further divided into seven chapters, the first of which sets
out certain definitions which relate to our attempt to modernise the law on
sexual offences. The definition of sexual penetration, in particular, is a
departure from the current common law definition and extends penetration to
include oral and anal penetration. Consequently, the crime of rape, which
is essentially the unlawful and intentional act of sexual penetration, is
broadened significantly. Rape will now cover forced oral sex and the
situation in which a man is sexually penetrated against his will or when an
object such as a gun is used to penetrate a victim.

New crimes of compelled rape and compelled sexual assault are created to
specifically deal with an instigator of the crime who compels, through the
use of force or some other means, someone else to commit rape or sexual
assault. This new crime is not to be confused with aiding, abetting or
accomplice crimes.

A victim may also be compelled to engage in acts of self-penetration or
acts of sexual self-degradation. The instigator will henceforth face a
charge of compelled sexual self-assault. Compelling a husband to watch his
wife or daughter being raped will henceforth require the perpetrators to be
charged with both rape as well as the crime of compelling a person to
witness a sexual offence. There are a host of other crimes in the chapter
relating to adult persons flashing, exposure of child pornography, incest,
bestiality and the crime of committing a sexual act with a corpse.

Crimes against children are dealt with specifically in recognition of the
fact that children are vulnerable. Statutory rape and sexual assault are
two crimes that have been preserved in this law to provide further
protection to children between 12 and 16.

The Bill regards children under 12 as incapable of consenting to any sexual
act. This means, of course, that children above 12 can factually consent.
However, if the child is between the ages of 12 and 16 and the consent of
the child has been established, any person found to have engaged in a
sexual act with such a child will nonetheless be guilty of statutory rape
or statutory sexual assault.

A very compelling case was made for the extension of this provision to
children under the age of 18, and we did consider this. However, given the
diversity of our society and the prevalence of sexual activity amongst
children in the category between 16 and 18, it was felt that extending
statutory rape and sexual assault in this way would have the unintended
consequence of criminalising 16-year-olds to 18-year-olds engaging in
sexual behaviour.

Statutory rape, we hope, will no longer apply to the proverbial teenage boy
who, having been intimate with his teenage girlfriend, finds himself hauled
to the police station by the girlfriend’s irate father. Indeed, if
prosecution is to follow in this kind of circumstance, both the young man
as well as the young lady would have committed a crime, and both are now
required to be charged. More and more, we hope the crime of statutory rape
will be used to convict adults who entice and seduce young children into
sexual behaviour.

Children and persons who are mentally disabled are the two categories which
have been dealt with specifically in recognition of their inherent
vulnerability. Persons who are mentally disabled are defined as those who
are affected by any disorder or disability of the mind to the extent that
they, at the time of the alleged commission of the offence, were unable to
appreciate the nature and reasonably foreseeable consequences of a sexual
act, unable to act in accordance with such appreciation, and unable to
resist or communicate their unwillingness to participate in such an act.

Specific crimes created for both these vulnerable categories include sexual
grooming, prostitution, benefiting or living off the proceeds of such
prostitution, creating pornography using children or persons who are
mentally disabled and benefiting financially from such pornography.
Exposing children and persons who are mentally disabled to pornography and
harmful material is now also criminalised. Both these vulnerable groups are
further protected by the introduction of the register of sex offenders.
This register will, hopefully, be in operation within six months of the Act
being enacted.

The register will contain names of sex offenders who offend against
children and persons with mental disabilities. The register will be
established specifically to enable employers to screen potential employees
who work with or have excess to children prior to employing them. The law
provides that such employers must screen potential employees. Existing
employees are enjoined to disclose any conviction, failing which they are
liable to be criminally convicted and also lose their jobs.

Licensing authorities granting licences to businesses which provide
supervision or care services to either of the vulnerable categories will be
required to apply for a clearance for applicants prior to the relevant
licences being granted. Likewise, people who adopt children or foster them
are also in future to be cleared by the register.

It should at this juncture be stressed that this register is not a naming
and shaming tool akin to the paedophile registers that operate in other
countries. There are strict confidentiality provisions that are crafted to
avoid the terrible experiences of those in other countries who have been
falsely tagged because of administrative errors and commonly shared names.

As this register will contain names of offenders within our borders as well
as without, it is hoped that it will evolve into a sound preventative and
protective mechanism for our children and persons who are mentally
disabled, and that our country will no longer be seen to be a safe haven
for paedophiles.

In regard to treatment, the Bill provides for a whole protocol to be
developed around the administration of post-exposure prophylaxis – Pep - to
victims of certain sexual offences. In future, any such victim who may
potentially have been exposed to the HI virus, who presents herself within
72 hours of the offence occurring at a designated clinic or police station
and who lays a charge, will be provided with the Pep treatment.

The Compulsory HIV Testing of Alleged Sexual Offenders Bill of 2003 was
collapsed into this Bill due to its close relationship with the main aim
and purport of this Bill.

Provision is made for a mechanism to allow victims, who may have been
exposed to the bodily fluids of a perpetrator, to obtain the HIV status of
such offender whose identity may be known to them. Such a mechanism will
kick in upon the granting of a court order. Criticisms have, inter alia,
been raised to suggest that a negative result of the perpetrator would
dissuade victims from receiving the Pep treatment. This argument, I
believe, is a shocking assault on the intelligence of victims of sexual
offences, who are mainly women.

While this mechanism is not perfect, it is certainly worthwhile. Its
advantages to rape victims are obvious. Rape victims will be given
information as to whether or not they have been exposed to the HI virus,
and this is an important psychological tool.

Rape victims will also be empowered thereby to make certain decisions about
their lives, lifestyles and loved ones. While there is no doubt that this
provision will be challenged, we are confident that our courts will see the
finely balanced checks and balances provided for in this regard.

Most unusually for legislation, we provide a comprehensive national policy
framework in recognition of the fact that one of the most critical
challenges in the criminal justice system is the lack of interdepartmental
co-ordination with regard to sensitive and efficient service delivery,
particularly when it comes to sexual offences.

The establishment of an intersectoral committee, consisting of the
Directors-General of Justice, Social Welfare and Health, the National
Commissioners of Police and Correctional Services and the National Director
of Public Prosecutions, is meant to ensure the implementation of the
objects of this Act.

The objects are, inter alia, to ensure intersectoral co-ordination and
enhancement of service delivery at the level of our criminal justice
system. If we succeed in the attainment of synergies in the criminal
justice system, I want to submit that half of the battle against crime and
sexual offenders in particular would have been won.

We have introduced in this Bill some changes to the law of procedure and
evidence, which I don’t have time to go into right now, but my colleague Mr
J B Sibanyoni will be dealing with this at some length.
I do, however, want to deal with one further very important aspect of this
legislation, which is the transitional provision that we have included
relating to human trafficking. Again, in a bizarre turn of events, the
inclusion of this provision has been criticised by those who claim to be
fighting for the protection of women and children. The crux of the argument
seems to be that trafficking should be a stand-alone crime, while we only
deal with it in the context of trafficking in persons for sexual purposes.

While it is true that human trafficking may be for purposes other than
sexual exploitation – and, in that sense, the provisions could be said to
be narrow in their scope - there is, however, an undeniable link between
trafficking and sexual exploitation, in particular the prostitution of
women and children.

Countries that have legalised prostitution rank as high or very high
receivers of trafficked persons in the UN report on global trafficking
published this year, while our own country, where prostitution is unlawful,
and countries like Sweden, which regard prostitution as violence against
women and children, rank far lower as potential receiver countries for
trafficked persons.

I say again: there is an undeniable link between prostitution and human
trafficking. This is a very sobering thought for those of us who are policy-
makers and those of us who are listening, particularly in the light of the
Law Commission’s review on the matter of adult prostitution. As this is
meant to be a transitional provision, it will be replaced once a
comprehensive piece of law dealing with human trafficking is enacted. But,
until then, these clauses that we have placed in the Bill will remain an
important weapon in our efforts, alongside those of other countries, to
eliminate human trafficking.

Finally, I want to take this opportunity in the last few minutes that I
have left to thank, firstly, all those individuals who have made comments
and who have made submissions to the portfolio committee. I believe that a
lot of the good suggestions have, in fact, enhanced the quality of the
Bill.

Secondly, I want to take the time to really recognise the sterling efforts
of the legal drafters in the Department of Justice and Constitutional
Development, in particular Mr Lawrence Bassett, Mr Henk du Preez, Ms Dalene
Clark and Mr Hennie Potgieter, who have really gone over and above the call
of duty and have worked weekends to try to get this Bill sorted. I do thank
you very, very much. [Applause.]

Thanks also go to the Deputy Minister and the Minister for their guidance
and assistance, and, lastly, thanks go to all the members of the portfolio
committee who, when the rest of Parliament was away, were the only ones
warming the seats of this House. Thank you for putting up with me and thank
you for the dedication shown.
I want to conclude by wishing everybody a happy festive season. Look after
your children, and may it be a safe season for all of us. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Thank you, Madam Chair. In the same spirit that the Chair
addressed this, can I likewise wish members of the House everything of the
best over the festive season and may I congratulate you, Madam Chair, on
your festive headgear.

Let me assure the House right at the start that the DA supports this Bill.
We do not do it holding our noses, as many of us did when we supported the
messy Civil Union Bill earlier in the week. The DA regards this legislation
as an important reform measure, which is long overdue. The fact that we are
rushing it through the National Assembly on this last day of the year’s
session, ahead of the sixteen days of activism against violence against
women and children, is better than not doing it at all.

That having been said, it is certainly not a perfect piece of legislation,
as the justice portfolio committee itself recognises, and that has been
documented in detail in our report to the National Assembly on the agenda
today.

A number of issues have been left hanging in the air. For instance, the
criminalising of a person’s nondisclosure of his or her HIV status has been
left out for further consideration by the department.

The issue of adult prostitution has been dealt with in a piecemeal and
possibly unsatisfactory way, the Constitutional Court’s decision
notwithstanding, partly because it is currently subject to a review by the
SA Law Reform Commission, and the issue of rehabilitation of offenders has
been left out for further study. Nevertheless, it is a vast improvement on
what we had before.

An unanswered question is why we had to wait so long for the law dealing
with sexual offences to be reformed. After all, the previous Sexual
Offences Act dates way back to 1957. It is true that the SA Law Commission
spent several years researching a new legal regime for sexual offences. I
think the Minister mentioned that this Bill has been 12 years in the
making.

However, the ANC government only introduced the new Bill to Parliament in
2003. This was extensively discussed and amended after 128 submissions were
received on the draft Bill, and after a week of public hearings. The
process, however, came to a halt in February 2004, ahead of the April
general election. The Bill then failed to return to Parliament for two and
a half years. Several promises by the Minister in the interim to bring the
Bill back, given to me among other members during this period, failed to
materialise. It appears the public outcry around the Zuma rape trial was
persuasive in the Bill’s return, which occurred shortly afterwards in June
this year.

The Bill before the House is now very ambitious. Its object is to
completely overhaul the law relating to sexual offences, as has been
outlined by the Chair. It’s far-reaching, comprehensive and a very
complicated piece of legislation which breaks a lot of new ground.

Among other things, the Bill repeals the common law offence of rape and
replaces it with the new expanded, nongender-specific statutory offence of
rape applicable to all forms of sexual penetration. This quantum leap was
necessary in terms of the Constitution and will establish South Africa’s
legislation as among the most progressive on sexual offences. Sexual
assault, previously indecent assault, is similarly dealt with.

The Bill also creates a host of new statutory offences criminalising
certain sexual acts as well as introducing new sexual offences against
children and mentally disabled persons.

Perhaps one of the most positive aspects of the Bill is that it introduces
a number of provisions intended to protect children against sexual
predators, paedophiles and pornography. Importantly, and in line with the
Constitution, the Bill eliminates the differentiation between the age of
consent for boys and girls, so that it is now 16 for both.
A troublesome aspect of this change, however, for children, boys
particularly, between the ages of 16 and 18 is their vulnerability at this
time to adult sexual predators, which has been pointed out in the justice
committee’s report, and we say that this aspect requires further research.

The Bill introduces new dimensions to the consequences of sexual offences
in that it provides that certain services must be afforded by the state to
rape victims who report the rape either at a police station or at a
designated state hospital - for instance, the right to receive post-
exposure prophylaxis against HIV infection at designated state hospitals
within 72 hours and the right to apply for the alleged perpetrator to be
tested for HIV.

These are important reforms, insisted upon by the portfolio committee as a
result of pressure from civil society and the input from the SA Law Reform
Commission. However, they do not, in our view, go far enough. One of the
DA’s main concerns is that the provisions ensuring that a rape victim or a
child victim of sexual offence would be treated by the court as a
vulnerable witness in the earlier version of the Bill, which served before
Parliament previously, have now been removed from the Bill before us today.
The DA believes these provisions are necessary to prevent secondary trauma.

It is true that the Criminal Procedure Act has been amended to include
watered-down elements of the SA Law Reform Commission’s original proposals
in this regard, but in our view this is not sufficient protection. It has
been argued that to afford complainants in rape and sexual assault cases
this status would be too costly in terms of the extra facilities and
services that need to be made available, but we do not accept that this is
a good reason. All our experiences of sexual offences courts make the case
for the inclusion of this provision; in fact, they cry out for it. Properly
equipped sexual offences courts yield double the conviction rate of other
courts.

Another important issue in the Bill is the establishment of a national
register for sex offenders. This is regarded as controversial in some
quarters, and creates wide and possibly burdensome obligations on those
working with children, but the DA agrees that the establishment and
maintenance of this register is vitally important for the better protection
of vulnerable children and the mentally disabled.

And, for the first time, trafficking in persons for sexual purposes has
been outlawed in legislation by way of an interim provision in the Bill,
pending the finalisation of proposals by the SA Law Reform Commission. The
inclusion of this transitional measure was initiated by the DA, as we had
already promoted legislation by way of a private member’s Bill and had made
proposals to the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development,
which had been accepted.

For all these reasons, we support the Bill. However, we have some
reservations about certain aspects, particularly the late introduction of a
provision criminalising the soliciting of sexual services from prostitutes,
as we have indicated, and also a fairly dubious extraterritorial
jurisdiction over sexual offenders, which, we believe, could possibly be
contested in the Constitutional Court. But save for these problems we
believe the Bill, though complicated, is satisfactory and a vast
improvement on what we had before. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, Sheila referred to those red things in
your hair, and I just want to say they make you look very attractive and
beautiful, and I hope this doesn’t make me guilty of sexual harassment.
[Laughter.]

The chairperson of the portfolio committee and Sheila, to some extent, have
highlighted details of the Bill, and I therefore do not want to repeat what
they have said. I only wish to deal with the Bill briefly and make some
general comments.

With the introduction of this Bill, we’ve come to the end of a very long
and difficult journey. No one worked harder during the past few years than
the chairperson of the portfolio committee, who made an excellent speech
today. We wish to thank you for that and also the staff who worked so hard,
and even Johnny de Lange for a long period - thank you very much.

This Bill for the first time provides South Africa with a single
comprehensive piece of legislation dealing with sexual offences. This is a
great and historic event in the life of our criminal justice system. The
point is that for decades a very large gap existed in our criminal law
dealing with offences of a sexual nature. This lacuna meant for instance
that the criminal offence of rape only applied to the rape of a woman by a
man. This has caused considerable misery, especially where men have been
raped by other men. Before today, this was not rape. Now it is, thanks to
this Bill. The Bill finally closes the gap by expanding the definition of
rape to include all forms of sexual penetration without consent,
irrespective of gender.

We are especially grateful for the creation of the national register for
sex offenders, which will fill another gap in our law, and this will
hopefully in practice result in more protection for children against abuse.

In conclusion, I want to highlight one of the portfolio committee’s main
recommendations on the implementation of the Bill, namely that the
department should launch a project that is aimed at the promotion and
facilitation of training on the legislation and its implications. The
department has to submit a detailed proposal on such a project to the
committee, after consultation with all the relevant stakeholders. This is,
in our opinion, a vital recommendation. All too often this House passes
legislation that looks very good on paper, but sometimes these laws are
almost unimplementable or are so difficult to implement and to understand
that their objectives are never realised or are only partially realised.

The IFP supports the recommendation and calls on the Department of Justice
and Constitutional Development to present its proposals to Parliament as
soon as possible. The IFP supports the Bill.

Mr G SOLOMON: Chairperson, this Bill extensively and comprehensively
reviews and amends all aspects of the law and its implementation relating
to sexual offences. It deals with these in a single piece of legislation,
based on the values of human dignity, equality and nonsexism as stated in
the Freedom Charter of our people, which today lies at the heart of our
constitutional democracy.

Chapter 5 of the Bill provides for certain services to certain victims of
sexual offences, including affording a victim of certain sexual offences
the right to require that the alleged perpetrator be tested for his or her
HIV status.

I am mindful that HIV/Aids is a heavily contested terrain in South Africa
today. It is not my intention to enter this discourse, save to say that our
government’s response to the challenge of HIV/Aids is not as narrow as in
your medical model but a holistic and comprehensive approach, taking into
consideration also the issues of underdevelopment, poverty and the status
of women in particular in our society.

My purpose here is to explain, firstly, chapter 5 in a practical way so
that victims might clearly understand the possible risk of HIV infection
which they are exposed to in an encounter with the sexual offender and,
secondly, what medical treatment and services they are entitled to as a
result of such a violent encounter. Thirdly, the process provided for in
this Bill to be followed affords victim the opportunity of knowing as soon
as possible whether he or she might have contracted HIV. Fourthly, there
are the constitutional implications of the rights to privacy, bodily and
psychological integrity, and the right to access health care services and,
fifthly, there is the right of every accused person, including an alleged
sexual offender, in this regard to be presumed innocent until a court of
law proves otherwise.

Without any doubt, the prevalence of sexual violence against persons,
especially women and children, and the Aids pandemic in our country create
the real possibility that sexual offenders having HIV might infect their
victims with the virus when they commit sexual assaults of a penetrative
nature.

Because our government is concerned about the risks which victims are
exposed to, the Bill provides for a legal procedure for the compulsory
testing of alleged sexual offenders. In essence, chapter 5 makes provision
for medical treatment and advice for the victim, compulsory HIV testing of
the alleged offender, procedures to be followed to procure such tests, the
role of third parties with a material interest in this process and
maintaining the confidentiality of the information.

In this regard the sexual offences Bill entitles the victim who has been
exposed to risks of infection with HIV as a result of sexual assault to
receive, at state expense, a post-exposure prophylaxis or Pep treatment at
a health facility designated by the Minister of Health. It also entitles a
victim to get free medical advice on the administering of Pep and to be
supplied with a list of public health institutions which provide these
services.

With regard to the application for compulsory HIV testing of the alleged
offender, the victim or an interested party on behalf of the victim, may
make an application to the magistrate for a court order directing that the
alleged offender be tested for HIV.

If an interested party is involved, such an application must be with the
written consent of the victim unless the victim is under the age of 14
years, mentally disabled, unconscious, under curatorship in terms of an
order of court or a person whom the magistrate is satisfied is unable to
provide the requested consent. The magistrate must consider the application
in chambers as soon as possible. Moreover, a police official may, for the
purposes of investigation, apply to the magistrate in whose jurisdiction
the offence occurred for an order for compulsory HIV testing.

All of this may be done in the absence of the victim if the magistrate is
of the opinion that there is prima facie evidence and that it is in the
best interests of the victim.

The results of the test may not be communicated to any person other than,
firstly, the victim or an interested person as defined in the Bill;
secondly, the alleged offender; and thirdly, the investigating officer and,
where applicable, a prosecutor.

The confidentiality of the results must be maintained and any test obtained
with a false charge is an offence liable on conviction to a fine or
imprisonment not exceeding 3 years. Disclosure of the results with
malicious intent or in a grossly negligent manner is an offence, liable on
conviction to a fine or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 3 years.

Inspired by a vision to create and build a society based on the values of
human dignity, freedom, equality and nonsexism, as expounded in the Freedom
Charter, the ANC believes that incidents of sexual violence, particularly
against women and children, undermine this vision.

Central in this regard is the right to freedom and security of the victim
which includes, amongst other things, the right to bodily and psychological
integrity, and the right to access health care services.

Sexual violence in the context of a serious HIV/Aids pandemic, as is the
case in South Africa, severely undermines the victim’s freedom, dignity and
security of his or her person. This is the context in which the right of
access to the HIV status of the alleged offender should be approached and
assessed.

It is important to understand that the right to determine the HIV status of
the alleged offender in appropriate circumstances would empower victims to
gain some control over their lives at a time when they have been violated
by sexual assault. It is precisely because of this that knowledge of the
HIV Status of the alleged offender by the victim should be approached and
understood.

It will inform and enhance the choices that victims have to make about the
rest of their lives. It must be emphasised that there are real benefits for
the victim in having knowledge about the HIV status of an alleged offender.


For instance, when there is the possibility of infection, it would assist
the victim in making further choices as to whether or not to continue the
post-exposure prophylaxis, or Pep treatment and also how they conduct
themselves with regard to matters of sexual and reproductive activities.

Our democratic Parliament would be failing in its constitutional democracy
if it did not also express concern for the constitutional rights of the
alleged offender. Central in this regard is section 35 of the Constitution
which provides, amongst other things, that every accused person, including
the alleged sexual offender, be presumed innocent until a court of law
pronounces on the matter.

Therefore, taking into account the constitutional guarantees, the sexual
offences Bill creates the procedural mechanisms to safeguard and protect
the constitutional rights of alleged offenders as follows. The application
for compulsory HIV testing must be considered by the magistrate in
chambers. The magistrate must be satisfied that there is prima facie
evidence that (a) a sexual offence has been committed, (b) the victim may
have been exposed to the body fluids of the alleged offender, and (c) no
more than 90 calendar days have lapsed since the alleged offence occurred.

The alleged offender retains his or her right to apply to the High Court
for a review of the order directing compulsory testing if that order was
not granted in accordance with the prescribed requirements in the Bill.

In conclusion, I believe this is an excellent and modern piece of
legislation that will adequately meet the needs of our society. However,
the success of it hinges on the following: adequate conscientisation,
education and training of all relevant role-players including the broader
society.

The GCIS can play a crucial role to facilitate the public awareness part of
this process. Thank you.

Ms F BATYI: Chairperson, the amended sexual offences Bill is a step in the
right direction but far more is needed to rediscover the moral fibre of our
people. As with most of our crises, it is the grass-roots citizens that are
the biggest victims of sexual offences.

According to police statistics, more than 55 000 rapes were reported in
2004. Clearly, this revision of our sexual offences law is a welcome part
of the solution. The Bill’s protection of vulnerable groups, such as
children and those with mental disabilities, and its recognition of gender
equity in the criminal justice system is laudable.

This legislation binds together the diverse components within the sphere of
sexual offences. At the same time it builds a wider problem-solving outlook
on potential scenarios for the survivors of sexual offences.

The ID therefore supports the sexual offences Bill. However, we must not
forget that legislation is only one component of this process. With the 16
Days of Activism fast approaching, the ID calls on the government and
opposition to promote more than just legislation. I thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Madam Chairperson, Deputy Minister, South Africa reportedly
has the highest rate of sexual offences in the world, with most rapes going
unreported. The ACDP therefore welcomes and supports most of the provisions
of this Bill.

There are numerous improvements as pointed out by previous speakers, which
I will not repeat but which we support. However, we, together with
thousands of people, churches and organisations who made similar
submissions, believe that the age of consent for sexual acts should have
been lifted from 16 to 18 years.

What is commonly referred to as statutory rape is a significant legal
protection for vulnerable children. In most rape cases, adult predators
claim that the victims consented. The victims then have to disprove
consent, resulting in the secondary trauma of cross-examination in lengthy
trials.

In increasing the age from 16 to 18 years, this legal protection would be
extended to a broader and very vulnerable category of children who, in the
event of a sexual offence, would merely have to prove that the sexual act
took place to obtain a conviction. There would be no issue regarding
consent.

Minors may also not enter binding contracts without parental guidance. They
can only vote at the age of 18 years, and obtain drivers licenses, purchase
alcohol and get married at that age. It is significant that the Tobacco
Products Control Amendment Act seeks to lift the age of purchasing
cigarettes from 16 to 18 years.

It must be inferred from this amendment that it is agreed that 16-year-old
teenagers are less able to decide on the long-term health implications of
smoking than 18-year-olds. Surely, the same argument should apply and is
even more persuasive for sexual intercourse, which can result in a death
sentence through HIV/Aids.

Whilst disappointed that our proposal was not accepted, we do understand
counterarguments relating to the rationality test and that the whole issue
of statutory rape charges could be at risk. I may agree that that risk
should not be taken at that stage. We are encouraged that the portfolio
committee resolved to look into this issue and that further research should
be done on this issue.

In conclusion, our thanks to the Minister, Deputy Minister, Chairperson and
the legal drafters for their hard work on this very important piece of
legislation. Well done!

We wish to state that the ACDP will support this Bill subject to the
reservations expressed. And a word of particular thanks to the Deputy
Minister for considering this issue of age. I know it gave you some
sleepless nights. But thank you for your kind consideration. I thank you.

Ms N M MAHLAWE: Chairperson, hon members, my heart aches, and the pain
makes my senses numb whenever I hear from the media that a baby – a child -
has been raped. This is a serious state of affairs and it needs the
involvement of all of us to fight this scourge.

At the end of 2005 it was reported that 50 children, including infants, are
raped every day, and that in the period 2004 to 2005
55 114 cases of rape were reported in this country. What is disturbing is
that 90% of child victims know their attackers and assaulters, who happen
to be their relatives or friends of the family or neighbours and well-known
community members.

In September 2006 it was revealed that children are now the victims of
almost 50% of all rapes and attempted rapes in this country and that 20% of
all these reported rapes were of children under the age of 11 years.

The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development has been
working hard to amend the criminal law to ensure that these matters I have
referred to above change or are at least on the decrease. It is also
believed that this is in line with section 28 of the Constitution of South
Africa, which provides that children have a right to be protected from
maltreatment, neglect, abuse and degradation, therefore closing the gaps
that existed in the criminal law.

I rise, therefore, upholding these requirements and therefore wish, from
the outset, to inform you guys out there that this Bill is going to put a
stop to the belief that you have an entitlement to sex or to sexually
violate women and children.

The Bill does not create only guilt for offences, but also provides for the
establishment of a national register for sex offenders.

The sexual offences Bill codifies common law offences and creates specific
offences in respect of sexual penetration, sexual violation, sexual
exploitation and sexual grooming of children. It criminalises the exposing
and displaying of all sexual organs and pornography to children. It also
criminalises the displaying of female breasts to children. I know women
like to take their children to the bathroom sometimes. I think it is time
now that they have to stop that. Otherwise they are going to be in danger.

The Bill makes it an offence to compel a child to watch a sexual act by
another person or other persons or masturbation or engage in an act of
sexual penetration in the presence of the child, or any other acts of
sexual violation.

Children should not be used for pornographic purposes. We have seen or
heard of teachers who, instead of teaching the children entrusted to them,
take pornographic pictures. This is an offence and has to stop.

Juxtaposed to these offences that are created by the Bill, as I have
indicated, is the national register of sex offenders. The register is a
reinforcement to the Bill in that it ensures that whosoever has been
convicted of a sexual offence against a child will be recorded in the
national register.

This applies to offenders who have committed the offence either before or
after the commencement of the Bill, whether this has been done inside or
outside the Republic or whether a court had found him guilty before or
after the commencement of the Bill.

The highlights of the national register for sex offenders are that anyone
who has been convicted of a sexual offence against a child will not be
allowed to continue in his job.

Perhaps I should clarify which institutions are targeted. These are all
institutions where there are children under the age of 12 - this includes
crèches, day-care centres, hospitals and, most importantly, schools.

Think of how many cases have been reported of educators who sexually
violate and sexually abuse children at schools. Only yesterday in the Cape
Argus it was reported that 11 teachers in the Western Cape have been
charged with sexually related offences against children.

The Bill provides that anyone found guilty of such an offence should have
his services terminated immediately. The hon Minister of Education, Comrade
Pandor - I’m sorry that she is not here – I think is being vindicated by
this Bill in her attempts to clear the schools of rot.

Any employer will be required to apply for a certificate from the registrar
who will be the custodian of the national register, which will show whether
any potential employee is recorded in the register as having committed a
sexual offence against a child. Likewise, any employee who fails to
disclose that he – I don’t know whether I should say “she” as I’ve never
heard about the “shes”– was convicted for a sexual offence against a child,
will have their services terminated immediately. Even if an employee
discovers that another employee committed a sexual offence against a child,
he should terminate the services of such an employee.

If for some reasons services cannot be terminated immediately, the employee
must be removed from a position where they will gain access to children.

Another highlight of the Bill is that if an employer fails to comply with
any of the provisions in the register he or she is guilty of an offence,
and would be liable to conviction.

In conclusion, I want to say that there is no place to hide with all the
details of sexual offenders that are going to be contained in the national
register. These include details of court processes, dates, and places of
jurisdiction, whether local or foreign. This Bill will go a long way to
deter sexual offences against children. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Chair, the South African Medical Research Council has
disclosed in its recent annual report that almost one fifth of South
African men have raped a woman at least once in their lives. Hearing these
statistics and voicing our support of South Africa’s commitment to
eradicate sexual violence, we strongly support this long-awaited Bill.
Last week a little seven-year-old girl was taken to a field by a trusted
family friend where she was raped, stabbed and then set alight.  This girl
has lived to tell of the horror and a 28-year-old stands in court today to
justify his actions, or rather deny them. This is but one case out of many,
clearly showing how sick and evil a society we live in. We come to the
podium to denounce sexual violence and to speak of educating the people
against sexual violence. We talk about taking it to schools and creating
awareness and both preventing and protecting against sexual violence.

The MF believes that there are far more deep-seated issues as to what forms
the fabric of South African society. It is shocking that the majority of
sexual offences are committed by children on children, with an estimated
130 059 child sex offences that were processed by the state between 1999
and March 2006. We need to address the root cause of the problem before we
can institute preventive and protective measures.

This Bill is certainly a step closer to that. However, punishment for such
a horrific crime needs to be no bail and a harsh sentence if not
castration. It is certainly a step forward to extend the definition of
sexual violence and realise that both men and women can be victims or
perpetrators.

Education on sexual offences is crucial to the future of this pandemic in
South Africa. It is punishment that shall serve as the best deterrent in
addressing the core that produces this violence and that shall conquer it.
Prayers are sent to all these victims of sexual offences, for those are
scars that could never heal, but justice shall prevail. This Bill is key to
stamping out sexual violence. The MF thanks the committee chair and the
team, including the Minister and the Deputy Minister, for their hard work
and supports the sexual offences amendment Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms C B JOHNSON: Madam Chair and hon members, persons with mental
disabilities often from one of the most vulnerable groups in our society.
Often due to the nature of their disability, they are unable to properly
express themselves and they have to rely on others to protect them and to
speak out on their behalf.

During our deliberations on this Bill, what we heard from NGOs and the
Human Rights Commission in particular, is that the sexual abuse of persons
with mental disabilities often goes unnoticed for years. Only when it
manifests in either HIV or pregnancy, does the abuse come to light. It also
causes problems in criminal convictions and in prosecutions because persons
with mental disabilities often have great difficulty in passing the
evidentiary tests in court and therefore the conviction rates are generally
low.

The Bill that is before the House today goes a long way in protecting the
most vulnerable of the vulnerable. Chapter 4 of the Bill specifically has
been drafted to protect persons with mental disabilities. We have created
special crimes in this Bill, such as the crime of sexual exploitation of
persons who are mentally disabled. What this would be, for example, is if a
guardian, a teacher or a caregiver at home intentionally allows or permits
the commission of a sexual act with a person who is mentally disabled.

Other specific crimes that have been created in chapter 4 include sexual
grooming of persons who are mentally disabled, which would be, in other
words, encouraging or enabling a third party to perform a sexual act with a
mentally disabled person. Other crimes include the display or exposure of
pornography or other harmful materials to persons who are mentally
disabled, as well as the crime of using persons who are mentally disabled
for pornographic purposes.

Persons with mental disabilities face numerous challenges. It is estimated
that some 6% of our population lives with some form of mental disability.
What makes these people enormously vulnerable to sexual violence and abuse
are factors such as an inability to consent to sex, an inability to
communicate their lack of consent or a possible lack of appreciation of the
nature of the sexual act itself. Furthermore, reliance on caregivers and
other people often leads to even greater vulnerability. This is where the
new proposed national register for sex offenders which is created in the
Bill will offer substantial protection to persons with mental disabilities.
How the register will work is that any person who has been convicted of a
sexual offence against a person who is mentally disabled may not be
employed to work with or hold any position of authority, supervision or
care over persons who are mentally disabled. So, the purpose of the
register would be to inform an employer, such as a hospital, a care
facility or an institution if any of the employees, or potential employees’
names would appear on the register. It also places an obligation on the
employees who have been convicted of such sexual offences to disclose these
convictions without delay to their employer.

A society is often judged on the way in which we treat our most vulnerable
groups. This Bill is an important tool in ensuring that people with mental
disabilities are afforded the necessary protection in law so that they do
not become victims of sexual abuse and violence. At a time when we are
focusing on the 16 Days of Activism for No Violence Against Women and
Children, let us remember that legislation is but one element. What we are
striving towards and what we are committed to is a criminal justice system
which is sensitive to the needs of vulnerable groups and a society that
treats victims of sexual violence with dignity and respect. In that, we
take great pride in rising to support this Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, the FD welcomes the amendment Bill. We
particularly welcome the comprehensive and extensive review of all laws
relating to sexual offences and the inclusion of all these offences in a
single statute. We agree that women and children are particularly
vulnerable and are more likely to become victims of sexual offences. South
Africa has a relatively high incidence of sexual offences, especially
against women and children. This is indicative of the moral decay in our
society.

It is not only the duty of the religious leaders in churches, mosques and
temples to teach against sexual sin, but parents, caregivers and teachers
must all play an active role in sex education. One of the objects of this
Bill, in clause 2(e)(iii), is to eradicate the relatively high incidence of
sexual offences by facilitating a uniform and co-ordinated approach by
relevant government departments in dealing with sexual offences.

Once this Bill has been passed and if government wants to demonstrate that
it is serious about sexual offences, it must deal with sexual offences in
our prisons that take place there on a daily basis, often with the
knowledge of the prison warders. The report of the Jali Commission and
other investigative reports have proven beyond reasonable doubt that male
rape is rife in our prisons. With the passing of this Bill, a prisoner who
has experienced rape in any of our prisons will be able to institute a
substantial civil claim against our government if it can be proven that a
government official such as a prison warder has been fully aware of the
repeated sexual offences, but has taken no adequate precaution to separate
offenders from their victims in prisons.
A further object of the Bill states that relevant organs of the state must
give proper recognition to the needs of victims of sexual offences through
timeous investigation and prosecution. The FD therefore supports this Bill.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J B SIBANYONI: Chairperson and hon Members of Parliament, in this debate
I am focusing on evidentiary matters as contained in chapter 7 of the Bill.
In this regard, the Bill provides for the following. In section 58, it
talks about evidence of previous consistent statements. This section
permits courts to admit evidence of previous consistent statements in
sexual offences, on condition that the courts should not draw a negative
inference if no previous consistent statement was made. The effect of the
previous statements is to support or corroborate the evidence given by the
complainant in court. Such negative inferences are currently drawn, which
result in the complainant being viewed with suspicion and disbelief, just
because the complainant failed to report, at the first opportunity, the
sexual act to any person in whom the complainant confides. This practice
originated in medieval England where the perpetrator could defend himself
on the grounds that the women did not raise the so-called “hue and cry”
immediately after the alleged rape.

Section 59 deals with evidence of delay in reporting. The delay in
reporting a sexual offence may no longer be held against the complainant.
Not even the length of the delay may militate against the complainant’s
case. The Bill provides as follows, and I quote:
   ... the court may not draw any inference only from the length of any
   delay between the alleged commission of such offence and the reporting
   thereof.

Currently and previously, courts treated allegations of sexual misconduct
with suspicion and where the complaint was reported earlier, it served to
rebutt the suspicion in establishing a lack of consent. I quote section 60,
which says that a court:

   ... may not treat the evidence of a complainant... with caution, on
   account of the nature of the offence.

This section creates certainty that the cautionary rule is no longer part
of our law in South Africa. The section prohibits courts from treating the
evidence of a complainant with caution for the reason that it relates to a
sexual offence. The cautionary rule has been used in the past to test the
evidence of complainants, mostly in rape cases. Whilst the rule provided a
safety valve against false accusations of rape, it has been viewed as
unfair to victims of rape when they are subjected to the test as to whether
their complaints are genuine. It has also been regarded as discriminatory
against women as most rape victims are women.

The law before 1998 was that there was a duty on the court to recognise the
dangers or risk in relying on the evidence of a single witness, accomplices
and witnesses in sexual offences. Courts sought some safeguard that might
have the effect of reducing the risk of a wrong conviction. The effect of
the cautionary rule was that magistrates or judges must be cautious when
they analyse the evidence of a rape victim.

In conclusion, I want to say ...

... njengombana sibandamela emalangeni alitjhumi nasithandathu (16), weJima
lokuLwisana nokuTlhoriswa kwaboMma nabeNtwana, kulitjhudu namhlanjesi
sikhuluma begodu siphikisana ngomThethomlingwa lo. Umthetho lo uzakusiza
ukulwisana nemiguruguru eqaliswe ebantwaneni nebantwini bengubo.

Abomma bafumana ubudisi ngekorweni yokusegela namkha ngekhotho. Ngebanga
lokuqalisiswa khulu namkha lokuphenyisiswa khulu kobufakazi bukangazimbi
okatiweko namkha otlhoriswe ngokomseme, abomma abanengi bayasaba ukuvela
ngaphambili, babike bonyana bakatiwe.

Umphakathi esiphila kiwo uyakhethulula ngehlangothini labomma. Umthetho
kufuneka ubavikele. UmThethomlingwa lo uzobakhuthaza bona bakhulume, balise
ukuthula njengombana vane batjho bathi “Break the silence!” Ngamanye amezwi
“Khuluma.” (Translation of isiNdebele paragraphs follows.)

[... as we are getting closer to the 16 Days of Activism, a campaign to
fight against children and women abuse, it is a pleasure today to talk
about and debate this Bill. This Act will help to fight against women and
child abuse.

Women experience difficultly in courts regarding the way they are cross-
examined and the way in which investigations with regard to sexually abused
victims are conducted. Most women are scared to come forward to report a
rape.

The community we live in discriminates against women. The law must protect
them. This Bill will encourage them to talk, and not be silent because they
sometimes say, “Break the silence!” In other words, “Speak.”]

Evidence of women complainants will no longer be viewed with suspicion.

Kafitjhazana ngifuna ukukhuluma ngekulumo eyethulwe ngumhlonitjhwa u-Sheila
Camerer emalungana nokuthi senza umthetho namkha umlando omutjha eSewula
Afrika wokuthengisa ngedini. Ngifuna ukutjho ukuthi silandela kwaphela nje
isiqunto esathathwa yikhotho, lapho ikhotho iqala khona bonyana sesiphila
esikhathini sokulingana namkha sedemokhrasi lapho kufanele ukuthi abantu
namkha izelelesi zithathwe ngokulinganako, ngaphandle kokukhethulula ukuthi
umuntu lo ungumma namkha umfazi.

Into leyo soke siyayivuma, kodwana siqale ikakhulukazi ukuthi Ekuphetheni,
angiqalise kancani ekulumeni kamhlonitjhwa u-Steve Swart, yokuthi ukuvuma
namkha ukuvikeleka kususwe eminyakeni eli-16 ukuya keli-18, abantwanaba
abaphakathi kweminyaka eli-16 neli-18, bangatholakali sele bathathwa
njengeenlelesi, batholakale sele banamarekhodi, ngombana siyazi ukuthi
iinkhathi ziyatjhuguluka. Abantwanaba bahlakanipha msinyazana.
Nabatholakala bamlandu, lokho kuzobavimbela ukuthi nasele bafuna
ukusebenza, bangakwazi ukusebenza endaweni lapho basebenza khona
ngabentwana.

Emaswapheleni, ngifuna ukutjho ukuthi ihlangano ye-ANC edosa phambili
begodu ephila njalo, iyawusekela umThethomlingwa lo. (Translation of
isiNdebele paragraphs follows.)

[Briefly, I would like to refer to the speech by hon Sheila Camerer about
us making the law or making a new South African history in commercialising
sex. I would like to say that we are following the decision taken by the
court in which the court treats people equally or whereby people and
criminals are treated equally in a democratic country, and also without
discriminating against women.

We all agree on this issue.  But I would like to focus on the speech by hon
Steve Swart, that the age of consent be moved from 16 to 18 years. These
children between the age of 16 and 18 should not be seen as criminals or as
having criminal records because we know that times change. These children
develop quicker. They will be prevented from getting jobs in kindergartens
if found guilty.

In conclusion, I would like to say the ANC-led government supports this
Bill.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon
Chairperson Ms Christmas Tree - I thought I had to just put that in.
[Laughter.] Hon members, ladies and gentlemen, I like the hat, Chair. I
have to be polite at the end. May I just say: Hallelujah! Hallelujah!
Hallelujah! At last, this Bill is before Parliament. And I want to say:
Hallelujah! Again.

Mr M J ELLIS: Sing it for us.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: No, I can’t
sing. I think this Bill has taken a very long and torturous, and probably a
very necessary consultative route to get where we are. The mere fact that
we can today in Parliament, on a rare occasion, have all the parties agree
that this Bill should be the one that they will vote on, I think, shows
that sometimes, although these processes are painful and torturous, they
are probably necessary to get buy-in from people. We should congratulate
everyone.

We should start with the political heads that have driven this Bill, the
various Ministers, and particularly our present Minister Mabandla. I think
we should particularly thank the portfolio committee, both from the
majority party - and particularly the chairperson, who is not listening –
and also other members and particularly members of the opposition, who I
think have always played a very constructive role as far as this Bill is
concerned. They also need a big congratulation.

To the SA Law Commission, that has done an enormous amount, but
particularly to the various members of the department, Lawrence Bassett,
Henk du Preez, Hennie Potgieter and then, of course, the very able Miss
Dalene Clark. I really think that we should thank them. They have brought
enormous research and enormous talent to bear, to be able to let us pass
this Bill. [Applause.]

I want to thank everyone for the very balanced way in which they have even
criticised some aspects. No Bill can be perfect. Hopefully in future we
will further amend this Bill to make it better; to make sure that it
provides even better protection for people. I also thank everyone on that
score. All the inputs that you have made, and particularly the report with
the resolutions, will be studied carefully, and where we have to come back
to Parliament, we will do so.

It would be remiss of me not to talk about the cloud that is hanging over
this Bill again. As we walked into this Parliament today, I heard that we
are not going to vote on this Bill, because of some technicalities. I do
think it is very unfortunate, because the reasons for not doing so, I
think, are completely wrong. They are based on wrong legal advice, and
unfortunately the legal advice we are receiving in this Parliament just
seems to get worse and worse. I have seen, on four different occasions,
examples of legal advice given in this Parliament. The kind of information
given in these instances, to say the least, is wrong.

It is very serious that Parliament should take this matter forward and make
sure that we have the necessary capacity and skills. The legal advice we
receive is amateurish and is highly unprofessional. What is worse is that
decisions are being based on that kind of information. The department was
not asked on any occasion for its advice or what it felt about the issues
around why this Bill was not to be voted on today. I think that is just
absolutely wrong and it should be rectified.

The issue here is of a mixed Bill that has been raised. This issue is not
new in this Parliament. We have debated it for 12 years. We have, over and
over, stated that we know the Constitution does not provide for a mixed
Bill. It does not provide for a procedure for a mixed Bill. We have dealt
with it in the Rules in such a way that we say that when a Bill can be
split up into 75 or 76, we will do so. In all the discussions that we have
had, we have also acknowledged that there are some Bills that are so
intertwined that you cannot split them up as mixed Bills. This is a prime
example. When we come to Justice issues, quite a lot of our Bills will be
mixed in nature. We have made provision that when you comply with certain
requirements in the criminal justice system, then you can get PEP. This is
not a PEP policy for the Department of Health, because they don’t deal with
all issues of PEP. It is a very narrow mechanism that has been created that
within the first 72 hours after you have been raped, that if you do comply
with certain things in the criminal justice system, then you receive PEP
from the Department of Health.

The advice that has been given is that this is a Health matter and should
be excised from the Bill and put in a separate Bill. What people fail to
see, of course, is that if you put it in a separate Bill, you are going to
take all the Justice issues, which are also section 75 issues, to the other
Bill. Therefore, the other Bill is not going to be passed because it will
not be a section 76 Bill.

We have debated this over and over in Parliament and we have all agreed
that the test, when we have done this in the Rules Committee, is the
dominant purpose test. The dominant purpose in this case is clearly the
criminal justice system. If you comply with certain things in the criminal
justice system, then you get PEP. It is very clear that there should be no
reason why this Bill should not be processed and why we shouldn’t have
voted on this Bill.

The consequence of this is that the Bill will now only be voted on next
year. The NCOP cannot process the Bill and we now have to wait again for a
few months until they have done their hearings. I must say that it is a
highly unacceptable process. We now again have to wait for a number of
months for this Bill to get on the Statute Book.

I also want to finally say that, if you want to know what this Bill is all
about, watch the programme on the History Channel. Last night they had a
programme on this absolute maniac, Moses Sithole, the one who was a serial
rapist after 1994. Just the things that he did and got away with in the
justice system are very scary. This Bill is really a Bill to try to deal
with that and try to minimise the damage that the Moses Sitholes have done.


I want to dedicate this Bill to all those South Africans, the majority of
South Africans, who treat their partners with decency and respect and do
not treat their partners as objects on whom all sexual deprivations can be
imposed. To those of you amongst us ...

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, may I please ask a question?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I will
always answer a question from Koos Koek.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Why can’t we proceed and vote on the Bill now?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: No, there
are apparently problems with it. I think I have said my say as far as I
did. I wanted to put it on record and I think we have said so. Hopefully,
there is still a possibility that Parliament will come back. We have to
wait for the NCOP to do their cycle of work and maybe by then all parties
can convince Parliament that we should proceed and vote on that occasion.

I really want to dedicate it to all those decent South Africans who do not
get decent treatment. Those of you who do feel that you want to get
involved in these things, particularly where you are preying on our
children, we will deal with you mercilessly and do not expect any sympathy.


May you all have a happy festive season and thank you for supporting the
Bill.

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, we move that the
Bill be referred back to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
Constitutional Development to consult with the Joint Tagging Mechanism in
terms of Rule 249(3)(e).

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly referred back to the Committee.


                       FIREARMS CONTROL AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Consideration of Bill)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:
That the Bill, as amended, be passed. Thank you.

Motion agreed to.

There was no debate.

Bill accordingly passed.

         SOUTH AFRICAN INSTITUTE FOR DRUG-FREE SPORT AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Consideration of Bill)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:
That the Bill, as amended, be passed.
Motion agreed to.

There was no debate.

Bill accordingly passed.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): We will now take Orders No 5 to 63
together. These are the Eighty-Fifth to the One-Hundred-and-Forty-Third
Reports of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts.


    CONSIDERATION OF EIGHTY-FIFTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
               ACCOUNTS - REPRESENTED POLITICAL PARTY FUNDING

    CONSIDERATION OF EIGHTY-SIXTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
                     ACCOUNTS - RURAL HOUSING LOAN FUND

   CONSIDERATION OF EIGHTY-SEVENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
                    ACCOUNTS - SPECIAL INVESTIGATING UNIT

    CONSIDERATION OF EIGHTY-EIGHTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
                    ACCOUNTS - ACCOUNTING STANDARDS BOARD

    CONSIDERATION OF EIGHTY-NINTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
     ACCOUNTS - BANKING SECTOR EDUCATION & TRAINING AUTHORITY (BANKSETA)
 CONSIDERATION OF NINETIETH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
               - SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL BIODIVERSITY INSTITUTE

    CONSIDERATION OF NINETY-FIRST REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
   ACCOUNTS - CHEMICAL INDUSTRIES EDUCATION & TRAINING AUTHORITY (CHIETA)

    CONSIDERATION OF NINETY-SECOND REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
       ACCOUNTS - CLOTHING, TEXTILES, FOOTWEAR AND LEATHER EDUCATION &
                       TRAINING AUTHORITY (CTFL-SETA)
    CONSIDERATION OF NINETY-THIRD REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
     ACCOUNTS - FOREST INDUSTRIES EDUCATION & TRAINING AUTHORITY (FIET)

    CONSIDERATION OF NINETY-FOURTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
                     ACCOUNTS - FINANCIAL SERVICES BOARD

    CONSIDERATION OF NINETY-FIFTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
                  ACCOUNTS - GREATER ST LUCIA WETLAND PARK

    CONSIDERATION OF NINETY-SIXTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
                      ACCOUNTS - SOUTH AFRICAN TOURISM

   CONSIDERATION OF NINETY-SEVENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
          ACCOUNTS - CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD (CIDB)
    CONSIDERATION OF NINETY-EIGHTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
                ACCOUNTS - COMPETITION TRIBUNAL SOUTH AFRICA

    CONSIDERATION OF NINETY-NINTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
                      ACCOUNTS - COMPETITION COMMISSION

    CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDREDTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
      ACCOUNTS - COUNCIL FOR SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH (CSIR)

   CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-FIRST REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
       PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - DEVELOPMENTAL BANK OF SOUTHERN AFRICA LIMITED

   CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-SECOND REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
    PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - EXPORT CREDIT INSURANCE CORPORATION OF SOUTH AFRICA
                               LIMITED (ECIC)

   CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-THIRD REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
         PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - ELECTRICITY DISTRIBUTION INDUSTRY HOLDING

   CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-FOURTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
   PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - EDUCATION, TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT PRACTICES SECTOR
                                 (ETDP-SET)

   CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-FIFTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
   PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - SECTOR FOR FINANCE, ACCOUNTING, MANAGEMENT CONSULTING
                    AND OTHER FINANCIAL SERVICES (FASSET)

   CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-SIXTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
              PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - FINANCIAL AND FISCAL COMMISSION

  CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-SEVENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
              PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - FOOD & BEVERAGES SETA (FOODBEV)

   CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-EIGHTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
               PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - COUNCIL FOR GEOSCIENCE (SGE)

   CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-NINTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
              PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - HUMAN SCIENCES RESEARCH COUNCIL

   CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-TENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
    PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION OF SOUTH AFRICA
                                LIMITED (IDC)

  CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-ELEVENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
               PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - INDEPENDENT DEVELOPMENT TRUST
  CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-TWELFTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
                      PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - INSURANCE SETA

 CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-THIRTEENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
     PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - INTERNATIONAL TRADE ADMINISTRATION COMMISSION OF
                             SOUTH AFRICA (ITAC)

 CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-FOURTEENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
             PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - KHULA ENTERPRISE FINANCE LIMITED

 CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-FIFTEENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
           PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - MINING QUALIFICATION AUTHORITY (MQA)

 CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-SIXTEENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
                 PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - NATIONAL EMPOWERMENT FUND

  CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-SEVENTEENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
               ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - NATIONAL NUCLEAR REGULATOR

 CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-EIGHTEENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
    PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - PRIMARY AGRICULTURE, EDUCATION & TRAINING AUTHORITY
                                   (PAETA)

 CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-NINETEENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
              PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - SOUTH AFRICAN QUALITY INSTITUTE

 CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-TWENTIETH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
    PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL ACCREDITATION SYSTEM (SANAS)

 CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-TWENTY-FIRST REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
           ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK (SARB)

 CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-TWENTY-SECOND REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
    ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - SOUTH AFRICAN SPECIAL RISK INSURERS ASSOCIATION
                              (SASRIA) LIMITED

 CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-TWENTY-THIRD REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
             ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - SAFETY AND SECURITY (SASSETA)

 CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
     ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - SERVICE SECTOR EDUCATION & TRAINING AUTHORITY
                               (SERVICE SETA)

 CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
          ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - AIR TRAFFIC AND NAVIGATION SERVICES
 CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
                        ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - ARTSCAPE

     CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT OF STANDING
              COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - BLIND SOUTH AFRICA

 CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
             ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - BUSINESS AND ARTS SOUTH AFRICA

 CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-TWENTY-NINTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
              ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - COUNCIL FOR HIGHER EDUCATION

 CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-THIRTIETH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
            PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - EDUCATION LABOUR RELATIONS COUNCIL

 CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-THIRTY-FIRST REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
         ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - INTERNATIONAL MARKETING COUNCIL (IMC)

 CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-THIRTY-SECOND REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
        ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - NATIONAL HOUSING FINANCE CORPORATION LTD

 CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-THIRTY-THIRD REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
              ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - NATIONAL MUSEUM BLOEMFONTEIN
 CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
             ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - NURCHA FINANCING CONSTRUCTION

 CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
               ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - SERVCON HOUSING SOLUTIONS

 CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
                     ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - MARKET THEATRE

     CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT OF STANDING
                COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - THE PRESIDENCY

 CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
                    ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - THUBELISHA HOMES

 CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-THIRTY-NINTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
             ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - TRANS-CALEDON TUNNEL AUTHORITY

  CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-FORTIETH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
                    PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - VOORTREKKER MUSEUM

  CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-FORTY-FIRST REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
           ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - WAR MUSEUMS OF THE BOER REPUBLICS

 CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-FORTY-SECOND REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
               ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - WATER RESEARCH COMMISSION

  CONSIDERATION OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-FORTY-THIRD REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
         ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - UMALUSI COUNCIL FOR QUALITY ASSURANCE


Mr N T GODI: Chairperson, comrades and hon members, it is always with a
sense of pride that I come to this podium to present, on behalf of Scopa,
reports which are a product of commitment and dedication to the highest
interest of our people. We are here to deliver on our mandate as Scopa to,
on behalf of this House, exercise oversight on the financials of national
departments and public entities.





We are presenting before this House the Eighty-Fifth to the One-Hundred-and-
Forty-Third reports; that is, 58 reports. All of them are what we call
“Category C” reports. These are reports whose financial audit outcomes are
unqualified and have unsubstantive or no matters of emphasis.


These entities are living proof that it is possible to adhere fully to the
letter and spirit of the Public Finance Management Act. For this, we thank
and congratulate them, and we hope that their future audits will be equally
clean. These reports are good examples that serial offending departments
and entities can emulate.

What is worth noting is that among these reports are a number of sector
education and training authorities. A lot has been said in the past about
the administration and management, effectiveness and viability of Setas.
While we cannot reflect on the effectiveness of the Setas that are here, we
can, however, all attest to their sound financial management, which Scopa
believes is the foundation for everything else. Certainly, there can be no
timeous and qualitative service delivery without sound financial
management.

Whilst we accept that there are Setas that are struggling to properly
fulfil their mandate, we believe that these ones are a glimmer of hope that
with sufficient will and hard work things can be turned around. We are
referring here to the Bank Seta, Chemical Industry Seta, Clothing and
Textile Seta, Forestry Industry Seta, Education, Training and Development
Seta, the Financial Services Seta, and the Food and Beverage Seta.

On behalf of Scopa, we want to commend these reports to the House. We also
want to thank the programming Whips for finding sufficient space for us to
present these reports.

The debate on these reports helps us to rally together and mobilise
everyone in the fight against mismanagement, maladministration and waste of
public resources. It also helps us to bring to the fore the important work
that Scopa does. These debates help Scopa to lay bare the indisputable
connection between quality and timeous service delivery on the one hand and
sound financial management and administration on the other. They help us
spread our call for a heightened sense of vigilance and intolerance against
corruption and mediocrity. These debates go a long way in strengthening
Scopa’s hand as the defender of the public purse.

As we present these reports and as the House rises for recess, I want to
pay a special tribute to my colleagues and comrades in the committee as
well as the staff and the Auditor-General’s Office for their hard work and
close scrutiny of issues. The sense of purpose and focus in the committee
is both commendable and refreshing. With a united and focused Scopa there
will be no hiding place for those who do not comply with the laws we pass
in this House or National Treasury regulations.

Today, I personally wish to appreciate the opportunity I have had so far to
chair this important committee. Twelve months ago, immediately in my first
presentation of Scopa reports I gave an assurance that the trust shown in
me would not be in vain; and that I took this responsibility with open eyes
and that it was a responsibility I would discharge with neither fear nor
favour, sparing neither courage nor effort in the service of our people -
these being values bequeathed to us in the liberation movement.

Looking back we can say without fear of contradiction that we have lived up
to these aforesaid utterances. We said then, as we say now, that corruption
is about greed and not poverty. It is the well connected and well off, and
not the poor who are the motive force of corruption. It is about a clique
of the ideologically corrupted up against the people. It is completely
inimical, in sharp pointed contradiction with the ethos and values of the
liberation movement; it is against evolutional morality.

As Scopa, we appreciate the support that this House has given us, right
across party-political and ideological divides, in the processing of our
reports. It is this kind of support that gives us the impetus to keep on
keeping on with our work.

The struggle against a lack of respect for laws, policies, regulations, and
procedures in public finance management must be fought and won. It is a
patriotic duty and it is politically imperative.

Before I leave, I think the last word must surely go to that Vietnamese
Revolutionary, Uncle Ho Chi Minh. In discussing matters of this nature he
said, and I quote – very liberally:

   Embezzlement and waste stem from bureaucracy, from the fact that leading
   individuals or organs at all levels fail to get down to brass tacks, to
   supervise and educate ... They pay undue attention to form and fail to
   tackle the jobs in detail and in depth. They only like to convene
   meetings, write instructions and read reports, but control nothing
   thoroughly.


He further exhorts us thus:


   Embezzlement, waste and bureaucracy are enemies of the people, the army
   and government. To oppose embezzlement, waste and bureaucracy are
   revolutionary acts. To oppose embezzlement, waste and bureaucracy is
   democracy.

I thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Van der Merwe, why are you
pointing your fingers like somebody who always wears a hat?

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: I was merely trying to draw the attention of Marina
to look at this. That is all. I was not pointing at you, of course not at
you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Well, it is very confusing when you
are up here, so rather send her a letter. Thank you very much.

Mr T R MOFOKENG: Madam Chair, I am very thankful to have this opportunity
to say a few words about public accounts. The work of the public accounts
committee has an impact on service delivery. There are 58 reports before us
to be confirmed and adopted by this House, starting from the 85th report to
the 143rd report. The following fact sheet provides an overview of some of
the Scopa reports for the 2006 financial year. All of the entities
highlighted in these reports received unqualified audit opinions with no
significant matters of emphasis during the year 2005-06. That is very
important.

I think one finds that for many years we have had so many reports that were
qualified. Some of us who are not used to books of accounts become so happy
when we say something is qualified and think that we have done well. In the
transactions of books when we talk about qualification it means you have
done badly. So most of them normally come with a disclaimer and all of
that, but today there is no disclaimer. As a common procedure within the
committee there is a standard resolution for all such entities. In the
resolution the committee notes the receipt of the annual reports and
financial statements for the year under review, and acknowledges the
unqualified audit report that the entity receives.

The audit opinion, however, is made from the financial management and
regularity point of view, and it is by no means an opinion of the overall
performance of the entity, meaning that service delivery is included. It is
in this light therefore that the committee brings its report to Parliament,
and commends the entities on their performance. This also means that no
further interaction with the entity concerned is warranted as they have
received unqualified audit opinions with no significant matter of emphasis
on issues mentioned. This applies to all 59 reports.

The work of Scopa is not merely about ensuring proper financial management
in government, the department and public entities. Scopa’s oversight role
is important to service delivery. Scopa seeks to ensure improved service
delivery by focusing in those areas of poor financial management that are
hampering the effective use of the millions of rands annually voted by
Parliament to the various departments for them to provide service delivery.
By reviewing more than 260 annual reports every year and by holding public
hearings nearly every week that Parliament is in session, Scopa examines
the financial management performance of departments and entities.

By explaining the following key elements of effective financial management
we can assess the ability of the department to manage its finances and
conclude whether the department is at an adequate level of financial
management to provide a proper environment for effective service delivery.
The elements we look at are, firstly, the element of proper controls
because without proper controls funds and other assets are not protected or
resources properly controlled. Without controls, there is no certainty that
the programme of departmental objectives will be achieved or would be
sustainable.

Nearly every report of Scopa over the last few years has made
recommendations about the improvement of internal controls, and I am glad
to tell you that the reports of the Auditor-General indicate that
government departments have been showing steady progress in establishing
proper controls.

Scopa also examines the quality of financial management information, and
determines whether the availability of the management information is
reliable or used by the department to get the best out of their resources.
Without good management information a director-general is like a blind man.
It will be very difficult to make government more businesslike if stronger
management information is not well integrated into day-to-day management.
Good progress has been made in this area, but Scopa will keep on monitoring
it.

A last financial management focus area that Scopa examines is the strategic
planning, and how it is linked to resources. In setting strategic targets
or objectives and ensuring that these are achieved, and enabling
departments to provide the service delivery that they are established for,
Scopa has found that a higher number of strategic plans do exist, but they
are not always sufficiently linked to resources. Strategic plans also go
hand in hand with proper budgeting. Reporting to Parliament on performance
will become more and more important as Parliament improves its oversight of
service delivery performance.

The annual report promises to become the main accountability mechanism in
the hands of the legislature. Scopa therefore seeks to ensure improvement
of financial management systems that will enable government to provide
quality services. I want to state that we would not be effective without
the assistance of an independent Auditor-General, and we welcome the
improved legal framework established by the Public Audit Act, which enables
the AG to do his or her work even better.

As stated previously, the work of Scopa is not mainly about financial
savings, but about ensuring improved service delivery. This is critical,
because in the private sector bad service results in more business for
competitors. In the Public Service, however, there is simply no
alternative.

I am told that Scopa members have a poor reputation as senior public
servants, as we are seen as being aggressive. The ANC proposed the adoption
of this report. Thank you very much. [Time expired.][Applause.]

Ms A M DREYER: Madam Chair, Scopa is very similar to a rowing team. Why do
I say this? Rowing is the only sport where you make progress by going
backwards. Now in Scopa too we are going forward by looking backwards.
Therefore I want to look at where Scopa is today, and do so by looking back
to where it was two years ago.

In January 2005 when I became a member of Scopa I had heard so many stories
from colleagues, and I had seen so many newspaper articles and news clips
on TV about Scopa and how bad it was, that one could feel the tension when
I walked into that committee room. One could almost touch the distrust and
the suspicion.

Much of this came from the arms deal scandal that almost tore Scopa apart.
The controversy resulted in the unfortunate replacement of a Scopa
chairperson and many experienced members, and also resulted in a loss of
institutional memory. Scopa was not functioning optimally and not holding
the executive to account properly. But Scopa members realised their huge
responsibility, and they started working.

When the previous NNP Scopa chairperson resigned and a new one had to be
elected it became controversial once again. The spectre of possible
turbulence in Scopa was raised, but we followed the democratic practice in
Commonwealth countries that an opposition member becomes the Scopa
chairperson.  The new chairperson soon showed that he was committed to the
call and responsibility of Scopa.

He started steering the team efficiently through the turbulent waters. A
big breakthrough happened with the hearing on the controversial Imvume
management in the PetroSA deal. Scopa grilled PetroSA, and unanimously
adopted a strongly worded resolution, which was very critical of the Imvume
management transaction. Scopa showed that it was taking its watchdog job of
protecting the public purse and rooting out corruption seriously. Other
hearings followed where erring departments were grilled and serial
offenders were identified. Departments and entities with failing financial
management were becoming aware that they would be called to account, and
that they would be subjected to vigorous questioning.

People started noticing, the media took note, and Scopa started making
headlines for the right reasons. The Director-General of the Treasury told
Scopa members that Scopa put fear into the hearts of those who appear
before it. These were sweet words to the Scopa members. Today Scopa is,
once again, a strong and healthy committee. It takes seriously its
responsibility of protecting the public purse. I am proud to be a member of
Scopa.

However, this does not mean that there are no problems. There are indeed
many challenges ahead. Of particular concern is the late submission of
financial information to the Auditor-General. By August this year the
Auditor-General had not received the annual reports of 19 departments, and
that is 56% of all departments. This is causing a delay in the work of the
AG, but more serious is that when unlawful behaviour like this takes place
at government level the question is: What kind of message is government
sending to ordinary citizens? Is it acceptable to break the law?

A second area of concern is that there has been a significant increase in
the number of departments that receive qualified audit reports. In the
previous financial year there were only seven departments with qualified
audit reports, but there are 11 of them now. This is 32% of the total,
which is a third of all government departments. It is of serious concern
that financial mismanagement of state departments is increasing.

A third concern is the fact that the same erring departments receive
negative audit opinions year after year, showing no improvement whatsoever.
The worst serial offenders are Correctional Services, Defence and Health,
with Home Affairs having now received negative audit reports six years in a
row. These departments are facing serious financial mismanagement
challenges. Why are they not learning? Why are they not improving on
previous bad experiences? The AG tells us that the reason for this sorry
state of affairs is that accounting officers are simply not implementing
basic elements of financial management.

Who are the political bosses of these departments? They are the Ministers
Lekota, Balfour, Nqakula, and Tshabalala-Msimang. It is time that the
executive took responsibility for the performance of their departments.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M J BHENGU: Chairperson, the IFP notes that all institutions listed in
the reports of Scopa under discussion today received unqualified audit
reports from the Auditor-General. We are particularly pleased to note that
at least six Setas received unqualified audits.

The IFP therefore supports the reports of the Standing Committee on Public
Accounts before this House and we wish you also to note that we support the
vision and philosophy that drive the leadership of Scopa, as enunciated so
well by Mr Godi, because without that kind of vision, Scopa would not do
its oversight work properly. I thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, in view of all the Scopa reports in question,
the MF has no objection and expresses its gratitude and support for the
findings. We trust that the oversight of Scopa is adequate in ensuring the
various sectors under their eye are managed efficiently and effectively
with a system of checks and balances. The MF supports the reports. Thank
you.

Ms L M MASHIANE: Madam Chairperson, as hon members know, the Standing
Committee on Public Accounts carries out searching and rigorous assessments
of financial administration in the national public sector, so that
accounting authorities can be held accountable for their spending of
taxpayers’ money and their stewardship over public assets.

In their rigorous assessing of the financial administration in the public
sector Scopa categorises the annual reports into categories A, B and C;
categories C being the reports that Scopa is generally satisfied with and
for which there is no need to call the department or entity to a hearing.
However, Scopa would like the House to note that it is far from satisfied
with the general position regarding public sector financial management.

Scopa looks at the first three levels of financial management capacity in
the public sector. A level-one situation is basically a situation in which
a department is still at the start-up level and has very little to nothing
in terms of policies, procedures, guidance and clarity around how they
should be managing the financial affairs in their organisation.

Often you then find no accountability from the point of view that nobody
has broken any rule or law because there was no rule or law to break when
carrying out their duties.

A level-two financial management capacity is when an entity has fairly good
policies, procedures and guidance around financial management and how to
manage and run the organisation. But those policies and procedures have not
been institutionalised within the organisation and proper training has not
been provided to the staff.

What you find in a level-two situation is that you do have policies and
procedures but the level of compliance is very low.

A level-three financial management situation refers to a situation at a
higher level than level two, where you have very good policies and
procedures in place. In fact, a lot of training and education has been put
into those policies and procedures. Those policies and procedures have been
institutionalised within the organisation to the extent that you could go
to the lowest-level person and ask them: “Are you aware of this human
resource policy?” They would then be able to say, “Yes, we know of that
policy and the policy requires me to do a, b and c.” For example, the
Auditor-General in his general report, which he tabled, raised the
following area of concerned that demonstrate that most departments and
entities are still struggling with financial management: 122 cases of
policy frameworks that are either weak and/or not yet developed.

This situation represents a need for systems, policies and procedures to be
put in place and adequate policies and skills to be made available. Seventy-
eight cases are attributable to a lack of monitoring. These issues also
indicate a lack of commitment and involvement by, amongst others,
management in this important internal control process. The commitment and
leadership from management sets the tone for internal control and the
control environment within a department and contributes to the fact that
issues continue to be reported.
Nineteen percent of the total national expenditure represents compensation
of employees, yet the departments and entities do not address the vacancy
rate at senior management level, and this leads to a lack of monitoring, as
I have just explained.

With regard to late submission and resubmission of annual financial
statements, as I stand here some entities have still not tabled their
annual reports and this issue needs Parliament’s immediate intervention.

Asset management remains the major challenge for effective internal
control. The issues range from the acquisition of those assets and their
recording through to the reconciliation and evaluations. Internal audits,
and audits to the committee remain other challenges. The root cause of
these issues is the problem of capacity.

Having said that, I would like to call on the portfolio committees to take
note of Scopa’s resolutions to follow-up and ensure that there is a linkage
between the problem areas identified by Scopa and departments’ strategic
planning, budgeting and performance reporting. Because if proper and
effective financial management is not included as a strategic priority by
departments, service delivery will always be hampered and South Africa’s
scarce resources will be wasted or mismanaged.

Before I sit down, I want to thank the outgoing Auditor-General Mr Shauket
Fakie for the support and dedication he has shown in supporting Scopa. It
would also be a grave mistake for me not to thank our chairperson, Mr
Themba Godi, for the commitment and dedication he has shown to Scopa, but
to advise all members of Scopa - Mr Pierre Gerber and the lot - to please
go and rest. The beginning of next year will be very tough for all of us.
Thank you very much.

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, we move that the
reports be adopted.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, I thought it would be very useful if we could go
through each one of them, because I think the Table staff need some
practice at reading and it would be very useful. Could we do that?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): We would then start again at Order No
5. I am not getting any response from any speaker. I think we would have to
proceed. I am sorry.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Chair, I suggest you don’t take Mr Ellis
seriously.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, I beg your pardon, after my long lecture to our
caucus the other day. I would really like to support the Deputy Chief Whip,
or the Chief Whip - I am not sure what he is at the moment - of the ANC in
his proposal.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I am sure he is very thankful.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Chairperson, I am very
thankful that I am not a member of the DA and have to endure long lectures
by Mr Ellis.

The Deputy Chief Whip of the Majority Party moved: That the Reports be
adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Reports accordingly adopted.

            WITHHOLDING OF REMUNERATION OF MAGISTRATE M MATEREKE.

                          (Consideration of Report)

Ms F I CHOHAN-KHOTA: Chairperson, there is not really much to  say  in  this
matter. The House has previously suspended Magistrate Matereke  and  we  are
now merely endorsing the decision to suspend his  salary,  and  I  recommend
that the House so approve.
Question put: That the recommendation of the Committee  be  adopted,  namely
that the suspension of the salary of Mr M Matereke be approved.

Question agreed to.

Suspension of salary of Mr Matereke accordingly approved.

 HEARINGS ON THE IMPLICATIONS AND APPROVAL OF THE PROPOSED NEW SALARY SCALES
  FOR THE MAGISTRACY, IN PARTICULAR THE INTRODUCTION OF A NEW MOTOR VEHICLE
   ALLOWANCE FOR MAGISTRATES AND SENIOR MAGISTRATES, AS RECOMMENDED BY THE
    INDEPENDENT COMMISSION FOR THE REMUNERATION OF PUBLIC OFFICE BEARERS

                          (Consideration of Report)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, we move that
the report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
Development be adopted and that the recommendations dealing with procedural
matters affecting the joint business of Parliament be referred to the Joint
Rules Committee for consideration.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.
  STUDY TOUR TO SOUTH AFRICAN SOCIAL SECURITY AGENCY’S (SASSA) HEAD OFFICE,
   PRETORIA (GAUTENG), AND THE REGIONAL OFFICES IN THE EASTERN CAPE (EAST
     LONDON AND PORT ELIZABETH) AND NORTHERN CAPE (KIMBERLEY) PROVINCES

                          (Consideration of Report)


Mr B M SOLO: Deputy Speaker, Hon members, from 21-24 August 2006 the
portfolio committee embarked on an oversight visit to the South African
Social Security Agency, or Sassa, offices in three provinces, namely
Gauteng, the Eastern Cape and the Northern Cape. The visit commenced at
their head office in Pretoria and proceeded to the regional offices in Port
Elizabeth and East London in the Eastern Cape and Kimberley in the Northern
Cape.

The South African Social Security Agency was established by the state to
assume responsibility for the payment and administration of social grants.
Apart from the problems experienced with regard to these services, the
establishment of Sassa is in line with the call to ensure a better life for
all.

Members are familiar with problems that were widely published through the
media with regard to administration and payments of grants, hence the
establishment of Sassa.

Indeed, we were encouraged by what we saw. We found an organisation that
has laid a firm foundation to ensure swift and user-friendly services right
from the head office through to the regional offices. The passion,
motivation and professionalism displayed by all involved provide us with
the necessary resolve that today is better than yesterday and tomorrow will
be better than today.

This once more is an indication of our commitment to provide quality
service to the beneficiaries and ensure that minimum standards operate
countrywide consistently, efficiently and predictably. It is not for this
debate to recycle or duplicate the report in the form of an oral
representation as members have received an approved report. However, I need
to draw the attention of this House to the tremendous progress made so far.
If one studies the report, one will clearly see that a major step has been
taken in line with our resolution, that is fighting poverty together for a
better life for all.

The report covers a whole range of administrative issues, infrastructure
issues such as buildings, technology issues, human resource issues and
other matters. It further shows that Sassa is managing the transitional and
transformation process without compromising service delivery. It shows how
Sassa has improved service delivery by introducing new initiatives for
application turnaround time, enhanced payment models, an optional services
infrastructure network and improved access to service in rural areas and
payouts.

Sesiyathola manje ukuthi abantu abalindi izinyanga eziyisithupha ukuze
bathole ulwazi lokuthi bayayithola na imali noma cha; kodwa izicelo zabo
zithatha isikhathi esingangezinsuku ezintathu noma kube ilanga elilodwa.
[We also learnt that people no longer wait for six months to have
information on whether they will get their money or not; but their
applications take at least between one and three days to be approved.]

Lo nto iyanceda ke ukuba abantu bangabe benyuka besehla, bemana bejikiswa
ngento engaziwayo. Ezobugcisa ziphuculwe kangangendlela yokuba abantu
bayakwazi ukuvavanywa, baxelelwe ngoko nangoko ukuba bayasifumana kusini na
esi sibonelelo. Ii-ofisi zeSasa kuthiwa ngesilungu: they are user friendly.
[Kulula ukuzisebenzisa.] kwaye uyambona u-‘Batho Pele’ phaya, ngoba baqashe
abantu kangangoko kwiidesika zooncedo zabo. Abantu abasami emigceni emide,
abangaziyo nokuba iza kuphela nini na.

Ngelinye ixesha babona sele kuvalwa iminyango kusithiwa, “Nize ngomso.” I-
Sasa iyijikile ke loo nto leyo, ithi, ‘senza ngoku.’ Abantu babuzwa imibuzo
efanelekileyo, abo bakwazi ukubeka iingxaki zabo bakwazi ukuvavanywa.
Akusathethwa izinto eziyimfihlo esidlangalaleni njengakwaNdabazabantu phaya
kudala ukuba wonke umntu azi into yokuba sele kuphelile ngawe. Kukho ubomi
babucala. Iindawo ezininzi zokwamkela imali ziyaphuculwa, ingakumbi phaya
emakhaya. Ngethuba besihambele kweleMpuma Koloni siye saya kwindawo
ekuthiwa yiKwelerha apho bekuye kuvulwa iholo entsha, ngoba njengokuba
nisazi, phaya ekhaya awekho amaholo oluntu.

Sibe nexesha elimnandi ngokwenene apho, abantu bonwabe kakhulu. Bade
babonelelwa banikwa phaya kwesa sibonelelo sikarhulumente ekuthiwa xa
sibizwayo yi-Social Relief of Distress Grant. Le ithi xa abantu xa sele
belambe kakhulu noko urhulumente abasizele abanike esi sibonelelo. Bekukho
iintsapho ezingaphezulu kwe-100 ebeziphiwa iipasile noko ezingathi zithe
xaxhe, ukuze batye kude kufike ikrisimesi. Ezi ke zizinto ezingaziwayo,
uSasa abone ukuba makaziveze ebantwini, ukuba uyancedisa ekubeni abantu
baphume kobu buhlwempu baphila phantsi kwabo.

Bekumnandi ngokwenyani eKwelerha, sitshotsha nokutshotsha phaya, kukho laa
nto ekuthiwa yi-integration, kukho nabantwana besikolo besiculela kamnandi.
Nabantu bethu torhwana abangekafikeleli kwizinga lokuthi bafumane
isibonelelo semali yobudala ub’ubabona ukuba bachwayitile, ngoba bafumene
okuya phantsi kwempumlo kule nkgqubo eyaziwa ngokuba yi-Social Relief of
Distress.

Ndiyacela ukuba amalungu afake isandla ekuthini kusetyenziswane noSasa lo,
ukuze abantu bakwazi ukuncedwa ngendlela efanelekileyo, ingamkubi ngoku
sele sazise iindlela ezintsha zokuziswa kweenkonzo ebantwini.
Ngokungaphandle kokumosha ixesha, ngoba ndiyabona ingathi noko ilanga sele
litshonile, mandithi intle le nto yenziwa nguSasa yokuthi nathi noko
sizibone siphethwe njengabantu, singasamkeleli ngaphantsi kwemithi,
singasami emigceni, singasalindi ukuza kukaNongqawuse xa sicela uncedo
kurhulumente. Ndiyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[This helps to avoid a situation in which people move up and down and are
turned away for no apparent reason. Technological systems have been
improved to such an extent that people can be tested and be informed
immediately whether their applications for grants are approved or not. The
Sassa offices are user-friendly and you can see the Batho Pele principle,
because they have employed enough people at their help desks. People are no
longer waiting in long queues not knowing when they will be attended to.

People sometimes found themselves locked out and told to come back the
following day. Sassa has turned that around; it says, “Action now.” People
are asked relevant questions and those who can present their cases are
interviewed on the spot. Confidential issues are no longer discussed in
public, as used to be the case in the past. There is now privacy and many
pay points are being developed, especially those in the rural areas. During
our visit to the Eastern Cape we also visited a place called Kwelerha where
there was an official opening of a community hall, as you know that there
are no community halls in rural areas.

We really had a good time and people were very cheerful. They were even
provided with a social grant known as a social relief of distress grant.
The government provides this to people living in severe poverty. More than
100 families were given food parcels that will last them until Christmas.
These are things that Sassa has decided to reveal to the people, as they
were not aware of them. Sassa is doing this to eradicate the poverty in
which people live.

We had social integration and dancing in Kwelerha, and school pupils were
singing nice songs. One could see that even people who had not yet reached
the stage of getting the old age grant were happy, because the social
relief of distress programme had brought them food.

I wish to make a request to members that they should work in partnership
with Sassa, so that people can be served in a proper way, especially now
that we have introduced new systems of service delivery to people. Without
wasting much time, because I can see that we do not have enough time, let
me say that Sassa is doing a good thing in that at least we are being
treated like human beings; we no longer receive our grants under the trees,
and wait in long queues when we apply for social grants. I thank you.
[Applause.]]

Ms J A SEMPLE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I present this report on behalf of my
colleague hon Mike Waters.

As of 1 April 2006, the SA Social Security Agency, Sassa, began to take
over responsibility for paying social assistance grants in three provinces,
namely Gauteng, the Western Cape and the Northern Cape. The target date of
March 2007 was given, by which the Sassa would be managing grant payments
for the remaining six provinces. I am glad to say that this target has been
met and that Sassa has already taken over full responsibility for grant
administration in all nine provinces. Sassa also needs to be credited for
the fact that, throughout the transfer period, service delivery was never
negatively affected and beneficiaries continued to receive their grants.

When one thinks that we have over 11 million beneficiaries, this is no
small feat. One issue that did concern my colleague Mike Waters, however,
was the fact that more than 6 000 grant administration staff members from
national and provincial departments of Social Development were transferred
to Sassa without the vast majority being vetted. This did raise concerns
during the trip as this makes Sassa vulnerable to the same grant fraud that
took place in the provinces previously, because corrupt officials may have
been transferred to the new agency.

On a positive note, the committee was fortunate enough to visit a pilot
project in the Eastern Cape where the processing time for grant
applications is between one and three days, unlike the current 90 days it
takes in some provinces and longer in others. This is extremely encouraging
as it is giving effect to the Batho Pele principle in making people feel
that they are actually valued. Sassa has a huge mountain to climb and the
initial results indicate they are doing it at record speed. We can only
wish them well and we know they will succeed. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, the MF takes this opportunity to
applaud the SA Social Security Agency, Sassa, for its efforts to transfer
the social assistance grant from the Department of Social Development
effectively and efficiently. In view of the recommendation, we are certain
that if Sassa reports to us on its pilot project to speedily assess, verify
and approve grant applications then we may be able to close the loopholes
that existed previously in grant management.

We further express a shared interest in the Department of Social
Development’s oversight of Sassa, the accessibility of disability grants
and antiretroviral treatment. The recommendations made in respect of this
oversight visit, we believe, are crucial to the effective management of the
grant system in South Africa. However, fraudulent activities are still
found and we are steadfast in our resolve that all forms of corruption need
to be stamped out. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs M M GUMEDE: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members and colleagues, it is yet
again a privilege for me to be at this podium today, mandated by the
Department of Social Development to, maybe, release the report of its
newborn baby, Sassa, which is the South African Social Security Agency,
born on 1 April 2006. The ANC-led government took over on 27 April 1994 and
much has been done to transform the apartheid legacy in this department,
where social help was only meant for the white minority and aimed at their
choices.

The Freedom Charter clearly states that all shall share in the wealth of
this country. Social assistance was extended to all as stated in section
27(1)(c) of the Constitution, and the CRSS, Committee for the Restructuring
of Social Security, was appointed to conduct research and their
recommendations led to 14 departments administering different societies.
Later, CRSS felt that there were still remnants of discrimination and
therefore the CICSS, or Committee of Inquiry into a Comprehensive System of
Social Security, was established and its recommendations led to the
Presidential Jobs Summit in 1998.

In 2002 the Taylor Committee’s report demonstrated political will and a
review was conducted on social security. In his state of the nation address
in 2002 President Thabo Mbeki announced a campaign to register all who were
eligible for social grants in 2003 and all who took part were thanked. In
2004 the social grants were extended from the age of seven to 14. However,
there were still remnants of apartheid in-between. A 10-year progress
review in the first decade and microsocial trends in South Africa in 2006
all highlighted that there are still a lot of vulnerable people, especially
in the rural areas, who are unable to access social grants. Sassa was then
established to improve service delivery by improving turn around times for
applications and appeals, and cutting down on corruption in the system, as
well as providing quality service at pay points, informed by the principles
of Batho Pele.

Sassa is responsible for the management and delivery of social grants. Its
strategic intent is to facilitate improvement in the quality of services
provided to beneficiaries and ensure that the minimum standards operate
countrywide for consistent and predictable service delivery. It took over
this function in the provinces from 1 April 2006. As has already been said,
this is the summary of the Portfolio Committee on Social Development’s
report on an oversight visit to the South African Social Security Agency
from 21 to 24 August 2006.

The purpose of the oversight visit was to obtain first-hand information on
the progress that had been made with the establishment of this very new
agency. The following offices were visited. We started at the Sassa head
office in Pretoria. Sassa has made significant progress in assuming the
full social assistance administration functions since 1 April. The
organisational structures at its head office and regional offices have been
stabilised and key appointments have been made, especially in the area of
financial management.

The process of installing the essential information technology, human
resource and physical infrastructure networks has also unfolded fairly
smoothly without any reported disruptions to the mechanism and system of
grant payments. Sassa has also assumed full control and inherited
accountability for operation of the Scopen system while the funds flow
process for the payment of grants between the national Department of Social
Development, Sassa and the provinces has been finalised. A communication
strategy has been developed and is in the process of being rolled out.

Sassa further reported that they are in the process of procuring about 40
mobile service units equipped with essential material to complement efforts
to enhance levels of service delivery in the deep rural areas. A tender has
been issued for the procurement of mobile unit, with the evaluation and
implementation of the tender only expected during the 2006-07 financial
year.

Sassa also pointed out a number of challenges it still experiences,
including fraud prevention, litigation, equity plans for employing disabled
persons and service delivery improvements.

The agency is vigorously dealing with inherited short-term problems such as
illegitimate beneficiaries by looking at things that lead to corruption of
the database. It has a fully fledged fraud unit complemented by, among
others, a fraud hotline through which fraud linked to grant administration
and payments can be reported. Frauds tip-offs received are handed over to
the Special Investigating Unit, SIU, for in-depth investigation.

What we saw in the Eastern Cape region is that the Eastern Cape regional
office is fully established and operational. As from 1 April 2006 a
national tender for seven district offices, independent from the Department
of Social Development, was to have been approved and was due to be
advertised at the time of the visit.

In terms of human capital, the Eastern Cape region reported that
1 400 social security personnel were transferred to Sassa in the region as
from that very date. Nine hundred of these staff members are on short-term
contracts. Of the 57 critical posts advertised to date, 52 have been filled
by women, who thus constitute 90% of these posts.

The region indicated that it was compliant with the requirements for
financial management and reporting as set out by the head office. However,
challenges were reported in respect of commitments carried over from the
2005-06 fiscal year. One challenge is the fact that the region still needed
to make use of the Department of Social Development’s bank account for the
transfer of payments, as well as the actual division of ring-fenced assets
and liabilities. A further challenge for the region is to obtain clarity on
who, between Sassa and the Department of Social Development, is responsible
for litigation cases that were filed before and after 1 April 2006.
The roll-out of the enhanced management information system will contribute
significantly to reducing the region’s turnaround time in grant
applications and thus improve levels of customer satisfaction. The system
is a computerised resource mechanism that hosts grant application files and
is able to track movements of files and eradicate the possibility of
missing files, which has been the source of many litigation actions.

The regional office has an established and functional Medical Asset Unit,
which is credited with improving the quality of disability and care
dependency grant assessments. The unit has 15 doctors, two for each
district, who conduct quality control of disability applications, focusing
on technical issues.

The issue of poor infrastructure and poor office and road conditions in
outlying areas continues to be a hindering challenge for the region. The
reliance on other stakeholders such as the Department of Home Affairs and
the Departments of Health for medical assessments and Justice for foster
care matters was also reported to be a challenge. The fact that there is
currently no clear policy on appeals was also cited as a challenge in the
region’s efforts to improve grant administration. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The Deputy Chief Whip of the Majority Party moved: That the Report be
adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT -
                           STUDY TOUR TO AUSTRALIA

There was no debate.

The Deputy Chief Whip of the Majority Party moved: That the Report be noted
and that the recommendation be referred to the Speaker for consideration.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly noted.

           CONSIDERATION OF FIRST REPORT OF JOINT RULES COMMITTEE

There was no debate.

The Deputy Chief Whip of the Majority Party moved: That the Report be
adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

     CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW COMMITTEE - ANNUAL
                     CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW REPORT, 2006

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now recognise the Deputy Chief Whip of the Majority
Party. I was told that the chairperson of the committee would introduce the
report, but ... I see the Deputy Chief Whip who is out of order.
Chairperson, come and introduce the report. [Interjections.]

Adv A H GAUM: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I am acting on behalf of the
chairperson, who cannot be here today.

In keeping with the constitutional imperative that the Joint Constitutional
Review Committee must review the Constitution at least annually, the
committee invited the public earlier this year to make submissions. The
public was specifically encouraged to make submissions on the equality
clause in the Bill of Rights and on the institutions supporting
constitutional democracy. Eleven submissions were received from the public,
and we would like to thank members of the public for their contribution to
strengthening our constitutional democracy. We also received submissions
from the National Assembly Rules Committee and the Free State legislature.

In dealing with these submissions, the committee realised once again that
our Constitution and the values underpinning it may and should be the focus
of continued public discussion and debate. In this way, all South Africans
will be able to make the contents of the Constitution their own, turning it
into a living document with real meaning for everyone. It is only when all
South Africans accept ownership of the Constitution that they will come to
protect and defend it even when it may not necessarily suit them.

As has become the norm under the able chairmanship of the hon Manie
Schoeman, this year’s review exercise was comprehensive and thorough. We
were also once again fortunate to have had the excellent legal assistance
of people like Advocates Adhikari, Vassen and Jenkins and Mr Hendricks,
enabling us to really apply our minds to all the submissions.

The submissions once again included the so-called hardy animals such as the
request for a referendum on the death penalty. As usual, a number of
submissions did not deal with proposed constitutional amendments, and it
should therefore be emphasised once more that while we want to encourage
submissions, we cannot entertain those that have no bearing on the
Constitution or require amendments to ordinary legislation instead of
amendments to the Constitution.
The Rules Committee requested us to consider the appropriateness of the
recognition by the Constitution of the leader of the largest opposition
party in the National Assembly as the Leader of the Opposition. This matter
originated from the view of opposition parties other than the DA that “the
use of the title `Leader of the Opposition’ creates the impression with the
electorate that this person makes statements and takes a stand on issues on
behalf of all opposition parties”.

Counterarguments were advanced on behalf the DA, inter alia, that the title
of the Leader of the Opposition has been maintained in a country like
Britain even though a new reality of three strong parties instead of the
traditional two has emerged there in recent years, and that this title has
been included in the Constitution to give special recognition to the
opposition.

The committee acknowledged that the particular title has given rise to
dissatisfaction amongst smaller opposition parties. We said that amendments
to the Constitution should be done after proper deliberation and with due
circumspection, and we suggested that all political parties internally
debate the matter with a view to finding consensus. This decision was
communicated to the Joint Rules Committee for further consideration.

The Free State legislature submitted that the Constitution be amended so as
to increase the size of the respective legislatures to, inter alia, allow
them to conduct more efficient oversight and ensure public participation.

We felt that all provinces should be involved to advise us, and we have
therefore written to the provincial legislatures, inviting them to express
their views at a meeting to be convened in the first term of 2007.

While all of the submissions pertaining to institutions supporting
constitutional democracy did not propose amendments to the Constitution, a
number of these submissions did make important recommendations with regard
to the functioning of these institutions. For example, it was submitted
that these institutions should be more accessible to the public, especially
to the uneducated and the poor.

We were of the view that while there was merit in these submissions, they
could be more comprehensively dealt with by the recently established Ad Hoc
Committee on the Review of State Institutions Supporting Constitutional
Democracy under the able chairmanship of the hon Kader Asmal.

There were also certain misconceptions with regard to these institutions.
One member of the public has so much confidence in the Public Protector
that he suggested that the Public Protector be empowered to review court
decisions. For obvious reasons, the committee opted to protect the notion
of the separation of powers implied in our Constitution and the
impartiality of our courts.

In another submission, the role of the SA Human Rights Commission and that
of our courts were confused as it was submitted that the commission should
impose heavier sentences on convicted offenders.

The floor-crossing matter also crossed our table. The committee is aware
that this matter is currently receiving the attention of the Standing
Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals and Special Petitions.
We refrained from engaging in a parallel process while being mindful that
we may have to deal with the matter at a later stage.

Then there was also an apparent attempt to influence the presidential
succession matter. It was submitted that the Constitution be amended so
that President could be directly elected by the people rather than the
National Assembly. I don’t know; it seems the people don’t have that much
confidence in us.

The committee diplomatically decided that the desirability of amending the
electoral system was a far-reaching policy consideration that would require
more research and discussion before the committee could consider the
matter.

All in all, we had a most interesting and rewarding constitutional review
exercise this year. Once again, it was a privilege to engage in matters
dealing with our internationally acclaimed and respected Constitution. We
should never stop educating one another on the values enshrined in this
larger-than-life contract of and between our people, the contract of a
people who believe that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united
in our diversity.

It is indeed an honour to support the 2006 report of the Joint
Constitutional Review Committee as tabled. Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr J T DELPORT: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The report was
presented as if the committee was unanimous on all aspects. It is quite
clear to the hon colleague and everyone present that, on that issue, the
words or the phrase in the title ``Leader of the Opposition’’ creates
confusion.

I made it quite clear that the DA was against that phrase and doesn’t agree
and, in fact, I said that the only confusion that can be could be amongst
people who do not understand English properly.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, obviously that is not a point of order; it
is a matter for debate. Hon Gumede, the House still has a lot of business
to deal with, but if the hon members need a convenient break, I am sure we
might consider that.

I now recognise the Deputy Chief Whip of the Majority Party.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, we move that
the report be adopted.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is that the report be adopted. Are there any
objections?

Mr M J ELLIS: Yes, it is a pity that we have to stand up on this particular
point because my colleague, the hon ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The question is just on whether there are any
objections. I think based on what he said earlier on, it is OK that you
object.

Mr M J ELLIS: Well, I would like to object to that particular point, but
the rest of the report we will support.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I beg your pardon?

Mr M J ELLIS: I want to have the objection of the DA noted on the one
particular point that my colleague has raised, but we don’t have any
problem with the rest of the report. I mean if the hon Gaum had just put
the matter properly in the first instance, we wouldn’t be in this difficult
situation now.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: OK. I just wanted to say that what we are looking at
now is the motion that the report be adopted, and you say that you have
objections. Because there are objections, we have to follow what we usually
follow when we have objections. You have to put the question. Do you want
to object or do you want to be recorded in Hansard or what do you want?

Mr M J ELLIS: I certainly don’t intend calling for a division, Madam Deputy
Speaker, but I would like our objection to be noted.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: That’s fine.

We still have a lot of business. We will now record it properly that Mr
Ellis is not objecting to the report, so the report is not objected to.
[Interjections.] What is the problem now?

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, as I see it, we have no option but to
object to the report. If we can’t object to one aspect of it, then we have
to object to the report as a whole.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: So you object to the report?

Mr M J ELLIS: Yes.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: All right. Now I really have to put the question if you
are objecting to the report.
The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, Mr Delport
rose and he took umbrage at the way Mr Gaum phrased his introduction to the
report. I didn’t hear the hon member Delport object to anything in the
report itself and maybe he can clarify that, but certainly it will be quite
distinct what is in the report and what any member might have said about
the report. In any case, I mean Mr Gaum assured us that perhaps Mr Delport
didn’t hear him quite correctly. But, in any case, be that as it may, the
matter before the House is what is in the report, not what anyone said here
about that report.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are you actually saying? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I am saying that Dr Delport
should tell us what exactly he is objecting to – whether he is objecting to
what Mr Gaum said or whether he is objecting to anything that is in the
report.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the DA says they object. Of course, it is the DA’s
democratic right to object. So, I wanted to put the question, but I am told
that there is no need. Your objection will be noted.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, if the hon Deputy Chief Whip of the ANC
wants us to call a division, we will do so with pleasure.

Dr C P MULDER: Yes, Chairperson. It seems to me that the report is correct
because, while we are noting things, I think we should also note that on
this matter that deals with the opposition, there is only one party that
has a problem with it. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think I have always been taught that the right thing
to do is to do things correctly, and I think we need to put the question.
Those in favour say ``Aye’’.

HON MEMBERS: Aye.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Those against, say ``No’’.

HON MEMBERS: No.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the Ayes have it.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, the DA would like its objection to be
recorded. Thank you.

Motion agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Report accordingly adopted.
 Consideration of request for approval by Parliament in terms section 231(2)
    of the constitution - Free trade AGREEMENT (FTA) BETWEEN THE SOUTHERN
 AFRICAN CUSTOMS UNION (SACU) AND THE EUROPEAN FREE TRADE ASSOCIATION (EFTA)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members! Dr Delport and Mr Gaum, please leave the
House for some time. Go and attend to your business outside. The speed with
which you passed here really scared me. [Laughter.]

Mr B A D MARTINS: Madam Deputy Speaker, esteemed hon members, I rise to ask
you to ratify the Free Trade Agreement between the Southern African Customs
Union, Sacu, of which South Africa, Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia and
Swaziland are members, and the European Free Trade Association, Efta, that
includes Norway, Switzerland, Liechtenstein and Iceland.

The agreement is historic because it is the first full free trade agreement
that Sacu has negotiated as a single entity. This agreement bears testimony
to the ability of Sacu member states to co-ordinate their negotiating
positions, overcome differences, and pursue a common set of negotiating
objectives.

Under the terms of the agreement, the European Free Trade Association will
grant the Southern African Customs Union full and immediate duty-free and
quota-free access for industrial products on entry into force of the
agreement.

The agreement further offers firm predictability and security that can be a
positive inducement for investment decisions in Sacu. Also, with regard to
basic agricultural products, Efta has offered Sacu limited but improved
market access in several important product lines. This opens opportunities
in agricultural trade, which is particularly important for Botswana,
Lesotho, Namibia and Swaziland. Sacu also reached an agreement with Efta to
co-operate on the so-called new generation trade issues, that is trade in
services, intellectual property, investment, competition and government
procurement.

The Sacu-Efta agreement will establish a legal and institutional framework
to conduct and manage trade relations between the parties. The agreement,
containing the main text, a series of bilateral agricultural texts and
several technical annexes, is currently subject to ratification procedures
in all nine of the signatory countries with a view to its implementation on
1 January 2007. The agreement will thereafter be phased in over a period of
up to nine years. Once fully implemented, substantially all trade between
the parties will be duty-free.

Finally, and with respect, I request the National Assembly’s support for
the ratification of the Sacu-Efta agreement. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are there any objections to the approval of the
agreement? No objections.

Free Trade Agreement (FTA) between the Southern African Customs Union
(SACU) and the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) approved.

   Consideration of Request for Approval by Parliament IN TERMS OF SECTION
 231(2) OF THE CONSTITUTION - CONVENTION ON THE PROTECTION AND PROMOTION OF
                    THE DIVERSITY OF CULTURAL EXPRESSIONS

Mr M R SONTO: Madam Deputy Speaker, the Portfolio Committee on Arts and
Culture requests Parliament in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution
to approve the ultimate ratification of the Convention on the Protection
and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions.

This convention was adopted by a majority vote at a Unesco general
conference held in France on 20 October 2005. This convention invites us to
enact a meaningful development of cultural capacity, a creative industry
and a better balanced practice of global trade in cultural goods and
services. This practice will see continuously sustained South African
domestic production.

South Africa played a critical role in placing the convention on the Unesco
agenda. The international co-operation section of the convention is the
section that will determine the benefits that developing countries will
derive from the ratification of this convention.

Article 8, and the whole convention for that matter, must be read in the
spirit of understanding culture as not something imposed by governments, as
some UN member states insinuate, and have thus refused to approve it, but a
means by which member states can protect and defend our endangered heritage
that has been plundered, historically, by colonialists.

You will understand that the states that refused to approve this convention
were led by America, because America is opposed to shared resources. I must
say, America would have led the pack in approving the convention had it
been on human destruction.

Nearly everywhere indigenous languages are falling into disuse, traditions
are being forgotten, and vulnerable cultures are being wiped out. Arts and
culture the world over is seen as the banqueting arm of government. Because
of that, and to save this situation, the Portfolio Committee on Arts and
Culture requests this House to approve ratification of the convention so
that South Africa can deposit its instrument of ratification with the
depository. I thank you. [Applause.]
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are there any objections to the approval of the
convention as it appears on the Order Paper? No objections.
Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural
Expressions approved.

   CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT IN TERMS OF SECTION
  231(2) OF THE CONSTITUTION - AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF BOTSWANA,
  THE REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE, THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA AND THE REPUBLIC
   OF ZIMBABWE ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE LIMPOPO WATERCOURSE COMMISSION

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Madam Deputy Speaker, as has been said, this House is
being asked this evening to ratify a very important international agreement
between South Africa, Zimbabwe, Botswana and Mozambique, to establish what
is called the Limpopo Watercourse Agreement.

It is a very important agreement, in our view, because for the first time
one of the issues that is being raised here is to allow all the parties to
use, now in an equitable manner, water around the Limpopo River. We are
quite sure that by agreeing to this agreement, we will indeed bring about
peace around the Limpopo River.

We are asking you, as part of adopting this agreement this afternoon, to
ensure the establishment of infrastructure, major investment and, of
course, dams. Equally, this agreement will enable co-operation, strengthen
relationships and assist to share benefits among these four countries. This
agreement will also enable stakeholder participation in decision-making
within the basin.
The Mozambican government has offered to host at least the secretariat of
this commission, and we are very delighted about that. Therefore we are
asking this House to ratify the agreement and allow freedom along the
Limpopo River. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are there any objections to the approval of the
agreement as it appears on the Order Paper? No objections.

Agreement between the Republic of Botswana, the Republic of Mozambique, the
Republic of South Africa and the Republic of Zimbabwe on the Establishment
of the Limpopo Watercourse Commission approved.

            PRECEDENCE GIVEN TO ORDER NO 1 UNDER FURTHER BUSINESS

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move:

   That the House now considers Order No 1 under Further Business.

Agreed to.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – PROGRESS REPORT
 FROM SPECIAL PENSIONS BOARD ON IMPLEMENTATION OF SPECIAL PENSIONS AMENDMENT
               ACT, NO 28 OF 2005 (ACT 69 OF 1996, AS AMENDED)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, we move
that the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.




                              FAREWELL SPEECHES


Mr M J ELLIS: Thank you very much, Madam Deputy Speaker. I want to say that
when one makes a farewell or says goodbye to people there is usually
somebody to say goodbye to, but the House is so empty this afternoon it all
seems a little bit hollow.

I want to say right upfront how strange it is to say farewell to an almost
empty House, but it really has been the most fascinating year. It started
off with the local government elections, and the pace did not seem to
subside after that at all. All of a sudden we are here at the end of the
year, saying farewell, and I must say the prospect of some well-earned
leave is in sight.
It has been a fascinating year. It is difficult to even remember the
beginning of the year, with those local government elections hanging over
us. One other thing is that there has been a great deal of work during the
course of the year. The local elections played havoc with the parliamentary
programme and we certainly had to play catch-up to a large extent.

There are a number of other things that have happened during this year as
well. For example, we have had the trial of a senior party office bearer of
a particular party on rape charges, the imprisonment of prominent members
of a particular political party on fraud and corruption charges, the
unwillingness of a certain political party - in fact two political parties
- to accept defeat in the local government elections and their
extraordinary attempt to regain power at all costs.

All of these and many other matters have actually influenced and affected
the political landscape during the course of the year, but here in
Parliament there have been other matters as well, not least of all the
ongoing saga of Travelgate with all its ramifications; the Oilgate issue
and all that is happening around that now; the Civil Union Bill, with
special mention of the extraordinary manner in which it was handled and
then, of course, the extraordinary motion of censure of the DA Chief Whip,
brought about by the ANC Chief Whip. I am sure we will all accept that
there is a particular lesson to be learned from this incident. We are aware
that we have an absent friend here today in the form of the same ANC Chief
Whip, who seems to have mysteriously disappeared from the scene. Lots of
rumours persist, of course. Most of the year he has been present in the
Chamber, which at times has taken on the appearance more of a lynch mob
than the highest debating Chamber in the land.

But I would say that the important lesson to be learned is this: Be careful
who you injure on the way up because you never know when and how you might
need them on the way down.

Indeed, it has been a fascinating year. But quite frankly, the fighting is
over for a while and it is time now to contemplate a well-earned rest. In
doing so, however, we must again bear in mind that when we return next year
we will not have the steadying, highly professional hand of Kasper Hahndiek
to guide us and again we wish him well in his retirement and thank him for
all he has done over the 36 years he has spent in Parliament.

It is also appropriate now to say thank you to other people who have played
an important role in Parliament this year.

I want to begin by thanking the ANC very sincerely indeed. This year they
have given us so many opportunities to attack them and it has been
absolutely wonderful. We have enjoyed every one of them. Thank you for a
job truly well done. We look forward to next year, which we are sure will
be more of the same. You really do have some big issues to resolve and we
look forward to watching you do so. To the ANC, you have made our job most
enjoyable, thank you very much indeed.
I want to thank the staff of the National Assembly for their hard work.
They are a close-knit and professional team. Thank you all for your
assistance at all times. While we will miss Mr Hahndiek, we know that you
will do the job superbly after he has gone and you will continue his fine
tradition. Of course, I do say to the Table staff that a little bit more
bias towards opposition parties will be very much appreciated.

I also want to thank the presiding officers and the House Chairs for their
role. I am sure that they may have noticed that the DA does not always
agree with all their rulings or, certainly, all their decisions but we do
acknowledge and accept that they wield the authority and we respect that
and consequently toe the line. A lot of important things have happened this
year, apart from Mr Van der Merwe’s cake and, quite honestly, I want to say
to the House - because a great deal of interest has been shown in this
particular cake - that it looked a lot better than it tasted and I do have
to stress again to the hon Koos that the quality of the candle was totally
inappropriate. To bring a candle of such poor quality into this House, I
believe, was shocking, but a great deal of this was initiated by Madam
Speaker and Madam Deputy Speaker during the course of the year.

I do want to say sincerely that for me one of the highlights of the year
was working on the committee established by Madam Speaker on the Moseneke
Commission and chaired by the hon Geoff Doidge. It was a great experience.
But I would like to say that I hope that committee’s work will bear much
fruit in the new year.

I also want to thank all my fellow Whips, both from my own party and from
other parties. We have worked well together this year and as it is the end
of the year and therefore in the spirit of Christmas, I would like to thank
hon Sam Louw, who is not in the House at present. Okay, I do recognise him
now. Sam, thank you very much for making programming meetings particularly
interesting. I also want to thank hon John Jeffery just for being what he
is. Certainly, these two gentlemen have helped to make some meetings very
interesting, and of course the hon John Jeffery has also helped to make
some meetings very boring, but that is another matter all together. And of
course I do want to thank hon Margaret Rajbally for just being Margaret.

To the service officers, to the staff, to the security services and
everyone associated with Parliament - even Public Works, believe it or not
- thank you for what you have done this year and have a good break.

But especially to all of us, Members of Parliament, the DA wishes you all
well and a safe and very happy festive season.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I wish to pay tribute to all
these tired members who have waited until 18:00 to adjourn for the year. I
am very hesitant to refer to candles and cakes in view of who is in the
Chair at the moment. May I say this: If you people really want something to
work, bring a cake into the House, because I have been notified that I will
surely see President Mbeki.

Yet another year is over, Madam Deputy Speaker - a hard year in which we
worked hard. I want to contribute by saying we want to go home. I am not
going to use all my five minutes. I am dedicating three minutes to you and
I am only going to speak for two minutes.

I believe that these end-of-the-year speeches close the door on any
conflict or unpleasantness that we have experienced. I believe it is a
golden opportunity for Members of Parliament to be just human beings for a
while and forget about our political differences, our conflicts and our
criticisms against one another. This is the opportunity to just be
colleagues. We have worked hard and we are going on leave.

Therefore, we in the IFP wish to thank all our colleagues and the
parliamentary staff for a year of excellent co-operation, a very successful
year. I agree with everything that the hon Mike has said. I am not going to
repeat all those thanks.

We wish all our colleagues and the staff a merry Christmas and a prosperous
New Year. May you all rest well and return next year, ready to address the
challenge of securing a better life for all South Africans, which is the
duty of each and every one of us.
Be careful on the roads, we want to see you all back next year. Go well,
until next time.

Ms N C NKABINDE: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members, it is that time of
the year when we bid farewell to each other before departing for our
constituencies and homes. As always, we can look back upon the year and
note that many important decisions and laws were made by Parliament. Once
again we must thank each and every hon member, irrespective of political
ideology, who participated in the parliamentary process and ensured that
vibrant, participatory democracy occurred.

It is also apt that we remember and pay tribute to the many members of
staff who support our efforts and keep the wheels of this institution oiled
and turning.

When we take the year in review we must also note that we have bid farewell
to a number of hon members and staff who passed away. Our thoughts are with
their families and friends as they approach this festive season, when the
absence of deceased loved ones is often felt most keenly.

This has been a particularly sad year for the many prominent people who
passed away, especially in the music industry, where we have lost many of
our leading talents.

It is appropriate that as we approach this festive period we take note of
the many lives that our roads claim; not only the famous and talented, but
more than 10 000 South Africans from every walk of life die on our roads
every year. Countless more are maimed and injured. We appeal to all hon
members and staff to take special care during this festive season, to
travel safely and encourage everyone they meet to follow suit. The carnage
must stop.

To our Christian brothers and sisters, we hope that the Christmas
celebration will deepen your faith, and to everyone, we hope that the
holidays will reinvigorate you and bless you with the company of family and
friends. God willing, we will meet in the new year to proceed
enthusiastically with the second half of this parliamentary term. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Madam Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the ACDP I would like to
associate ourselves with the sentiments already expressed. Our sincere
thanks to the presiding officers - you, Madam Deputy Speaker, and the House
Chairpersons – and Table staff for your kindness and graciousness. Also to
the Secretary of Parliament, and all committee, administrative, library,
service, security, catering and cleaning staff, a heartfelt word of thanks.

I also wish to thank the media for their ongoing and in-depth coverage of
Parliament. It is much appreciated and we trust that they too will have a
good rest.
We’ve had a long and challenging year. We’ve dealt with hugely
controversial issues, not least of which was the Civil Union Bill, which
might see us returning before Christmas. At all times we in the ACDP have
prayed for wisdom and believe we have contributed to robust and hearty
debate. At the end of the day we all have the best interests of our nation
and our people at heart.

The ACDP wishes you all a very blessed and peaceful Christmas filled with
the love of our Lord Jesus Christ. Our prayer for all parliamentarians is:
The Lord bless you and keep you; the Lord make His face shine upon you and
be gracious to you; the Lord lift up His countenance upon you and give you
peace. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Deputy Speaker, we have come to the end of a very long
and exhausting year in terms of our parliamentary agenda. I’m of the view
that on this occasion with farewell speeches we must realise that it’s not
the time for parties to blame one another, but rather to reflect as
individuals on what each one of us has done in the past year with regard to
fulfilling our obligations as a representative of our people and as a
Member of Parliament.

Ek dink ons moet besef dat die werklikheid ook is dat daar dinge gebeur het
in ons parlementêre stelsel wat miskien vraagtekens plaas oor die
geloofwaardigheid van ons Parlement as instelling. Ek dink nie ons moet
illusies daaroor hê dat daar by die publiek sekere persepsies mag bestaan
wat nie noodwendig altyd positief is oor wat ons doen en wat ons hier
verrig nie. Mag dit vir ons elkeen ’n uitdaging wees wanneer ons volgende
jaar terugkom om juis daaraan te werk dat ons die werklike beeld van die
Parlement voorhou as ’n instelling waarop elke Suid-Afrikaner kan trots
wees. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[I think we must realise that it is also a reality that things have
occurred in our parliamentary system which perhaps raise questions about
the credibility of our Parliament as an institution. I do not think we must
have any illusions concerning certain perceptions that may exist among the
public which are not necessarily always positive about what we do or what
we accomplish here. Let it be a challenge to us all when we return next
year to work on presenting the true image of Parliament as an institution
of which each South African can be proud.]

I would also like to use the opportunity to thank my colleagues in the
caucus of what has become known as the “caucus for the smaller parties”.
Those are all the smaller parties, with the exception of the DA and the
IFP, which meet on a regular basis once a week to discuss issues. I know
it’s a laden term, which may be dangerous to use, but we just may become
what could be known as the “third force,” but in a positive sense.
[Laughter.] We are working on that!

Ek wil ook dankie sê vir die dienste van die Parlement. [I also want to say
thank you to the services of Parliament.]
These include the protection services, the SA Police Service, the service
officers, the cleaners, the catering staff, each and every member of
Parliament’s staff who work tirelessly to make our stay here as Members of
Parliament pleasant. Thank you very much. Sometimes you may think that we
do not see that, but we do.

Aan almal ’n Geseënde Kersfees en ’n voorspoedige Nuwejaar. Die geveg gaan
volgende jaar voort, dan gaan ons weer vorentoe. Baie dankie. [Applous.]
[To everyone a merry Christmas and a prosperous New Year. The struggle
continues next year, and then we move forward again. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Deputy Speaker and hon members, as we come to the end of
yet another year it is important that we exchange greetings as we head for
the season of joy, peace and giving. Surely, this has been a good year,
thanks to the talent and effort of the team. One would ask who the members
of the team are.

They are the hon members in this House, the presiding officers – all five
of them – the Whips, the chairpersons of committees, and employees of
Parliament, from the Secretary to the least of all, the junior members of
staff. It is this joint effort of all the above that has made this a good
year.

We thank the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker for the leadership they have
given. The three House Chairpersons have eased the yoke of the Speaker, and
in the process they have enhanced the function of this institution. In
gratitude we must, of course, applaud the Speaker for having seen fit to
ensure that at her discretion she invited members of smaller parties when
she undertook some of her overseas visits.

The Chief Whips’ Forum has functioned like a properly lubricated machine
despite its size and the varying political philosophies it has to contend
with. It has been putting the interests of the country above all. Hopefully
hon Louw and his committee will consider granting more time to the other
parties in the interests of the country.

Parliament has gone through a gruelling period, taking into account the
matter of the Travelgate scandal that still has to be resolved, but we know
that no hurdle is insurmountable. We need to note that those who live in
glass houses should refrain from throwing stones. Changes that have been
brought into being tended to tempt one to feel that, surely, today is
better than yesterday and hopefully tomorrow will supersede the rest in
brightness.

Thanks to the Table staff, the service officers and the orderlies without
whom this House would not function at all. We call on all to ensure that
during the festive season we hasten slowly to arrive alive. We in the UCDP
wish you all a fine festive season and as we part we say:
  God be with you till we meet again;
  Neath his wings securely hide you,
  Daily manna still provide you;
  God be with you till we meet again.

I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, we have concluded another year that
has driven us even closer to the true democracy that we so crave. It has
been a challenging, eventful, fruitful and promising 2006. We look forward
to 2007 and to being as effective and determined in turning our wheels of
democracy to transform the nation and deliver to the people.

I take this opportunity on behalf of the MF to thank Madam Speaker, the
Deputy Speaker and all the House Chairpersons for an auspicious 2006. Our
gratitude and applause are extended to the entire House, the NA Table, all
parliamentary staff, security and support staff for their fabulous
contribution making our ends worthwhile, attainable and successful.

This year we have laid many of our dear members to rest and I once again
offer our prayers and condolences to all the bereaved families and loved
ones of the deceased.

I once again take this opportunity to thank Mr Hahndiek for his great
contribution to the House and wish him well on his retirement. We also
welcome Mr Mansura to the House as our new Secretary to the National
Assembly, and we look forward to steering our ship in the new year with
him.

We wish all a merry Christmas, an Eid Mubarak to our Muslim community and a
prosperous New Year. May the season be restful and celebrated wisely and
safely in the company of friends and loved ones. We wish all our matrics
the best of success and a bright road ahead with great ambitions.

May we return to this podium in 2007 with determination and enthusiasm for
the challenges and mission that will await us. May we return to our
constituencies carrying our progress for 2006 and return in 2007 with
desires, needs and wants so that this democracy may be a true
representation of the people.

To all our political parties: Dear colleagues, go out there and remember to
give to those who don’t have, and make a difference to the have-nots this
festive season. To the hon Mike Ellis I want to say thank you very much for
your thoughts and I bless you. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Deputy Speaker and hon members, on behalf of the FD, I wish
to bid you and all presiding officers farewell until 2007. I would also
like to thank you, Deputy Speaker, and all presiding officers without
exception for the manner in which the National Assembly meetings were
conducted. Meetings were often very lively and vibrant, as an earlier
debate today illustrated, and in response presiding officers were
challenged to take a firm stand to maintain the decorum of the House.

If there is one member who must get an award for the most graphic and
original speech, it has to be the hon Koos van der Merwe, who takes the
cake with icing, and candle, included, of course!

Allow me to thank all party-political leaders, presiding officers, Chief
Whips and all parliamentary staff for a job well done. A special vote of
thanks goes to Mr Kasper Hahndiek for over 30 years of work well done at
Parliament.

We have come to the end of a very busy year and the time has come for us to
return to our constituencies to complete our constituency work. We must
never forget that we are here because of them. Our lives as MPs would be
empty and futile if we could not have a positive impact on the lives of our
constituents.

As we enter this festive season and have our huge meals, we must be mindful
that there are still millions of people without proper housing, without
electricity and water, or basic services. Our job is not done until we
ensure that all the laws we have passed and all the reports we have
accepted, when implemented, will significantly improve the quality of life
for all our people.

May God bless you and your families as you take a well-deserved rest, and
may all those who celebrate Christmas have a blessed Christmas and a happy
New Year. I thank you.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, this is not
the opportunity to do annual reports, but just very briefly I’d like to say
that during the course of this year, which was quite a momentous and
tumultuous year, we did succeed in advancing the vision of a People’s
Parliament that works for the creation of a better life for all.

Even though this is not the opportunity to do an evaluation of the year, I
think there are certain landmarks that we should remind ourselves of, for
example the fact that we, as a nation, went to the polls again in local
government elections and further consolidated our democracy; the fact that
we celebrated the 50th anniversary of the Women’s March; there was the
centenary of the Bambatha Rebellion; and there was the 30th anniversary of
the June 16th uprising.

At a parliamentary level there was also the People’s Assembly that we held
that, I think, stands out. On the international front there was our hosting
of the SADC PF and our participation in the DRC elections. Of course, there
was also the election of South Africa to the UN Security Council.

As a Parliament we continued to pass transformative legislation. I can
mention the Further Education and Training Colleges Bill and the Civil
Union Bill, and we came so close to passing the sexual offences Bill but,
hopefully, will do so in the near future.

I think we also continued to strengthen our oversight role. We ensured that
greater resources were allocated for constituency work. We engaged in a
very thorough debate around a parliamentary oversight model and, I think,
all of these things are taking us forward as a Parliament.

I think we need to also pay tribute to those of our colleagues who walked
with us, but are not seeing the end of the year with us. We think in
particular of the late hon Stella Sigcau, the hon Vincent Mabuyakhulu and
the hon James Kati. We pay tribute to them.

We would like to thank the presiding officers, the Secretary and the staff
of the parliamentary service; in short, everyone who contributes to making
Parliament work in the way that it does. In particular, we would like to
thank the Whips of all parties with whom we work so closely in the Chief
Whips’ Forum. Despite many appearances of animosity, we actually are very
united in serving the best interests of Parliament and our people. We would
also like to thank the people of South Africa who have sent us here with
the mandate that we have.

Lastly, I just want to say to everyone we hope that somewhere in the next
couple of weeks you will have some rest, you will reintroduce yourselves to
your families and you will just generally have a good festive season. Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Deputy Chief Whip. Order, hon members! I
would also like to take this opportunity, on behalf of the Speaker and the
House Chairpersons, to wish all members a fruitful constituency period and
a restful and peaceful recess. May you and your families enjoy the festive
period.

The year has been difficult and the hard work of members and staff has not
gone unnoticed. We have passed 26 Bills - some of them very, very
complicated – during this year and we have done much oversight work. We
successfully hosted the Youth Parliament, the Women’s Parliament and the
People’s Assembly. We processed many appointments in respect of
institutions that support democracy. We considered international agreements
and reports of the numerous organs of state.

So, dear members, I know that as you move back to your constituency
offices, much more work awaits you, but the holiday period will soon bring
some relief. Although there is a slim chance that we may have to return to
consider the Civil Union Bill should the NCOP propose amendments, let us
think positively and hope that this is our last day in Parliament for this
year.

I wish you and your families well. God bless and goodbye.

The House adjourned at 18:21.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses—to be submitted to President for assent


      (1)   Bills passed by National Assembly on 16 November 2006:


           (a)   Firearms Control Amendment Bill [B 12D—2006] (National
                Assembly—sec 75)
           (b)   South African Institute for Drug-Free Sport Amendment Bill
                [B 7D—2006] (National Assembly—sec 75).


      (2)   Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 15 November
          2006:


          (a)    Postal Services Amendment Bill [B 22B—2006] (National
                 Assembly—sec 75)
          (b)    Measurement Units and Measurement Standards Bill [B
                21B—2006] (National Assembly—sec 75)
          (c)    Accreditation for Conformity Assessment, Calibration and
                Good Practice Bill [B 29B—2006] (National Assembly—sec 75).


      (3)   Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 16 November
           2006:


           (a)   Carriage by Air Amendment Bill [B 18—2006] (National
                 Assembly—sec 75)
           (b)   Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 32—2006] (National
                 Assembly—sec 77)
           (c)   Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 33—2006] (National
                 Assembly— sec 77)
           (d)   Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 34—2006]
                 (NationalAssembly—sec 75)
           (e)   Further Education and Training Colleges Bill [B
                 23D—2006](National Council of Provinces—sec 76).


National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committee

The following members have been appointed to serve on the Disciplinary
Committee, chaired by the Deputy Speaker, viz:

African National Congress
Gumede, D M;Ramodibe D M (designated by the Speaker in terms of Rule
191(1)(c))

Democratic Alliance
Delport, J T

Inkatha Freedom Party
Van der Merwe, J H

United Democratic Movement
Bici, J

Independent Democrats
Harding, A

African Christian Democratic Party
Dudley, C

Freedom Front Plus
Mulder, C P

United Christian Democratic Party
Mfundisi, I S

Minority Front
Rajbally, S (designated by the Speaker in terms of Rule 191(1)(c))

United Independent Front
Mdaka, N M (designated by the Speaker in terms of Rule 191(1)(c))

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
     Life and Status of Women on Special Report from the South African Women
     Entrepreneurs – A burgeoning force in our economy for 2005, dated 14
     November 2006:

        The Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and
        Status of Women, having considered the Special Report from the South
        African Women Entrepreneurs- A burgeoning force in our economy for
        2005, referred to it, reports that it has concluded its
        deliberations thereon.
2.    Report of the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
     Life and Status of Women on Report and Financial Statements of the
     Commission for Gender Equality (CGE) for 2004-2005, including the
     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005
     [RP 120-2005], dated 14 November 2006:

        The Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and
        Status of Women, having considered the Report and Financial
        Statements of the Commission for Gender Equality (CGE) for 2004-
        2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 120-2005], referred to it, reports that
        it has concluded its deliberations thereon.

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local
     Government on an Oversight visit to Oudtshoorn, dated 7 November 2006:

        The Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government, having
        undertaken an oversight visit to Oudtshoorn, reports as follows:

A. Introduction

1.    During the Peoples Assembly 2006 held in Oudtshoorn from 14 – 15
     September 2006, Committees were requested to do oversight visits with
     relevant bodies. A delegation from the Portfolio Committee on
     Provincial and Local Government, the Select Committee on Local
     Government and Administration and the Select Committee on Finance
     undertook an oversight visit to the Oudtshoorn Local Municipality on
     Thursday, 14 September 2006.

     The aim of the oversight visit was to interact with the Mayor, Deputy
     Mayor,Municipal Manager, Councillors and Senior Managers of the
     municipality and interact with the Women’s Empowerment Project in
     Oudtshoorn.


2.    The People’s Assembly 2006 took place under the theme “All Shall Have
     Equal Rights.” Issues addressed by the People’s Assembly 2006 included:
       •    Rural Women’s participation in the economy.
       •    The impact of legislation dealing with unlawful discrimination
          against people with disabilities: How far have we come?
       •    The rights of the child: Child labour with a specific focus of
          children on farms.

     The main objective of the People’s Assembly 2006 was:
       •    To mark the tenth anniversary of the Constitution.
       •    To take stock of Parliament’s constitutional role of passing
          laws that seeks to address and redress issues of inequalities.
       •    To provide a vehicle for peoples’ voices to be heard on issues
          affecting them.

3.    However, for the Committee, the main focus of the interaction was to
      understand the functioning of the municipality in respect of all
      relevant legislation, the functioning of the ward committees and
      impact of the projects on the community, resource utilization and
      assistance from the municipality and the private sector.
4.    The delegation from the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local
      Government comprised of Mr S Mshudulu, Mr I Mogase, Mrs M Gumede, Mr G
      Phadagi, Mr W Doman and Mr M Swathe. Mr S Shiceka and Mr E Sogoni
      represented the Select Committee on Local Government and
      Administration and the Select Committee on Finance respectively.

B. Interaction with the Oudtshoorn Local Municipality

   1. The meeting was convened in the Municipal Chambers of the Oudtshoorn
       Local Municipality and was attended by the delegation and Deputy-
       Minister N Hangana.
       Members of the Oudtshoorn Local Municipality - Mr J Swartbooi:
       Executive Mayor, Mr J Swiggelaar: Deputy Executive Mayor, Mr M May:
       Municipal Manager, Mr C Van Der Mescht: Housing, Mr G Juthe,
       Councillor B Blaauw, Councillor A Lekay.

   2. The Deputy Minister thanked the Mayor for hosting the meeting and
       explained that the delegation was there to interact with officials
       from the Oudtshoorn Municipality – to understand the difficulties and
       challenges being faced by the municipality and how the committees
       could be of assistance.

   3. The Municipal Manager gave the Committee a broad overview of the
       municipality, a profile of all wards, the challenges in respect of
       unemployment, poverty alleviation, training, the impact of ostrich
       farming in the area and the budget. The Municipal Manager also
       touched on the various initiatives being undertaken by the
       municipality. The housing project was well underway and about 600
       units had already been completed. He explained the long delay in
       obtaining the Environmental Impact Assessment Report for the country
       estate and golf course development and appealed to the Committee for
       assistance in this regard. The country estate would give the
       community a boost in terms of job creation and other positive spin-
       offs. He also indicated that the recent flooding had put a heavy
       strain on the municipal infrastructure and the area was declared a
       disaster area. The municipality desperately needed more funds to
       address this issue. The municipality had its audit committee and
       necessary procurement policies in place.


   4. Members questions centred on the following:


        •  service delivery i.r.o water and sanitation
        •  debt collection
        •  the impact of ostrich farming in the community
        •  training and empowerment
        •  staff appointments, demographics and performance contracts
        •  valuation of properties i.r.o the Property Rates Act
        •  the status of the housing challenges in Dyseldorp

   5. The Municipal Manager explained that they had completed a capacity
       questionnaire to assess capacity of municipalities. They worked
       closely with the District Municipality and received valuable support
       from the district. All documentation was electronic with an
       electronic filing system also in place.


       The restructuring process in the municipality was completed with
       issues relating to women, youth and disabled being addressed by the
       social directorate. Mention was made of the Aids Rehabilitation
       Centre being managed by an NGO on behalf of the municipality. A
       document was in place to deal with the indigent and the issue of
       powers and functions. A water tariff structure was also in place with
       special focus on the indigent. The revenue collection rate currently
       stood at 92% for the municipality. The municipality had received
       money from the provincial department of housing to address the
       housing problems in Dyseldorp and the councils had secured money in
       their budgets to alleviate the ablution problem. The new valuation
       role was to be implemented in July 2008 and a transport plan had been
       adopted by the District Municipality for implementation. There were
       many old bylaws that needed to be addressed.

C. Interaction with Community Members/Women’s Empowerment Group Members


   1. The delegation held a community meeting at the Bridgeton Community
      Hall with members of the community and members of the Women’s
      Empowerment Group of Oudtshoorn. These members were given a chance to
      highlight problems and challenges they were facing with the
      municipality and  councillors of the area. Most of the issues centred
      on the following:


          • irregularities and the perceived discrimination in the awarding
            of contracts and the tender process
          • policies in respect of women, youth and persons with
            disabilities
          •  monies made available for projects was taking too long to
            reach the intended beneficiaries
          • policies in respect of the indigent
          •  inaccessibility of councilors
          •  the language policy of the municipality
          •  nepotism with appointments to vacant posts
          •  housing problems in Dysselsdorp and filthiness of townships
          •  poverty and unemployment

   2. A member of the delegation explained that they were informed that all
      was well and functioning and challenges were being addressed by the
      municipality. After hearing from the community - this did not seem to
      be the case. The delegation promised the community that they would
      secure an urgent meeting with the Mayor’s Office immediately to seek
      answers on the issues raised. The delegation thanked the community for
      their time and effort.

D. Follow-up Interaction with the Oudtshoorn Local Municipality


   1. Present at the meeting was the delegation and members of the
      Oudtshoorn Local Municipality which included Mr J Swartbooi: Executive
      Mayor, Mr J Swiggelaar: Deputy Executive Mayor, Mr P Nel: Speaker,
      Councillor Ms R Le Kay, Councillor C Stemmet, Councillor G April,
      Councillor E Fortune,Councillor J Coetzee, Councillor D De Jager,
      Councillor N Gunguluza, Councillor M May, Councillor B Pannas,
      Councillor G Phillips, Councillor K Witon, Councillor J Harmse,
      Councillor N Soman, Councillor B Blaauw, Councillor E Ngalo,
      Councillor S Billy, Councillor C Ngalo, Councillor L Lamprecht,
      Councillor J Olivier, Councillor S Biljohn, Mr B Vermaak, Mr K Lubbe,
      Ms E September, Mr C Ceaser, Mr R Jullies and Mr N Oosthuizen.

   2. The reason for the meeting was to give the council some feedback on
      the meeting held with the community earlier in the day. It was
      mentioned that there was a host of concerns raised at the community
      meeting and Members felt it important to share these with the council
      with a view of trying to resolve some of the issues raised.
   3. The Chairperson proposed that the Committee work through the list of
      concerns raised and find a way forward in dealing with them.

   4. Language Policy of the Municipality:
       It was brought to the attention of the Committee that all
       correspondence from the municipality was only in Afrikaans. This
       resulted in communication problems for those councilors who did not
       understand Afrikaans or who preferred correspondence in at least one
       other language, preferably English. It was mentioned by a councilor
       that the translation facilities of the District Municipality had been
       offered to the municipality but was not acted on. The Speaker and
       some councilors claimed there was no problems i.r.o language policies
       while others insisted that the problem did exist.


       The Chairperson was of the view that the municipality may have a
       language policy, but that it was not being implemented. To resolve
       the issue, the Chairperson ruled that they be supplied with the
       evidence that the municipal hansard, notices and other correspondence
       did, in fact, cater for other language groups. If not, the
       Chairperson requested that correspondence be communicated in English
       as well.


   5. It was agreed that the Committee would arrange a structured follow-up
       meeting with the Oudtshoorn Municipality in the near future. It may
       be necessary to invite the South African Local Government Association
       (SALGA) and the Department of Provincial and Local Government (DPLG)
       to this meeting.

E. Recommendation

   1. The Minister for Provincial and Local Government should make available
       a report on the outcome of the investigation launched by the MEC for
       Local Government in the Western Cape – to prepare the Committee for a
       follow-up meeting with the Oudtshoorn Municipality.

Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government
   on an Oversight visit to Provincial Disaster Management Centres, dated 7
   November 2006:


     The Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government, having
     undertaken an oversight visit to Provincial Disaster Management
     Centres, reports as follows:


A. Introduction

   1. During the 2nd Term Programme of the Portfolio Committee on Provincial
       and Local Government, the Committee held hearings on the state of
       readiness of municipalities in respect of Disaster Management. At the
       end of these hearings with a range of provincial disaster management
       centres, the Committee resolved to visit some of these centres during
       the 3rd Term to gain an insight into the achievements and challenges
       being faced by these disaster management centres. The provincial
       visit took place from 9 – 12 October 2006.

   2. The delegation from the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local
       Government comprised of Mr S L Tsenoli, Mr S A Mshudulu, Mrs M M
       Gumede, Mr M M S Lekgoro, Mr B Solo and Mr W Doman. Members of the
       Committee Section staff included Mr L A Brown, the Committee
       Secretary and Mrs B Madikane, the Committee Assistant.
B. Objectives

   The overall purpose of the oversight visit was to give a higher profile
   to disaster management in government. There was significant progress in
   respect of infrastructure – but the risk of losing this at great costs
   financially - and in some instances people as well – remains. The main
   objective of the visit was to look at the following:

         • the state of readiness of disaster management in the provinces
         •  the challenges with regard to implementation of the relevant
           legislation
         •  issues with respect to intergovernmental relations
         •  to look at the joint operations centres – interact with
           officials from the local district


C. Provincial Disaster Management Centres

   1. The provincial disaster management centres visited are in the
       following provinces - Western Cape, Eastern Cape, North West and
       Gauteng.
   2. Meetings involved a range of stakeholders including local government
       councillors, government officials, elected and official
       functionaries.


D. Provincial Disaster Management Centre, Western Cape Province – Monday,9
     October 2006
   1. Present at the meeting were Mrs S Majiet, Head of Department: Local
       Government and Housing, Mr R Dyantyi, MEC: Local Government and
       Housing, Mr S Carstens: Disaster Management, Mrs J Pandaram: Disaster
       Management, Dr W Smith: Emergency Management Services, Mr J Rikhotso:


   Disaster Management, Cllr D Ximbi: Safety and Security, Mr G Pillay: City
       of Cape Town Disaster Management Centre, Mr P Adams: Safety and
       Security, Mr J Minnie: City of Cape Town Disaster Management Centre
       and Mr G Killian: Department of Provincial and Local Government.


   2. The delegation received a broad profile of the geographical area,
       statistics and hazards in the Western Cape by Mr S Carstens. He also
       gave the delegation a historic overview of disaster management in the
       Western Cape with a breakdown of the identified hazards and a
       comprehensive risk overview. On implementation of the Disaster
       Management Act, Mr Carstens gave the delegation a holistic picture of
       how the centres were progressing at national, provincial, district
       and local government levels and the legal requirements for the
       establishment of a disaster management centre in South Africa. He
       also made mention of the operations of the Emergency Management
       Centre and information technology software collaboration between the
       centres. Mr Carstens concluded by briefing the delegation on the
       areas of concern which included funding, capacity, competency and
       issues revolving around the hosting of the 2010 World Cup.


   3. Dr W Smith gave the delegation an overview of the Emergency Management
       Centres and the system in place which included the Control Centre
       Software, In-Ambulance Software and the In-Hospital Functionality.


   4. The delegation received a presentation on the recent disaster that hit
       the Eden District Municipal Area in August 2006 with background,
       intervention, estimated flood damage losses, recovery plans, lessons
       learned and recommendations.


   5. The delegation then moved to the City of Cape Town Disaster Management
       Centre in Goodwood for a presentation on their Disaster Risk
       Management, legislative requirements and the Case Study of the N7
       Bridge Informal Settlement fire incident that occurred recently.

E. Provincial Disaster Management Centre, Eastern Cape Province –
   Tuesday,10 October 2006

   1. Input by Nelson Mandela Metropolitan Municipality


       a.   In accordance with the National Disaster Management Policy
          Framework the first draft of the Provincial Disaster Management
          Framework was circulated for comment in May 2006. The Province
          had also developed an Integrated Disaster Risk Management
          Strategy that outlined the following strategic goals:
                   • to institutionalise and strategically direct the
                     integrated execution of uniform Disaster Risk
                     Management Policy and Strategy
                   • to institutionalise the integrated application of risk
                     reduction planning and best practice disaster risk
                     management methodology
                   • to implement and sustain a uniform disaster risk
                     management information system
                   • to create and sustain appropriate disaster risk
                     management awareness, training, education and focused
                     research
       b.   The Province had assisted municipalities through the use of
          service providers to develop disaster management policy framework
          documents which are to be adopted by Councils.


       c.   A minimum of R 20 million annual budget was provided by the
          Department to address disaster management, fire and emergency
          services. Only an operational budget was provided for by some
          municipalities. The province had an immediate budget shortfall of
          at least R 350 million to address the state of disaster
          management, fire and emergency services over the MTEF period.


       d.   The Department had created a Directorate for Disaster Management
          and Emergency Services with 36 posts. Municipalities are moving
          with a slow pace to employ adequate staff members to service the
          needy communities.


       e.   The Province had established a functional disaster management
          centre on a temporary basis. Discussions were being held with the
          Provincial Treasury for funding to build or purchase a permanent
          structure. Functional district and metropolitan disaster
          management centres were established. Satellite centres cascading
          down to local municipalities were currently being established.


       f.   The Province communicated through the Provincial Disaster
          Management Advisory Forum that convened monthly with the
          government departments and other relevant stakeholders.


       g.   Successes included the co-ordination of disaster management at
          provincial, district, metropolitan and local levels despite the
          limited resources, the implementation of the pilot project on
          Disaster Management Information systems and the implementation of
          the Disaster Management Act. Another success was the district and
          Metropolitan Disaster Management Policy Framework.


       h.   The overarching challenge faced is under-funding which meant
          that other challenges facing the Province and municipalities
          could not be addressed.

   2. Input by Cacadu District Municipality


       a.   Cacadu was one of the largest of the six districts, comprised of
          nine local municipalities and, four district management areas. A
          Policy Framework for the district was developed in line and in
          accordance with the National and Provincial Policy frameworks and
          the first draft is presently circulated for comment. The
          framework broadly outlines the following:


                 • Institutionalizing the Disaster Risk Management policy
                   and strategies
                 • Risk Reduction Planning
                 • Integrated Disaster Management information system
                 • Awareness campaigns, training and education and research.


       b.   A risk analysis of the district as a whole was completed in July
          2006 and the remainder of the Disaster Management Plan was
          scheduled for completion by end 2006.


       c.   The centre was relocated during 2005 from Greenbushes outside
          Port Elizabeth to Algoa House building situated in Port Elizabeth
          Central. The present DMC is considered to be temporary as it is
          envisaged that the offices of Cacadu District Municipality and
          the Disaster Management Centre will relocate to a new building in
          Jeffrey’s Bay.


       d.   The Disaster Management reports to the office of the Municipal
          Manager and has a total of 13 staff members.


       e.   District Advisory Forum meetings were held three times per
          annum. The meeting was chaired by the Municipal Manager and
          attended by officials, politicians, companies, state and
          provincial departments and other stakeholders. Local Advisory
          Forum meetings were held at least four times per annum at each of
          the nine local municipalities in the district. Presently no
          interdepartmental meetings were held but would be introduced
          after acceptance of the Policy Framework and Disaster Management
          Plans.


       f.   Projects for 2006/07 included the following:


                 • Compilation and implementation of Disaster Management
                   Response Plans
                 • Workshop on Disaster Management Act in 4 satellite areas
                 • Issuing of Disaster Management equipment to volunteers
                 • Conduct flood awareness campaigns at 6 schools in
                   Ndlambe, Makana and Kouga
                 • Conduct severe weather campaigns at 6 schools in Ndlambe,
                   Makana and Kouga
                 • Provide assistance to disaster affected communities
                 • Purchase electronic Resource Data Base/information
                   system.
                 • Developing and upgrading of two way radio communication
                   system in Cacadu District Municipality
                 • Purchase capital items needed for Disaster Management
                 • Conduct training and education programmes
                 • Facilitate community awareness programmes
                 • Facilitate response and recovery programmes


       g.   Fire projects included the following:


                 • Establish basic fire fighting services in DMA
                 • Provide training to at least 10 persons in each of the
                   identified communities
                 • Conduct Fire Awareness campaigns at 10 schools in Cacadu
                   District Municipality area
                 • Establish fire fighting services and assist local
                   municipalities
                 • Ensure sustainable fire services at local municipalities
                   by providing operational support.
                 • Provide fire fighting courses to fire officers and fire
                   fighters
                 • Upgrading of secure buildings to house fire vehicles and
                   assets


       h.   It was indicated that emergency funding from National or
          Provincial Government to the district municipality was taking
          long to reach the affected communities. The SAAB Grid information
          system was also a challenge in that similar systems were
          available in South Africa that were already in use, compatible
          and with competitive pricing. The SAAB Grid offer to the district
          municipality included a high annual maintenance fee over a very
          long period of 15 years and an annualincrease.


   3. Input by Alfred Nzo District Municipality

       a.   The municipality was the poorest compared to the other districts
          in the Province. Poverty index figures showed that the district
          stood at 49.9%. Due to demarcation the district was divided into
          Umzimvubu and Greater Matatiele Municipalities. The delegation
          was given a brief overview and background to Disaster Management
          and Fire Service, the establishment of the District Disaster
          Management and Fire Station and the Disaster Management Satellite
          Centres and Fire Stations.


       b.   Disaster Management was a sub-directorate within the Department
          of the Office of the Municipal Manager. There were two divisions
          in the sub-directorate, namely Disaster Management and Fire
          Services. There was currently a staff complement of 18 with the
          organogram still being reviewed. There was a concerted effort to
          build capacity of officials and communities. On the state-of-
          readiness, the centre was operational 24 hours through the 18
          trained volunteers with personnel on standby.


       c.   Challenges/difficulties being faced included:


                   • lack of ownership of the programme by municipal
                     entities and organs of state
                   • correct placement of the function
                   • appointment of and clear role and responsibilities of
                     the Head of the Centre
                   • budgeting of the programme by municipalities
                   • insufficient funding for post and disaster recovery
                     phase
                   • lack of appropriate disaster risk management structures
                   • lack of personnel and other resources
                   • lack of political will
                   • re-occurrence of disasters without intervention of the
                     Department of Housing in terms of the Emergency Housing
                     Scheme

   4. Input by Buffalo City Municipality


       a.   The municipality was a large Category B Municipality with
          capacity to address large incidents with nineteen response plans
          to address most of the disasters which occur in the city. The
          municipality was currently investigating a service level
          agreement for Disaster Management to clarify the legal status for
          the municipality with regard to disaster management.


       b.   A draft Disaster Management Framework has been prepared but
          required the outcomes of the service level agreement before it
          could be submitted to Council for approval.


       c.   Buffalo City had a well equipped centre as well as a sub-centre
          in King William’s Town. A ward councillor forum had been
          established and the terms of reference would be submitted to
          Council shortly. Technical task teams to conduct planning and
          address prevention and mitigation would be established in 2007.
          Buffalo City had conducted an indicative risk assessment and was
          a pilot for the national implementation of the Disaster
          Management Framework.


       d.   Buffalo City Disaster Management Centre participated in the
          provincial and district advisory forums and had a working
          relationship with a number of government departments. Joint
          Operation Centres were established for major events in the city.

   5. Input by Ukhahlamba District Municipality


       a.   The district disaster management centre was established and was
          in full operation on normal working hours. Disaster Risk
          Management Satellite Centres were established throughout the
          district in all four local municipalities. The Disaster Risk
          Management Unit had seven personnel. Volunteers were trained in
          all four local municipal areas and used in times of disaster.
          District and Local Disaster Risk Management Advisory Forums have
          been established and were continuing successfully.


       b.   The District also had a senior fire officer employed for all
          fire related matters with an office in Barkley East. Volunteers
          and members of the local municipality were assisting with fire
          fighting services in their respective municipal areas. These
          volunteers were multi-skilled as they were trained for both
          disaster risk and fire fighting. Two medium fire fighting trucks
          had been purchased and have been deployed at the Maletswai
          municipal area and one in the Elundini area. There were plans to
          purchase two medium fire fighting trucks in the next
          financialyear.


       c.   The Disaster Management Act was being implemented successfully
          in some areas, but the Centre had embarked on an awareness
          campaign to inform the Sector Departments, CBO’s, NGO’s, Local
          Municipalities and the community at large about the Act. Disaster
          Risk Management By-Laws were being formulated for the District.


       d.   The placement of the unit has always been a concern and
          discussions were held regarding the matter, but no response has
          been satisfactory. The District was in the process of
          establishing a District Disaster Risk Management Policy Framework
          and consultants have been used to assist.


       e.   Relations with Government Sector Departments have been
          established and strengthened through the Disaster Risk Management
          Advisory Forums. The District was facilitating the development of
          cross-border relations with neighbouring district municipalities
          and local municipalities to assist one another during
          emergencies.

   6. Input by O R Tambo District Municipality


       a.   The Disaster Risk Management Centre was provisionally housed at
          the O R Tambo House in Myezo Park. Plans to build a new Centre
          were at an advanced stage but funding was a huge challenge. This
          new Centre was expected to encompass fire fighting services. The
          main Centre was staffed by nine personnel and it was envisaged
          that the Centre would operate on a 24-hour basis as of November
          2006.


       b.   Seven Satellite Centres had been established but infrastructure
          in the form of offices was a challenge in all Satellite Centres –
          the exception being the Mhlontlo Satellite Centre where the
          municipality was very co-operative in assisting with office
          accommodation and the Ntabankulu Satellite Centre where the
          District Municipality had given support. Each of the Satellite
          Centres had been issued with a suitable disaster response
          vehicle.


       c.   The Centre had, through the assistance of a service provider,
          produced a draft risk management policy framework. Consultation
          with local municipalities would start at the beginning of
          November 2006 and it was expected that by the end of December
          2006 consultation would have been finalised and adopted by
          Council in 2007.


       d.   The Disaster Risk Management Advisory Forum created a platform
          for enhancing intergovernmental relations as it was attended by
          provincial organs of state, NGO’s, CBO’s and the Provincial
          Disaster Risk Management Centre.


       e.   The main challenge remained funding, especially for
          commissioning scientific risk and vulnerability assessment.

   7. Input by Chris Hani District Municipality

       a.   The first draft of the District Disaster Management Framework
          was available and out for comment within the institution. Policy
          in respect of response, relief and rehabilitation had been
          drafted and submitted to the policy committee. The District had
          embarked on an intensive education and awareness programme
          including schools. Volunteers had been trained in first aid,
          fundamentals of disaster management and fire fighting. Municipal
          officials and councillors have also been trained in disaster risk
          management planning, fundamentals of disaster risk management
          planning and emergency trauma response.


       b.   The Centre was an active member of Provincial Disaster
          Management Advisory Forum, Eastern Cape Emergency Services Co-
          ordinating Committee, Disaster Management Institute of Southern
          Africa and the District Disaster Management Advisory Forum. A
          partnership with the Department of Education, Sport and
          Recreation and Culture had been established.


       c.   The District still needed to address the following challenges:


                  • Availability of at least level 1 plans before the end of
                    2005/2006 financial year
                  • Availability of guidelines on education and awareness
                    programmes
                  • Strengthening of existing and establishment of
                    partnerships with role players and stakeholders
                  • Availability of clear cross-boundary agreements with
                    neighbouring districts
                  • Funding for the programme
                  • Adequate personnel for the Centre
                  • Support/co-operation by departments internally and
                    externally
                  • Funding for a reconstruction programme

F. Provincial Disaster Management Centre, North West Province – Wednesday,
  11 October 2006

  Present at the meeting were Mr P Siko: Department of Local Government and
  Housing, Mr M Mosiane: Department of Local Government and Housing, Mr G
  Kwena: Centre for Disaster Management, Mr M Jacobs, Mr L Williams:
  Department of Provincial and Local Government, Mr T Watson-Thomas:
  Department of Local Government and Housing, Mr H Bezuidenhour: Disaster
  Management, Mr M Skweit: Greater Taung Local Municipality, Ms B Madumo:

  Greater Taung Local Municipality, Ms B Mogakwe: Greater Taung Local
  Municipality, Ms A Maepe: Greater Taung Local Municipality, Councillr O
  Oliphant, Mr T Msimang: Department of Local Government and Housing, Mr R
  Lesar: Southern District Municipality, Mr P Monare: Bonjanala District
  Municipality and Mr P Dyonase: Department of Local Government and Housing.


  1.  Input by North West Province


       a.   The National Disaster Management Act 57 of 2002 was implemented
          at National and Provincial level from 1 April 2004 and at
          District Municipality and Local Municipality level as of the 1
          July 2004. All implementers from National to Local had two years
          in which to fully implement the Act at their level of
          responsibilities.


       b.   The Disaster Management Centre has been established and was
          fairly functional and continues to improve. The head of the
          centre had been appointed in an acting position. Until the start-
          up grant from DPLG is granted to the District Municipalities
          there will only be progress where funds have been transferred
          from Province. Some municipalities, which have structures in
          place from the old Civil Protection, have continued to operate
          but only from within the old municipal boundaries due to
          financial constraints.


       c.   Southern District Municipality - Has started its Disaster
          Management structure and appointed a permanent member of staff to
          act as the disaster co-coordinator. A disaster management forum
          within the district municipality has been established with
          disaster management plans currently being developed with the
          “Grant in Aid” from the province.


       d.   Bophirima District Municipality - This District Municipality is
          an example of how Disaster Management structures should be
          operating by this time. The Municipality has over the past 4
          years established all necessary structures in the way of control
          centers and forums on all levels. It has incorporated all the
          previously rural Disaster Management structures into the
          municipalities and have brought in all relevant role-plays on
          political and operational level. It is yet to expand their forum
          to include the line functionaries from within the District
          Municipality structure. It has already commenced on an intensive
          training programme for volunteers from the informal sector as
          well as farm labourers in both fire fighting and first aid.


       e.   Bojanala Platinum District Municipality - All structures were in
          place and fully operational in the district. New structures were
          being established in the areas not formally covered, such as
          Moses-Kotane and Moretele. In addition the municipalities were
          aligning their operations to incorporate the new boundaries.


       f.   Central District Municipality - This District Municipality has
          employed a permanent member of staff to work as the Disaster
          Management coordinator. Structures have not yet been established.
          The district council has not as yet prioritized their Disaster
          Management in the IDP. Disaster Management plans were not yet
          finalised.


       g.   Current challenges faced were that there were no adequate funds
          for Province, District and Local Municipalities for effective
          Disaster Management Process. There was inadequate commitment from
          councils and lack of prioritization of disaster management. The
          placement of the centre and disaster management seen as a non-
          core function thus perpetuating a perception that this was money
          down the drain.
  2.  Input by Greater Taung Local Municipality on Recent Flooding Disaster


       a.   The average yearly rainfall for the area was 418 mm, with the
          western part of Greater Taung Local Municipality having been in
          various level of flooding since 20 February 2006. The Greater
          Taung Local Municipality had for the period January to June 2006
          received on average 1380 mm of rain. The extent of the flooding
          was equal to a 1 in 50 year flood and seriously affected 12
          villages in Greater Taung Local Municipality. Due to the serious
          affect that the floods had on the population of these villages,
          the Greater Taung Local Municipality regarded it as its duty to
          intervene in the affected area. To mitigate the effect of the
          flooding on the population of the villages, the Municipality by
          means of its Disaster Management Structures started to distribute
          disaster relief to affected households in the form of tents,
          blankets and emergency food supplies.


       b.   The Tamasikwa Bridge was seriously damaged and will have to be
          rebuilt. The Moretele Bridge, Matlapaneng Bridge and Choseng
          Bridge and approximately 60 km of rural road needs to be
          rehabilitated. The Reivilo-Lykso road has been seriously damaged
          and will need to be reconstructed. The cost to repair the road
          infrastructure could be in the region of R 41 000 000.00.


       c.   A total of 1032 houses have, since February 2006, collapsed or
          have serious structural damage and will have to be rebuilt.
          Approximately 700 households were currently living in disaster
          management supplied tents. To replace these houses using the
          Peoples Housing Process could cost approximately R 35 000 000.00.
          The North West Department of housing has approved 2000 houses to
          replace damaged houses.


       d.   The 12 affected villages were cut off from clinics with clinic
          personnel being airlifted into the affected villages. Seriously
          ill and near term pregnant woman were evacuated to hospitals.
          Accessibility of villages by mobile clinic staff remained
          problematic in the Dry Harts area. The bad conditions of rural
          roads had serious consequences for rural households.


       e.   Water supply in the affected villages has been polluted -
          increasing the cases of diarrhea. Measures have been taken to
          educate the local populations on how to decontaminate their
          drinking water using “Jik” and boiling water. All bore holes in
          the areas that supplied water has been tested. Water supplies in
          the Vaaltyn, Tamasikwa and Letlhapong areas have been polluted by
          E-coli and coli forms. Sedibeng Water has introduced measures to
          provide safe water including putting up water tanks in the
          affected areas.


       f.   The Department of Social Services has been struggling to deliver
          social service payments in the affected areas due to continuous
          heavy flooding. Even when social grants are paid, communities
          have problems to reach shops to buy supplies due to the bad
          condition of roads.


       g.   The rural farming areas have been severely affected
          (approximately 54 horses, 43 cattle, 31 goats and 145 sheep have
          died). Commercial areas have lost 117 cattle, 24 horses 395 sheep
          and 17 goats. Animal diseases were wide spread and foot rot
          amongst sheep was a problem. Irrigation pivots along the Harts
          River had been flooded causing millions of rands worth of damage.
          Schools have been severely disrupted by the floods and teachers
          and scholars were cut of from their schools causing disruptions
          the last three weeks.
       h.   Medium Term Intervention Proposals included the following:


                  • Emergency repairs be done on roads and bridges to
                    connect communities to service centers.
                  • Sedibeng Water implements immediate measures to provide
                    safe water.
                  • The Department of Agriculture destroy dead animal
                    carcasses and assist in preventing animal diseases.
                  • The Heath Department continues to provide immediate
                    mobile health services.
                  • The Department of Social Services implement measures to
                    continue providing social services in the affected area.
                  • Disaster relief be continued into affected areas until
                    the situation normalised.
                  • An immediate assessment of housing damages is conducted
                    to start an emergency housing project before winter.
                  • Sewer problems be attended to and an assessment be done
                    of the damages done to public infrastructure.

       i.   The Greater Taung Local Municipality received approximately 150
          tones of food that was distributed to approximately 5200
          households. 373 Bags of clothing was also distributed to
          different communities. The final distribution of food and
          clothing was completed on the 27 of July 2006. Some late
          donations of food and clothes were still beingreceived.


       j.   Long Term Intervention Proposals included the following:


                  • Relocation of communities away from flood prone areas as
                    identified in the Spatial framework of the GTLM.
                  • Proper planning for relocation of houses and
                    reconstruction of roads and bridges and other damaged
                    infrastructure.
                  • Housing scheme to replace damaged housing and that an
                    alternative site for relocation of communities in flood
                    plains be identified.

       k.   The Department of Local Government and Housing in North West had
          approved an emergency housing project of 2000 houses to replace
          damaged and destroyed houses to the value of R 82 000 000.00. The
          need for proper planning of infrastructure for the new housing
          had delayed the start of the emergency housing project. A
          contractor was appointed by the Department to construct the 2000
          houses.


       l.   To repair municipal access roads, National Government had
          approved R 11 400 000.00 for repairs to municipal road
          infrastructure. This money was to be structured through the MIG
          grant and had to be spent by March 2007. The project managers had
          been appointed and tenders were allocated. Another R 14 000
          000.00 was to be spent on provincial roads by the Department of
          Public Works.


       m.   The Development Bank of South Africa (DBSA) had donated R 500
          000.00 to help victims of the flood disaster to rebuild their
          houses. A total of R 1 300 000.00 received for the Greater Taung
          Disaster Fund was used to benefit the seriously affected areas
          with Local Economic Development Projects run from the office of
          the Mayor to address the high unemployment in the affected areas.

G. Provincial Disaster Management Centre, Ekurhuleni Disaster
     Centre,Gauteng – Thursday, 12 October 2006


       a.   The Provincial Disaster Management Forum (PDMAF) must make
          recommendations to the Disaster Management Centre and act in an
          advisory capacity with regard to matters pertaining to disaster
          risk management. The Forum is also required to support the
          programmes of the Disaster Management Centre by providing
          technical expertise.


       b.   The PDMAF should further play a role in drafting disaster risk
          management plans, promoting joint standards of practice, develop
          the information management and communication systems and advise
          and make recommendations on training and public awareness.


       c.   The structure of the Provincial Disaster Management Framework
          comprises four key performance areas namely:


                   • Institutional Capacity for Disaster Risk
                   • Risk Assessment
                   • Risk Reduction’
                   • Response and Recovery
                   • The three enablers being:
                   • Information Management and Communication
                   • Education, Training, Public Awareness and Research
                   • Funding
        d.  During an incident, numerous procedures and administrative
          functions are required to support incident management. The
          actions described in the support functions are not limited to
          particular types of events but are overarching in nature and
          applicable to nearly every type of incident.


        e.  Emergency Support Functions (ESF) identifies ESF coordinators
          and the primary and support agencies pertinent to the ESF.
          Several ESFs incorporate multiple components, with primary
          agencies designated for each component to ensure integration f
          and transition between preparedness, prevention, response,
          recovery and mitigation activities.


        f.  Support agencies are responsible for conducting operations using
          their own authorities, subject matter experts, capabilities and
          resources. They also participate in planning for short-term and
          long-term incident management and recovery operations and assist
          in the conduct of situational assessment.


        g.  Risk Specific strategies pertaining to each disaster class have
          been developed. Priority risks have been identified and include
          floods, fires in informal settlements, dolomite sinkhole
          formation, undermining of inhabited areas, major chemical
          industry risk and incidence of motor vehicle accidents.


        h.  The Gauteng Disaster Management Centre will monitor a range of
          networks and services which include local authorities, Gauteng
          EMS, SAPS and Private Dispatch Centres.


        i.  The final comments on the Disaster Management Plan from all
          stakeholders have been completed and forwarded to the MEC for
          approval. Identification and implementation of Emergency Support
          Functions has also been completed.


        j.  Funds have been made available for a Disaster Management Centre
          for Gauteng and should be completed in 2007.

Observations


        a.  There is a need for the Committee to arrange a joint meeting
          with the Department of Provincial and Local Government and
          National Treasury on issues of adequate start-up grants at all
          levels and adequate resourcing for disaster management at all
          spheres of government.


        b.  The Department of Provincial and Local Government should ensure
          that councillors and public representatives across all 3 spheres
          must form a key part of mobilisation for training in respect of
          disaster management.


        c.  The Committee should complete its oversight visits on the
          implementation of the Disaster Management Act by provincial,
          district and local areas – and visit the remaining provinces.

Recommendations

        a.  The Department of Provincial and Local Government should ensure
          that Disaster Management is afforded a higher priority at all
          spheres of government and be reflected in the Integrated
          Development Plans (IDPs) as required by law.


        b.  The Department of Provincial and Local Government should conduct
          capacity building and awareness workshops across all spheres for
          political support for disaster management.


        c.  The Department of Provincial and Local Government should develop
          an evaluation and monitoring mechanism to gauge disaster
          management preparedness across all spheres.

  Report to be considered.

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert T061116E-insert – PAGES 2800-2813



