---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol18 - THURSDAY 30 JULY 1987'
layout: debate
year: 1987
month: JULY
month_slug: Jul
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>THURSDAY, 30 JULY 1987</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>Prayers&#x2014;<recordedTime time="1987-07-30T14:15:00">14h15</recordedTime>.</narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#reports_of_standing_selectcommittees">

<heading>REPORTS OF STANDING SELECTCOMMITTEES</heading>

<speech by="#cunningham">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">J H CUNNINGHAM</person>:</from>

<p>as Chairman, presented the Sixth Report of the Standing Select Committee on Manpower and Mineral and Energy Affairs, dated 29 July 1987, as follows:</p>

<block name="quote">The Standing Committee on Manpower and Mineral and Energy Affairs having considered the subject of the <i>Electricity Bill</i> [B 69&#x2014;87 (GA)], referred to it, your Committee begs to report the Bill with amendments [B 69A&#x2014;87 (GA)].</block>

<p>Bill to be read a second time.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#cunningham">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">J H CUNNINGHAM</person>:</from>

<p>as Chairman, presented the Seventh Report of the Standing Select Committee on Manpower and Mineral and Energy Affairs, dated 29 July 1987, as follows:</p>

<block name="quote">The Standing Committee on Manpower and Mineral and Energy Affairs having considered the subject of the <i>Energy Bill</i> [B 90&#x2014;87 (GA)], referred to it, your Committee begs to report the Bill with an amendment [B 90A&#x2014;87 (GA)].</block>

<p>Bill to be read a second time.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#appropriation_bill">

<heading>APPROPRIATION BILL</heading>

<summary>(Committee Stage resumed)</summary>

<p>Vote No 28&#x2014;&#x201C;Environment Affairs&#x201D; and Vote No 29&#x2014;&#x201C;Water Affairs&#x201D;:</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_environment_affairs_and_of_water_affairs">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENT AFFAIRS AND OF WATER AFFAIRS</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, since this is the first time I have dealt with this Vote in the capacity of Minister, I thought it fitting to open the debate with a few general remarks. Allow me to begin by thanking all the officials of the department, as well as the officials of the various institutions connected with this department, for their help and support on my taking over this portfolio.</p>

<p>&#x2020;Mr Chairman, I should also like to congratulate Mr S Pachai on his appointment as Deputy Minister of Environment Affairs. I sincerely believe he will make a valuable contribution to environment affairs in South Africa, and we look forward to his participation in this debate later today.</p>

<p>*I should like to begin by briefly sketching the object and composition of the Department of Environment Affairs. I do so on the one hand because one often encounters ignorance among the public concerning what matters fall under that department and, on the other, because it is probably the department with <span class="col_2661-2662" refersTo="page_0175"/>the greatest multiplicity of functions. The object of the department is, in short, as follows:</p>

<block name="quote">Om die onderhoubare benutting van lewende hulpbronne en die gehalte van die menslike omgewing te bevorder tot voordeel van die bevolking van Suid-Afrika.</block>

<p>In order to comply with this, the department has been subdivided into a considerable number of components, namely forestry, marine development, environmental conservation, the weather bureau and, of course, administration. In addition, the following institutions fall under this portfolio: the National Parks Board, national botanical gardens, the Council for the Environment, the National Hiking Way Board and the Forestry Council.</p>

<p>This, then, is the composition of the Department of Environment Affairs in a nutshell. The obvious result of this composition is that certain activities of the department are in the limelight more often than others.</p>

<p>To begin with, I should like to make a few remarks about the Weather Bureau. I receive weekly weather forecasts from the Weather Bureau for the week ahead. I find it absolutely impressive &#x2026;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">J H VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>Do you also keep Hendrik Schoeman informed?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>&#x2026; to see how regularly their forecasts are on target, and I believe they deserve praise for that. We are used to a daily forecast which is sometimes not all that correct. I should like to say, however, that if we look at the overall forecast, the macroforecast, for the week&#x2014;I have verified this over the past few months&#x2014;these people are always very near the mark. I predict that the Weather Bureau will play an even more important role in future, especially when accurate weather forecasts are important not only for the man in the street but also for certain sectors of our economy like the agricultural and construction industries, to mention only two.</p>

<p>I should like to single out one specific industry. We shall soon be launching an enormous project at Mossel Bay where we shall be extracting gas from the sea-bed. I have been informed&#x2014;I am not surprised that the hon Chairman is smiling like that!&#x2014;that the extremely sophisticated construction work which is to take place there will be absolutely dependent on correct weather forecasts, not only on a daily basis but on an hourly basis. The Weather Bureau will do its utmost to provide the requisite service there.</p>

<p>&#x2020;Hon members may be aware of the fact that, in line with the Government&#x2019;s policy to bring decision-making closer to the people of the country, many of the department&#x2019;s executive responsibilities have been devolved to the various provincial administrations. This has had an effect on the scope of the tasks performed by both the department and the provincial authorities. In effect, most of the department&#x2019;s executive responsibilities attached to the functions in regard to the conservation and management of the coastal zone, the islands off our coasts, mountain catchment areas, wilderness areas, driftsand areas and nature reserves as well as the responsibility for fishing harbours and fisheries inspection services including the patrol boats have been devolved to the various provincial authorities. This devolution of the executive powers of the Department of Environment Affairs has resulted in the transfer of some 1 800 staff members to these administrations.</p>

<p>*If time permits, I shall say more about this matter at the end of the debate.</p>

<p>In the past year the relationship between man&#x2019;s striving for development and the preservation of his environment was again subjected to close scrutiny. Here I should like to mention as an example the decision not to proceed with the building of a landing strip on Marion Island. The fact that a landing strip on the island is badly needed cannot be argued away, and the advantages and disadvantages of constructing such a landing strip had to be weighed up. After an investigation carried out by an independent research team into the impact of the envisaged development, it was realised that the building of a runway would do too much damage to the sensitive ecology on the island. It was my privilege during the course of the week to watch a series of slides and films on that very sensitive ecology, and I think the decision which was taken was absolutely the correct one.</p>

<p><span class="col_2663-2664" refersTo="page_0176"/>Environmental considerations were decisive in this decision not to proceed with the building of the landing strip, and I believe we received not only national but also international recognition for it.</p>

<p>Another example was the blue swallow issue. The expansion of plantations is essential in order to meet the future timber requirements of this country. In the implementation of this policy, conservation and the establishment of plantations often come into conflict, as was demonstrated once again in the Southern Transvaal forest region where the Berlin area is one of the last habitats of the blue swallow, one of our most beautiful and scarcest species of swallow. Exhaustive investigations were undertaken, and the Department of Environment Affairs decided to leave more than 400 ha of prime afforestation land untouched and even to improve the area by destroying wattle stands in an effort to save this endangered species of swallow from extinction.</p>

<p>I do not want to create the impression that one should go overboard in responding to the demands of environmental conservation and that progress and development should come to nothing as a result of unrealistic conservation demands. I am, however, advocating a delicate balance between conservation and exploitation, the more so when development is envisaged in environmentally sensitive areas. Everything should be done to ensure that the effect on the environment is thoroughly understood and taken into account before far-reaching decisions are made.</p>

<p>An important part of the interaction between the exploitation and the conservation of the environment is the education of the overall population. Urgent attempts are being made by the department to bring home to the public the principles of the judicious utilisation of the environment. With the help of experts from all over the country and after comment had been received from a wide range of interested organisations, the Council for the Environment prepared a concept policy for environment education which is at present the subject of a proposed White Paper.</p>

<p>An important project already in progress to make the public and especially the youth more environment-conscious includes a National Environment Week. It is associated with World Environment Day and with National Arbor Day which are celebrated in June and August, respectively, of each year.</p>

<p>&#x2020;At this stage I would like to pay tribute to Mr Fred Otto, the Director-General of the Department of Environment Affairs, who will be retiring at the end of August. He has served the State and especially environmental related affairs in this country very well and he has done so for many years. With his staff he has ensured that all possible means have been brought into play to nurture an understanding of environmental problems among the public at large. On behalf of the Government and myself I would like to wish him and Mrs Otto a long and happy retirement. [Interjections.] I would also like to congratulate Mr Otto&#x2019;s newly appointed successor, Mr Bill Visagie, and I am sure that the Department of Environment Affairs will be in excellent hands for the future and that he will build on and expand the work of his predecessor to the benefit of South Africa. I am sure hon members join me in wishing him well for the future.</p>

<p>*I see that the Deputy Director-General designate, Dr Serfontein, is also here this afternoon. He played a very important role in the organisation of our fishing control regulations, and I should also like to wish him everything of the best in his new post.</p>

<p>&#x2020;I would like to dwell very briefly on the role of the department&#x2019;s marine development branch. The marine resources of the country contribute substantially to the country&#x2019;s wellbeing, for example in creating employment opportunities, generating foreign exchange and providing valuable sources of protein. Many different approaches to the management of marine resources are possible but the Government holds that its policy must not only be dynamic and capable of adapting to a dynamic marine ecosystem but also be capable of meeting the demands arising from changing cultural, socio-economic and political conditions.</p>

<p>This is clearly illustrated by the Government&#x2019;s reaction to the recommendations of the Diemont Commission which were published in a White Paper last year. Hon members will no doubt be aware that thanks to proper management, dedicated research <span class="col_2665-2666" refersTo="page_0177"/>and favourable environmental conditions and with the application of a dynamic approach, it was possible recently to increase the anchovy quota, initially by 150 000 tons&#x2014;that is 50&#x0025; on the original&#x2014;and only recently by a further 150 000 tons, which brings up the percentage increase to 100&#x0025;.</p>

<p>I must warn hon members, however, that the sea remains an unpredictable environment and a similarly high quota cannot be guaranteed for the ensuing years. Research will continue and management of the resource will respond according to such research results with a view to optimal resource utilisation.</p>

<p>I should like to congratulate our scientists on the sophisticated techniques which they have developed. The results of recent years have confirmed that considerable confidence can be placed on their research results. As the Minister responsible for marine resource management I shall lean very heavily on their recommendations.</p>

<p>The increased production of fishmeal in both South Africa and South West Africa for this year could result in an extra R120 million to the local industry. Furthermore&#x2014;this should be very gratifying to the stockfeed industry&#x2014; the importation of fishmeal from overseas will not be necessary this year and this will also bring about a saving on our foreign exchange account.</p>

<p>I have also noticed with satisfaction that interest in mari-culture is growing. This is a development which I support strongly and I will give my support to such ventures wherever possible.</p>

<p>It is also envisaged to introduce revised sea fisheries legislation during the 1988 session of Parliament. A draft Bill was in fact published in May this year and interested parties were called upon to submit comments or representations on the proposed legislation. These comments will be taken into account when preparing the final Bill.</p>

<p>To return to the draft Bill on environment conservation which was published during May of this year, I wish to inform the Committee that valuable comment was received from a large number of individuals and organisations, and that a very wide field was covered. There was general concern that not enough time had been allowed for all interested parties to study the Bill in all its consequences. Now they have the necessary time. I have consequently decided that, as some hon members may have seen in the Press release by my department, a draft Bill will be published again later this year after some suggested changes have been made.</p>

<p>*I have singled out only a few facets, and I shall listen with interest to the speeches which follow. I trust that ideas will be advanced which can be adopted fruitfully in the formulation of policy for carrying out the tasks which are the functional responsibility of the department.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">D S PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, I trust that you will give me an opportunity to react very briefly to the bomb explosion that took place in Johannesburg earlier today, injuring a number of people. The CP regards this cowardly act of terrorism as proof of the ANC&#x2019;s threat to extend its armed struggle to White residential areas, and also as a warning to the Dakarites that nothing good can come out of discussions with murderers and terrorists. The CP expresses its sympathy with the injured and supports al! steps taken by the security forces to bring these murderers to book.</p>

<p>May I congratulate the hon the Minister of Environment Affairs and of Water Affairs on his new office, and wish him every success.</p>

<p>I also want to address a word of welcome to the hon the Deputy Minister of Environment Affairs in this House this afternoon. I trust that he will accept what I am going to say now in the spirit in which it is meant. We in the CP see him as a leader in his community, and we think he would come into his own as a member of a full-fledged Cabinet in an own Indian Parliament.</p>

<p>Mr Otto, the present Director-general of Environment Affairs, retires on 31 August and we should like to add to what the hon the Minister said by wishing him a well-deserved period of rest. We congratulate his successor, Mr Visagie, on his appointment. We trust that both he and Dr Serfontein, who is succeeding Mr Visagie, will experience a great deal of job satisfaction in their new posts.</p>

<p>Sir, the hon the Minister must not interpret <span class="col_2667-2668" refersTo="page_0178"/>the fact that I am not discussing Water Affairs Vote to mean that I regard Water Affairs as being less important than Environment Affairs. The reason is merely that the Official Opposition has been allocated extremely limited time. In fact, I have an affection for the Department of Water Affairs, a department which is 75 years old this year and one in which I served as a private secretary. I have only the greatest appreciation for the officials of this department and the work they do.</p>

<p>I think it fit that in the extremely limited time at my disposal&#x2014;only 10 minutes under this Vote&#x2014;the CP as the Official Opposition should give a summary of our approach to environment affairs. Essentially environment affairs is concerned with the relationship between man and his environment, in respect of which the Creator&#x2019;s injunction was that man should occupy, cultivate and rule the earth. It appears that man was not always obedient to this injunction, and began to exploit his environment and even destroy it in some places. This led to a so-called environmental crisis, which was not due to a natural change which had taken place independent of man, but was a direct result of human activity or a lack thereof.</p>

<p>It is logical that man, who created the environmental problem, should rectify the situation. Man&#x2014;this does not include all people&#x2014;who has become a plunderer of his environment, will have to undergo a kind of metamorphosis in order to become the protector and guardian of his environment.</p>

<p>We were probably guilty initially of the approach that our environment, our flora and fauna and all our natural resources, as well as the air we breathe, were inexhaustible on the one hand and could be violated, disturbed, disrupted and even destroyed and exhausted on the other&#x2014;nature would take care of itself and recover by itself. This approach was wrong. Our Creator&#x2019;s injunction also contains a duty of conservation, a duty to preserve and protect. Today we are even prepared to conserve certain aspects of the environment for purely aesthetic reasons.</p>

<p>Control of pollution has been recognised for practical as well as aesthetic reasons, and here the control of atmospheric and noise pollution is a good example. I know that strictly speaking, this does not fall under the Department of Environment Affairs, but I refer to it as a general approach to environment affairs. Even if one could prove that this kind of pollution was not potentially dangerous to man&#x2019;s health, the control of pollution is justified on the basis that spiritual psychological values, which are just as important as physical values, could be regarded as so important in certain circumstances, because it was regarded as being influenced by smoke, odours or noise, that they should receive priority in the approach to environment affairs.</p>

<p>The key concepts&#x2014;I also associate myself with the hon the Minister in this respect&#x2014;is the education of our people with regard to conservation, control, planning, development and balance. Education is of major importance in instilling an awareness of and a responsibility to the environment. We associate ourselves with the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources&#x2019; definition of conservation. I quote:</p>

<block name="quote">Conservation is the management of human use of the biosphere so that it may yield the greatest sustained benefit to present generations while maintaining its potential to meet the needs and aspirations of future generations.</block>

<p>As stated in the policy statement of the National Parks Board of Trustees, conservation is a human action that is performed to the advantage of man&#x2014;in the context, of course, of the Creator&#x2019;s injunction. Conservation includes a variety of management options, which vary from complete protection to intensive, multipurpose use of natural systems and resources. Conservation also includes the protection of products of civilization that have cultural value.</p>

<p>According to this policy document&#x2014;we associate ourselves with it&#x2014;the essential function of national parks is to guarantee the conservation of ecosystems in their most natural state. It is self-evident, therefore, that national parks provide one with an exceptional opportunity to experience nature in a spiritually educational way, as well as to use it in a pleasant, but controlled way, and to be educated and inspired by nature.</p>

<p>Control, as a second aspect of restricting <span class="col_2669-2670" refersTo="page_0179"/>environmental problems, solving them and preventing further problems, is exercised mainly by the legal system. Initially, only private law remedies of the <i>actio legis aquiliae</i> and the interdict were available. The main purpose of this, however, was to provide relief to certain people whose private interests had been violated. This was not an effective remedy, because it left an offender, someone who was guilty of pollution for example, against whom the offended party was not willing or able to take steps, free to continue his undesirable conduct. In addition these remedies could not prevent natural resources from being depleted. For that reason there has been a shift in emphasis in the environmental sphere, from the protection of the individual victim to the protection of the public in general. This has required the introduction of a great deal of legislation as well as the creation of an administrative network to implement the legislation.</p>

<p>According to Prof Rabie, a member of the Council for the Environment, this led to environmental law with a public law character and a strong emphasis on administrative law. Penal sanctions and permits, in particular, began to play an important part.</p>

<p>In the third place there is the planning aspect: Planning of development, closely associated with an awarement of the environment, was the logical further development. With the emergence of ecology during the past decade as an important interdisciplinary science which requires a specialized knowledge of <i>inter alia</i> physics, meteorology and geology, ecology could be used in environmental planning to anticipate the effect of proposed development on the natural resources.</p>

<p>The emphasis could and did shift to land usage planning, and experts emphasised that successful environmental conservation, control and development depended on effective land usage planning. Logically this planning had to be extended to planning of the use or utilisation of all natural, and in some respects also man-made, resources.</p>

<p>In this way, for example, we came to the multipurpose utilisation of our commercial harbours along our coast and the control and conservation of our fish resources which resulted in their being increased and there fore made more fish available for human consumption.</p>

<p>If we educate people to become aware of the environment&#x2014;to conserve and control where necessary&#x2014;and develop systematically, we shall regain the delicate balance that is necessary if man is to obey his Creator&#x2019;s injunction.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#le_roux">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">D E T LE ROUX</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, it is a pleasure to speak after the hon member for Potgietersrus, but I am not going to react to his speech. Apart from a bit of initial politicking, he made a substantial and thorough speech on the Vote concerned.</p>

<p>I want to associate myself with what was indicated by the hon the Minister, viz that the discussion of this Vote is the last one to take place during the term of office of the present Director-General, Mr Fred Otto, who will soon be retiring.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">J H VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, may I put a question to the hon member?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#le_roux">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">D E T LE ROUX</person>:</from>

<p>No, Mr Chairman, my time is very limited.</p>

<p>This department is a relatively tranquil department. Fred Otto manifested a personality which complemented this tranquillity of his department in the broad sense. As head of this department, he was likeable and helpful, and hon members of this House as well as the members of the standing committee wish him everything of the best for the future. Naturally we also want to congratulate his successor, Mr Visagie, who is very well-known to us.</p>

<p>Since the previous discussion of this Vote, an extremely important and valuable report, together with a White Paper have been tabled here. Unfortunately the Diemont Report has not yet been discussed in this House or the standing committee. I fear justice will not be done in this respect today either. I think perhaps the hon the Minister should consider referring this report to the standing committee for consideration and possible commentary. In the broad sense the report does give strong support to the standpoints and the conduct of the hon the Minister and his department. This is something that has not really received attention yet. The commission <span class="col_2671-2672" refersTo="page_0180"/>gives firm support, for example, to the contentious decision to institute a split quota system. There are also a number of other examples of recommendations in which the principles and policies following by the department are recommended. At least this is a sign of recognition of the department&#x2019;s and the Government&#x2019;s proper and correct handling of this industry.</p>

<p>I should like to exchange a few ideas about the squid industry in the Port Elizabeth region. The large-scale utilisation of this resource began in 1984 and is a considerable addition to the utilisation of our total marine resources at present. During 1985 and 1986, approximately 4 200 tons was caught annually, and this new kind of fishing holds many possibilities for the future. The initial scientific opinion indicated that a maximum maintainable yield of approximately 12 000 tons would be available. This was scaled down to 8 000 tons, however, and to all appearances we are dealing with an underutilised source and working on the basis of conservative estimates. I want to issue a warning, however, that we do not become too easy in our minds, because there are already clear signs that the resource is beginning to dwindle. In fact, it is half of what it was three years ago. This downward trend is very clear. It is not necessarily only as a result of the catches, but it is quite possible and probable that other factors, such as the large number of boats that make up the squid fleet, for example, could cause this.</p>

<p>I also understand from the scientists that there is a change in the behaviour of this source. They are worried about this. Since the jigging method is applied at the spawning stage and in very shallow water, the disturbance caused by a large fishing fleet may have an effect on reproduction. At the moment there is only one scientist who is doing research on this source and I should like to ask the hon the Minister to intensify the efforts made by science in this sphere, because only if we get a proper scientific profile of this source will we be able to deal with the source.</p>

<p>At the moment there are 296 registered boats and seven parent ships with factory licences. I want to tell the hon the Minister immediately that in my opinion there are far too many boats. I know the interim quota board granted these licences, but there are too many boats and the licences were shared out too easily and freely. The criticism that there are many foreign boats is unfounded to say the least, because two-thirds of this fleet are based in Port Elizabeth. The Port Elizabeth area therefore has its rightful share.</p>

<p>Local business acumen, especially the land-based packers, has at great expense created an infrastructure there for freezing facilities, with the orderly development of the industry as their objective. They are also the main driving force behind the effort to establish a harbour at Santareme Bay which will be available only to the squid fleet. Naturally this will facilitate the handling of the whole source in that there will be an official landing point and so on. I understand that many illegalities are taking place there at the moment as regards the factory ships that operate there, and I request that urgent consideration be given to this matter.</p>

<p>The advent of this industry has brought about great advantages for the region. It has also had a number of negative side-effects, however. Large-scale social and socioeconomic problems were experienced in that a large number of fishermen descended on the area which had few or no facilities. This aspect still gives cause for concern and is giving rise to opposition in the Jeffreys Bay, Cape St Francis and Oyster Bay areas. Conflicting interests are being experienced along the shore, especially at Jeffreys Bay and Cape St Francis, as well as at the Krom River mouth. Urgent attention will have to be given to this, because there is conflict between the residents, the local management and tourists on the one hand, and those involved in the industry on the other. This area has an immense investment in the tourist industry, and we shall really have to look into this matter.</p>

<p>Naturally, if we establish a harbour at Santareme Bay soon, many of these problems will disappear. In fact, private enterprise is attempting to provide financing for this purpose of its own accord by means of a levy on the catches. Although no delays are being experienced at the moment, I do want to ask the hon the Minister to use his considerable <span class="col_2673-2674" refersTo="page_0181"/>status to get the harbour established as soon as possible.</p>

<p>The greatest side-effect of that squid fleet, however, is the terrible onslaught that has been made on the line fish in the area&#x2014;from Bird Island to Plettenberg Bay. When the fleet is not catching squid, they catch line fish. They are already stripping the banks there completely. The the magnitude of the onslaught and the rate at which it is taking place are simply too great, and if we allow this state of affairs to continue unchecked, the source will be destroyed which would be a blow to the tourist industry. I think it is totally unacceptable to permit this slaughter by commercial fishermen, and I request drastic attention to be given to this matter. I know the decisions that will have to be taken here will be unpopular ones, but we have spoken about this in the past and I have also made recommendations in this connection.</p>

<p>In my opinion, only two methods can be used. On the one hand we must let the fishermen decide whether they want to catch squid or line fish. They simply cannot do both. On the other hand, we must restrict and close certain areas completely, and then exchange them with other areas, the area between Plettenberg Bay and Cape St Francis and the area between Cape St Francis and Bird Island, for example. I think we should try to do something in this direction. Of course, the closing of certain areas is not a new idea. The idea has a great deal of merit, however.</p>

<p>I should like to refer the hon the Minister to the latest edition of <i>Ski Boat,</i> the August 1987 edition. It contains an article&#x2014;unfortunately time does not permit me to quote from it&#x2014; written by Graham Winch, in which he advocates this very idea. Underlying the whole problem is the lack of effective and proper law enforcement. The late Minister Wiley indicated in a Press statement that he was going to use the Navy to assist in enforcing the law. I want to quote from his Press statement. He said:</p>

<block name="quote">The Minister of Defence has agreed that naval vessels will be authorised to assist with patrolling the squid fishing grounds, and appropriate arrangements are being made in close association with my departmental officials.</block>

<p>I should like to know from the hon the Minister what is happening in this connection. Proper law enforcement is essential. I know that this function has been devolved to the provinces. I request the hon the Minister, however, to give his urgent consideration to this matter once again. [Time expired.]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#lorimer">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">R J LORIMER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, I hope the hon member for Uitenhage will excuse me if I do not follow his speech and his special plea concerning the chokka industry, with which I am largely in agreement. I would also be interested to hear what the hon the Minister has to say about the assistance to Sea Fisheries by patrol vessels of the SA Navy.</p>

<p>In the first instance I should like to congratulate the hon the Minister on the taking up of his new position of Minister of Environment Affairs. It is the first time he is handling this basically non-political portfolio and, from what I know of him, I have high hopes that he will have a considerable impact on the environmental scene.</p>

<p>Secondly, I should like to say that I have known Mr Otto for a considerable length of time. I wish him much happiness in his scheduled retirement. May the weather forecast always be fair and sunny for him in the future. I understand that this is the last time that he will be officiating during the debate. May he enjoy long years of happiness and tranquility in the future. I also wish his successors, Messrs Visagie and Serfontein who are on their way up, well in their new posts.</p>

<p>In the extremely restricted time that I have available I should like to raise a number of matters with the hon the Minister. Firstly there is the question of the proposed marina at Robberg in Plettenberg Bay. I am glad that the hon the Minister of Constitutional Development and Planning is here too, because it overflows into his portfolio at the present time. He, in fact, replied to a question of mine.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hulley">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">R R HULLEY</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, he is Minister of almost everything.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#lorimer">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">R J LORIMER</person>:</from>

<p>Yes. The hon member watched him!</p>

<p>It seems to be quite extraordinary, in the first place, that the department of the hon the <span class="col_2675-2676" refersTo="page_0182"/>Minister of Environment Affairs is expressing no opinions on this matter, in view of the fact that applications of this kind&#x2014;and I use the hon the Minister&#x2019;s own words in response to a question from me&#x2014;&#x201C;have been devolved&#x201D; to the Administration of the Cape of Good Hope who now holds the responsibility for dealing with the matter.</p>

<p>I find it somewhat extraordinary that the responsibility for a major matter of environmental concern, involving a very sensitive and beautiful feature of South Africa&#x2019;s coastline, should not be vested in this hon Minister&#x2019;s department. He can devolve power from this department by all means, but I believe channelling it through the Department of Constitutional Development and Planning is an anomaly that should be dealt with.</p>

<p>The Sea-Shore Act, No 21 of 1935, specifically grants powers to a Minister&#x2014;not this Minister&#x2014;to let any portion of the sea-shore and the sea, all of which, in terms of this Act, is owned by the hon the State President. They are allowed to let any of this, they are even allowed to sell it. It has to be the Minister, however. The Minister concerned, as stated in the Act, is in fact the Minister of Community Development or, in certain instances, the Minister of Transport Affairs. I think there is a need that this specific piece of legislation should be updated as speedily as possible to pass on the responsibility for this matter, the administration of the Sea-Shore Act, to the Minister of Environment Affairs.</p>

<p>According to the Act, the Minister concerned may delegate any of the powers vested in him to a local authority, but he is also allowed to withdraw such delegation. It appears to me that there is an urgent necessity to introduce legislation which will ensure that this hon Minister and the Department of Environment Affairs take full responsibility for the development of the whole coastline and that development does not take place in an uncoordinated bits-and-pieces manner. The whole coastal ecology is far too sensitive to be subjected to unplanned development, and we have seen most unattractive and damaging development take place on other parts of the coastline. We should ensure that this kind of thing does not happen in the future at all.</p>

<p>In the case of the proposed Robberg development, it is quite ridiculous that, for example, if such a facility is desirable and necessary&#x2014;I am not sure of either&#x2014;only one site is being considered. Consideration should be given to a number of alternative sites, the one chosen being where the environment and ecology would be the least adversely affected. The mere fact that a particular developer wishes his particular piece of land to be developed using part of the sea, which is owned by the State President, is no reason at all to give him pride of place when it is being decided whether such a facility should exist and, if so, where. In the first place, it is vitally important to consider whether it is indeed necessary to have such a facility and whether it is at all desirable.</p>

<p>In my opinion this proposed marina can have only one purpose&#x2014;to become a parking area for the wealthier sections of the international yachting community. I do not believe there would be any worthwhile benefit to the local community or to the thousands of holidaymakers who visit Plettenberg Bay every year. I question the need for such a development, because I believe it would undoubtedly damage ecologically and aesthetically one of the most beautiful features of the South African coastline, and particularly because it would benefit only a very small and very wealthy section of the community.</p>

<p>It is also extremely important that an environmental impact assessment be carried out. I am very gratified that the Cape Provincial Administration&#x2019;s Department of Nature and Environmental Conservation has made a recommendation that studies should be made of the physical effects of this development on both the sea and the terrestrial sections thereof. In passing, however, I was somewhat distressed to read in the section on environmental conservation in the department&#x2019;s annual report that there appears to be some doubt concerning the future of environmental impact studies. I do not know why this is at issue, as I believe that these things are vitally necessary at any time. I wonder if the hon the Minister could tell me in his reply why there is any sort of doubt at all about the necessity for such studies.</p>

<p>One thing that is shown up by this application for the development of Robberg is that an assessment of the whole coastline is needed, <span class="col_2677-2678" refersTo="page_0183"/>probably from as far as the Gourits River right round to the Storms River, and future requirements must be assessed and defined. I am totally against the development at Robberg until such time as a study has been conducted. It also appears that there is a wave of public opinion against the development, and this too should be a very important consideration.</p>

<p>My final point on this matter is that I believe the hon the Minister should point out to his Cabinet colleagues as soon as possible the anomalous situation in which matters of major importance to the environment are not handled by this department but by the Department of Constitutional Development and Planning, a department which is already overloaded. Surely it is logical and sensible to suppose that in any normal government environmental matters should be the responsibility of this hon Minister. I have every confidence in the Cape Provincial Administration&#x2019;s Department of Nature and Environmental Conservation, but this department should be responsible directly to this hon Minister who could then delegate powers directly to them if he so required. I do not believe we have to go along two sides of the triangle. The straight line is desirable in terms of good government.</p>

<p>Another matter that I want to raise very quickly with this hon the Minister is the question of atmospheric pollution from Sasols 2 and 3.</p>

<p>I know that a considerable amount of work is being done in this respect. Much has been done to contain these somewhat obnoxious odours which permeate the atmosphere right through the Eastern Transvaal and the Transvaal even west of Johannesburg. I would like to hear the state of play on this somewhat vexed subject. I have had complaints over a period from people living in various towns adjoining Sasol, including Sasol I, about the health of children in the area. From time to time we read newspaper reports of damage to health. I would like an authoritative statement from the hon the Minister about that particular matter.</p>

<p>I do not know whether I have much time left, but one other matter I want to refer to has to do with a question I asked with regard to the culling programme in the Kruger National Park. The whole matter of national parks is going to be handled by my colleague, the hon member for Parktown, but I specifically asked a question as to how many animals of which species had been culled over the past three years, and I put next to it a question which had to do with the profits from the by-products factory at Skukuza in the park. That by-products factory makes a considerable profit every year, which is, of course, of much benefit to the Parks Board and obviously, to the level at which the park can be run efficiently. I regret that I cannot finish what I was going to say. [Time expired.]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#fick">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">L H FICK</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, it is a pleasure to follow on the hon member for Bryanston. I think I can assure him that we, in general, agree with his concern about undesirable development on the coastline and I believe we also share his views on and his concern about pollution. I am not addressing myself to the specific points that he made but to his viewpoints in general.</p>

<p>I would also like to say on behalf of this side of the House, together with the hon the Minister, that we are glad to see the hon the Deputy Minister here. We are looking forward to what he is going to say and we would like to wish him all the best in his new responsibility. We are looking forward to working together with him in every way that we possibly can.</p>

<p>*The physical volume of the abalone industry, the amount of work it provides, and its contribution to the gross national product in terms of currency earnings, is not very great. What is important, however, is that abalone is a special seafood. It is relatively scarce throughout the world, has become a very sought-after dish in South Africa, and its value abroad has quintupled in the past five years.</p>

<p>Almost 90&#x0025; of this unique resource is situated in the coastal area from Cape Point, through False Bay, as far as Walker Bay and Quion Point. Almost 100&#x0025; of the individuals who depend upon the commercial section of this resource for their livelihood, come from the coastal communities of Kleinmond, Hawston, Gansbaai and Hermanus.</p>

<p>At the same time the general public, as a result of the great demand for abalone, has a <span class="col_2679-2680" refersTo="page_0184"/>great and justifiable interest in the research into and the management and control of this source. I do not think I have to convince the hon the Minister of this; he is undoubtedly aware of and informed on the tension that arises from time to time between the members of the public and the commercial divers. Although abalone forms a relatively small component of the country&#x2019;s total marine resources, this particular coastal area and the established communities there have a great interest in it. I therefore want to mention certain aspects to the hon the Minister for his urgent attention.</p>

<p>In the first instance the state of the resource is described by scientists from the department as sound and stable. For want of better methods of determining the state of the source, one has to accept this evaluation provisionally. I must, however, stress with concern that in certain areas, for example, the Gansbaai-Franskraal-Kleinbaai area, the resource gives the impression of being over-exploited to a dangerous extent. My request to the hon the Minister is to help so that the total permissible catch in these areas is considerably reduced.</p>

<p>In the second instance I want to mention that the department has recently completed a most commendable survey of the source. We want to congratulate them on that, particularly Mr Rob Tarr, who was involved specifically in this task. We congratulate him and thank him very much for what he has done. However, with the greatest esteem and respect for the scientists who worked with Mr Tarr&#x2014;I am thinking, for example, of Dr Dave Pollock&#x2014;I must express my concern and that of the public because the impression of a resource that is being overexploited by the public and by the commercial industry, is not being dispelled by this scientific information and people are not being reassured by it. I want to ask the Minister seriously to consider the reintroduction of the permit systems for the public in an attempt to exercise better control and to make more reliable information available to scientists.</p>

<p>Questions also arise in connection with control regarding the wisdom of the devolution of certain functions to the province. The management of the country&#x2019;s marine resources comprises, inter alia, the disciplines of research, control and development. The necessity for and the details of these three disciplines are interdependent and all have an influence on one another, which fluctuates from time to time according to circumstances which change because we are dealing with a natural resource. To keep a management plan for this resource in operation, requires a unity of action across the whole spectrum of all the disciplines, and in practice as well.</p>

<p>It is my humble submission to the hon the Minister that the management functions of the country&#x2019;s marine resources should not be divided between two tiers of government. I should like to hear from the hon the Minister what the rationale was regarding the decision to devolve the control function to the province.</p>

<p>I believe we have to accept that while the devolution of power which we support in principle, is good in theory, it cannot always be carried out in practice with the same good result.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hardingham">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">R W HARDINGHAM</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, at the outset may I congratulate the hon the Minister on his appointment to this portfolio. Having been closely associated with him in the agricultural sphere, I can only say that I regard his appointment as highly suitable and I wish him well.</p>

<p>To the hon the Deputy Minister, Mr Pachai, may I also extend a very warm welcome on behalf of those of us who had in contact with him for some considerable time. In fact his constituency covers much of the same area as my own. So we have something very much in common. I extend to him my heartiest congratulations on his appointment.</p>

<p>It is with a sense of regret that one has notes that Mr Fred Otto, the Director-General, will be leaving the services of the department at the end of August. To him too may I convey all good wishes for a long and a happy retirement. I am sure that he will not lose lightly those contacts that he has made during the period of his occupation of the very important position that he has held.</p>

<p>Again, to Mr Visagie, may I extend my warmest congratulations to him on his appointment.</p>

<p>Those of us who are interested in environment <span class="col_2681-2682" refersTo="page_0185"/>affairs look forward to working with him.</p>

<p>Once again, when one looks at this enormous portfolio, one experiences a certain difficulty in deciding which of the many aspects, dealt with by the department one could cover in this debate. I wish at the outset to compliment the department on their very comprehensive report. It is well drawn up, it is good reading and it provides a lot of information.</p>

<p>The first point I would like to raise in this debate, is that I would like to stress the need for more emphasis to be placed on environmental education. It must be given far more attention in the future. It must be expanded to a degree where it can incorporate and bring with it a greater awareness of the pressures of the expanding population and the impact this is going to have on the environment. We must prepare now for these pressures that are already making themselves evident.</p>

<p>One regrettably sees many examples of the complete lack of respect for the environment in many rural areas. When one looks at the litter in the form of empty bottles, plastic containers etcetera that lie strewn along the roadsides, one can only be filled with a sense of disgust at the uncaring attitude of the public. The public must be educated to become more aware of the need to protect the environment. They must become directly involved by going out of their way to report cases where they see irresponsible littering take place. They must learn to react; but the greatest thing of all is that they themselves must become involved.</p>

<p>It is therefore absolutely essential that a more aggressive campaign be launched in schools to encourage the youth at least to recognise the importance of preserving the environmental assets of this country. I would even suggest that environmental conservation should become a major subject in education.</p>

<p>Close contact with environmental authorities in the TBVC countries and the self-governing states is also an absolute priority. This is the only basis on which it will be possible to arrive at a streamlined policy with the object of initiating a much more positive approach towards this very important facet of life. We must prevent further destruction taking place before it is too late. So much harm is being done before our very own eyes, but very little is actually being done about it.</p>

<p>That is why I appeal for a much bolder approach, not so much in the sense of love of the environment but in the sense of respect for the environment.</p>

<p>In the little time that I have I wish to turn my attention to several issues concerning the timber industry, which I feel should be brought to the attention of this Committee.</p>

<p>It is common knowledge that one of the greatest hazards with which this industry has to contend is that of fire. Consequently, the demands on insurance companies have increased considerably during recent years. This has happened in spite of increased premiums and it is regrettable to note that one of the largest insurers has now withdrawn from the market. This has resulted in the launching of a co-operative plantation insurance scheme to cover damage caused by fire. The initial financing for this scheme has been provided by the Central Timber Co-op and the South African Wattle Growers&#x2019; Association. These have made large contributions to the launching of this co-operative.</p>

<p>It is likely that approaches will be made to Government to underwrite temporarily certain guarantees, and I express the hope that these will be treated sympathetically. While long-term prospects for the timber industry look promising from the growers&#x2019; point of view, I must warn against the dangers of established producers being tempted to change from soft to hardwood production, and vice versa.</p>

<p>Furthermore, an alarming trend in the timber industry which gives cause for considerable concern is the fact that many small growers are being consumed by the larger concerns. This, of course, is having the inevitable result of further depopulation of the rural areas.</p>

<p>May I say, while I am on forestry matters, how much I welcome the decision of the Commission for Co-operation and Development in regard to the Weza Forest. It would have been an absolute tragedy if this, the largest natural forest in South Africa, had been lost to the RSA, and I do want to record how much I appreciate that decision.</p>

<p><span class="col_2683-2684" refersTo="page_0186"/>My speech would be incomplete if I failed to make mention of the very important role played by the Natal Parks Board. Not only is this board offering an excellent service in the form of the accommodation it provides &#x2026; [Time expired.]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#botma">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">M C BOTMA</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, the hon member for Mooi River will forgive me if I do not react to his speech now. I should, however, like to associate myself with the congratulations he expressed to the hon the Minister and the hon the Deputy Minister.</p>

<p>I should also like to thank our outgoing Director-General very sincerely for many years of outstanding service, as well as for his friendliness and for the fact that his door is always open to us.</p>

<p>My hearty congratulations go to Mr Bill Visagie and Dr Serfontein on their appointments. Mr Bill Visagie is very well-known in my constituency. As Chairman of the Walvis Bay Development Advisory Committee he has played a leading role in addressing the economic activities of Walvis Bay.</p>

<p>Since I should like to talk about fish, I should also like to express my gratitude towards the Potgieter Commission for what it has done to address our problems in the fishing industry.</p>

<p>It is true to say that the Chief Directorate of Marine Development and more specifically its research institute, achieved some particularly impressive research results during the second half of last year. Time does not permit me to elaborate on them, but it is very clear from the report that certain research projects are suffering as a result of a shortage of staff, but mainly as a result of a shortage of funds, and we hope the hon the Minister will be able to address this problem in future.</p>

<p>It is perhaps less well-known that this research institute is also undertaking research along the coast of South West Africa in conjunction with and at the behest of the Department of Sea Fisheries of South West Africa. However, what troubles me as the representative of Walvis Bay is the fact that this research institute has not been able to discern any significant growth in pilchard resources, and that it has therefore recommended to the South West African Administration that only 35 000 tons of pilchards be caught during the year 1987. South West Africa has approved a quota of 40 000 tons and at the moment, together with additional catches, the figure already amounts to 56 500 tons.</p>

<p>The question that troubles me, however, is to how accurate this research is. How reliable is it? Over how long a period was it undertaken? The industrial sector and the community of Walvis Bay would very much like to conserve this valuable resource, but on the other hand, if there is a possibility that more fish could be caught, it would be unfair to place unnecessary restrictions upon fishing. That is why we should very much like to know where the safety margin lies.</p>

<p>As far as anchovies are concerned, the hon the Minister has referred to the fact that the Western Cape has thus far had an exceptionally good anchovy season. The same applies to Walvis Bay, and although no quota has been allocated by South West Africa in respect of anchovies, the catches this season already amount to 350 000 tons.</p>

<p>I want to mention the fact that the late Minister Wiley and his department saw fit to allocate a quota of 2 000 tons of pilchards to the Fishermen&#x2019;s Association of Walvis Bay, as well as fishing rights to the 26 private boat-owners. This allocation has been of tremendous advantage to these people in Walvis Bay. It has also been of tremendous advantage to Walvis Bay on the industrial and economic fronts, and on behalf of the community of Walvis Bay I should like to express my sincere gratitude for this fine gesture and this allocation.</p>

<p>We in Walvis Bay are thankful. It is very clear to us that the Almighty has once again opened up to us the doors of that abundant larder, the sea. Our nets are full and our cup runneth over. However, it is a source of concern to us that the assault by man, and also by the beasts and birds of prey, upon the resources of the sea, is a tremendous one. Since 1952 man&#x2019;s assault on these resources has increased in intensity by virtue of sophisticated equipment, together with radar and everything associated with it.</p>

<p>Man has never maintained a balance; moreover, man has also failed to maintain a balance as far as another sector of marine life is concerned, for example the seals, in not <span class="col_2685-2686" refersTo="page_0187"/>exploiting them as well. We have allowed the seal population to increase to approximately 1 200 000. A very conservative estimate is that a seal eats one ton of fish per year. In other words, the seals alone eat 1,2 million tons of fish per year; in conjunction, the sea birds eat approximately 250 000 tons, and according to our figures almost 1 500 000 tons are devoured by sea creatures and birds which prey on them.</p>

<p>The economic value of this fish is astronomical. If one were to express this value in monetary terms, it would amount to a tremendous total. On the other hand, when one takes into account that the fishing industry of the Western Cape and Walvis Bay caught approximately 600 000 tons of fish last year, and that this year, in view of the tremendously good season and larger quotas they will catch approximately 900 000 tons, one sees that the beasts and birds of prey eat 600 000 tons more fish than man processes.</p>

<p>That is why I want to lodge a plea to the effect that although research is being done on seals, the hon the Minister take active steps to grant concessions for the exploitation of adult seals. It is no use exploiting the pups because there is no market for their pelts. We must give some thought to the seals and to use being made of seal meat. As hon members know, there is in fact a market for the sex organs of male seals. There is a large market for them in the East because they promote virility. I am not going to recommend them here, Sir, because the hon the Minister of National Health and Population Development might feel unhappy about it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_national_health_and_population_development">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF NATIONAL HEALTH AND POPULATION DEVELOPMENT</person>:</from>

<p>I would rather try perlemoen!</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barnard">

<from>*Dr <person refersTo="hansard_za">M S BARNARD</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, it is a pleasure to speak after the hon member for Walvis Bay. It was a very interesting speech in which he firstly mentioned various interesting facts and secondly touched on various problems concerning the protection of fish resources and seals. I believe he will pardon me if I pass directly from Walvis Bay to the Kruger Park where I think there are fewer problems. [Interjections.]</p>

<p>I want to thank the department for their lovely booklet and I do not think anyone has yet made mention of it. Its title is &#x201C;The National Parks in South Africa: Policy statement of the National Parks Board of Trustees.&#x201D; I assume that all hon members will read it. If they have not done so already, they ought to do so.</p>

<p>The motto of the National Parks Board is <i>Custos Naturae.</i> It means &#x201C;custodian of nature&#x201D; and illustrates the board&#x2019;s task. This task, in essence, reads as follows, and I should like to read it:</p>

<block name="quote">To establish a representative series of national parks throughout the country and to preserve and manage them in terms of the National Parks Act, 1976, in such a way that they will be preserved for all time in their natural state to the benefit and inspiration of this country and all its people.</block>

<p>I wish to emphasise the words &#x201C;all its people&#x201D;. With that in mind, it is a great pleasure for me to welcome the hon Deputy Minister to this House this afternoon. That hon Deputy Minister is part of &#x201C;all the people&#x201D;, and it is just a pity that there are not more of all those people in our country who are able to collaborate in the promotion of a wonderful cause, namely the conservation of nature.</p>

<p>I believe that we on this side of the House would like to make this part of our country available to all the people in our country. I know this does not form part of the discussion of this Vote, but I nevertheless discern danger signals as far as this matter is concerned, which are that we find in the provincial administrations that some of these parks and resorts are being declared own affairs. That means that they will belong to one racial group only and that only members of that racial group will be allowed to visit them. I should like to know from the hon the Deputy Minister&#x2014;he will be speaking later this afternoon&#x2014;whether he will support us on this side of the House in our endeavours to open all these resorts to all the people of South Africa, whether they fall under the National Parks Board or under the provincial administration. I think this is very important.</p>

<p>This also has a bearing on what the hon the Minister said earlier, namely that these parks form part of the overall education of the <span class="col_2687-2688" refersTo="page_0188"/>population of South Africa. If the whole population cannot participate in something that is so important to the National Parks Board and nature conservation, then I foresee major problems in future. Perhaps what happened in other countries to the north of us will then happen to us, where conservation and appreciation for nature and the environment are perhaps not what they should be because they remained neglected in the past.</p>

<p>&#x2020;National parks have a special function to perform and the international definition of a national park which is accepted by the National Parks Board, reads as follows:</p>

<block name="quote">A national park is a relatively large area:</block>

<ol>

<li>1. Where one or several ecosystems are not materially altered by human exploitation &#x2026;</li>

</ol>

<p>*The hon the Minister will note the mention here of &#x201C;human exploitation&#x201D; and I believe that mines, roads and so on are all examples of that. I quote further:</p>

<block name="quote">&#x2026; and human occupation, where plant and animal species, geomorphological sites and habitats are of special scientific, educational and recreational interest or which contains a natural landscape of great beauty &#x2026;</block>

<p>I believe the attention of South Africans should increasingly be drawn to parts of our country where there is a beautiful natural landscape. We should see to it that more is done to preserve such areas. Furthermore it is said:</p>

<ol>

<li>2. where the highest competent authority of the country has taken steps to prevent or to eliminate exploitation or occupation in the whole area and to enforce effectively the respect of ecological, geomorphological or aesthetic features which have led to its establishment; and</li>

<li>3. where visitors are allowed to enter, under special conditions, for inspirational, educative, cultural and recreative purposes.</li>

</ol>

<p>&#x2020;It is therefore clear that natural character and permanent statutory protection are essential qualities of a national park. Parks are also carefully zoned so that the unique quality of a park is not spoilt by human usage and management activities.</p>

<p>*The problem which arises here is that although there are many restrictions and the parks are fenced off, there are nevertheless parts of these parks over which the Parks Board and the management cannot exercise control. I am a regular visitor to these parks and I experience it as a major problem that we have no control over the rivers before they flow across the boundaries of the parks. I should like to ask the hon the Minister to ensure that active care is taken of these beautiful rivers which are part of the national parks, especially of the Kruger National Park, and which are being polluted, depleted and dammed up. I ask the hon the Minister to tell us what is being done about it.</p>

<p>&#x2020;The organisation responsible for the control and management of a national park should preferably not be part of the public service and subject to political change, pressure or expediency. In the South African system this possibility was fortunately obviated by the creation in 1926 of an autonomous statutory body, the National Parks Board of Trustees&#x2014; 60 years ago people were quite clever and could already see what would be needed&#x2014; which is empowered under section 12 of the National Parks Act to control and manage the parks and maintain them for, <i>inter alia,</i> the benefit and enjoyment of visitors.</p>

<p>*If these parks are indeed intended to be for the benefit and enjoyment of visitors, they should be made aware of the fact that these days their behaviour is the major disruption in our parks. Two weeks ago I was in such a park and a new tendency has shown itself in that people lean out of the windows since they are not allowed to get out of the cars. There are in fact visitors who do so nevertheless, and this practice is increasing.</p>

<p>I also want to mention that not only the visitors, but especially the trucks which transport Coca Cola and food travel at such a speed in these parks that it seems as if they are on the N1 to Johannesburg. I think they should be dealt with summarily. Unfortunately we often see people from the Parks Board speeding through the parks too.</p>

<p>In one way or another the people who visit our national parks should be better educated <span class="col_2689-2690" refersTo="page_0189"/>so that they can appreciate these places a little more.</p>

<p>&#x2020;Time does not allow me to go into the history of the Kruger National Park but I should like to mention that the first tourist cars entered the park in the 1920&#x2019;s and in the first year the park showed a profit of only &#x00A3;32 Sterling. Since those early years 13 national parks have been established in the most remote corners of this country. Subsequently, the responsibility for the administration of the Lake Areas Development Act has also been passed on to the National Parks Board and, in terms of this Act, two national lake areas have been declared and are administered by the board.</p>

<p>Those parks all make up an unbelievable part of South Africa where conservation such as the saving from extinction of the mountain zebra etc is being practised. However, there is a shortage of funds for the further expansion of those parks.</p>

<p>*That is why it is foreseen that the answer in future will quite probably lie to a large extent in this measure which was adopted quite recently by means of a statutory amendment according to which &#x201C;agreement national parks&#x201D; can be established&#x2014;that is, where suitable privately owned land can by means of negotiation and with the written approval of land owners be declared &#x201C;agreement national parks&#x201D;. In this way the private sector will also be able to make a contribution towards guaranteeing lasting protection for these areas. I should like to ask the hon the Minister how much progress has been made in this regard especially with respect to the Potsberg Reserve which is perhaps situated in his constituency. That area is owned by 49 landowners but has now been opened to the public and I have seen how the public is flocking to it. [Time expired.]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#mar&#x00E9;">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">P L MAR&#x00C9;</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, the hon member for Parktown devoted his speech to the subject of national parks. I do not have the time to react to that, but one thing is very certain, and that is that the latest policy document of the National Parks Board is a very fine piece of work which will greatly clarify policy and the delimitation of functions.</p>

<p>Permit me also to thank Mr Fred Otto for his wholehearted co-operation in the past, and to wish him a very pleasant retirement. Our sincere congratulations also go to Mr Bill Visagie and to the hon the Minister and the hon the Deputy Minister.</p>

<p>For two years now the plantations and timber-processing plants have been functioning under the control of the department in accordance with a trading account. In spite of poor markets during the past two financial years, due to drought and so forth, the works managers are, to a large extent, succeeding in covering operating expenditure, with the exception of capital expenditure, by means of income and still ploughing surpluses back into the Treasury as well as finding funds for new afforestation. However, the most important contribution of the trading account has been that it has had a positive effect on the personnel of the department because it offers them an opportunity to prove that their administration does not compare unfavourably with that of the private sector.</p>

<p>It is difficult to determine the effect of the drought on the industry. In its latest annual report, SATGA estimates that the incremental loss in the growth cycle country-wide was approximately 1,44 million tons, with greater losses in respect of hardwood in the summer rainfall areas. These losses will be felt in the industry for the next eight to ten years. In addition the drought has also created a greater fire-hazard, and it is difficult to say whether the increased fire damage, to which the hon member for Mooi River referred, is to a large extent due to the increased fire-hazard as a result of the drought. It is a fact, however, that increased premiums have placed a very great burden upon the industry.</p>

<p>Furthermore, the industry has also been hard hit by sharp hikes in transport tariffs. The slacking off in the building industry, in turn, has had a detrimental effect on the timber industry, and in many cases production has had to be cut back to as much as 70&#x0025; of normal production. Apart from that, sawmills have also been obliged to carry far larger stocks in order to retain their existing contracts. The demand for pine pulpwood has been very poor and there are also some indications that those plantations that have to be renewed will be replaced with new hardwood, as the hon member for Mooi <span class="col_2691-2692" refersTo="page_0190"/>River has also said, which in turn is a dangerous trend with a view to the future because it is generally accepted that the present poor demand is of a purely temporary nature and that it is therefore very necessary to restore long-term confidence now.</p>

<p>The figure for the establishment of additional new plantations is still too low&#x2014;approximately 13 000 ha per annum&#x2014;whilst the estimated required figure is 39 000 ha if we are to satisfy all our needs in the future. It is possible that research, which has produced some very good results in relation to tree improvement and vegetative propagation&#x2014;it is estimated that there will be an increased yield of more than 50&#x0025;&#x2014;will facilitate an improved yield in the future, and it may be possible to reduce the figure of 39 000 ha at a later stage whilst still remaining self-sufficient.</p>

<p>Unfortunately I do not have the time to deal at length with the importance of the industry as a creator of jobs, and particularly as a decentralised industry. However, the industry is subject to all the risks to which farming as such is subject, and in certain cases it is subject to even greater risks because a harvest may only be expected 8 to 12 years after planting. Large capital investments have to be made and fluctuating interesting rates, rising production costs, invader plants, insects, etc, pose very great risks to this industry.</p>

<p>The industry&#x2019;s answer to this, however, is its extremely effective organisation and scientific management. In this regard the contribution of the State, as the owner of approximately 30&#x0025; of all plantations, is not insignificant. I should just like to mention the State&#x2019;s contribution by way of research, the provision of information, publications, guidance and so forth. In this way the State largely plays a stabilising role in the industry. However, in the interests of the country it is now necessary for timber production to be stimulated. For this reason the amending legislation which makes provision for the appropriation of State funds in the form of loans to land-owners for the purpose of establishing new plantations, is greatly welcomed. This will provide the necessary stimulation which is so vital for the industry at this juncture. It will also be the best investment for the future.</p>

<p>Nor is it true to say that the industry itself has done nothing. Plantations of 12 118 ha were financed by the CTC Scheme and an amount of R4 435 000 was involved. However, this is still not enough. I should therefore like to direct an earnest appeal to the hon the Minister to make a concerted effort to obtain substantial funds, particularly in order to relieve the accumulated pressure of the past few years on funds for new plantations. It would be a very good investment for the future.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy_minister_of_environment_affairs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENT AFFAIRS</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, I am indeed honoured to take part in this debate today. Firstly I should like to thank the hon the Minister for his kind words of congratulation and of welcome. I should like to reciprocate by wishing him well in his new field of endeavour.</p>

<p>I should also like to associate myself with his words to Mr Otto whom I wish a long and happy retirement, and I also add my congratulations and good wishes to Mr Visagie. I am looking forward to a very close and cordial relationship with him. I should also like to thank all my former colleagues with whom I served on the various standing committees over the years, for their friendliness during the period that I was with them. I enjoyed my association with them. I particularly want to thank the various chairmen. Not all the chairmen were returned after the last election, but I should like to express my deep appreciation to them for their co-operation and understanding at all times.</p>

<p>Naturally I have not yet had the time and the opportunity to become acquainted with all the functions and responsibilities of the Department of Environment Affairs during this short period. It has, however, become abundantly clear to me that the department is often used&#x2014;I could possibly even say misused&#x2014;in the endeavours of certain individuals and groups to set right the mistakes of the past. It is unfortunately a fact that planning decisions which were made in another era and for reasons which appeared to be sound at that point, are obviously, in terms of today&#x2019;s needs and approaches, no longer considered to be ideal. <span class="col_2693-2694" refersTo="page_0191"/>When we are dealing with land use, however, and the rights to develop on zoned land, it requires enormous sums of money to stop or reverse planned development. There was a time when there was far less sensitivity towards environmental issues. The country is covered with numerous examples of what is known today to be poor and even bad land-use planning. All of this occurred when norms and values differed from those of today.</p>

<p>The point I wish to emphasise is that because of past practices, we need to be even more careful at present to ensure that our natural environment is not degraded any further. It holds no advantage for anyone to wisely point out what are considered to be the mistakes of the past and then argue that because insensitive land-use planning took place, we can, for whatever reason, allow it to continue.</p>

<p>We are in a period of transition in planning for a better living environment. We still have much of which we can be proud and there is still much that can be integrated with sound development. We cannot, however, turn the clock back and use the past to justify our actions in the present.</p>

<p>What about the future, however? It is also a fact that land for development, particularly land for residential development in and around our larger urban centres, is urgently required for our growing population. I believe the answer to this very sensitive and vexed question of justifiable demands for development on the one hand and the conservation and protection of our natural environment on the other hand, is to be found in co-ordinated planning. Anyone can plan, but good and lasting plans can only emerge from the drawing boards of those who have had the insight into all the problems surrounding the planning decisions. I just feel that the essential element for success is to understand the various demands which are being placed on all land, particularly in our sensitive areas, and then to come to decisions which are most beneficial to society over the long term. Short-term solutions have never truly solved problems, merely postponed them.</p>

<p>I should like to refer to one or two specific matters which I find to be of great importance. I think the importance of these aspects cannot be overemphasised. The population of our country should be educated to a state of environmental awareness, an awareness to be able to recognise when an action, any action, can have a detrimental effect on the environment in which we and our children and their children will have to live.</p>

<p>Environmental education is the development of a pattern of behaviour which should be second nature to all of us.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#dalling">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">D J DALLING</person>:</from>

<p>It must start in the schools.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I look forward with interest to studying the proposed White Paper on a national policy on environmental education which is referred to in the annual report of the Council for the Environment and which, I assume, addresses this particular subject.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#dalling">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">D J DALLING</person>:</from>

<p>It should start in the schools.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">D S PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, may I ask the hon the Deputy Minister a question?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I am constrained by the time at my disposal. If the hon member wishes to pose his question in writing I will be only too happy to respond to him, but I have been given limited time and cannot afford to use it to give him a reply. I therefore appeal to the hon member to put his question in writing.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman_of_the_ministers_council_in_the_house_of_delegates">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN OF THE MINISTERS&#x2019; COUNCIL IN THE HOUSE OF DELEGATES</person>:</from>

<p>And he must do it!</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">J H VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>You have a big mouth, don&#x2019;t you, Rajbansi! [Interjections.]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>As I have also mentioned in the debate on this department&#x2019;s Vote in the other two Houses, I am gratified by the activities of the Keep South Africa Beautiful Association in the interests of creating a fitter-free country. My colleague, the hon member for Mooi River, also mentioned this in his address. I think we as Natalians share a common love for the environment, and I want to thank him for his participation and message.</p>

<p>I am particularly pleased to note that an amount of R250 000 has been provided in the <span class="col_2695-2696" refersTo="page_0192"/>department&#x2019;s budget to assist this organisation. The association, as hon members probably know, has employed the &#x201C;clean community&#x201D; system which is in operation in 30 countries throughout the world and is one in which whole communities are encouraged to become involved in the campaign against littering and to realise that littering is socially unacceptable. The whole system is again based on educating the people to become environmentally conscious and to think environment with every action, however small, which may have a detrimental effect on our environment.</p>

<p>The environment can in many ways be compared to our numerous natural resources, be they fish, minerals, water, timber and so on. They must be nurtured and carefully managed, otherwise they will be destroyed, and with that comes a destruction of the quality of life that we would like to leave as an inheritance to future generations.</p>

<p>I am pleased to have had an opportunity to take part in this debate, and I look forward with keen anticipation to my association with this portfolio.</p>

<p>I have also been very encouraged by the numerous messages of congratulation and support. What is particularly heartening is that this support has been received from people of goodwill of all race groups. To all those good people, too many to mention, I say, &#x201C;Thank you very much. &#x201D;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smit">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">H A SMIT</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, I would like to thank the hon the Deputy Minister for and congratulate him on his contribution in this House today.</p>

<p>*At the same time I want to tell the hon member for Overvaal that I certainly expected more from him in the way of decency, but perhaps he has not yet learnt to spell the word! [Interjections.]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">J H VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>I have never run away, the way you did when I wanted to thrash you in George! [Interjections.]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smit">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">H A SMIT</person>:</from>

<p>This afternoon I should like briefly to address two facets which in my opinion are not only of national importance but also of international importance. It is my pleasant task to address these aspects this afternoon because I have confidence in the hon the Minister, particularly in his capacity as a former member of the National Parks Board. I know he has a thorough knowledge in this regard.</p>

<p>In the first place I should like to dwell briefly on the question of the Knysna elephant, and in the second place refer in passing to the Wilderness lake area. It is true that previously elephants were widely distributed in the Cape. I have been told that as long ago as 1702 elephants were still being shot on the Cape Flats. At present the only surviving elephants in the Cape are to be found in the Addo National Park&#x2014;which has approximately 120&#x2014;and in the vicinity of Knysna in the Tsitsikamma Forest.</p>

<p>I am sure hon members will agree with me that Knysna is synonymous with elephants. I have personally had the privilege of observing these elephants in the vicinity of the Garden of Eden. The decline in the elephant population in the Cape has become the concern of all local and international conservationconscious people. The elephants at present to be found in the Knysna vicinity move about in an area approximately 30 000 hectares in extent, of which approximately 22 000 hectares are indigenous forest. This area falls for the most part under State control. I want to state categorically here that these elephants to little damage.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#malcomess">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">D J N MALCOMESS</person>:</from>

<p>How many are there?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smit">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">H A SMIT</person>:</from>

<p>At present there are three. I shall come to that in a moment. [Interjections.] According to a survey carried out in 1876, there were between 400 and 500 elephants in the Cape. The decline was dramatic because by 1910, only 40 of these elephants had survived. The next survey, carried out in 1970, indicated that the numbers had fallen to between 11 and 13. It is important that the next census in 1980 indicated that only three had survived in the vicinity of Knysna&#x2014;an old bull, a cow and a heifer whose sex has not yet been determined with any certainty at this stage.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_members">

<from><person refersTo="hansard_za">*HON MEMBERS</person>:</from>

<p>A heifer? [Interjections.]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smit">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">H A SMIT</person>:</from>

<p>I apologise. A calf. [Interjections.]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from><span class="col_2697-2698" refersTo="page_0193"/>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">J H VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>Typical Nats!</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smit">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">H A SMIT</person>:</from>

<p>This led the Minister to appoint a working group in 1981 to investigate the conditions of the elephants. This working group recommended that elephants be brought in from elsewhere by way of experiment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">I LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>What about the hon member for Overvaal?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smit">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">H A SMIT</person>:</from>

<p>However, the hon the Minister rejected the recommendation at that stage. This afternoon I want to address a plea to the hon the Minister to consider seriously, as an experiment, bringing three young female elephant calves into that area. I believe that he, with his sympathetic approach, will heed this appeal.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">I LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>What about the hon member for Overvaal?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">J H VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>He is a big old bull. [Interjections.]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smit">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">H A SMIT</person>:</from>

<p>Next I refer to the Wilderness lake area. I am aware that the hon the Minister is perfectly well informed regarding the takeover of the old Lake Areas Development Board by the National Parks Board in 1983. However, in the Minutes of a meeting of the National Parks Board of Trustees on 24 March 1983 at Tweeriviere in the Kalahari Gemsbok Park, I found the following extract:</p>

<block name="quote">&#x2026; that the Board agrees in principle to take over the functions of the Lake Areas Development Board subject to the following: That the Government accepts the financial implication thereto.</block>

<p>At that stage, the local inhabitants were delighted with this decision because it made new expertise available to us, but also because we could be included in a national plan. In this environment we are dealing with an absolutely unique ecosystem. We find a bewildering variety of bird species here. When we look at the visual beauty of these vlei landscapes, it is clear we are dealing with the most enchanting natural assets of the country. It is now more necessary than in the past that we acquire new areas so that this entity may be preserved.</p>

<p>The point of departure that the Kruger National Park or the Kalahari Gemsbok Park can be financially self-sufficient, cannot be made to apply in this area.</p>

<p>At this stage we urgently need additional areas and this will have certain financial implications. A survey has shown that we need 7 500 hectares with a financial implication of approximately R11,25 million. It is now necessary for the Government to afford us real financial support. This should be of concern to us all, not only in South Africa&#x2019;s interests but in the interests of the international world. I know we can depend on the hon the Minister&#x2019;s support.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hulley">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">R R HULLEY</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, if the hon member for George will excuse me I would prefer not to follow him on the subject of endangered species.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#malcomess">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">D J N MALCOMESS</person>:</from>

<p>You mean the hon member for Overvaal. [Interjections.]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hulley">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">R R HULLEY</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to add my good wishes to the retiring Director-General, Mr Otto. During the more or less five years that I have been spokesman on this subject I have had first class co-operation from him and I wish him well in his retirement. His golf score will no doubt come down in that period!</p>

<p>I would also like to extend my good wishes to the hon member for Bryanston who has become the spokesman for our party. He was an outstanding spokesman in the past and I would like to follow him in this debate on the subject of the legislative confusion, the confusion of lines of authority which exist in the environmental field. He gave an example in this regard concerning Plettenberg Bay. I would like to repeat the appeal I have made in the past for the formation of an environmental protection agency along the lines of the Environmental Protection Agency in the United States. That was set up some 20 years ago to solve precisely the problem that we face in this country today. It was set up to co-ordinate some 15 different legislative programmes in the United States.</p>

<p>In this country it has been stated, for example, that a fish swimming from an estuary in Natal to the waters of the Cape would fall under the aegis of at least 15 different laws. To make matters worse the laws and regulations that it would fall under are administered by a variety of Ministries, <span class="col_2699-2700" refersTo="page_0194"/>provincial authorities and numerous separate departments within Ministries, as well as such semi-government bodies as the Natal Parks Board and the Atomic Energy Board. In brief, this country has a great deal of environmental legislation but it is all compartmentalised in an overlapping series of responsibilities under various departments. There are furthermore not enough officials to deal with the legislation that exists. All of this leads to poor environmental protection and inefficiency. I remain convinced that a body such as an environmental protection agency with real teeth that can draw up regulations will truly benefit the environmental policies of this country. Such a body should have the power to regulate the total environment, the air, the water, the built environment, and so on, and the power to insist on environmental impact studies.</p>

<p>We have a vast range of towns and cities throughout South Africa which have different standards of environmental sensitivity. Some are models in this area and others have allowed some environmental disasters to occur. All I have been asking is that we follow the good example which was set in the United States some 20 years ago, and not fall way behind the times in this matter. The Council for the Environment cannot fulfil this role; it is an advisory body with no powers. We have to have something with real powers.</p>

<p>Another matter I would like to raise in this debate is the subject of the De Hoop Reserve and the Overberg missile test range. Hon members will recall that some years ago a massive controversy arose about this. At that stage it was resolved by the publication of the Hey Commission Report which established the principle of monitoring development in that Overberg range area from an environmental point of view against a comprehensive list of criteria. The Council for the Environment established a subcommittee called the Overberg Committee to monitor the recommendations. The principle of monitoring was accepted by the SADF at that time. I have been following the matter with great interest since that time and regret that I am most concerned by what has emerged so far.</p>

<p>In the Council for the Environment&#x2019;s annual report last year they already raised some disturbing references.</p>

<p>They mentioned initial confusion about the committee&#x2019;s terms of reference. They mentioned that insufficient time had elapsed to assess precisely how the recommendations of the Hey Report were being implemented. They also expressed their concern about an apparent lack of documentation on the terms of reference and the actions of those committees co-ordinating the day-to-day activities of the people involved at the range.</p>

<p>I looked forward with great interest to this year&#x2019;s report and I regret that it gives more cause for concern. The straws in the wind of last year appear to be confirmed. In this year&#x2019;s report they say that they have endeavoured to satisfy themselves that the development was proceeding in accordance with the Hey Commission recommendations. In a number of respects, however, this clearly is not the case. They refer to the De Hoek Reserve not having been extended. They refer to the slow development of a detailed monitoring programme. They refer to the need for proper documentation and minutes to keep all the decisions and agreements made on record. Clearly that is not happening, otherwise they would not refer to it. They refer to the need to follow up to ensure the well-being of the persons displaced as a result of the establishment of this range. Clearly this is not happening to their satisfaction. They refer to manpower and money to implement the recommendations. Clearly that is not being provided to them to do the job adequately. They end by saying &#x201C;it was deemed insufficient to determine whether or not the testing range is being developed in accordance with the Hey Commission Report&#x201D;.</p>

<p>I would like to appeal to the hon Minister to say quite clearly what is going on down there. Will he make it his personal responsibility to ensure that in regard to that development which is now placed beyond the eyes of public scrutiny&#x2014;we can only rely on the subcommittee and the hon the Minister to make sure that the recommendations are being followed&#x2014;the public undertakings given at that time are met and honoured?</p>

<p>The other question that I want to raise is the policy towards Cape fur seals. This was raised last year in debate. I made an appeal for a proper scientific programme to be established <span class="col_2701-2702" refersTo="page_0195"/>to determine policy towards Cape fur seals. This was not done. The hon the Minister&#x2019;s predecessor simply went ahead with the so-called &#x201C;shooing&#x201D; programme and touched off a massive controversy. The policy led to seals being born at sea and the pups dying on a massive scale from drowning. Dead seal pups were floating in among the bathers in the holiday season. Thousands of them were washed up on the shores of the Cape. It really caused public outrage among environmentalists. This year when I raised the question with the hon the Minister as to what the population of Seal Island is, it turned out from the reply that the population has actually been declining, from 58 000 in 1971, according to the reply, down to 20 000 now. Yet it was still deemed necessary to launch this misguided experiment which proved nothing. From the hon the Minister&#x2019;s reply it has clearly proved nothing at all and I make the appeal once again that before another &#x201C;shooing&#x201D; experiment is launched in this October/November, in this breeding season, that we please have a properly motivated scientific report before we again launch half-baked, misguided attacks on the seal population which is already declining as is confirmed in the department&#x2019;s report.</p>

<p>There is one more brief matter which I would like to raise. The new Minister has confirmed by his reply to Question 28 on 16 June that the late Mr Dave Allen of Port Elizabeth was in fact the recipient of certain valuable marine concessions which were granted without tender procedures being observed during the tenure of the late Minister John Wiley.</p>

<p>In view of the fact that it has been widely speculated that the late Minister and the late Mr Allen were good personal friends, I believe it is unfortunate that these valuable concessions were granted without tender proceedings having been followed. I would like to ask this hon Minister to clear the matter up, to allay any public misgivings and to put the matter beyond any doubt. In view of this I believe it is necessary for the new hon Minister to review and reopen these concessions to tender procedures and I call upon him to do so.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#schoeman">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">R S SCHOEMAN</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, the hon member for Constantia raised some questions concerning the broader policy framework within which our environmental efforts are being made. I think it would be more appropriate for the hon the Minister to respond to that when it suits him.</p>

<p>*I should also like to congratulate the hon the Minister on his new portfolio and to convey my best wishes to him on this occasion, where he is conducting the debate on this Vote in this Committee for the first time.</p>

<p>&#x2020;I would like to congratulate my fellow Natalian, the hon the Deputy Minister, on his new portfolio. We know him as a dedicated servant of the public in all respects for many years and I am sure he is going to do an outstanding job.</p>

<p>I share the frustration of the hon member for Mooi River, who unfortunately is not here at the moment, in knowing what to deal with when one takes part in the debate on this Vote. I think he raised a matter of overall importance, namely the question of environmental education. In fact, he said all that I would have liked to have said as well as anybody could possibly do, and I would like to congratulate his on that contribution to this debate. I am sure the hon the Minister will also take careful note of what he said.</p>

<p>I would like to refer to just one subject and that is our 3 000km coastal belt which I think is probably our country&#x2019;s most precious resource; arguably, I would say, more precious even than our gold industry. It is something which has taken 300 million years to create, but dramatic degradation has taken place during the past 30 years. Many people say we only need another 30 years to destroy this coastal belt completely.</p>

<p>I have in my hand a brochure which was written by a distinguished South African environmentalist with a very difficult surname to pronounce, Mr Michael Zakrzewski who has also gained distinction as the founder of a body called Ecca, the Environmental Centre for Coastal Areas, which is based in Durban. The heading to this brochure which I would gladly make available to any hon member who is interested, is &#x201C;Can South Africa&#x2019;s coast still be saved?&#x201D;. At that conference a deep concern was expressed at what was called &#x201C;the deterioration of the water&#x2019;s edge&#x201D;, and that interesting concept includes coastal areas, lakes, shores and river banks.</p>

<p><span class="col_2703-2704" refersTo="page_0196"/>In the very brief period of seven minutes allocated to me I would like to try to refer to seven specific aspects, the first of which is what is meant by &#x201C;coastal areas&#x201D;. Many factors prevent strict definition of this term because the boundaries vary from place to place according to various factors. Apart from factors such as settlement, industrialisation, fisheries and environmental indices, there are also strictly ecological factors and river catchment areas. As an example I would like to point out that in Natal, for practical reasons, on the Natal north coast the N2 freeway is accepted as the landside boundary, but there are limitations to that artificial boundary. On the water side the territorial waters at 12 nautical miles are usually considered as a boundary. Again this is artificial, because in many people&#x2019;s view the correct border is defined by the edge of the continental shelf of shallow waters. At Richards Bay that is only 20 km; at the Tugela Mouth, which is in my constituency, it is 45 km, and in Durban it is less than 20 km, and these are factors we will have to consider.</p>

<p>The second point I wish to raise is that we know that coastal areas are generally speaking the most sought after real estate for tourism and many other commercial activities, and that 90&#x0025; of the fish harvest comes from coastal waters. I wish to say that these two natural elements, the land and water, influence each other and can live side by side but can only do so if the absolute necessity for rational management of this resource is accepted.</p>

<p>The pressure is becoming increasingly unacceptable, and the situation is reaching the point where the value of the asset that is our coast is rapidly diminishing. The haphazard opportunistic development of coastal land&#x2014; some other hon members have referred to that today&#x2014;has already dramatically reduced the value of large stretches of our coast.</p>

<p>We need to agree on a strategy for the management of coastal areas, and we have to work out how to do this. I would submit that the first step is to thoroughly assess our whole coastal area, especially the sensitive and potentially precious local areas within the region. We must move to a point where we have a complete study, region by region, and a formal register of our national coastal areas.</p>

<p>There are alarming statistics about the degradation of the coast in Natal. For example, in a period of eight years something like 50&#x0025; of identified sensitive areas were destroyed on that coast. We must ensure that we prevent further dramatic devastation of this asset. We can learn from what is happening in other countries, but in many respects our problems are unique. In our own country, much is being done to formulate steps to be taken, but the fact of the matter is that we do not as yet have an effective and coherent policy for coastal management in South Africa, especially on what I would call &#x201C;the land side of the water&#x2019;s edge&#x201D;.</p>

<p>Mr Chairman, I would like to pay tribute to the work which the Committee for Coastal and Marine Systems of the Council for the Environment has been doing. It has prepared a number of very important reports which will serve as a policy framework when these are eventually accepted by the State.</p>

<p>*Finally, I want to suggest that the priorities outlined by that committee of the Council for the Environment should now be put into practice. Mention has been made of the need for arranging a symposium and for constructing a framework for Government policy within which all departments must function. &#x2020;</p>

<p>&#x2020;I am convinced that the hon the Minister, who himself has a coastal constituency, will be sympathetically disposed towards this end, and I am sure that we can rely on him in this regard.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#matthee">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">J C MATTHEE</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, first of all I would like to thank the hon member for Umhlanga for the very interesting subject he has raised here today. I will also deal with a particularly parochial matter, namely the St Lucia lake further north in Zululand.</p>

<p>Before I come to that, however, I would like to add my good wishes to the hon the Minister and to the hon the Deputy Minister in their new portfolios, and I look forward to working with them.</p>

<p>The future of Lake St Lucia has become so critical because the flora and fauna will be destroyed as the surface of the lake is rising at such an alarming rate that the lake will disappear when it reaches the level of the sea if a solution is not found soon. I will come to that at a later stage. This lake system is <span class="col_2705-2706" refersTo="page_0197"/>unique in that it has freshwater and seawater life and there is a delicate balance of fauna and flora that lives between the high salinity and the fresh water.</p>

<p>Salinity is the greatest danger facing this lake. Why is this so? Over the past 85 years fresh water reaching the lake has decreased dramatically because firstly, the Umfolozi River no longer feeds into the lake system, and secondly, the water of the Nyalazi, Hluhluwe, Nzimene and Mkuze Rivers is being subjected more and more to pumping and damming by farmers growing trees and other crops with a high demand for soil moisture which has reduced the amount of water reaching the river and, in turn, the lake.</p>

<p>Fresh water entering the lake through seepage from the shores is very important during dry periods. This seepage has now decreased because afforestation and other developments on the western side of the lake have virtually dried up the Dukuduku River and the Charters Creek streams.</p>

<p>Afforestation has also been developed on the eastern and the northern sides of the lake. That has also depleted to a very large extent the moisture in the soil on the banks.</p>

<p>I want to give hon members an idea of how big this lake is. It is the biggest lake in Southern Africa. It is some 40 km long with an average width of 4,8 km, is 20,8 km at its widest, and has a long channel of 21 km which leads to the sea.</p>

<p>I have already said that salinity is the biggest threat to the lake.</p>

<p>This salinity is caused by sea water entering the lake. During some tides the mouth is closed and a lot of sea water remains within the lake. Another reason for this is that very little fresh water is entering the lake, and a third factor is evaporation. Salinity above sea level destroys animal and plant life, and by that I mean that the normal salinity of sea water is 35 parts to 1 000. The worst average level of salinity the lake could take for a very short period is that of sea water, but in order to establish an equilibrium at least 73 000 morgen feet of water per year would be required to reduce the salinity to acceptable levels.</p>

<p>When we look at siltation, which is a further problem, we find that this has reduced the depth of the lake to a very large extent. It has partly destroyed the attached and floating vegetation and it has also smothered the benthonic fauna, which are the bottom-living forms of life such as worms, shrimps, crabs and so on.</p>

<p>To illustrate this, when a river enters a large body of water its velocity decreases and coarse material suspended in the water tends to settle out first. However, fine silt and clay are transported further into the lake and tend to settle over the whole lake, and this builds up over a period of time. Sediment samples taken at a depth of 9 m in this lake would seem to suggest that their ages vary between 1 800 and 4 000 years. Relatively speaking, therefore, it will not be too long before that lake disappears completely.</p>

<p>The biological and ecological balance of this lake has been hanging on a thread and we are very fortunate that this lake is still alive. Small fish feed on drifting plankton and some of the worms, shrimps and crabs that I have mentioned before. They, in turn, are eaten by sharks, skate, kabeljou, grunter and the like, as well as the bird life in the area which includes fish eagles, herons, pelicans and cormorants. In addition, wild geese, ducks and hippopotami feed on the plants.</p>

<p>If the plant and animal life is destroyed that lake will disappear for ever. The only way to save this lake is to feed water from the Pongola Dam into the Mkuze River and then into the lake. My information is that 85&#x0025; of the water in this dam is not being utilised and I therefore appeal to the hon the Minister to give serious consideration to the building of a canal from the Pongola Dam to near the Mkuze River. In order to save money the Natal Parks Board would then be prepared to link the canal to the river, thereby providing a regular flow of fresh water into the lake system.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_environment_affairs_and_of_water_affairs">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENT AFFAIRS AND OF WATER AFFAIRS</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, I have a slight problem. If I am not mistaken, we have had 13 speakers and I have approximately five minutes at my disposal to react to all of them. I shall do my best.</p>

<p>As regards those specific matters which were <span class="col_2707-2708" refersTo="page_0198"/>raised by hon members and which I shall not get to now in this very short reply, I want to assure the hon members that we shall study the Hansard report closely to determine which questions we have not answered, and provide them with written answers.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#dalling">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">D J DALLING</person>:</from>

<p>Very reasonable!</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I do just want to agree with the hon member for Potgietersrus. I think he mentioned at the outset that we have too little time. I think we have too little time in this debate to do justice to this Vote, but I am amazed that the Official Opposition requested so little time for this debate. I think they could have requested more time; perhaps I should then have had more time, too.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">J H VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>What makes you think we did not ask? [Interjections.]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>To dispose of these speeches quickly&#x2014;the hon member for Potgietersrus said there was a Creator&#x2019;s injunction, with which I agree, but there is one thing man did do. He took a certain section of the Creator&#x2019;s injunction, namely to go forth and multiply, and to fill the earth, very literally, and nowadays we probably have too many people for nature.</p>

<p>It was an uncontroversial speech and I thank the hon member for his support.</p>

<p>The hon member for Uitenhage discussed the squid resources. His problem is one I also have, and one I am working on. The fact that boats are now catching both squid and line fish is a great problem. I want to assure the hon member that we shall be giving a great deal of attention to this matter; I shall be discussing this with him further. Then, I think, he asked a question regarding the contact between the department and the Navy. No progress has been made in this regard because a devolution of authority to the second tier has now taken place. I thank the hon member for his contribution. I also want to thank the hon member for the work he does as chairman of the standing committee.</p>

<p>&#x2020;Mr Chairman, the hon member for Bryanston raised a few matters. I think he was perturbed about the devolution of power to second-tier government. On a point of information, the devolution instruction was not given via the Department of Constitutional Development and Planning but was given by means of a President&#x2019;s minute directly from this department to the provincial administrations. It did not go through the Department of Constitutional Development and Planning.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#lorimer">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">R J LORIMER</person>:</from>

<p>You said it had been devolved and as a result that I had to get the answer from the hon the Minister of Constitutional Development and Planning.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Devolution must not be seen as the delegation of power. It gives full power. Powers are not delegated but devolve; that means the power is now in the hands of the Administrator. However, what must be borne in mind, is that this department is the umbrella organisation under which all environment affairs will still fall.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#lorimer">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">R J LORIMER</person>:</from>

<p>But it has no teeth!</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>No, that is not right. Unfortunately I do not have the time to go into this argument because I have worked out the whole procedure as to how a provincial administration and this department will work together. There is a definite system. I can mention that there is a standing committee of which the Minister of Environment Affairs is the chairman, and the other members of the committee are the four Administrators. They will meet on a regular basis and discuss policy matters.</p>

<p>*The hon member for Caledon mentioned his concern in regard to abalone. I, too, am very worried about it. He does know, however, that it is a very problematic situation. We now have a 185 metres zone, which we know is inadequate, but if we were to increase it, the people would struggle to find the abalone. However, we shall indeed be investigating the whole matter.</p>

<p>The hon member for Mooi River apologised for not being able to be here. I shall leave him there for the moment.</p>

<p>The hon member for Walvis Bay referred to our research projects. We are grateful to the hon member for his concern for research because it forms the basis of our marine management. I want to assure him that we shall do everything in our power to obtain adequate funds and staff.</p>

<p>He discussed the commercial exploitation of <span class="col_2709-2710" refersTo="page_0199"/>seals, and other hon members referred to this, too.</p>

<p>&#x2020;I want to refer to the matter very briefly. Over the past 15 years three independent committees of inquiry including the recent Diemont Commission recommended a reduction in the seal population. In the most recent Government White Paper it is clearly stated that this recommendation has been accepted. In other words we accept that the seal population must be reduced. The Department of Environment Affairs will address the seal issue in a responsible way by taking cognisance of the advice given by marine scientists and at the same time not ignoring socioeconomic realities. The actions eventually taken will obviously not always be to the satisfaction of all parties concerned.</p>

<p>*I think the hon member for Walvis Bay made an interesting point when he said we should exploit the adult seals commercially and turn this into an industry.</p>

<p>I am pleased the hon member for Parktown enjoys the Kruger National Park and also that he is so interested in it. Does he know what beautiful mussels are to be found in that park? These mussels are far larger than those one finds at the sea.</p>

<p>The hon member asked what progress had been made with the agreement parks. I want to say briefly that good progress had been made in that regard. We have now settled matters regarding the Langebaan Park; that has been dealt with. We are now dealing with the Richtersveld where we are making good progress. Furthermore, we are also engaged in negotiations with the De Beers company regarding the establishment of a park between the Groen and Spoeg Rivers on the Cape West Coast. We are also engaged in establishing a park in the Kransberg area near Thabazimbi, and we are making good progress there, too. In general one could say the whole idea is making good progress.</p>

<p>&#x2020;I want to thank the hon the Deputy Minister for his contribution and I am looking forward to further contributions from him under this portfolio.</p>

<p>*The hon member for Nelspruit has given us a good account of the facts regarding the forestry matter, and we shall get in touch with him in connection with the questions he asked.</p>

<p>The hon member for George discussed the elephants. I want to tell him that I have in principle approved the return of the elephants to George.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smit">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">H A SMIT</person>:</from>

<p>Thank you very much!</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>This is subject to the provision that the National Parks Board exercises control over those elephants. The area must also be properly fenced, so that I do not receive any claims against me from the farmers in the area.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#schoeman">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">S J SCHOEMAN</person>:</from>

<p>They will look after themselves!</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, I believe the hon member for George will help look after the elephants. [Interjections.] The hon member can go and tell the people that approval has been given in principle.</p>

<p>&#x2020;The hon member for Constantia is perturbed about the legislative confusion. Unfortunately time does not allow me to go into the matter. The hon member for Umhlanga spoke on coastal management and I want to thank him for his contribution. The hon member for Durban Point made an interesting speech about Lake St Lucia and I will refer the matter to the hon the Minister of Water Affairs.</p>

<p>*Since the remainder of the debate is going to deal with the Water Affairs Vote, I should like at the outset to congratulate my colleague, the hon the Deputy Minister of Water Affairs, on his appointment and thank him for all the work he has done in this regard. I want to tell the House that a very large part of the day-to-day administration of the Department of Water Affairs is in his hands. I should therefore also like him to react to the discussion at the end of the debate. He, too, will then be able to react to hon members&#x2019; representations.</p>

<p>The Department of Water Affairs is 75 years old this year, and this is a special occasion in the existence of the department. I think the department deserves to be thanked for what it has done in the past. It has developed a water system throughout the length and breadth of the country and has also done excellent planning for the future. I should like <span class="col_2711-2712" refersTo="page_0200"/>to have it placed on record that the Government wants to convey its special thanks and recognition to the department and its officials.</p>

<p>This also brings me to a matter which could cause one to feel quite moved. I am referring to the retirement of the department&#x2019;s very capable Director General, Mr Johan du Plessis, who will be retiring at the end of August. We should like to pay tribute to him for a career of 38 years in the department during which time he rendered excellent service. His contribution to hydro-architecture is also recognised internationally, as the part he played in the International Commission for Large Dams can testify. He can look back with pride on his career, which contains numerous highlights. Even now, on his last lap, he and the department have surprised us with a publication of outstanding quality, namely the Report on the Management of Water Resources of the RSA. The complete reorganisation of the Department of Water Affairs is being announced and in terms of this greater independence of management on a regional level is being established in six regions. I want to convey the Government&#x2019;s thanks to Mr Du Plessis and to wish him and his wife a well-deserved rest.</p>

<p>At the same time I should also like to congratulate his successor, Mr G C D Claassens, who has been appointed Director-General, and Mr T P C van Robbroeck, who has been appointed as Deputy Director-General, on their promotions. We wish them every success in their new capacities. While I am on the subject of his name, I can also say that Mr Van Robbroeck had a special interest in and rendered special service in connection with the Lesotho-Highlands Water Scheme.</p>

<p>Hon members will no doubt be interested in the progress that has been made with the Lesotho-Highlands Water Project. I want to report briefly, right here at the outset, on that scheme. On 12 December 1986 the TransCaledon Tunnel Authority was established in terms of section 138 (a) of the Water Act to give effect to the agreement signed on 24 October 1986 by the government of South Africa and the Government of the Kingdom of Lesotho.</p>

<p>The affairs of the Trans-Caledon Tunnel Authority come under the management and control of a board of directors appointed by me on account of their management, technical and financial expertise and experience. With the exception of one member, namely Mr L D Hobbs, who is the chairman of the Rand Water Board, all members of the directorate have been selected from the top management of the Department of Water Affairs. Therefore, a management structure has now been created.</p>

<p>The TCTA is responsible, <i>inter alia,</i> for the execution, running and maintenance of the section of the project that falls within South Africa, and it also acts as an agent for Lesotho for the section of the tunnel between the Tlhaka Dam&#x2014;that really is a difficult name&#x2014;and the Caledon River.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>*An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>Dakar!</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>No, Tlhaka.</p>

<p>This includes the building a tunnel for conveying water from the dam in Lesotho over a distance of 34 km to the outlet in the As River near Clarens, from where it will reach the Vaal Dam via the Wilge and Vaal Rivers.</p>

<p>A consortium of South African consulting civil engineers, known as the Highlands Delivery Tunnel Consultants, was appointed on 27 April 1987 by the TCTA to undertake, under its supervision, the design of the tunnel. It is expected that the design of the tunnel and the preparation of the tender documents for the construction phase will be completed by the end of 1989.</p>

<p>On the Lesotho side, the Lesotho Highlands Development Authority has been established. Co-ordination between the two authorities takes place by means of a permanent joint technical committee which meets on a regular basis to discuss matters of common importance. To date this project has been going completely according to plan.</p>

<p>If I have the opportunity at the end of the debate I shall make a few more announcements, but for the time being I shall let this suffice and look forward to hon members&#x2019; contributions to this debate.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#schoeman">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">C B SCHOEMAN</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, in the very short time at my disposal permit me, too, to convey the sincere congratulations of <span class="col_2713-2714" refersTo="page_0201"/>this side of the House to the new hon Deputy Minister on his appointment. Then, too, we on this side also wish to extend our sincere thanks to Mr Du Plessis, who is to retire at the end of August, for the years of service he has rendered, and we wish him a long and happy retirement. We also wish to congratulate Mr Claassens, the Deputy Director, on his promotion to the post of Director-General from 1 September and Mr Roberts on his promotion to the post of Deputy Director from the same date.</p>

<p>In addition I wish to congratulate the Department of Water Affairs on behalf of this side of the House on its 50 years of existence and I trust that the next two and a half decades will be wet (<i>nat</i>) years. [Interjections.] Permit me, then, to congratulate the hon the Minister and all the officials on the activities of the department, particularly those of the Water Research Commission.</p>

<p>This body succeeds in employing skilled manpower across a broad spectrum and in rendering outstanding service. While the task of the Water Research Commission consists largely of long-term projects extending over years of prosperity as well as years of drought, in our opinion they are achieving signal success with those specific programmes. Accordingly I find it regrettable that the work of this research body should be hampered by a lack of funds. The submissions in the 1978 financial year for new projects amounting to R9,3 million, and the allocation of a mere R3,2 million for new contracts, is quite clearly a limiting factor for so important a research body. Indeed, the annual report of the Department of Water Affairs makes it very clear that although the department spends virtually 100&#x0025; of its appropriated funds every year, the annual increase in the Budget is drastically affected by inflation. In real terms, what this signifies is a decline of more than 6&#x0025;, as indicated in the 1985-86 annual report. This leeway which, owing to limited funds, has been building up for more than a decade will be very difficult to make up in future.</p>

<p>Let me come back to the Water Research Commission. The two research initiatives finalised over the past year, namely those relating to water losses from municipal distribution networks and to the socio-economic consequences of water restrictions are very illuminating but also disturbing. This is particularly so if one takes into account that the losses in certain parts of the PWV area amount to 30&#x0025;, as against the savings that are to be effected by restrictions, which sometimes amount to less than 30&#x0025; per residential area. If one looks at the socioeconomic consequences of the water restrictions it is quite clear that the activities of the consumer are significantly affected. The home-owner, the irrigation farming sector, mining, the electricity supply enterprises, the local authorities and industries are all sectors that are affected to a significant extent. Major financial inputs in the form of the sinking of boreholes are made, and many of these inputs constitute fruitless expenditure. The reduced revenue of local authorities, which then has to be supplemented by way of high tariffs, the distribution network and infrastructure which have to be installed at considerable capital expense and are under-utilized, as well as the ongoing operating expenses, directly influence the quality of life of people. The depreciation of properties and certain other expenditures are all factors that have a significant effect on the quality of life of people. The release of this report by the research commission is eagerly awaited.</p>

<p>Another very interesting research project is that relating to ground water, particularly the research into dolomitic ground-water resources in the supply area of the Rand Water Board. The purpose of this project is to integrate the ground-water resources with the water supply network of the Rand Water Board, and this entails the abstraction of water from dolomitic deposits by the sinking of boreholes. Although this project has been finalised I have unfortunately not yet seen the report. However, I wish to issue a friendly warning to the hon the Minister and his department that increased abstraction of ground water will indeed entail the shortterm benefits of achieving the necessary supplementation as far as water needs are concerned, but a drop in the water table could give rise to other serious problems.</p>

<p>Another real problem is that of large-scale urbanisation, which is taking place in the PWV area in particular. It is still an open question whether sufficient research and planning has been done to meet the growing <span class="col_2715-2716" refersTo="page_0202"/>demand for water. The infrastructure that will be necessary and the increased consumption resulting from the growing urbanisation will mean that in the long term it will not be possible to rely solely on the planning of the present Vaal Water Supply Project. It is therefore clear that in the long term it will not be possible to rely on the supplementing of this vital resource by the abstraction of ground water as a supplementary resource; this can only be utilised as a short-term aid.</p>

<p>The transferring of water from one region of a province to another, as in the case of the PWV area, cannot be regarded as an acceptable long-term solution, due specifically to the fact that local communities will lay claim to that vital commodity, water, to meet their own future needs and infrastructure. The friendly appeal that I should like to make to the hon the Minister is for him not to place a damper on the funds devoted to research into these serious problem areas. I make this appeal to the hon the Minister because in my opinion the warning lights are already beginning to flicker on the panel to show that this Ruhr area of South Africa could suffer a serious blow as a result of cut-backs on research projects, as I pointed out at the start of my speech. Vision and farsightedness must now be displayed with regard to our most important life resource, water.</p>

<p>I wish to conclude by saying that we are of the opinion that in the PWV area in particular, in pressing on with over-hasty physical planning without proper investigation of the attendant problems, we are relying on water resources that have already reached crisis level as regards their supply capacity. By adopting piecemeal methods and not attending to the real problems, irreparable damage could be done in the long term. We cannot permit both capital and research capital to be granted every year at a negative rate, particularly if the effect of inflation is taken into account.</p>

<p>Thirdly, the findings of the research commission on the socio-economic consequences of water restrictions should be made available as soon as possible and sent through the correct channels.</p>

<p>Fourthly, we congratulate the hon the Minister and his department on the quality of the annual reports they have received, and the moderate criticism I have expressed should be regarded as constructive.</p>

<p>Fifthly, we support the Budget and request the Treasury to lend a sympathetic ear as regards the allocation of funds for the provision of such a vital commodity.</p>

<p>Sixthly, the time granted to the CP to dispose of a debate in 15 minutes is hopelessly too little to debate anything meaningfully.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#rabie">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">J RABIE</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, I take pleasure in following the hon member for Nigel. He conducted a decent debate this afternoon and this shows that that side of the House is capable of conducting a decent debate if they make use of decent people. I am now praising those hon members. [Interjections.]</p>

<p>Over the past few years the fact has once again emerged that we are a water-poor country. Parts of our country are already desert and one shudders to read in the daily papers about what is happening in agriculture in certain parts of our country, with disastrous consequences for all of us. If the drought hits us, we all suffer. It is plain that water is expensive, but drought is even more expensive. A drought is a very expensive thing.</p>

<p>Whatever solutions, political or otherwise, may be found, the fact remains that water is an extremely limited national resource. The rapid population growth in particular is going to exert greater pressure on the available water resources and funds. We all know that the rate of increase is alarming. Wherever one goes there is the sound of children. I have wondered whether it would not be better to take the people to the water than to bring the water to the people. After all, one can make people there, too, once the water is there. [Interjections.] It is possible, Sir.</p>

<p>We must begin to think carefully. This matter of water is a very expensive issue. For the immediate future, practical and feasible management and control measures are crucial, and are desperately needed. I read in the reports that there are many possible ways of supplementing rain water, such as towing icebergs from the South Pole&#x2014;they should just wait a little with that because it is too cold at the moment&#x2014;precipitating water from mist and making rain by bombarding clouds with silver-iodide crystals. This has been and <span class="col_2717-2718" refersTo="page_0203"/>is being investigated and these are methods we may be able to use 25 years from now. The current solution is nevertheless that we should make better use of our available water.</p>

<p>What methods can we adopt, because our people do not want to listen? A simple, effective yet speedy form of water control is the imposition of water tariff systems for urban, industrial and agricultural use. The farmers must also go along with this. It must be based on a compulsory, fair, cumulative tariff block system. Provided the tariff is based on the value and cost of the service rendered, there can be no opposition. At present, as few as four out of a sample of 37 local authorities are applying their conservation tariffs. Such a tariff makes provision for the payment by peak consumers of the extra expense incurred to meet their needs. This approach has been applied successfully for many years in electricity tariffs and has been accepted without opposition. The installation of proven available water conservation measures&#x2014;basins, showers, taps and mechanical units&#x2014;in all new buildings and dwellings should be insisted on with immediate effect.</p>

<p>Considerable savings are also possible if climate-related garden layouts are encouraged. Excellent gardens can be cultivated without water. One only has to use one&#x2019;s head; my garden is a good example. In overseas countries water installations that waste water are being replaced in old buildings of a specific age, and offenders are liable to prosecution.</p>

<p>The unashamed pollution of river courses by some agencies is taking place constantly, notwithstanding existing standards that prescribe better run-off quality, monitoring programmes, reporting to the State and so forth. Alas, even the training and employment of suitable trained staff, in conjunction with inadequate counselling management and drainage maintenance units, has not produced the desired results, and the incidence of pollution is increasing.</p>

<p>In many instances city councils and industries are the main culprits. What is one to conclude if one takes into account that one out of 20 authorities in the PWV area complies with requirements in regard to phosphate and nitrogen content in run-offs to rivers, not withstanding the fact that existing legislation empowers the State to prosecute such offenders? In my opinion such lack of concern is indicative of a selfish obsession with one&#x2019;s own interests, if one takes into account the effect of this on the downstream neighbours.</p>

<p>The solution to a further problem, namely the re-utilisation of water, is certainly not making rapid progress, notwithstanding considerable capital expenditure. At Windhoek, Pretoria and Cape Town purified sewage water of an acceptable quality has been provided for human consumption over the past three years, but if one enquires as to why more municipalities do not follow this example, the response is a shrug of the shoulders and the statement that it would not be popular. I do not know whether the water looks different or tastes different.</p>

<p>One wonders&#x2014;Mr Du Plessis should listen to this&#x2014;how well the abstraction of water from the Umgeni River and from the Boland by the PWV and Greater Cape Town Area respectively is being received, particularly since this is done because they do not want to make use of purified water. We allow it, but it is not popular in my part of the world.</p>

<p>In times of high escalation in interest rates as well as a scarcity of capital it is in the interests of the country that conservation and purification of water become far more important. [Interjections.] In my opinion, the public at large will in any event prefer to have water conservation measures than to have the water restrictions of a few years ago reintroduced. Conservation and more effective purification are not permanent solutions, but they buy time.</p>

<p>We shall also have to consider delaying less urgently-needed schemes if conservation is not more actively applied by a service area, however drastic such a step may be. Nevertheless one can only hope and trust that everyone will realise that conservation must now become the law.</p>

<p>Finally I wish to convey my thanks and appreciation to Mr Du Plessis, who is now going farming. I hope that he will not have floods and droughts. I thank him for his open door policy and the advice he gave us.</p>

<p>I request the new Director-General, Mr Claassens, please to keep his eyes, ears and <span class="col_2719-2720" refersTo="page_0204"/>heart open. Since he was born in Worcester, he must please give me what I want. [Interjections.] I wish the new Deputy Minister of Water Affairs everything of the best. He will go far, because he has a very kind face and even though others have said that he is only capable of making &#x201C;sports&#x201D;, I know that between those eyes there is a very good heart, and I ask him, too, to give us what we ask for. [Interjections.]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#lorimer">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">R J LORIMER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, the hon member for Worcester has expressed himself on methods of saving and re-using water. This is something that we have all had to face during the drought period in recent years. I do not think there is much disagreement with what he has said.</p>

<p>At the outset I want to wish Mr Du Plessis a very happy retirement on behalf of the people in these benches. I hope that he will be able to relax on tranquil waters with no storms at sea coming up to disturb the even tenor of his happy retirement.</p>

<p>I also wish Mr Claassens success in his new position. I hope things will go very well indeed with this most important portfolio that he will be leading.</p>

<p>I want to address myself on the subject of water supplies generally for the PWV area over the next two or three decades. As hon members know, we are now experiencing probably the worst drought for&#x2014;we are told&#x2014;between 200 and 500 years. Since 1978 the rainfall has certainly not been adequate and we have suffered drought conditions for nine years now. This is more than the biblical seven years and I do not know what we are being punished for. I have my suspicions on occasion, but a drought of nine years seems to be overdoing it a little! [Interjections.]</p>

<p>I think this drought has given us a warning of the importance of water to the national economy, specifically in the PWV area, the heartland of industrial South Africa. I would go so far as to say that the future economic prosperity of South Africa could depend on the water supply and the ability of this department to produce the water necessary for industrial development, because many of our political problems depend on economic solutions and, if these economic solutions are not forthcoming because of an inadequate water supply, then I believe that we are in trouble.</p>

<p>What has been done so far? I think perhaps a brief summary can be given of what has been done with regard to the water supply to the PWV area to supplement the Vaal Dam. Firstly one can look at the very successful Drakensberg pumping scheme which I think is a great credit to the department. Water is pumped from the Tugela into the Sterkfontein Dam. One can also look at other action that has been taken. Geohydrological investigations involving drilling for dolomitic groundwater appear to be going ahead successfully. Again this is not by any means the total solution but it is a partial solution.</p>

<p>The hon the Minister has expressed himself on the Lesotho Highlands Water Scheme and it is interesting to note that this is going ahead fairly fast. On the other hand it is also fairly obvious that in a major scheme like this we cannot expect to see the benefits for many years to come. There is an enormous amount of work to be done. The hon the Minister indicates that it will be five years. That in itself I think is outstanding for a tremendous project of that nature.</p>

<p>However, all the steps that have been taken to date are probably going to be inadequate when one looks at the population projections right through towards the middle of the next century. One thing this department has to do is to look to the future.</p>

<p>I recently read an article concerning another exciting prospect and I wanted to ask the hon the Minister whether the department is in fact investigating this. It has to do with the building of large and deep storage facilities to take flood water.</p>

<p>This was discussed in a paper by a Mr B G A Lund in the publication <i>Civil Engineer in South Africa</i> last year. I must say I found it very exciting. It depends on having major dams on rivers like the Vaal.</p>

<p>It is based on the premise that during flood times and good rain times water that would otherwise be lost to the sea could be captured and stored. They say that it is inadequate to capture and store that water in the dams that have been built, the Vaal Dam, or increasing the size of the Vaal Dam, or the H F Verwoerd Dam, because so much water is <span class="col_2721-2722" refersTo="page_0205"/>eventually lost through evaporation. One cannot rely on floods every year. One has to store that water for a considerable period and use it over a period without too much loss from evaporation.</p>

<p>If large and deep storage facilities can be found, evidently there could be a completely different picture. I believe that since the publication of the paper concerned, Mr Lund has evidently indicated that the potential sites exist for these deep storage facilities.</p>

<p>Also, the contention is that these facilities could be built relatively cheaply. Reservoirs would be large enough to capture and hold most floods for long periods because of the minimal amount of evaporation. The contention is also made that sites near the Vaal Dam, deep natural storage dams, could be found. There were two indicated within 50 km of the Vaal Dam. Water would then be drawn off these facilities by pumping or by gravity for use in the PWV area. The figures projected are that the yield could be greater than the present yield of the Vaal Dam itself.</p>

<p>It is also indicated that there are sites available in two other areas, specifically an area close to the Bloemhof Dam, so that water could be pumped from this deep storage facility into the Bloemhof Dam which would of course be of immense benefit to the Vaalharts Scheme, for example, also the Taung area of Bophuthatswana, which desperately needs water. The load would be taken off the Vaal Dam for that Lower Vaal area.</p>

<p>I gather he identifies further sites fairly close to the H F Verwoerd Dam. I had reservations about this when I read the article because how do you get water from the H F Verwoerd Dam to the PWV area? Again the contention is made that water could be pumped from the H F Verwoerd Dam up to the Reef far more cheaply than any other modes of bringing water to the Reef. The investment in pumping stations may perhaps be lower than other more expensive answers to the problem. I do not know whether this is so. Again I am asking the hon the Minister for clarification as to whether this is a possibility at all.</p>

<p>This whole idea depends entirely on an analysis of historical run-off figures at flood times. Various technical data is submitted which has to do with how often floods might occur&#x2014;be it every 18 or 19 years&#x2014;when we get good rains. We all hope that this drought condition is not a permanency in the Vaal River catchment area. We all hope that some time or other there are going to be floods. I think there are many theories submitted as to whether we are going to get floods or good rains again. I believe that we shall. Of course, schemes of this sort are useless unless they are within the financial potential of what we can pay.</p>

<p>The figure given as far as the Vaal development is concerned, was in the region of R500 million. I gather that the projected estimated unit costs of water delivered in this way could be extremely favourable.</p>

<p>I realise that at this stage this is little more than an idea. It would depend on whether these deep storage facilities could be found. However, the quantities of water involved are enormous. When one thinks of the possibilities of this, I wonder whether it is not worth investigation. I would suspect that an investigation has already been carried out by the department, but if that is not the case, I believe that because the possibilities are so great and the importance of providing water is so tremendous, we should investigate it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">J F PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, I should like to participate in the debate on this Vote by speaking about water development in the Eastern Cape region.</p>

<p>Before speaking about that, however, permit to take this opportunity of first congratulating the hon the Minister on the fact that he is now for the first time assuming responsibility for this Vote in the House of Assembly, a Vote dealing with environmental and water affairs. Those of us who know the hon the Minister, know that he is very well-equipped for this task and that he has devoted his entire life to the protection and development of water resources. If one were to visit his farm, one would see that he utilises the water resources there in such a way that not a single drop of water is lost. That takes some doing, and if we all followed that example, in my opinion our farming community would be much better off. We also know that because he adopts this point of departure, he will manage this portfolio with great distinction and will <span class="col_2723-2724" refersTo="page_0206"/>prove to be of great significance to us as far as water affairs are concerned.</p>

<p>Mr Chairman, please allow me, too, to congratulate the hon the Deputy Minister, the hon member for Gordonia, on his first contribution in this House and on the fact that this is the first time he is handling a Vote in the House of Assembly.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">J H VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>But he has not even taken the floor yet.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">J F PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>We are very proud of him and we also have every confidence in him. I think that in the congratulations the hon member for Worcester extended to him, he also gave us a clear inkling of what we think and expect of the hon member for Gordonia, the hon the Deputy Minister. We trust that he will make excellent progress and still go far.</p>

<p>I also want to convey my thanks to the retiring Director General for his understanding and for the exceptional service he has rendered in this department. I also want to associate myself with those who congratulated his successors.</p>

<p>I have already intimated that I am going to speak on the development of water resources in the Eastern Cape region. If we look at all the other regions in the RSA, we note that a great deal of progress has been made and that the majority of the water resources in other regions have already, to a large extent, been developed to their full potential.</p>

<p>If we look at the Drakensberg area in the Northern Cape, however, probably one of the richest water areas, not only in the Cape, but also in the RSA, and if we look at the development of those water resources, we note that this is still one of the few areas&#x2014;if not the only area&#x2014;in which water resources have not yet been developed to their full potential. This applies, in particular, to one of the largest rivers feeding the Orange River, ie the Kraai River, which feeds the Orange Rivier from its catchment area in the highest-lying areas in the Cape Province. Owing to this river&#x2019;s height above sea level, I think that if thorough research is done into the potential and exploitation of this river and its water resources, we could make very profitable use of this river to provide water for other areas where there is a water scarcity, even in areas such as Bloemfontein and Queenstown, not by pumping water to those areas, but by utilising refined techniques and the development of the present level of our engineering industry relative to the employment of the principle of gravity. Perhaps one could even arrange things in such a way that there was still a sufficient overflow to maintain a permanent input for the Orange River Project. We know that several reports have been published about the water resources of the Drakensberg&#x2014;I now want to overstep the rules by saying the water resources of the southern borders of Natal, from the Umzimvubu River. We also know that the reports of Dr Henry Olivier rated the possibility of utilising those water resources for the generation of hydro-electric power very highly. We also know that Dr Van der Riet wrote his doctoral thesis on the hydroelectric potential of the water resources of the eastern side of the Drakensberg. We also know of reports submitted to the department by the developer, planner and engineer, Mr Moritz Reid, who also emphasised the possibility of these water resources. When one looks at these reports, it appears that these water resources can be utilised very positively, not only for the provision of hydroelectric power, which could possibly equal the power we obtain from the Cahora Bassa Scheme at present, but also the possibility of developing these water resources and transferring the water, with the aid of gravitational forces, to the upper reaches of the catchment area of the Orange River so that additional water can be provided for the industries in the Eastern Cape and in particular for the farmers in the irrigation areas along the lower reaches of the Orange River.</p>

<p>If these developments in regard to the water resources in that area do materialise, not only would this be to the benefit of that area and that region, but also to the whole of South Africa and its people. By means of that and also by way of negotiations with and the co-operation of Transkei we could make the position of Transkei and its people a more viable one.</p>

<p>With these word, it is a pleasure for me to support the adoption of this Vote.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#brazelle">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">J A BRAZELLE</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, the hon member for Aliwal must excuse me if I <span class="col_2725-2726" refersTo="page_0207"/>travel from the east to the north and speak about the Northern Cape.</p>

<p>Before doing so, however, I should like to associate myself with the congratulations extended to the hon the Minister and the hon the Deputy Minister on their promotions in the department, and I should also like to associate myself with the expressions of gratitude to Mr Du Plessis, the retiring Director-General.</p>

<p>I am of the opinion that South Africa&#x2019;s future will depend on two factors, in particular, and they are attitudes and water. Earlier this afternoon he spoke about attitudes, ie attitudes towards nature and towards conservation. If I were to take that further, I would be able to speak of both vertical and horizontal attitudes and then perhaps also lapse into philosophizing theoretically about those fine concepts. For that reason I want to confine myself to this second leg, ie water. I also want to restrict myself even further to the water system on which, as far as figures are concerned, the largest number of people in South Africa depend, ie the Vaal River system.</p>

<p>I think it is common knowledge that the demands made on the Vaal River system far exceed the water supply. The situation has also been aggravated by the lengthy drought to which the hon member for Bryanston also referred. Here in the summary in the Director-General&#x2019;s report this is also designated as one of the worst droughts since 1978. What I find interesting is the following, and I quote from the report:</p>

<block name="quote">It is interesting to note that the cumulative inflow into the Vaal Dam over the eightyear period from 1978 to 1986 has been only half that of the drought of the thirties.</block>

<p>We always speak of the great drought of 1933; it now seems to me as if the inflow was only half of what it was during those years. It is calculated that such a drought occurs once in every 200 years or once in every 500 years.</p>

<p>In the discussion of this Vote it is a good thing to pay tribute to the present Deputy Minister and his predecessors, and also to their officials, for their far-sightedness in taking extensive steps, particularly during the past two decades, in an attempt to solve the problem of a water shortage, including that in the Vaal River system. In this regard let me refer, in the first instance, to the development of the Orange River project, there no longer being any need for a downflow of water from the Vaal River to the Lower Orange River. Secondly let me refer to the construction of the Bloemhof Dam, which was supposed to serve as the chief source of water for the Vaalharts irrigation scheme. Unfortunately this dam has been virtually empty for almost the past two years. Thirdly let me refer to the Lesotho-Vaal River project which supplies water from outside the Vaal River catchment area. Fourthly I have in mind the completion of the second transfer scheme, ie the TugelaVaal River project for making water available in this fashion. Fifthly there has been the increase to the height of the Vaal Dam wall on more than one occasion and, in the sixth instance, the planning of the Lesotho-Highlands project to which reference has already been made.</p>

<p>This afternoon I want to extend my sincere thanks for what has been done and for the planning involved. I also want to express my thanks to the municipalities for their contribution. According to this annual report municipalities were expected to effect a 30&#x0025; saving in water. I do not think that statement is correct. What was actually expected of them was to save 30&#x0025; on the 1982 consumption figure. That consumption did not include the natural growth and demand of the towns and cities. Today, however, I want to make the contentious statement that the people who, in our municipal areas, have thus far really saved water, are the ordinary homeowners and not the industrialists. In saying that, I am nevertheless very conscious of the strategic industries for which, in my opinion, there should be norms different to those for ordinary consumers. In this context I am referring to the three Sasols, etc.</p>

<p>Today I want to argue for an in-depth investigation into the provision of water to the Northern Cape&#x2014;those areas traditionally dependent on the Vaal River for their water supply. Here I am referring, in particular, to the Vryburg, Hartswater, Warrenton and Kimberley districts, and also to the approximately 8 000 hectares of scheduled agricultural land at Taung in Bophuthatswana. This area also includes the largest irrigation scheme in South Africa, and that is the <span class="col_2727-2728" refersTo="page_0208"/>Vaalharts irrigation scheme. I could now continue by pointing out how much water had been saved in the past five years&#x2014;savings which varied from 42&#x0025; in 1983-84 to 50&#x0025; this year. I could also indicate how revenue of R57 million per year decreased to such an extent that a loss of approximately R25 million per year have been incurred. Any farmer with 38 500 per year must incur losses. This situation cannot continue, and that is why I am asking us to take an in-depth look at the situation.</p>

<p>In the short term we can request assistance from higher up, and I think that our pleas will be heard and that we shall have a good summer. As far as medium-term and longterm prospects are concerned, however, we shall have to look at the water supply to these dry parts of our country. This project has already been investigated by the RDA region No 19. I feel, however, that we should join the department and the hon the Deputy Minister in examining this issue.</p>

<p>They tell me that pumping would cost 77 cents per kilolitre, a figure unacceptable to agriculture. I therefore now appeal to the hon the Deputy Minister to have his department join us in seeking solutions to this problem in the Northern Cape.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_jager">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">C D DE JAGER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, I should like to associate myself with the previous speakers, and specifically with the speaker who has just preceded me. Not only do I associate myself with the congratulations conveyed to the hon the Minister and the department, but also with the ideas he expressed about the situation in which we find ourselves in regard to water.</p>

<p>There is one thing I want to add about Mr Du Plessis and his department. This is the one department which, with 1 200 fewer staff members, succeeded in effecting a saving of R1,2 million in the past year. I can assure the House that of all the departments I have encountered in the Public Service in Pretoria this is the one department which gives one the most cordial welcome and is most attentive to the needs of the public. I want to thank them very sincerely for that friendly service they furnish to the public. I should like to argue&#x2014; as previous speakers have done&#x2014;that more finance should be made available to this department. We are all too inclined to accept that water will simply pour down from the heavens, irrigate God&#x2019;s little acre and keep us all alive. The time has come for us to give serious consideration to supplying water to this country of ours. Although certain schemes have been implemented with great success, we must take into account, when implementing such schemes, that taking water away from one area and transferring it to another might have long-term ecological consequences that we cannot all foresee. I know that the department is giving attention to that and implementing these schemes with great care. We know that abstraction from dolomitic areas also embodies certain dangers, but I know that that is also done judiciously. The necessary precautionary measures are, in fact, taken.</p>

<p>The department, with its experts, needs finance in order to give attention to the desalination of sea-water. That is an inexhaustible but costly source. I know we all shy away from it, but that was also the reaction to the manufacturing of petrol from coal, which was also a costly process to develop. Ultimately we cannot but be grateful for the fact that those insurmountable problems with which many people thought we were faced, were eventually overcome and that that project was tackled. I do want to ask that finances be made available for that purpose. Even though international research is being done in this field, I am convinced that our country has the scientists who will ultimately be able to effect the desalination process, just as petrol has economically been manufactured from coal. We shall, however, have to give these scientists an opportunity to do the necessary research in that field.</p>

<p>I want to broach another matter. In our farming communities we find, particularly in the lower-lying sections of our rivers, that as a result of scientific development, centrepivot installations and the provision of electricity, higher-lying riparian owners are constantly using more water. There is no longer a breathing space when pipes are shifted from one point to another. The pivot-centre systems, these &#x201C;Kreepy Kraulys&#x201D; are constantly on the go. Water is abstracted for 24 hours each day. Whereas less water was previously used because it was not possible, owing to the pipes having to be moved, to utilise the full 30-hectare quota, the attitude now is: &#x201C;I have <span class="col_2729-2730" refersTo="page_0209"/>a quota for 30 hectares and at times I irrigate 70 hectares, but I am still not exceeding my quota. I am just employing it differently. &#x201D;</p>

<p>The Director-General once suggested that a system of water meters should be instituted for all farmers. I think there are regulations that even make provision for the fact that such farmers should provide water meters at their own expense. I want to assure hon members, even if this proves to be unpopular with certain farmers, that this is the long-term solution, because we must have proper control. No one is entitled to take more than his share. Unfortunately I also have some experience of the other side of the coin&#x2014;as the director will know&#x2014;of people who &#x201C;steal&#x201D; water, thus prejudicing others. I am glad to see that the department is taking action. I understand that steps are also going to be taken which will give the department more control in this regard. We need it in order to have a uniform and fair distribution of water, because as things stand at present, the farmers in the Lower Limpopo area will not be able to stay on there. That is also a strategic area which must remain populated, but those farmers are no longer receiving the necessary water owing to the constant use of centre-pivot systems in the upper reaches of the river, systems which abstract so much water from the Limpopo that unless there is some great flood, all these dams and cofferdams which have been constructed will never be filled in periods of normal rainfall. So the lower reaches of the river are no longer receiving any water from the normal run-off.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#bosman">

<from>*Brig <person refersTo="hansard_za">J F BOSMAN</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, I should like to associate myself with all the previous speakers in their congratulations to the hon the Minister, and the hon the Deputy Minister as well as with the sentiments they expressed to the retiring Director-General and his successor.</p>

<p>I also want to pay tribute to the imaginative and ingenious way in which this department has served our country and its communities. For decades the Department of Water Affairs has faced exceptional challenges in our arid country which can supply its own requirements only by means of imaginative planning. More than half of the available surface run-off water is stored in dams throughout the country already. It is calculated that by the year 2020 South Africa will have reached the optimum degree of the present economic resources&#x2019; potential. This places even greater pressure on the ingenuity of this department which will have to investigate even more imaginative projects timeously.</p>

<p>In my speech before this Committee I should like more specifically to deal with the groundwater source, the possibility of control and management of this source and the fact that this source still has great possibilities of being utilised in our arid country. The use of subsurface water has always captured the imagination because it is an invisible resource which is life-giving in many cases because cattle farmers and in some cases irrigation farmers in large parts of our country are dependent upon this resource.</p>

<p>In addition no fewer than a total of 105 smaller towns are completely dependent upon groundwater for human and ordinary urban use. Unfortunately the availability of these sources means that the groundwater&#x2014;I wonder how many of us are guilty of this&#x2014; can be used by engaging a single switch; in certain areas it can be used excessively and literally wasted. It is clear to me that it is not practically possible at the moment to exercise control and management over such water, but I want to make a plea that we consider this problem more urgently in future in order to protect these sources so that more people can make use of them.</p>

<p>The question arose as to whether or not one should consider the problem on the level of local government. No reliable statistics are available on the number of boreholes that are sunk in the PWV complex, for example. Judged by the new air pressure drilling methods and the number of drilling contractors who are available to drill in these areas on a full-time basis, the figure is becoming comparably enormous, and I believe this can even be disquieting.</p>

<p>Although research in connection with subterranean water is not readily available and is very difficult, it is calculated that the Republic has approximately 5 400 cubic metres of exploitable groundwater annually. This means that more than twice as much subterranean water than the total capacity of the Vaal Dam, for example, is estimated to be available. It is estimated that only one third <span class="col_2731-2732" refersTo="page_0210"/>of this water is being exploited at present. That means that there is still a considerable capacity for further exploitation.</p>

<p>Unfortunately it is also true, however, that this water does not necessarily occur in the areas where it is most needed. Excessive amounts are available in certain areas, however, and that is why I welcome the draft legislation envisaged by the hon the Minister and which is serving before the standing committee at present, so that that surplus capacity can be utilised for communal use by water administration.</p>

<p>Larger quantities of groundwater are found in alluvial deposits, for example, particularly alongside rivers of which the Limpopo is one, and also in the dolomitic deposits of the Johannesburg and Pretoria areas. Initially these two cities were dependent on only this source. During the past few years the Department of Water Affairs has launched an intensive drilling programme in the dolomites and along the supply area of the Rand Water Board to determine the potential. The hon member for Nigel referred to this as well. I understood that the programme, which has cost more than R12 million so far, had indicated that the requirements of the Rand Water Board could be supplied from this particular source at a certain price for one year. These facts reassure one somewhat when one looks at the water level of the Vaal Dam which has not risen significantly during the past few years.</p>

<p>Because of the invisibility of groundwater sources in other areas of the country and the initially expensive methods of exploration, I understand the local authorities and communities are rather loath to make full use of the available resources. The Department is often confronted by requests for expensive undertakings involving surface sources, such as transferring water over long distances to supply communities with water. The Government must encourage local authorities to make the greatest possible use of groundwater sources before expensive projects are undertaken.</p>

<p>Another valid reason is the question of who has ownership of groundwater. I know this is probably a contentious question. All surface water is public water, whereas groundwater belongs to the owner of the plot or property.</p>

<p>I think it is hardly possible to change this principle in our country, but one should consider equitable ways of reconciling the needs of the community and the rights of the relevant land-owner. The utilisation of surplus water must be made possible in the national interests in some way, within reasonable limits of course, without threatening the equitable rights of the owner.</p>

<p>We are grateful to take cognisance of the enormous work the department has done and is doing in respect of research in the sphere of supplementing groundwater. In the case of Potgietersrus it is being proved that the groundwater sources made all the difference in times of drought and was more permanent than the surface sources on which it depended.</p>

<p>I want to make a plea, however, for the Department of Water Affairs and the Water Research Commission to intensify the exploration for groundwater in co-operation with local authorities and other research bodies. It is possible that even greater sources may be available than have been discovered thus far, which could make a contribution to industrial development and even bring about the possibility of future irrigation.</p>

<p>What happened in Sishen is an example of what can be achieved by such research. When the Sishen mines were exploited, a water source was discovered which even made it possible to abandon the building of the Vaal-Gamagara pipeline.</p>

<p>I wish the departments, the hon the Minister and the hon the Deputy Minister everything of the best.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy_minister_of_water_affairs">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, I should like to thank the hon the Minister and other hon members for their congratulations and good wishes for the future. It is a privilege for me to serve under the hon the Minister, and I want to congratulate him on his promotion to Minister of this department. It is a privilege to gain from his experience.</p>

<p>I should also like to associate myself with the hon the Minister&#x2019;s congratulations to the Department of Water Affairs on its 75th anniversary. We all agree that since its establishment in 1912 this department has done wonders in this country. On behalf of <span class="col_2733-2734" refersTo="page_0211"/>this side of the House we also want to extend our sincere thanks and appreciation to this department for its contribution to the growth and development of the Republic of South Africa.</p>

<p>It is also a privilege for me to express my thanks to the Director-General, Mr Johan du Plessis, who is shortly to retire. We thank him for his selfless and outstanding service in this department with which he has had ties over such a very long period. We wish him and his wife a pleasant rest, good health and a happy retirement.</p>

<p>I should also like to associate myself with the hon the Minister&#x2019;s congratulations to Messrs Claassens and Van Robbroeck who have respectively been appointed Director-General and Deputy Director-General. Both these gentlemen are very well-known to us, and in the light of their outstanding achievements in the past we are convinced that in the new posts they will also take these achievements even further.</p>

<p>&#x2020;The importance of agriculture in the economy of South Africa and the strategic value of food production cannot be ignored. In this context irrigation farming plays an important socio-economic role but is at the same time the sector which uses by far the greatest share of water. Irrigation farming development has also proved to be very capital-intensive and often not viable in purely economical terms.</p>

<p>*In 1970 the Commission of Enquiry into Water Matters emphasised, in its report, that in each particular case the justification for new irrigation projects ought to be based on careful socio-economic analyses of the benefits and costs of such projects and the weighing up of these projects against the possible alternative employment of the necessary funds. In its report the commission also noted:</p>

<block name="quote">Since water is relatively scarcer in the Republic than irrigable land, the Commission recommends that the endeavour should be towards the maximum yield per unit of water, but that consideration should be given to the need for achieving an optimum combination of production factors by fixing realistic prices for all the input components.</block>

<p>The recommendations of the commission, accepted as policy by the Cabinet, have been implemented with great circumspection, and on the strength of benefit-cost studies proposed new State water schemes for irrigation purposes have been listed in order of priority.</p>

<p>When we look at the production of various products in our country, and at the cost of new irrigation schemes, at the moment there is really no great need, from a production point of view, for the development of extensive new irrigation schemes. In saying that, however, let me also say that the water intended for agriculture, should in future be reserved for agriculture even though we do not immediately proceed with extensive new schemes. What is much more important is that we properly stabilise existing irrigation schemes in this country by way of proper canal and drainage systems. If, in the process of the stabilisation of the old schemes, new development could be facilitated&#x2014;if new land could therefore be made available for development in terms of that improved system&#x2014;this would also improve the costbenefit ratio of both the systems, the new and the old. That is what we encounter at the moment in the Riet River with the completion of the Sarel Hayward canal. This process is to our economic benefit and we should continue generating new development with the aid of existing infrastructure.</p>

<p>&#x2020;It is my considered opinion that this policy is a sound one. By scheduling irrigation development to keep up with demand we shall not only ensure the most cost-effective investment of scarce capital but also ensure a viable existence for our farmers and their neighbours. The department naturally recognises the requirements of the Government&#x2019;s Economic Development Programme, the National Physical Development Plan and the Industrial Decentralisation Programme, and will make water available when a definite demand has been established. The Government is well aware of the water requirements of the agricultural sector and will ensure that sufficient water will be available timeously when the need for increased agricultural production on irrigation is required.</p>

<p>*Please permit me to make a few remarks about the Lesotho Highlands Water Project. I am asked, from time to time, why the existing water resources of the RSA are not <span class="col_2735-2736" refersTo="page_0212"/>an option in augmenting the water supply of the Vaal River system.</p>

<p>These resources are indeed an option when it comes to augmenting our supplies, but our option of obtaining water from Lesotho could also lapse if we were to delay. That is why we have had to make immediate use of it. We could preferably exploit the other options we do have at a later stage, for example the augmentation of the Tugela-Vaal and also others in connection with which investigations are already under way&#x2014;they are always available to us&#x2014;and then include them in this system.</p>

<p>At the same time, taking water from Lesotho has great economic benefits for us. In doing so we would be granting assistance to our neighbouring states and also promoting interdependence.</p>

<p>Whilst I am dealing with the subject of the Lesotho Highland Water Project, I want to state emphatically that this project does not have any significant influence on the overall development of the Orange River Project, as envisaged in 1962. Since the announcement of the Orange River Project in 1962, quite a large portion of land, which was proposed at that stage, has been rejected or withdrawn from this project, and as a result of agricultural investigations new land is destined for development in terms of the Orange River Project.</p>

<p>However, the Lesotho Highlands Water Project certainly does strengthen the water supply position to the Orange River system. It is calculated that after the overall completion of the Orange River Project there will still be reserve water available for the development of approximately 75 000 more hectares of land.</p>

<p>I also want to dwell for a moment on the development in the sphere of water management in the respective provinces and on other related aspects. In the Western Cape, during the past year, we could grant the water schemes their full quotas, except in the case of the Olifants River scheme in respect of which restrictions had to be imposed owing to a dry summer. Let me just tell hon members who come from the Western Cape, and who have an interest in irrigation schemes and dams here, that next week I shall be accompanying the department on a visit to all these irrigation points. So if there are any hon members who would like to join us for that visit, or who want to meet us at specific spots, they may obtain the itinerary for our visit to those areas next Monday afternoon and Tuesday.</p>

<p>In the Eastern Cape we could also provide all the water schemes with their full water quotas. The De Mistkraal weir in the Little Fish River has also been completed. We paid a visit to that project about three weeks ago. Work on the Amatola State Water Supply Scheme in the Kubisi River also commenced during the past year. Unfortunately the larger water schemes in the Free State, for example those in the Riet River, the Modder and Lower Riet Rivers and the Sand and Vet Rivers had stringent water restrictions imposed. Construction work on the Sarel Hayward canal has, in fact, now been completed, but quite a few improvements still have to be introduced to the overall Riet River system, the Orange-Douglas canal&#x2014; which we are working on at present&#x2014;and also the Caledon and Modder River schemes. I am now referring to the Knelpoort Dam, about which there was a comprehensive account on television during the past week. It will soon be possible to determine the conditions for the sale of water in the Sarel Hayward canal and also, at a later stage, to farmers along the Riet River scheme and the Skorsbrug irrigation scheme, so as to give these people an opportunity to develop economic units there too. In Natal water levels are satisfactory and sufficient water could be provided to the State water schemes. The Inanda Dam on the Mgeni River is halfway towards completion, and in 1989-1990 will again be able to supply water to the Mgeni Water Board.</p>

<p>Good progress is also being made on the construction of the Zaaihoek Dam in the Slang River near Volksrust. It is this dam which will also improve the situation in regard to the immediate water supply to the Vaal River system.</p>

<p>Water levels in the Transvaal dams have generally been low. Water restrictions have again been introduced for most of the State water schemes. At the Vaalharts and Loskop Dams stringent water restrictions have been <span class="col_2737-2738" refersTo="page_0213"/>introduced. At Vaalharts this year we have imposed a 50&#x0025; restriction. Last year it was 55&#x0025;. At Loskop the restriction is 75&#x0025;. The towns of Potgietersrus, Pietersburg and Louis Trichardt have had water restrictions of 20&#x0025; and 25&#x0025;. For the fifth successive year there has been virtually no water available from schemes such as Albasini, Rooikraal and Rust de Winter. The severe drought we have experienced in recent times&#x2014;calculations indicating that the probability of such a drought occurring is one in 200 years&#x2014;has created unprecedented problems for agriculture and for the provision of water to towns. If one looks at the building programme of the Department of Water Affairs, however, it is clear to one that the department is making every effort to solve these problems just to enable us to keep going in periods of normal drought.</p>

<p>I still have to reply to all the other hon members who made contributions. At this point, however, my time is limited to approximately one minute.</p>

<p>I just want to express my sincere thanks to those hon members for the contributions they made. Let me just deal with hon members two at a time.</p>

<p>We had a very positive contribution from the hon member for Nigel. I should have liked to reply to each of these points; in fact, I made relevant notes. The hon member for Worcester probably thinks I am more head than heart. [Interjections.]</p>

<p>I also want to express my thanks to the hon member for Nigel who wished us many rainy years ahead. [Interjections.] I greatly appreciate that.</p>

<p>&#x2020;The hon member for Bryanston referred to the water supply in the PWV area.</p>

<p>*I also thank the hon member for Kimberley North very sincerely.</p>

<p>Unfortunately my time has expired, but as far as the hon members for Bethal and Germiston District are concerned, we shall reply to their requests in writing.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_environment_affairs_and_of_water_affairs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENT AFFAIRS AND OF WATER AFFAIRS</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, I wish to convey my sincere thanks to my colleague, the hon the Deputy Minister, for his contribution. It really gave hon members a fine indication of good cooperation and co-ordination. He makes a tremendous contribution to the general administration of this department.</p>

<p>I should also like to extend my thanks to all those who have conveyed their good wishes and congratulations on our appointments and who have wished us well.</p>

<p>There is little time left, but I should just like to touch briefly on a few matters.</p>

<p>The hon member for Nigel said that we should make more funds available for the research commission. Nothing would give me more pleasure than to be able to do so. We currently obtain funds for the research commission from levies, and we can increase those levies, but we have to strike a careful balance between the benefit we can derive from the greater funds and the higher price that the consumer of water will have to pay.</p>

<p>I should also like to refer to the hon member for Worcester, who spoke about the re-use of water. He said that he could not understand why people did not re-use water more; he said that he did not know whether it tasted or looked any different. I can give him the assurance that it does not taste or look any different. Indeed, I suspect that if he pours a glass of water in Pretoria, one third of that water has in any event already been through the sewerage system. However I agree with the hon member that we should re-use our water.</p>

<p>&#x2020;The hon member for Bryanston spoke of the possibility of large and deep storage facilities. This whole matter has already been investigated and I can assure the hon member that, based on a risk analysis, the figures quoted by the consulting engineer to whom he referred are not as promising as he believes. However, we are looking into the whole matter, and where the possibility exists that we will withdraw water from the dolomite, we are thinking of putting back the water we have drawn in times of flood.</p>

<p>*As regards water development in Eastern Cape, we want to convey our sincere thanks to the hon member for Aliwal, who raised this point, for his kind words to us in this regard. I can give him the assurance that that scheme that he proposed has indeed been thoroughly investigated. Basically it was a <span class="col_2739-2740" refersTo="page_0214"/>power generation scheme, and at one stage we thought that it could be a viable scheme, particularly if it were linked to the generation of power. However, at that stage Eskom lost interest because it had other priorities, and we abandoned the scheme for the time being. Nevertheless this is still one of the schemes that is being kept in reserve for future use; he may be sure of that.</p>

<p>The hon member for Bethal asked for more funds. He said that the transferring of water from one area to another posed dangers. Yes, of course it poses dangers, but the department is fully aware of that. May I refer once again to something I mentioned in the first part of my speech, namely the enquiry into the management of our water resources. The English title is &#x201C;Management of Water Resources of the Republic of South Africa&#x201D;. It is a formidable piece of work in which every facet of the water culture is considered, and I do want to urge hon members to acquaint themselves with its contents.</p>

<p>With reference to what the hon member had to say about water meters and water thieves, I just want to say that the Act provides that we can impose certain limitations on water users. If people disregard these limitations we impose on them, that means they are stealing other people&#x2019;s water. If a farmer in the upper reaches of a river has no sympathy with the other farmers in the lower reaches, then I will have no sympathy with him when he gets into trouble. Therefore I want to issue a warning that farmers should not knowingly disregard restrictions imposed by the Act. We should like to see the water distributed in as equal, balanced and just a way as possible among all who have to use it. I think that hon members will agree with me as far as this is concerned.</p>

<p>I want to convey my sincere thanks once again to all the hon members who made such positive contributions. To me this is evidence that people are really aware of the importance of water.</p>

<p>Votes agreed to.</p>

<p>Chairman directed to report progress and grant leave to sit again.</p>

<p><b>House Resumed:</b></p>

<p>Progress reported and leave granted to sit again.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#adjournment_of_house">

<heading>ADJOURNMENT OF HOUSE</heading>

<summary>(Motion)</summary>

<speech by="#leader_of_the_house">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">LEADER OF THE HOUSE</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, I move:</p>

<block name="quote">That the House do now adjourn.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1987-07-30T17:57:00">17h57</recordedTime>.</p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

