---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol11 - MONDAY 16 APRIL 1928'
layout: debate
year: 1928
month: APRIL
month_slug: Apr
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>MONDAY, 16th APRIL, 1928.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1928-04-16T14:20:00">2.20 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

<debateSection name="#condolence">

<heading>CONDOLENCE.</heading>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That an address be presented to his Excellency the Governor-General expressing the respectful and heartfelt sympathy of this House with his Excellency and her Royal Highness Princess Alice, Countess of Athlone, on the tragic death on the 15th April, 1928, of Lord Trematon, their only son.</block>

<p>The tragic occurrence which is the cause of this motion is, I am sure, deeply deplored by the whole of the people of South Africa. An only son, very promising, has suddenly in the full vigour of his life, been wrenched from his loving parents and family circle, whilst far apart from all those who were dearest to him in such moments. The anxious days of hope for, and despair of recovery have filled our hearts with mourning, deep sympathy, and love for the so sorely stricken parents, their Excellencies our highly respected Governor-General and his beloved wife, Princess Alice. In introducing this motion to the House I feel it is not only in accordance with the desires of hon. members of this House, but also in accordance with the inmost desire of the whole of the people of South Africa. For this reason I rise and move the motion which I have just read.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I endorse wholeheartedly the words that have fallen from the Prime Minister, which will have, I am sure, a re-echo throughout the length and breadth of this country in the hearts of all His Majesty&#x2019;s subjects. The sympathies of this House go out to his Excellency and her Royal Highness in the great and tragic bereavement which has so swiftly overwhelmed them, a bereavement which is more than usually tragic when we know, as the Prime Minister knows, that it was the intention of his Excellency and her Royal Highness to visit England within a few months for the purpose of not alone having a reunion with their son, but also for having the pleasure of taking part in his twenty-first anniversary, which I believe was to have taken place, had he lived, in August of this year. I think I am expressing the view, not alone of this House but of every section of the people throughout the length and breadth of this country when I say how deep our sympathy is with his Excellency and her Royal Highness in the death of their only son, a young man not alone of great promise, but one who had inherited the personal charm which has endeared his Excellency and her Royal Highness to the people of this country. Our sympathy goes out in the most heartfelt manner, and I can only express the hope that providence will endue his Excellency and her Royal Highness with strength to endure the great blow that has befallen them, so that the country may continue for a considerable period of time in the future to have the benefit of the good work they have done in the past and which I hope, notwithstanding the blow that has befallen them, they will be able to continue to do. Might I also be permitted to tender the sympathy of this House to Lady May Cambridge, who has lost an only brother and a deeply-loved one as well. I second the resolution that has been proposed by the Prime Minister.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from><span class="col_2925-2926" refersTo="page_0057"/>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person>:</from>

<p>On behalf of my friends of the Labour Party, may I associate ourselves with this motion. I think everyone throughout the country, during this long and terrible time of anxiety that his Excellency and her Royal Highness have gone through, had hoped and prayed that there might be a happy issue. Our sympathies are heartfelt and deep with them in the affliction which has befallen them.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to; members rising.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I think that I am acting in accordance with the wishes of all hon. members of the House in moving that we should now adjourn as a mark of deep respect.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1928-04-16T14:30:00">2.30 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

