---
title: 'National Assembly - 04 June 2002'
layout: debate
year: 2002
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2002/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2002-06-04
---

TUESDAY, 4 JUNE 2002
                                    ____

                      PROCEEDINGS OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

The Chairperson of Committees took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

Mr D A HANEKOM: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that for the first time five African leaders, including
       President Thabo Mbeki, and the UN Secretary-General have been invited
       to the G8 summit where the eight major industrialised nations will
       discuss a plan to assist Africa on the road to prosperity, with
       Africa being the focus for one entire day;


  (2) believes that this focus is a result of the efforts of prominent
       African leaders, including our President Thabo Mbeki, to focus the
       attention of the world on the challenges faced by our continent, as
       well as the launch of Nepad which presents a comprehensive plan for
       the development of Africa; and


  (3) looks forward to the G8 summit making a tangible contribution to the
       future development of the African continent.

Mr R S NTULI: Mr Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) condemns the continuing failure of the ANC government to resolve the
       critical school textbook shortage in the Eastern Cape;


  (2) notes that pupils at 250 schools are still without textbooks in a
       range of subjects, with the matric exams only months away;


  (3) further notes that Ministers who preside over incompetent or idle
       officials must take responsibility for their failures by apologising
       to the pupils and parents involved;


  (4) calls on the ANC Government to ensure that books and stationery reach
       these pupils within one week from today; and


  (5) appeals to the ANC to stop pretending that it cares about people and
       to start proving it by looking after our children.

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  a Namibian conference on the World Summit on Sustainable
           Development was held in Namibia under the auspices of Globe,
           including inputs from South Africa and many other African
           countries;


       (b)  all members endorsed the world summit as an excellent
           opportunity to reverse the fortunes of the African continent;
           and


       (c)  every effort is supported to promote partnerships between the
           developed and the developing world to assist us to advance the
           use of renewable energy, to improve water sustainability and
           sewage disposal, to foster good governance, to roll back Aids
           and poverty, to render funding to projects transparently and
           accountably, and to encourage the richest 21 countries to
           increase their aid to developing countries to 0,7%; and


  (2) therefore calls on all persons representing SA and the African
       continent to negotiate in good faith at Bali and not to allow
       disagreement over targets to compromise the positive aspects of the
       summit, since the setting of accurate targets is extremely difficult
       without thorough scientific investigation, and real commitment is
       more important than targets that cannot be reached.

Ms S B NQODI: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move -


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -
       (a)  four main venues to be used during the World Summit on
           Sustainable Development - Sandton Convention Centre, Hilton
           Hotel, Nasrec and Ubuntu Village - will use environmentally
           friendly power in keeping with the theme of the summit; and


       (b)  green power is generated from renewable and sustainable energy
           resources;


  (2) welcomes the use of environmentally friendly power during this
       summit; and


  (3) hopes that this will encourage research into the use of green power
       in our country.

Mr J J DOWRY: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move -


  That the House -


  (1) notes the decisive action taken by the New NP and its leadership in
       dealing with the allegations against Mr Peter Marais;


  (2) further notes that -


       (a)  as to date, the DP/DA leadership has yet to take action against
           senior members of its party who have been implicated in alleged
           dodgy dealings with Jürgen Harksen; and


       (b)  their lack of action contradicts their own proclaimed position
           as safekeepers of political morality, because the hon Mr Leon
           has failed to do any of the things that in the past he
           castigated the ANC for failing to do in similar circumstances,
           therefore destroying the DP/DA's credibility as an effective
           opposition; and


  (3) once again calls on the DA to do the right thing by following their
       own advice and to put the interests of the citizens of Cape Town
       first, and not to allow delivery and effective governance to be
       hampered.

Mr D G MKONO: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Kokstad C-max prison, which has been built at great
       expense to taxpayers, has stood empty for the past two years;


  (2) further notes with concern allegations that catering for the opening
       ceremony, presided over by Deputy President Zuma, has cost a
       staggering R2,4 million;


  (3) also notes that the prison has been the subject of a long-standing
       dispute between Government and the local council, who fear that the
       prison will be a drain on water resources, and will completely
       overtax inadequate infrastructure in the area;


  (4) calls on the national Government to ensure that the programmes it
       engages in are thoroughly planned and managed, with due respect for
       the needs of local communities; and


  (5) condemns extravagant ceremonies that do not contribute to development
       and upliftment in a country where poverty is at an all-time high.

Dr J BENJAMIN: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move -


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Western Cape has been rocked by scandal, with
       accusations against various politicians including DA mayor, Gerald
       Morkel, and former premier, Peter Marais;


  (2) believes that such accusations and exposures diminish respect for the
       political process, for democracy and the role of politicians as
       leaders in society;


  (3) calls on all who have been involved in any murky practices to come
       clean; and


  (4) further calls on Mr Gerald Morkel, whose name has been tainted by
       accusations of improper association with German fugitive, Mr Jürgen
       Harksen, to follow the example of Peter Marais and to resign.

Dr C P MULDER: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek met die
volgende sitting sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) daarvan kennis neem dat -


       (a)  die politiek in die Wes-Kaap 'n nuwe laagtepunt bereik het met
           die bedanking van mnr Peter Marais as premier van die provinsie
           en die omstredenheid wat mnr Gerald Morkel, burgemeester van
           Kaapstad, omhul;


       (b)  die kiesers in die Wes-Kaap met geesdrif en vertroue in 1999 se
           algemene verkiesing vir die DP en Nuwe NP gestem het, juis om
           seker te maak dat die Wes-Kaap regeer kan word deur 'n regering
           wat spreek van integriteit en effektiwiteit; en


       (c)  die politiek in die Wes-Kaap vanweë die optrede van beide die
           Nuwe NP en DP ontaard het in 'n onverkwiklike verleentheid vir
           elke kieser en dat hulle nou met ontnugtering na die twee partye
           kyk; en


     2) 'n beroep doen op politieke partye in die Wes-Kaap om die politiek
        in die provinsie op 'n hoër vlak te bedryf sodat dit nie alle
        politici onder verdenking sal plaas en kiesers sodoende apaties en
        negatief oor die politiek maak nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, I give notice that I shall move at the next
sitting of the House:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the politics in the Western Cape have reached a new low point
           with the resignation of Mr Peter Marais as premier of the
           province and the controversy surrounding Mr Gerald Morkel, mayor
           of Cape Town;


       (b)  the voters in the Western Cape voted with enthusiasm and
           confidence for the DP and the New NP in the general elections of
           1999, precisely to ensure that the Western Cape was ruled by a
           government that stands for integrity and effectiveness; and


       (c)  the politics in the Western Cape, owing to conduct by both the
           New NP and the DP, have deteriorated into an unpleasant
           embarrassment for every voter and they are now looking at these
           two parties with disillusionment; and


  (2) calls upon political parties in the Western Cape to practise politics
       in the province at a higher level so that this will not cause all
       politicians to come under a cloud and consequently cause voters to
       become apathetic and negative about politics.]

Mr J SELFE: Mr Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that six days have passed since it was revealed that, in 1997,
       Mr Harksen donated R100 000 to the ANC and R100 000 to the National
       Party and that they may have received much more than that;


  (2) further notes that the DA has opened its books to a forensic audit
       and promised that, if it is established that the party received money
       from Mr Harksen, it will repay every cent;


  (3) records its disappointment that neither the ANC nor the New NP has
       undertaken to allow a forensic audit of its donations; and


  (4) therefore resolves that the ANC and the New NP should undertake to
       refund all the money they received from Mr Harksen or else explain to
       the public why they refuse to do so.

Dr O S B BALOYI: Mr Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notwithstanding the negative label now given to all politicians,
       namely that they are bad and unreliable people, urges all politicians
       to bring out the best of who they are, their minds and their hearts;
       and


  (2) further encourages politicians to start living with more integrity,
       honesty, compassion and genuine enthusiasm for the betterment of our
       society and country.

Mrs N R SHOPE: Mr Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  Western Cape swimming heroine, Natalie du Toit, a teenager who
           lost her leg during a scooter accident, successfully defended
           her title at the annual cold endurance event from Robben Island
           to Bloubergstrand on Saturday; and


       (b)  this event was to raise funds for a much needed swimming pool at
           the Vista Nova High School for disabled children;


  (2) believes that Natalie's endurance and commitment to succeed under
       difficult circumstances serve as an inspiration to all youth;


  (3) further believes that the participation of swimmers in this event is
       for a good cause and is consistent with the call of the President,
       Thabo Mbeki, for volunteers and Vukuzenzele [arise and act];


  (4) commends all swimmers, young and old, who participated in this
       swimming event; and


  (5) congratulates Natalie on winning this contest.

Dr W A ODENDAAL: Mr Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move:
  That the House -


  (1) notes the hon Mr Gibson's statement with regard to Peter Marais that
       his resignation must ``surely vindicate Tony Leon and the DA's
       resolution last year that Mr Marais was not fit for public office";


  (2) believes that in the light of the allegations made against senior
       members and the leader of his own party, Mr Gibson should reveal what
       criteria, according to the DA, are deemed as being ``not fit for
       public office";


  (3) further notes that -


       (a)  last year Mr Marais won his court case against the DA; and


       (b)  in his judgment, referring to the DA's actions, the judge said:
           ``The political stratagem employed by the respondent (the DA)
           smacks of unfairness, unreasonableness and a lack of good
           faith"; and


  (4) wonders if anyone guilty of such a modus operandi is ``fit for public
       office''.

Ms N NKABINDE: Mr Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the state of public health in the Eastern Cape province
       has been the subject of much concern and, according to reports, is
       deteriorating at a horrifying pace;


  (2) further notes that this deterioration appears to be a result of the
       provincial government's mismanagement and incompetence, whilst the
       great majority of doctors and nurses in public health continue to
       work with dedication against these odds;


  (3) condemns the suspension of Dr Rank, Chief Medical Superintendent in
       Port Elizabeth, which appears to be nothing other than the
       persecution of a doctor who has spoken out to protect the lives and
       health of his patients; and


  (4) calls on Government to halt the persecution of whistle-blowers and
       dedicated South Africans who seek to protect the lives of the needy.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                          (The Late Hansie Cronjé)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with deep regret and sadness the sudden death of the former
       captain of the Protea cricket team, Hansie Cronjé, on Saturday, 1
       June 2002;


  (2) notes that -


       (a)  Hansie was a born and an inspirational leader who served South
           African cricket for many years;


       (b)  he was willing to accept responsibility for mistakes made by
           him;


       (c)  throughout his career he was committed to transformation of
           cricket in South Africa, a fact that many young South Africans
           from all walks of life will bear witness to;


  (3) conveys its sincere condolences to his family in their sad
       bereavement.

Agreed to.

                            ELECTIONS IN LESOTHO
                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without
notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the recent elections in Lesotho were universally acclaimed
       by election monitors to be free and fair;


  (2) further notes that the opposition has declared its dissatisfaction
       with the results and that there is a threat of unrest as a result;
       and


  (3) urges all parties to accept the election results and to use
       democratic processes to further their political aspirations.

Agreed to.

          CONGRATULATIONS TO BAFANA BAFANA AND OTHER AFRICAN TEAMS
                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) congratulates Bafana Bafana on earning their first point in the 2002
       Soccer World Cup in South Korea;


  (2) notes with appreciation their determined fight back from a two-goal
       deficit to draw the match; and


  (3) commends the African teams for the encouraging results some of them
       have produced in the opening matches and looks forward to greater
       successes as the tournament proceeds. [Applause.]

Agreed to.

                CONGRATULATIONS TO THE SOCCER TEAM OF SENEGAL
                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the House congratulates the soccer team of Senegal on their victory
  over France in the opening match of the Soccer World Cup tournament.
  [Applause.]

Agreed to.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! We acknowledge the presence in the
gallery of Dr Awa Marie Colesec, minister from Senegal, Dr Souleymane
Mboup, Abu Daya, and His Excellency Samba Buri Mboup, the ambassador of
Senegal based in Pretoria. [Applause.]

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 16 - Health:

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, hon members, Acting Premier of the
Western Cape and MEC for Health, MECs present here, representatives of
various statutory bodies, registered nurses, my colleagues and the
community health workers who have come to support the Budget Vote speech,
the national Health budget that I have the responsibility to propose this
afternoon amounts to a total of R7,18 billion.

The budget is not a huge amount in terms of the overall size of the
national Budget. Public health services, as hon members are aware, are
funded mainly through the equitable share allocated to provinces. But the
manner in which this national health budget is used has a critical impact
on the entire health sector, both private and public, which spends more
than R70 billion a year and affects each and every one of us.

I intend to focus on major structural and policy issues in health and on
the international dimension that has a critical impact on our own
performance. Next week, in my address to the National Council of Provinces,
I will look more closely at the services issue that is linked intimately to
the provinces.

If hon members look at the numbers in the budget for the indications of
programme development, there are two obvious areas of expansion and one
less visible area of change. There is a substantial increase in spending on
HIV and Aids. There is an allocation for the transfer of state mortuaries
from the Police Service to the Health authorities, and hidden within a
grant for tertiary health care services is a stronger focus on
redistribution of funds from urban centres to rural provinces.

As a nation we have asserted, through our Constitution, a fundamental
belief that health care is, in the first instance, a human right. It is not
a mere commodity, and we do not accept that unrestricted market forces are
the best mechanisms to distribute health care, certainly not in a country
with the social inequality that we have. Our regulatory framework,
therefore, embraces both the public and the private health care sectors.
This year we will strengthen this framework by tabling the National Health
Bill that spells out our vision of a single national health care system,
although with distinct components.

In framing this Bill, we have been guided by the broad public interest and
the goal of creating and sustaining a system that benefits all the citizens
of South Africa. Its drafting has involved a number of trade-offs, and in
seeking to balance various interests, we have kept our eyes firmly on the
need to prioritise services for the poor.

The forthcoming World Summit on Sustainable Development has focused us on
the relationship between poverty, development, human status and health
services. South Africa and its SADC partners played a critical role earlier
this year in positioning health issues high on the WSSD agenda. In January
we hosted an interministerial meeting on health and development for SADC
states and the E9 countries. Just two weeks ago the positions that we
asserted at that meeting were endorsed by the World Health Assembly in
Geneva.

The Global Health Committee has come to recognise that disease, disability
and premature death exert a terrible downward drag on the socioeconomic
development of countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America. This burden
could be dramatically reduced by public health interventions that have a
proven record. The global cost of these interventions and the potential
benefits that would flow from them have indeed been qualified. The WHO-
sponsored Commission on Macroeconomics and Health concluded that as many as
8 million lives a year could be saved by a package of simple health
interventions costing just $US34 per person per year.

While developing countries do not have within them the resources to carry
through these critical interventions on the scale that is required, the
global community certainly does. There is a moral imperative, therefore,
for basic health care to be defined as a global concern in which the
resources of wealthier nations are systematically and purposefully
channelled to improve health care systems in the developing world. There is
a matching moral imperative for developing nations to prioritise health
care and to commit themselves to the sustained improvement of delivery
systems. If this approach sounds familiar, it is probably because it is the
thinking that underpins our health sector transformation and the core
principles of Nepad.

We take pride as a country in the leadership we have discharged in
elaborating the health component of Nepad, a role that was recognised
recently by African health ministers. Through SADC, we shall take this
process further, when African health ministers deliberate on the strategy
at the next meeting of the WHO Afro-region in August. Many of the bilateral
agreements that we are currently forging are strategically geared to
support Nepad. Lesotho and Angola are among the new signatories, and
tonight Senegal will be endorsing a joint declaration with us.

Another development that signals the possibility of pursuing a
transnational approach to combating major public health problems is the
creation of the global fund to fight HIV and Aids, TB and malaria. The
global fund is a groundbreaking, multicountry public-private partnership.
It was shaped on the Abuja Declaration on HIV and Aids, TB and malaria by
African heads of state last year, and called into existence by UN Secretary-
General Kofi Annan, and by April this year the fund was making its first
disbursements.

South Africa is, of course, a donor to the fund, with a pledge of $US2
million, and a major beneficiary. The Department of Health, in partnership
with various nonprofit organisations, including Napwa, has already been
granted well over R1 billion over the next two years. When we consider that
dedicated funding for HIV and Aids for various departments in this year's
budget amounts to R1 billion, we begin to appreciate the magnitude of the
global fund grant. We remain concerned, however, at the fund's weak
response to the world's poorest nations. Very few benefited in the first
round of allocations, and this could compromise the credibility of the fund
if it is not addressed.

Part of my intention in taking this international detour was to make the
point that we, the developing countries, have successfully argued on the
international stage that health care must be seen as a weapon in the war on
poverty, and we now have a duty to live by the same rules within our own
borders. We need repeatedly to interrogate whether our own health systems
and policies really serve to promote the interests of the poor, and I
believe a critical yardstick of this is how well we manage the risks to
good health.

Are our policies really geared to conserving health through well-tested
preventive and promotive strategies? Are we conserving our health resources
through good stewardship and wise use? When it comes to preventive and
promotive health interventions, we as South Africans have a mixed report
card.

In relation to communicable diseases we have learnt through experience to
work in a concerted manner across sectors and even across borders to stem
the tide of infection, and we have seen extremely positive results, for
instance, in malaria control and the containment of cholera.

Furthermore, our expanded programme of immunisation has dramatically
reduced dangerous childhood illnesses. In April, together with Swaziland
and Lesotho, we launched a subregional certification committee for the
polio-free initiative. This committee will ensure that we meet all the
necessary requirements during the final push to reach polio-free status by
the year 2005.

But our efforts and achievements are patchy when it comes to managing the
risks associated with other major causes of morbidity and death, namely
hunger, chronic disease and trauma. Perhaps we mistakenly regard heart
disease, hypertension, cancers and diabetes as diseases of excess that only
affect an affluent minority. Nothing could be further from the truth. These
diseases cut across every level of society, and in terms of sheer numbers
take the greatest toll amongst the poorer of our people.

Similarly, impaired mental health is experienced by large numbers of people
living in conditions of hardship and deprivation. The old myth that the
poor are resistant to psychiatric problems lay in the health
establishment's refusal to acknowledge the humanity of the dispossessed.
Small wonder that emotional problems left to fester through times of
violence, turmoil and economic hardship have produced such high levels of
dysfunction, suicide, alcoholism, domestic violence and sexual abuse.

Our trauma cases stretch our casualty departments to the limit, as we treat
the victims of criminal attacks, road accidents and shockingly casual
violence. The causes are multiple, but one factor towers above the rest:
the abuse of alcohol and other illegal substances. The constant rise in the
proportion of gunshot wounds, which are very often fatal, tells us that
easy access to firearms is fuelling the violence in our country.

Managing these major and costly risks to health requires committed
intersectoral work and concerted action on a number of fronts. We need the
right policies and laws. I refer to measures like our Tobacco Products
Control Act, which is having a clear impact on limiting exposure to passive
smoking and will be further strengthened through an amending Bill later
this year. We need to consider carefully other areas where regulation might
be more useful than persuasion. For example, has the time not come to set
conditions and restraints on the marketing of alcohol? Anyone who has seen
the results of foetal alcohol syndrome studies will certainly think that
the time is right. Are our road regulations sufficient to truly promote
safety? How can we institute environmental controls that effectively deal
with lead poisoning?

We also need the right partners, with Government and with civil society. As
Government we need to understand that potential partners do not lightly
share resources, insights and their good name. If we want joint action we
have to work for it. A further major factor in containing health risks is
quite simply people. Many pre-emptive measures in health are finally in the
hands of the individuals, groups or communities. We talk about empowering
people to take control of their health, but what does this mean?

April this year was observed throughout the country as Health Month. As a
first-time effort it was a considerable success, involving all spheres of
government, nongovernmental organisations and the private health care
sector. Various MECs for Health report that the response from communities
was both inspiring and very humbling indeed. Volunteer activity formed the
core of events, and these ranged from cleaning and repairing hospitals and
health facilities to establishing food gardens, digging toilets in cholera-
prone areas and joining TB and HIV groups for care-giving.

People commented on how this shared activity bridged social divisions
between employed and unemployed, public servants and communities, rich and
poor, educated and illiterate. The experience of Health Month has renewed
our commitment to building people-centred public administration.

Close to 90% of the budget before us flows from the national department to
the provinces in the form of conditional grants. These grants are added to
provincial health votes, and 60% of this combined amount will be spent on
personnel.

When we talk of managing the risk to health, therefore, a critical
dimension is our ability to build and conserve our human resource assets.
Indeed, the successful conclusion of our transformation agenda depends on
this. The solution lies in a number of interlocking interventions to
address the burning questions of recruitment and training, equity and
shortages of professionals in rural areas, and the migration of health
professionals.

When it comes to shortages in the rural areas, the system of community
service provides significant relief. This year the programme has put no
fewer than 1 742 young doctors, dentists and pharmacists in the field. In
2003 we shall expand community service to cover physiotherapists,
radiographers, occupational therapists, speech and hearing therapists,
clinical psychologists, dieticians and environmental health officers. We
are working to improve the quality of supervision of new practitioners,
especially in remote country areas. With the help of telemedicine
facilities and private practitioners, I think we are making headway.

In September this year we will harvest the first crop of nine graduates in
our Cuban medical training programme. Candidates were recruited largely
from rural provinces and are contracted to work in the provinces that
sponsored them for 10 years. This year we have introduced a special
development grant that is only available to the rural provinces to expand
registrar posts at regional hospitals, therefore increasing the pool of
specialists outside of the major cities. We are also addressing the supply
of health workers through the expansion of mid-level workers or assistants
to professional personnel in a range of areas, including rehabilitation and
pharmacy where professionals are especially scarce.

Furthermore, we support the statutory councils in their moves to review and
slightly relax the definition of scopes of practice, which set out the
boundaries between health professions. An excess of health professional
territoriality may stop health workers from legally performing procedures
that they are quite capable of doing, thereby denying help to patients.
Even though we have made some progress on the question of representativity
of student intakes at medical schools and the support offered to students
from disadvantaged communities, I remain concerned that much more could
still have been done this year.

We are also perturbed at the poor alignment between the country's health
needs and the professionals that we are producing. Some medical schools are
turning out graduates who are so poorly equipped to deal with malaria,
HIV/Aids, sexually transmitted infections and TB that they require
immediate retraining in these areas. Professional nurses are emerging from
four years of training unqualified to perform as primary health care
practitioners. This is incomprehensible - after all, it is almost eight
years since we positioned primary health care as the foundation of our
national health strategy.

In the past year we have tackled the health brain drain among ministers of
the Commonwealth and through the World Health Assembly. We are close to
agreement on a code of practice for recruitment of health professionals
amongst Commonwealth countries. The code will not restrict international
recruitment, but by setting requirements for fairness and transparency it
will make migration more predictable and therefore less destructive.

If the brain drain is the downside of a global labour market, the upside
lies in opportunities for training abroad. We have identified particular
fields in which we lack expertise, for instance biotechnology,
pharmaceutical policy support and epidemiology, and we have received
training offers from several countries.

Within the context of the SADC region, we are proud that South African
universities have created an additional 100 places at medical schools over
and above the normal intake for training students from the region. We were
honoured to count the minister of health of Swaziland, Dr Phetsile Dlamini,
amongst the recent Medunsa postgraduates.

In my last budget speech I asked whether the statutory councils were equal
to protecting the interests of the public. During the year a joint task
team from the department and the various statutory councils considered
these issues and produced a preliminary report.

The task team affirms that the purpose of the council is indeed to protect
the public, not to promote the collective interests of their professions,
the pharmaceutical industry or the medical schemes. Furthermore, the task
team takes the view that these bodies must be constituted and appointed in
a manner that guarantees that the public interest comes first. It proposes
that a charter should be drawn up to clearly define the responsibility of
council members and that this be promulgated as a regulation.

The financing of hospitals is a fundamental aspect of our quest for equity.
The national health budget impacts on this through conditional grants for
tertiary level care. This year the basis for these grants shifts
fundamentally. Until now the bulk of tertiary care funding has been
targeted at only ten central academic hospitals, in only four provinces.
This was based on a wrong perception that they were responsible for the
country's tertiary care.

However, we did an extensive survey, visiting 531 units in 62 hospitals,
and found a poor relationship between where tertiary care grants were
directed and where the work was actually being carried out. For instance,
Gauteng and the Western Cape received 73% of the funds available but were
only performing 56% of tertiary services. Conversely, certain other
provinces were offering substantial tertiary care with little or no
assistance from the national budget. This meant that they were funding
tertiary services at the cost of investing in more basic health care and,
of course, this raises serious questions about equity.

What compounds the situation is the fact that the big teaching hospitals
are not really national referral centres. We found that more than 90% of
the patients at six major academic hospitals came from the provinces where
the hospitals are situated. As a result of this, the Minmec has decided to
phase in a system of ``like for like'' funding for tertiary health
services, beginning this year. All existing tertiary services will be fully
covered by the grant, but where the grant has been subsidising lower levels
of care, this will no longer be possible.

Redistribution of resources is never a comfortable process and some
sacrifices are unavoidable. But let us be clear that if we lack the
integrity to face these sacrifices, then it means that we are prepared
simply to live in the social legacy of the Bantustans, that we are
comfortable to let the wretchedly poor subsidise services for the less poor
and the wealthier. Our actions to reshape tertiary services include a broad
year-long consultative process that we call the modernisation of tertiary
services.
We are seeking a consensus vision for tertiary care and solutions that will
address a variety of challenges - solutions that eliminate wasteful
duplication, solutions that are more affordable, solutions that clarify the
relationship between tertiary care hospitals and medical schools, and
solutions to the technology backlog and skills shortages that undermine the
quality of tertiary care.

There is certainly a tension between the strategies of extending access to
primary health care to all our people, and at the same time improving
tertiary level services, which are costly, and benefit limited numbers. We
have no option but to wrestle with this tension, because we cannot
contemplate sacrificing our tertiary hospitals. To do so would be to
destroy the integrity of the public health care system, which is based on a
referral chain from a network of clinics through districts and regional
hospitals to highly specialised facilities.

Turning to the subject of HIV Aids and tuberculosis, I wish to highlight
particularly the areas of expanded activity. The response to Cabinet's
statement on 17 April, following its consolidation of our HIV Aids
programme, has indeed been very encouraging. We will do everything possible
to nourish the spirit of hope and purpose with which Cabinet has addressed
the situation.

Central to this endeavour will be the strengthening of our multisectoral
response and improved implementation of all major aspects of our national
five-year strategy. Members may be aware that we have finalised national
protocols for the provision of a combination of two drugs, AZT and 3TC, at
public health institutions for survivors of sexual assault. The protocols
cover the type of counselling that must be provided to enable survivors to
make an informed choice about the medication, with a full understanding of
the risks that are involved. The written consent of survivors is required
because of the lack of scientific proof of the efficacy of these drugs as
prophylaxis after sexual assault.
It is important that the public should appreciate that, while nobody can
undo the damage of rape, a comprehensive health system response
significantly limits the harm, through preventing pregnancy and sexually
transmitted infections, through counselling and assistance, and through the
collection of vital evidence.

It is difficult to predict what the uptake of AZT and 3TC will be, but we
have done some cost estimates for this new intervention that is, of course,
not covered by the current budget. However, in the light of Cabinet's
commitment to assisting rape survivors, we feel confident that a
satisfactory funding solution will be found.

Before I deal with the HIV/Aids features of this budget, I would like to
highlight the fact that one of the most significant innovations in Aids
funding this year falls outside this budget. It is an amount of R400
million factored into the equitable share of four provinces to boost our
collective response. Government and its key partners continue to assert
that prevention programmes are the cornerstone of our national HIV/Aids
strategy.

During the coming year the amount allocated to this department for
prevention increases from R158 million to R174 million. South African Aids
prevention activities are varied, creative and substantial, and they extend
well beyond Government initiatives. Our free condom distribution is
massive. The use of the media, and especially educational radio and
television, has given prevention initiatives an enormous boost.

So, where are the results? We keep on asking. The bottom line in prevention
is whether the HIV infection rate begins to drop. The best measure we have
of this is our annual prevalence survey done at public sector antenatal
clinics. The 2001 results confirm that the HIV prevalence rate has indeed
stabilised. But perhaps the biggest cause for optimism is the sustained
drop in HIV prevalence amongst mothers under 20 years, making for a total
drop of 5,6% since the prevalence peaked in the age group in 1998.
Improving health through behaviour change is always a slow process. We
appeal to pessimists and critics not to stand on the sidelines. If they
have a better idea they should get involved. Our hope of defeating HIV/Aids
lies in the size, the diversity and the morale of the army we build.

When it comes to prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV, the
clinics and hospitals grouped as 18 research sites saw more than 90 000
pregnant women during the first year. About two thirds elected to take an
HIV test and about 10 000 of those who tested positive were provided with
nevirapine.

The programme now moves into the critical stage of the one-year follow-up
test of the babies who received nevirapine. This will tell us: Have we
achieved the maximum possible benefit of reducing the risk of HIV infection
from one in three babies to one in six babies; if not, what is weakening
the outcome? By offering formula feed, have we protected babies from HIV
transmission through breast feeding but exposed them to new health risks
such as diarrhoea and malnutrition; if so, how serious is this? Or have we
disturbed infant feeding practices to the extent of exposing babies to
malnutrition and infection, but failed to establish a pattern of safe
feeding that protects them from HIV? What is the impact of the programme on
the health of the mother herself?

We feel we have a duty to face these difficult questions. We want to be
effective in saving the lives of our children and women. We need especially
to understand how the choices of feeding options impact on the long-term
outcome. The answers will enable us to fine-tune the programme of
expansion. The Constitutional Court ruling on prevention of mother-to-child
transmission will, of course, have a bearing on how we proceed.

Additionally, our research to establish whether a single dose of nevirapine
produces long-term resistance to the drug is proceeding under the direction
of the National Institute for Communicable Diseases. The manufacturer,
Boehringer Ingelheim, is co-funding this research.
We are committed to early and effective treatment of the many illnesses
that put people with HIV at risk. And we want to state unambiguously that
the health system will act to root out discrimination against people living
with HIV/Aids through the refusal to treat opportunistic infections.

The effective treatment of tuberculosis and STIs is particularly critical
and last year we did important groundwork to improve our responses.
Technically, our public sector STI management is excellent, but we need to
build a better relationship between our public services and young clients
in particular, and we need to share technical know-how with the private
sector.

In relation to TB, we have achieved the basic turnabout from a hospital-
based to a community-based service over the past five years. We are now in
a position to look more critically at the quality and effectiveness of this
new programme. We have set targets for the next five years, successfully
canvassed for major funding from the Global Fund and identified external
experts who can assist us in this regard. As the country with the ninth
most serious TB problem in the world, we have much more to learn. Next
week, we are hosting a major Africa region TB conference, in Durban, in
partnership with the International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung
Disease.

Undoubtedly one of our greatest unmet needs is providing end-of-life care.
It is here that the relationship between social and health services becomes
critical, and where the gravity of poverty begins to exert a terrible
pressure.

We are striving to build community-based and home-based care in the face of
rapidly growing demands. Our allocation for home-based care is stepped up
to R42 million this year, and for the first time an amount totalling R30
million has been earmarked for ``step-down'' beds providing hospice-type
care within hospitals.

I would like to salute all the men and women who have taken upon themselves
the responsibility of caring for terminally ill people in our society. Many
are retired nurses who feel compelled to return to their calling. We admire
their courage, and recognise their compassion. As a society, we are deeply
indebted to them.

The health service has a vital role to play in training community health
workers and supporting home-based care networks. A person who devoted
herself to this work is Ms Philisiwe Magubane, from Nkonjeni Hospital in
KwaZulu-Natal - she is sitting in the gallery. [Applause.] She is the first
national winner of the Cecilia Makiwane Award for outstanding nursing
practice. We are honoured to have her in the gallery today. [Applause.]

We also have Ms Gladness Mathebula from Ehlanzeni district in Mpumalanga.
She represents one of the seven outstanding districts in our annual
District Health Service Competition. [Applause.] The challenge of improving
the quality of care in the way our two special guests have done remains a
central concern, and I will deal with this extensively in the NCOP.

The quest for safe and affordable medicines remains high on the national
health agenda. We realise that there are some concerns about the lack of
visible progress. But, since the drama of the Medicines and Related
Substances Control Amendment Act court case, which was resolved out of
court in April 2001, we have been working on four very serious points.

Firstly, we have been building a better working relationship with the
pharmaceutical industry through a formal seven-a-side structure that meets
periodically.

Secondly, we have been co-ordinating a series of legislative measures.
These include technical amendments to the principal Medicines and Related
Substances Control Act and the regulations pertaining to both the Pharmacy
Act and the Medicines and Related Substances Control Amendment Act. We
foresee that this will be finalised this year.

Thirdly, and perhaps most importantly, we are gearing up to implement the
new statutory provisions. That will certainly put additional pressure on
the Medicines Control Council and we are strengthening the council in
preparation for this. Furthermore, the pricing committee that will be
created to advise the Minister on the pharmaceutical policy will need
expert technical support.

Lastly, we are continuing to explore ways of supporting the local
manufacture of pharmaceutical products, and have investigated various
options in many other middle-income countries. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairperson, the Minister tried to create the impression
today of a Minister much in touch with the people and the service they need
to improve their health care. She talked about the importance of sustained
health delivery; then she said that health care was an important weapon in
the fight against poverty. She talked of a mixed report card in terms of
successes in this regard. But I want to say to the Minister that,
regrettably, her report card reads rather badly.

It is now almost three years ago to the day since the hon the Minister was
appointed as Minister of Health, a period marked by indecision and a lack
of leadership. For example, one only has to look at the HIV/Aids policy of
the Ministry over the past five years to realise that while little was
achieved by her predecessor, the Minister's failure to lead, preferring
rather to be led, has been disastrous.

In truth, there have been remarkably few successes in the area of health
care over the past eight years. While transformation of health care
services, which she talks about, was absolutely vital and still is, the
manner in which this has been carried out has been, to be quite frank,
unsatisfactory.

Certainly one accepts the fact that far more people have access to health
care services now than they did eight years ago. But the quality of these
services has deteriorated significantly, and hospital care is a prime
example. In 1996, the Government commissioned a CSIR audit of the 359
public hospitals. The result was that the audit recommended the most of
these hospitals be rehabilitated. Thirty per cent were found to be in a
serious crisis and many of these needed replacing completely.

Now, certainly one accepts the fact that this Government could not be held
responsible for the conditions of these hospitals in 1996, just two years
after taking them over. But regrettably, little has changed since then,
despite the fact that much money has been put into the budget for hospital
rehabilitation. Much has been talked of as far as the Minister's hospital
rehabilitation process is concerned. I stress the point that money has been
budgeted for it, but the truth is that success has been remarkably limited.

Over the past five years, at least four more audits have been carried out.
The conclusion of each is that far more money is needed, but in addition
more staff and better management are required if hospital services are to
be improved.

Of course, one of the most important causes for the deterioration of
hospital services is the failure of the much-vaunted primary health care
system, a system which the Minister referred to today. Although a major
clinic-building process was undertaken in 1995 to effectively take the
burden off hospitals, a combination of resource restraints and managerial
deficiencies have prevented these clinics from providing the kind of
service that is required, thus causing patients to continue to flock to
hospitals, something we were trying to avoid. And the general feeling is
that there has been a lack of leadership to achieve what is required.

Furthermore, public hospitals have experienced enormous problems in
retaining staff. To date, slashed hospital budgets have resulted in a
moratorium on recruitment. The Minister indicated today a new proposed
approach to the whole staffing issue.
Time will tell whether it will be successful or not. But, at the same time,
we have to face the fact that many doctors and nurses continue to leave the
services for the private sector and for overseas. The 2002 SA Health Review
identified various problems as contributing to a low sense of morale
amongst health care providers, including, and I quote:


  ... huge demands, difficulties in prioritisation, inadequate management
  skills, lack of rewards for competence or sanctions for incompetence, and
  hierarchies that are too rigid.

Other reasons that people are giving for leaving are HIV/Aids, excessive
workloads due to staff shortages, variable levels of paramedical staff,
etc.

Further, the Minister referred to the community service system. It is a
rather dubious community service system that we have because, according to
the Rural Doctors Association, it has failed to alleviate the crisis in
rural hospitals. In 2001, of 11 000 ... I beg your pardon, Madam Speaker.
Of 1 173 doctors available, 83% were placed in rural hospitals. I beg your
pardon, again, Madam Speaker. They were placed in urban hospitals.
[Interjections.] This is achieving completely the opposite to what the
Minister wants to achieve.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: [Inaudible.]

Mr M J ELLIS: The hon member must not worry, because the next time that hon
member speaks, I will be waiting for him! [Laughter.]

Academic hospitals, too, have been severely affected in that, since 1995,
the funding of these hospitals has not kept pace with growing patient
numbers, resulting in the deterioration of the quality of service rendered.
In addition, we have to put up daily with theft from hospitals of medicines
and equipment, shortage of qualified pharmacy staff, and long queues of
patients awaiting attention. All of these add up to a system that is simply
not working. Health services have deteriorated.

Perhaps the second-worst example of the Minister's fiddling while patients
are dying, after the HIV/Aids issue, is the issue of tuberculosis. The
Minister made a big issue about this today, but we have not got on top of
the TB epidemic in this country. The number of cases has increased from 61
000 in 1995 to 121 000 in 2000. Quite frankly - I am sorry I have not got
the time to go into it - her handling of the SA National Tuberculosis
Association issue has been absolutely frightful. There was an organisation
that was doing remarkably good work in the area of TB until she got her
hands on it.

It is a great tragedy. It really is. [Time expired.] [Interjections.]

Mr L V J NGCULU: Chairperson, hon members, it is indeed an honour and a
privilege for me to speak on the Health Budget Vote debate. We are now
halfway through this term of Parliament, and eight years into our
democratic dispensation that ushered in a programme of a better life for
all. We can boldly proclaim, as the ANC, that we have done our people
proud. It is indeed eight years of celebration and confidence. We have rung
true the clarion call of the Freedom Charter, and -


  ... we pledge ourselves to strive together, sparing neither strength nor
  courage, until the democratic changes here set out have been won.

Forty-five years later, in 1999, the ANC stated in its manifesto:


  The days of darkness are over: together we have ended apartheid minority
  rule. The rays of dawn have begun to light up our horizon; the light of
  freedom is challenging the departing darkness of apartheid, the days of
  despair have given way to the season of hope.

Dotted over the length and breadth of South Africa today are clinics and
other health facilities that seem to bring health closer to the people.
Paraffin lamps and unsanitary water are being replaced by electricity and
water provision. We are slowly moving to the road we have chosen for
ourselves - a road to a better South Africa, and to a better life for all.

We have approached, in particular, the issue of health in a manner that is
integrated, comprehensive, sustainable, caring and responsive to the needs
of the people. We have resisted a temptation of a flashlight approach that
vanishes in darkness and leaves the people in despair and hopelessness.

Rather, in partnership with the people, we have developed a health system
that will be affordable, accessible, based on the strategy of primary
health care, and in doing so we have developed a vision and determined
effort to attack the root causes of ill health, poverty and inequality.

It is perhaps proper at this juncture to remember the great son of the
South African revolution - Comrade O R Tambo. When the children and the
youth of the ANC at Solomon Mahlangu Freedom College at Morogoro were
getting sick and dying of malaria, O R Tambo called on the community of
Morogoro to declare war on tall grass surrounding the school, which was a
breeding place for mosquitoes. In his gumboots and with his grass cutter, O
R led the youth and community of Solomon Mahlangu Freedom College in the
cutting of grass, pushing it away from the frontiers of the school. In
action, O R Tambo contributed to the improvement of the eradication of
malaria at Morogoro.

As we discuss the Health budget today, we should remember the action of
this great son of our country. He was never satisfied with being perched at
podiums, criticising and pointing fingers, but decided to be at the
crucible of the struggle for a better life.

We in the ANC, celebrating 90 years of struggle for a better future and a
better life, can stand proudly today and boldly proclaim that our march to
a better health system is on course. We have put in place a unitary health
system where all have access to affordable basic health care services. The
national Department of Health's strategic framework emphasises that the
next five years must focus on accelerating quality health services, the
primary call being that all of us must lend a caring hand in building hope
and a better health care system.

Central in our campaign for better health is the task of intensifying the
effort of pushing back the frontiers of poverty that will bring pride and
dignity to those who endured the yoke of oppression and degradation.

Thus, in our view, access to electricity or toilets should not be seen just
as social benefits, but these bring in improved health benefits, improved
quality of life and, of course, dignity. Some among us may take this for
granted. Yet, to those who have been at the receiving end of oppression,
access to such amenities is indeed an achievement.

We would like therefore to urge that discussions at the World Summit on
Sustainable Development take into account the fact that the environment and
health are interrelated.

The budget for 2002-03 is a good budget. Given, of course, the depreciation
of the rand and the impact of this on medicine, there might be a need to
look at further increases for the Health budget.

There has been a significant upscaling of the HIV/Aids budget, reaching
over R1 billion this year. Perhaps more significant is the new funding
mechanism which has been introduced in this year's budget which transfers
HIV/Aids money to provinces with less limitations on how to spend it. This
will, of course, be done via conditional grants and an equitable share.
Thus, for now, there should be no province that can say that it could not
carry out its HIV/Aids programmes due to a lack of funds.

However, we must raise a concern when it comes to interprovincial equity.
For instance, the Eastern Cape's and Limpopo's budget are the lowest when
compared with the wealthy provinces of Gauteng and the Western Cape. If one
takes away the conditional grants from the budgets of these provinces, the
increase in health becomes negligible. If we want to narrow the gap between
the historically advantaged and disadvantaged provinces, there is a need to
review the principle of equity and arrive at real equity.

Serious attention must be paid to the whole aspect of the distribution of
health personnel. The current skewed distribution between the rural and
underserviced areas remains a challenge. Some form of incentives needs to
be considered. But critical to this is the need to have scrutiny of the
intake and representativity at medical schools. The historically white
universities are not doing well at accepting and sustaining black medical
students. This is an area that is going to need some serious attention.

We are indeed proud to have witnessed improved patterns of spending in
provinces. In the previous financial year, provinces have performed very
well. They have spent about 99,65% of their budgets.

However, there are worrying trends that we as a committee need to focus on.
We are mindful of the fact that health is also a concurrent responsibility
of provinces. Yet there are certain areas that will require some attention,
chief among them being the problem of roll-overs, resulting in unnecessary
problems and pressures on our public hospitals. There is going to be a need
for conditional grants, especially those designed for the improvement of
hospitals, to be ring-fenced.

The question of late allocation by provinces needs to be sincerely
combated. If some provinces such as the North West, the Eastern Cape,
Mpumalanga and Limpopo need specific attention, we should not allow things
to continue as normal. Some of these provinces have conceded that they do
not have the capacity to deal with the magnitude of challenges. Hence we
need to find some expenditure to address the shabby service. We do not
accept a situation where people raise the problem of capacity not as an
early warning system, but to mitigate the problem.

As a portfolio committee, our demand is not onerous; it simply says that
those given the responsibility of taking forward the agenda of our
Government, of a better life for all, should do exactly that. The ANC
remains committed to its agenda of a better life for all. We are convinced
that the test of our success will not be found in headlines and boardrooms
but in an actual change of the living conditions and wellbeing of our
people. No individual can deny that, in the mere space of eight years, we
have made a mark to achieve a better South Africa.

I would like to thank in particular the Portfolio Committee on Health for
its co-operation and understanding. I would also like to congratulate the
department and the director-general for their sterling work and commitment.
They held the fort during trying times in our history. We are confident
that, as we continue to improve, they will be imbued with more confidence
and enthusiasm.

I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Minister for
her good work and her ability to face the challenges of her portfolio. It
has sometimes pained me to witness the abuse and vilification that she has
endured. Having known her for over 20 years, and having witnessed her
commitment to her profession and freedom, I wonder what toll these
vilifications have had on her life. We take pride in the fact that she has
weathered the storm.

We are confident that as a committee we are dealing with a portfolio whose
success is hidden in improved health conditions of the people. The hon the
Minister will know better than me what O R once said, that the sacrifices
we make will always be dwarfed by the justness of our cause. How true that
is today! This is where our strategic focus should be - the improvement of
our lives.

We should not be afraid to face this challenge, for in it are found the
aspirations of our people. The people of South Africa, black and white,
remain convinced that the only organisation committed to a better life is
none other than the ANC. It is them that we should not fail. Therefore,
what can we say but that we support this budget. [Applause.]

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Chairperson, in the past I likened working with the health
portfolio to being like Alice on a trip through Wonderland - not certain
where the dream ended and reality began. Fortunately, just as Health was
about to be engulfed, like Alice, in a pool of tears, it has begun to swim
to safety. The hope is that as dreams become more tinged with reality, we
will yet set up on the shore and use our worst mistakes as springboards to
success.

While there are still many problems to solve, it is with a sense of
optimism that the IFP supports this budget. Why is it that in Health,
Education and Welfare the problems are greatest in delivery at provincial
level? It is for no other reason than that concurrency legislation and co-
operative governance burden us. We need a simpler, clearer division of
authority and responsibility: beginning with capacity at local level,
followed by provincial and then national levels; allowance for differences
among provinces; autonomous spending; and a degree of redistribution by the
centre, if we want delivery to flow in Health, Education and Welfare.

We see the wheels turning in Finance, which pretty much does its own thing,
whereas the 20% of health expenditure spent on conditional grants is like a
20-handicap in golf. The nevirapine case has well demonstrated how some
provinces are ready to provide nevirapine and others not. A series of court
cases was needed to hold everyone back and to demonstrate that
socioeconomic rights can be no more than populist mantra when they are not
used to hold Government to account.

The two most positive signs in health policy, both of which make one feel
that opposition politics may have a place after all, are the move to
increase provincial spending and management, and the move towards public-
private partnerships. Provinces are given more funds to implement
programmes, greater flexibility in their spending of conditional grants and
larger contributions for health care than for health prevention - a move
that we applaud. Secondly, there is a commitment to public-private
partnerships, and this will breach the gap between private and public
levels of service, provided that the contracts are competitive and that
private managers are held to account.

Improved though the enhanced response appears, it will not be without
problems, because it entails two forces moving in opposite directions and,
as Newton pointed out: opposite forces negate each other. The move to
autonomy is still hampered by constitutional and structural limitations
that tie delivery into bureaucratic knots. These shortcomings contribute to
many of the problems that Mr Ellis noted.

As for the settlement between Discovery and the Council for Medical
Schemes, we welcome it. But we believe that it will do little for
spiralling medical costs. Even the prescribed medicine list will not stop
the escalating costs that result from more sophisticated medicines and
diagnostic procedures, from the overregulation of medical schemes and from
a failure to use Government as a large competitor in a free health market.

We are entering a new phase of genetic medicine, where medicine will be
able to target tumours on genetic profiles, rebuild spinal cords, replace
missing enzymes, make humans glow in the dark, and make them bigger or
smaller. This will mean higher costs for fewer people and will require us
to have our ethical values clearly in place, and a health industry designed
so that the wealthy can take advantage of the latest miracle technology
while the poor, too, benefit in some way and are not abandoned and left to
die. The IFP stands by our proposals on health financing, which are very
different from those of the ANC.

We have been so busy arguing about nevirapine that we have ignored the vast
potential of lifestyle changes and complementary health measures. We are
also neglecting the vast potential for traditional healers to assist
Government with its TB and Aids programmes. Development of a herbal
medicine industry and better investigation of traditional herbs like unwele
[sutherlandia] would make a huge difference to our budget and our nation's
health.

The separation of alternative medicines, such as traditional Chinese
medicine, ayurveda and homeopathy, into a council separate from
conventional medicine serves only to confuse the public and disadvantages
doctors, who should be able to derive benefits and CPD points from studying
all forms of approved and regulated medicines.

Every moment of life is a miracle. But, we are fast-forwarding to a real
wonderland where biotechnology achieves the unbelievable. We need to invest
far more money in research to exploit the benefits of genetic engineering,
expand information technology into biotechnology, do gene sequencing on the
disease organisms that plague us, and better scrutinise the dangers that
genetic modification poses to foods. Labelling is not the answer, whereas a
reliable paper trail would at least make follow-ups possible.

The margins between dreams and reality, in the real world, are becoming
ever narrower. Whereas socialist systems were a good place to start
dreaming, now technology, good governance, research, scientific
partnerships with the developed world and dollops of plain hard realism are
the surest ways to make our dreams come true. [Time expired.]

Dr A N LUTHULI: Chairperson and hon members, I am happy to take part in
this Health Vote debate. I am going to focus on the district health system
and primary health care delivery.

The district health system is the vehicle through which the Government has
committed itself to providing primary health care. This is because primary
health care is considered to be the foundation of the health system that
our Government is working so hard to put in place. The overall aim of the
Department of Health is to promote the health of all the people in South
Africa through a caring, comprehensive and effective national health system
based on the primary health care approach. A comprehensive overall
functioning health system with a well-functioning district health system is
thus critical.

Last year, as the district health system became more entrenched, a number
of crucial milestones were reached. For example, South Africa is now
covered by contiguous metropolitan type A municipalities and district type
C municipalities.

Each of the district municipalities are subdivided into two or more local
type B municipalities. Secondly, a national health Bill was published for
public comment and sets out the framework for the setting up of the
district health system as the foundation stone for a national health
system. However, there is more clarity required on the roles of the
stakeholders at provincial and district levels. Thirdly, provincial health
authorities have been established in provinces, which will function as the
overall governance structures for the district health system.

As the Government is serious about delivering services to our people, a
more urgent approach has been adopted. The Government's dual approach will
ensure that services are improved in both urban and rural development
areas. European Union donor funding is being utilised to encourage each of
the metropolitan municipalities to improve aspects of service delivery. In
rural areas, the Government is committed to improving the lives of the most
impoverished communities through linked multisectoral programmes that will
improve services in 13 of the most disadvantaged rural district
municipalities.

These district municipality areas are known as the integrated sustainable
rural development sites. This remarkable initiative is being driven from
the President's Office. There are 13 of these sites: The Eastern Cape has
four, KwaZulu-Natal has four, the Western Cape, the Free State and the
Northern Cape-North West crossborder region one, and the Northern Province-
Mpumalanga crossborder region has two.

With regard to progress of the district health system at provincial level,
the budget hearings revealed that interprovincial equity needs further
refinement and attention. This is especially evident in the varying degrees
of progress that have been achieved in relation to governance issues.
Overall, the Free State, Gauteng, Limpopo and Mpumalanga have fared better
than KwaZulu-Natal and the Western Cape. On the other hand, the Eastern
Cape is still lagging far behind and requires support. I want to allude to
a case study and quote what has happened in the Free State with regard to
the implementation of the district health system. They have done well and
gone further than most provinces. [Applause.]

It is worth looking at the Free State model, considering that they have
made the most progress. From the outset, there has been political buy-in at
all levels. Health districts have been successfully realigned with the
newly created local government boundaries. Structures for governance have
been established, such as the provincial health authority, the provincial
health advisory board, the district health authorities and the health
committees.

Health services within the newly demarcated municipalities have been
functionally integrated. A provincial district health system conference, a
first in the country, was held in August last year, where the governing
bodies were officially launched by the premier, the Minister and the MEC
for health. This conference provided a platform to identify challenges and
to agree on solutions. For example, equity issues such as the impact of
poor infrastructure such as roads, transport, human resources and how rural
communities are worse off were discussed.

Drawing on the insight and the experience of stakeholders, solutions were
found, which included the need for better information, especially around
expenditure reviews; improved governance and community involvement; and
intergovernmental relations through improved communication by all parties,
the last being probably the most critical.

The task of establishing a well-functioning district health system remains
a daunting one that has to be executed within the context of limited
financial and other resources. It is therefore encouraging that health
service delivery receives the largest share of the budget allocation. It
must be said and acknowledged that, in the history of South Africa, no
government has ever done so much to bring health services, clinics and
health professionals closer to the majority of its people, especially the
poor, as the present Government has. [Applause.]

This is a fact which my friends on my left have to acknowledge, whether
they like it or not. [Interjections.] Our Government is clearly committed
and determined to continue to improve services, to reduce poverty, to bring
hope to our people and to end despair.

In terms of primary health care delivery much has been achieved. I will
mention a few achievements. Millions of children have been immunised.
Tuberculosis programmes are working well.
Mr M J ELLIS: Where?

Dr A N LUTHULI: Go and find out. Ask your researcher.

Nutrition programmes are in place for women and children and the
vulnerable. Millions of children are able to concentrate in school because
they receive a free meal. Medicines are available. Improved antenatal
services are available free of charge. [Interjections.] Access to services
has been expanded and improved. People with HIV/Aids receive the necessary
drugs for opportunistic infections. [Interjections.] Yes! Better screening
for breast cancer and cervical cancer is in place for the first time.
Health education and health promotion campaigns are in place. I could go
on.

Mr M J ELLIS: You make it sound so beautiful.

Dr A N LUTHULI: Of course it is.

Whilst we are expanding our primary health services, we are rebuilding and
upgrading our hospital facilities to the tune of millions, because we
recognise that a well-functioning but streamlined curative service is
crucial as well. We acknowledge that some of our hospitals are in urgent
need of attention because of their strategic position in the communities.
One has to mention Cecilia Makiwane Hospital in the Eastern Cape. A visit
by the Portfolio Committee on Health in 2001 revealed the sorry state of
this hospital. In spite of its condition, this facility was fully packed
with patients. There were nurses and doctors committed to delivering health
services even in these strenuous conditions.

I also visited Stanger Hospital in KwaZulu-Natal. This hospital was also
full of patients, even in the afternoon. It was strained to the limit with
Aids patients on intravenous fluids at the outpatients unit. Again,
dedicated men and women worked to their limits to service these people in
search of life.

One young male patient in a weak, strained and interrupted voice told me
that he would have long since died were it not for the treatment he
received at Kwadukuza Hospital. He comes in dehydrated from Aids diarrhoea
for rehydration and drug supplies to prolong his life. He receives these
drug supplies for opportunistic infections and gets rehydrated. His life is
therefore prolonged. Despite the strain under which our hospitals are
operating, we are still able to provide quality services and save lives.

Health is one area in which there will always be space for volunteerism. We
hear about health professionals leaving the profession but we forget that
we have a wealth of expertise and knowledge among our cadre of retired
health professionals and other professions, such as education and so on.

These persons - our retired nurses, teachers, preachers and so on - must be
co-opted to play a role in our health system. They could, for example,
assist with health education and health promotion, and educate patients on
their rights and on issues such as the importance of clean water, healthy
sanitation and the simple processes of washing hands. But we need to begin
with ourselves and lead by example. We must heed the President's call to
participate in community activities by taking the lead, and I am quite sure
that our community members will follow.

The Government can be proud of what it has achieved in seven short years.
More will be achieved in the months and years to come. As we prepare for
next year's budget, I want ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Dr S J GOUS: Mr Chairperson, time will not allow me to list the
achievements of the Department of Health. In this regard, the Minister has
done justice in her report. I will rather concentrate on some of the
problem areas. However, our criticism does not mean that we do not
acknowledge the Department of Health's substantial achievements under very
difficult conditions. In this regard our appreciation and thanks go to the
director-general, Dr Ntsaluba, and his whole team.

When one takes the inflation rate into account, the total budget allocated
to the Department of Health has not increased in real terms. Some analysts
even argue that it has decreased. Within the budget, there have been some
major shifts, specifically in favour of HIV/Aids programmes. It is also
important to acknowledge that the national Department of Health's budget is
actually very small, simply because health services are in most instances a
provincial concern.

The provincial spheres are experiencing the most glaring deficiencies, as
highlighted by the virtual administrative collapse of the Eastern Cape
health sector. The Mpumalanga Department of Health's inability to appoint
staff a full year after a brand-new hospital was opened by President Mbeki,
is a disgrace.

There are many other examples where the public is simply not receiving
adequate service delivery or value for money. I again emphasise that these
examples are mostly at provincial level.

Die hospitaalhernuwingsprogram is 'n voorbeeld van fondse wat goed
aangewend is. Dit is goeie beleid om in die onderhoud van kapitale eiendom
te belê, want dit verleng die lewensduur en bruikbaarheid van hospitale. In
die gebied waarvandaan ek kom, het hierdie vernuwingsprogram 'n tasbare
positiewe effek gehad. Dit het nie net 'n effek op die estetiese vlak nie,
maar ook op pasiënte en personeel se moraal. Ons wil die Departement van
Gesondheid aanmoedig om hiermee voort te gaan en selfs uit te brei.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The hospital renewal programme is an example of funds being utilised
wisely. It is good policy to invest in the maintenance of capital property,
because it extends the lifespan and serviceability of hospitals. In the
area where I come from these renewal programmes had a tangible, positive
effect. It not only had an effect on the aesthetic level, but also on the
morale of  patients and personnel. We want to encourage the Department of
Health to continue with this and even to extend it.]

Medicine control is still one of the problem areas. Our feedback is that
the Medicines Control Council is notoriously slow and disorganised. South
Africa has become a haven for smuggling medicine and for the manufacturing
and distribution of counterfeit medicine. The fact is that a full year
after the famous court case, medicine control legislation and regulations
are still overdue. We urge Government to address this problem immediately,
because this is causing South Africa tremendous harm.

Die ``brain drain'', spesifiek gerig op gesondheidswerkers, is nog 'n aspek
wat kommerwekkend is. Syfers dui daarop dat tot een derde van pas
gekwalifiseerde dokters die land verlaat. Dit is ook nie net van toepassing
op wit dokters nie, maar blyk verteenwoordigend te wees van alle rasse.
Hierdie is natuurlik 'n verskynsel wat in baie ander lande voorkom en is
ook nie beperk tot gesondheidswerkers nie, maar sluit vele ander professies
in. Ons wil die regering aanmoedig om hierdie probleem dringend aan te
spreek. Verder wil ons ook voorstel dat daar na insentief-gedrewe
oplossings gesoek moet word en nie na strafmaatreëls of diskriminerende
internasionale ooreenkomste nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[The brain drain specifically aimed at health workers is another aspect
which is alarming. Figures indicate that up to one third of newly qualified
doctors leave the country. This is not only applicable to white doctors,
but seems to be representative of all races. This is of course, a
phenomenon which occurs in many other countries and is also not limited to
health workers only, but includes many other professions. We want to
encourage the Government to address this problem urgently. We would
furthermore also like to propose that incentive-driven solutions be sought,
and not punitive measures or discriminating international agreements.]

We support the system of compulsory community service and welcome the fact
that this has been extended to include other health care professions. The
New NP would like to see even more professions included in the community
service system. However, we insist that community service is applied as
originally intended, namely to supply services to rural and underserviced
areas. Community service is not a way to fill posts in major or even
academic institutions where it defeats the purpose and simply becomes cheap
labour.

Ten spyte van wysigings aan die Mediese Skema Wet, stuur hierdie gebied
steeds op 'n ramp af. Die Nuwe NP se voorspelling dat mediese skemas
onbekostigbaar gaan word, is vinnig besig om 'n realiteit te word. Bydraes
styg teen vlakke ver bo inflasie of die ekonomiese groeisyfers en
terselfdertyd verminder dekking aansienlik. As administrasiekoste
uitgesluit word, het werklike koste met omtrent 250% gestyg tussen 1974 en
1999. Mediese skema uitgawes onverwant aan gesondheidsdienste, het in
dieselfde tydperk met rofweg 450% toegeneem. Dié toename is selfs groter as
die toename in die koste van medisyne. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[Despite the amendments to the Medical Schemes Act, this domain is still
heading towards a disaster. The New NP's prediction that medical schemes
will become unaffordable is fast becoming a reality. Contributions are
increasing at levels far above inflation or the economic growth figures and
at the same time cover is decreasing substantially. If administrative costs
are excluded, real costs increased by approximately 250% between 1974 and
1999. Medical scheme expenditure unrelated to health services increased by
roughly 450% in the same period. This increase is even greater than the
increase in the cost of medicines.]

Simply put, medical schemes are using about twice as much money to
administer schemes as they pay out to general practitioners for services
rendered. Surely there is something fundamentally wrong with this equation.
It is also obvious that medical schemes are partly to blame for this status
quo. Hon members should remember that this is an era where the IT explosion
is supposed to make administration cheaper. We predict that in this regard,
it will be back to the drawing board very soon.

Our country's health is experiencing a continuous onslaught from cholera,
TB, malaria and malnutrition. Above all of these hang the dark clouds of
HIV/Aids and poverty. The relationship between HIV/Aids and poverty has
been the subject of debate in this House often enough.

The following statements all have their own merit: Firstly, HIV causes
Aids; secondly, HIV is contagious; thirdly, HIV is in most cases sexually
transmitted; fourthly, HIV/Aids is a major factor in creating poverty;
fifthly, poverty is a major factor in the epidemic spread of HIV/Aids; and
lastly, we shall not overcome HIV/Aids unless we address poverty and we
shall not beat poverty unless we address the HIV/Aids pandemic effectively.

We are all guilty of using some of these facts in the name of political
expediency and opportunism. The bottom line is that they are all equally
true.

When we take the health budget into consideration, substantial amounts are
made available for HIV/Aids programmes. Add to this all the funds spent
indirectly, for instance on TB, nutrition, medicine and hospitalisation,
and it becomes clear that much more is being spent on HIV/Aids than the
budget suggests.

The fact is that this disease is multidimensional and its tentacles reach
everywhere. It is to the Government's credit that they are addressing this
disease multidepartmentally.

Let us stop for a minute and evaluate the Government's HIV/Aids response
objectively. We see massive awareness and education campaigns, campaigns
promoting condom use, STI awareness programmes, a traditional healer forum,
home-based care initiatives, councillor training programmes, vaccine
support initiatives, voluntary counselling and testing programmes,
substantive NGO funding, surveillance and research programmes, Diflucan
initiatives, and nutritional support programmes, to mention but a few.

In fact, we probably have the most comprehensive response to HIV/Aids in
the world, and certainly the best in Africa, and this is confirmed by the
World Health Organisation and the United Nations, and yet we refuse to give
credit where it is due.

Yes, of course we differ. We all have our pet subjects and our own view on
the rate at which certain elements must be implemented. We now have large-
scale mother-to-child prevention rollout, even if it is court induced, and
a commitment to anti-retroviral use for rape survivors. Common sense
dictates that anti-retroviral medication for Aids sufferers is inevitable.
It is just a question of time.

My message is clear and simple. Let us give credit where it is due. Let us
accept and realise that only by working together as a nation, despite our
differences - politicians included - shall we beat this dual scourge of
HIV/Aids and poverty, because if we do not, history will judge us very
harshly.

It would appear that Government chose the very difficult path of trying to
be honest. At times they say all the wrong things, but at least they are
mostly doing the right things. Politically, it would have been much easier
to say all the right things and do the minimum or nothing at all. They are
not guilty of the latter.

These are perspectives that we as politicians will have to bear in mind,
otherwise our own opportunism will sabotage and undermine the response to
this dreaded disease and threat. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! The hon Ms Nkabinde will be giving her maiden
speech.

Ms N C NKABINDE: Madam Speaker, hon Minister and members, when one speaks
of health, one touches one of the most basic needs that should be satisfied
for the South African people, especially the poorest of the poor. South
Africans are very dependent on the Department of Health, and therefore it
should not come as a surprise that this subject always leads to
controversy, debates, arguments and criticism. However, introspection
should be carried out so as to ensure that basic health care is always
protected and promoted.

A healthy nation is the foundation on which a country builds. It is the
cornerstone of the economy, because manpower is one of the basic resources
of any society. However, this important resource is often neglected, and
sometimes abused to the detriment of the nation.

The majority of South Africans have not had the best opportunities in the
provision of health care. Poverty is the root cause of ill health. Poor
people often lack the basic means to maintain a healthy body, that is,
adequate nutrition. As a result, they develop a lot of health disabilities
which they could have avoided under better circumstances.

The UDM welcomes and supports the Budget. However, we need to address some
of the discrepancies that are encountered on a daily basis. One of the
aspects that I wish to touch on is that of infrastructural needs. There is
a need to build new facilities and maintain existing ones, as some of them
are no longer in good condition. Most hospitals are understaffed and
overcrowded. There are institutions that still do not have proper
sanitation and no effective telecommunications systems.

The UDM appreciates the number of new clinics that have been built, but
raises its concern about the failure of Government to provide a 24-hour
service delivery, especially in the rural areas. The service should be
available at all times.

One should commend the department for introducing mobile clinics. However,
the conditions under which the system operates should be improved. For
instance, the staff needs to be provided with communication facilities in
case of emergencies, and with enough equipment and medication. The number
of mobile clinic visits in some areas should be increased. For example, in
one of the villages in KwaZulu-Natal, there is only one visit by the mobile
clinic per month.
The shortage of ambulances in some rural areas and townships needs
attention, because many people die due to waiting for paramedics for a long
time during crises such as road accidents, emergencies and childbirth.

Although the UDM supports the budget, I must raise concerns about
corruption and mismanagement of funds. The UDM calls on the national
department to be responsible in managing funds allocated to provincial and
local government, to ensure that there is no underspending or rolling over
of funds. Not enough has been done, especially by the national Government,
in order to fight HIV/Aids and to ensure that the provinces have the
necessary knowledge of the HIV/Aids budget and the programme that they
should carry out. Information should be cascaded, especially to people
living in the rural areas, and specifically on Aids-related issues.

One should applaud the department for having introduced the programmes of
home-based care and DOTS, with the main targets being community health
workers and volunteers. These have been the most efficient tools for
ensuring that the poorest of the poor do access and receive primary health
care. However, there is a shortage in the number of community health
workers, nursing staff and doctors serving the sick. [Applause.]

Ms S K MNUMZANA: Motlatsamodulasetulo, ka kgwedi ya Mmesa 1994, ha
maAforika Borwa a tswa ka makgalo ho ya dikgethong, ho bile le diphetoho
dipolotiking. Ke moo tshepo le kganya ho maAforika Borwa e ileng ya hlaha.
Kganya ya kganyetsa lefatshe jwaloka Mphatlalatsane. Tshepo le tumelo ya
bonahala ho ba neng ba tshepetse ho ANC. E ruri, puso e tlisitse tshepo,
tokoloho, le kganya, ho Afrika ka bophara, hobane dinaha tsa ka ntle di
shebile ho Aforika Borwa le boetapele ba yona. Phephetso e le ho fetola
maphelo a setjhaba sa Rantsho.

Seo se tliswa ke ho bona banna le basadi ba Kabinete ya rona ba theosa ba
nyolosa, ba fana ka tshepo eo ba nang le yona le tsebo, ho tlisa diphetoho.
Re leboha ka tswelopele eo ya bona le boetapele. Basadi le bona ba ne ba le
ka tlasa kgatello e kgolo, haholo jwang ba kojwana di mahetleng, ba
hlekefetswa mesebetsing, malapeng, mme ba sena le kabelo moruing wa naha.
Ha re fihla ho tsa bophelo, e ne e le mathata. Ya fihla puso ya ANC, ya
bula dikgoro, ya fetola maphelo a bana ba batho, mme ra bona diphetoho ka
hara mafapha a fapaneng a mmuso.

ANC ya tla ka mano, ya fetola dibaka tsa ditshebeletso, mme tsa tliswa
haufi le batho hore ba di fihlele ka bonolo, mme hoo, ho theotse dipalopalo
tsa bafu, haholo bana ba tshwerweng maselese le basadi ba neng ba shwa ka
nako ya peleho. Ha ke hopotse bahlomphehi le setjhaba hore re le ANC,
bofokodi ba rona re bo lemohile. Ho na le moo re sa sebetsang hantle teng,
jwaloka ka diporofensing tsa boKapa Botjhabela, le Mpumalanga. Hoo ha ho
bolele hore tsohle di ne di sa tsamaye ka thello. Letona le lefapha, ba
ntse ba etsa ho hong ka tseo.

Hoo ke ratang ho ho toboketsa, mme ke sa name ka hona, ke hore diporofensi
tseo ke di boletseng, ho na le tse ntle tseo ba di entseng. (Translation of
Sesotho paragraphs follows.)
[Ms S K MNUMZANA: Chairperson, in April 1994, when South Africans went out
in all directions for the elections, changes occurred in politics. That is
where hope and light for a South African appeared. Light swept across the
world like the morning star, and hope and belief were apparent in those who
believed in the ANC. Yes, indeed, the Government brought hope, freedom and
light to the whole of Africa, because other countries look up to South
Africa and its leadership. The challenge is to change lives in the black
community.

That is brought about by seeing men and women in our Cabinet going up and
down, giving the hope and knowledge that they have to people, to bring
about change. We are grateful for their development and leadership.

Women were also greatly oppressed. Especially the poor ones, those who were
abused at work and at home, and did not get any help from the economy of
our country. Health issues were a problem.

Then the ANC Government arrived and opened up doors, changed people's
lives, and we started seeing changes in the different Government
departments. The ANC arrived with programmes, altered services and brought
them closer to the people, so that people could easily reach them. That has
decreased the number of deaths, especially among children with measles and
women who died in labour.

Let me remind the House and the nation that we, as the ANC, have realised
our points of weakness. There are places in which we did not perform well,
like the Eastern Cape and Mpumalanga. However, that does not mean that
everything did not go well. The Minister and the department are doing
something about those things.

What I would like to emphasise, without going into details, is that in the
provinces that I have mentioned, there are some good things that have been
done.]

The hearings, our on-site visits and constituency work are barometers for
measuring achievement. Much has been done, and much has improved in the
provinces. We say well done to those provinces that have improved service
performance, for example the Northern Province and the Free State.

The wellbeing of women and children is strongly emphasised in our
Constitution and by this Government. Through our programmes and budgetary
allocations, we are making the Constitution a living document. The right to
access to health care services, including reproductive health care,
sufficient food and water, is no longer only a cherished idea, but reality
for our people who had nothing in the past.

We are increasing the pace of delivery to ensure that we comply with the
injunction that the state must take reasonable legislative and other
measures, within its available resources, to achieve the progressive
realisation of each of these ideals.

The ANC has ensured that a large section of the population has access to
free health services. This is no easy feat. Pregnant women and children
under six years can access the health services for free. As a result,
massive infrastructure commitments such as clinic building, upgrading
facilities and bringing health services closer to the people have been
embarked upon. Our people are able to access health services that are
within walking distance.

Though policies, guidelines and legislation are in place, there are areas
where we face challenges and where improvement is required, for example in
the area of Batho Pele. Much more has to be done to ensure that patients
are aware of their rights to a caring service. But, on the other hand, we
need to be doing more to ensure that the grievances of our health
professionals at the coalface of service delivery are being addressed.

Lack of infrastructure was a major obstacle to service delivery before
1994. We are still straining under the weight of catching up. However,
significant steps have been taken to widen access. Our primary health care
system now consists of 3 500 health care clinics nationally, of which 500
were built in the last five years.

Provinces are beginning to improve the management of clinics whose services
are free. Before 1994 one hardly had access to health care facilities, if
one was poor and had no money.

Through the budget hearings we learned that last year R444 million was
spent on construction of new hospitals, such as Pretoria Academic Hospital,
Nkosi Albert Luthuli Hospital, and Nelson Mandela Hospital. Whilst we are
expanding primary health care, we remain committed to rebuilding and
revitalising public hospitals. As a result, we are still spending about 60%
of our resources on hospitals. This year the department will be building on
the work they commenced last year to revitalise our public hospitals.

We must thank our Minister of Finance for making R3,5 billion available to
restore and replace hospital facilities. We trust that Dr Sibeko will work
very hard to ensure that our hospitals are flagship facilities for the rest
of the continent and, indeed, the world.

From health indicators and research in general, we can see that women's and
children's health has improved significantly. Important legislation has
been passed or is in the process of being passed that impacts significantly
on the health of the vulnerable, such as women and children.

Our approach is based on intersectoral principles. We understand that the
wellbeing of women and children lies not within the domain of health only,
but cuts across sectors and spheres.

The Domestic Violence Act gives women greater protection against actual
threat of physical violence, emotional, verbal and economic abuse,
intimidation and harassment.

The Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Act allows for legal termination of
pregnancy on request for all women, irrespective of their colour, under
defined circumstances, between 12 and 20 weeks. The Sterilisation Act
affords women more control over their bodies.

Although we have these exceptional pieces of legislation, problems of a
varying nature do persist, such as a lack of communication strategies, for
example. Women are still unaware how protection orders can be obtained
against abusive partners and how this can protect them. Does the SAPS
understand its responsibility in terms of the Domestic Violence Act?

Implementation of legislation is another recurring problem. Through
committee hearings, we learned that backstreet abortions were still
performed, but that the number of septic abortions had declined. The reason
for continued backstreet abortion speaks directly to the obstacles that are
hampering delivery of services and also implies that women still do not
know enough about the Act to assert themselves and insist on the services.

Inequalities with regard to the provision of services remain and we need to
close the widening gap. At the hearings we also learned that the health
workers need support. I want to urge the Minister and the MECs to ensure
that priority is given to the emotional needs of our health professionals
and that more managerial support is given to them as well.

As we move forward with our efforts to bring a better life to all our
people, I want to encourage the Minister and her department to continue to
prioritise women and children in programmes and policies, to strengthen
reproductive health services further and to ensure that women and children
know what our policies are about so that they are able to access them.

In conclusion, I want to stress that significant progress has been made in
the provision of public health care. The rebuilding of clinics and
hospitals, and the revitalising and rehabilitating of previously
marginalised hospitals and other health institutions are an indication of
the commitment of this ANC-led Government.

The enactment of legislation that protects and promotes the rights of women
and children, and that seeks to improve their health status, indicates a
major development towards a better and healthier nation.

Allow me to share the experience of Mrs Seroke, a midwife at Chris Hani
Baragwanath Hospital, who has been providing termination of pregnancy since
its implementation. One case that sticks in Mrs Seroke's mind is that of a
girl who came into the hospital with a coat hanger hanging from her cervix.
This case has remained with her and is one of the driving forces behind
this Sowetan midwife's commitment to providing Sowetan women with
termination of pregnancy. For the handful of midwives such as Mrs Seroke,
the greatest challenges to overcome are lack of support from management
opposed to service delivery, burnout, name-calling, and resistance by their
peer group.

I congratulate the Minister, her provincial MECs and their departments for
their vision and commitment. The ANC is committed to a better life for all
and supports the budget. [Applause.]

Ms C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, the most significant development in this budget
is said to be that Government is increasing its reliance on provinces to
direct and implement programmes and allocate funds for HIV/Aids as they
choose. Idasa says that national Government is banking on the idea that
provincial underspending, which has plagued HIV/Aids conditional grants up
till now, will decrease if provinces are given more discretion with funds
provided by national Government. They describe this as a gamble worth
taking, especially as the risk is reduced by the fact that the budget
simultaneously addresses the problem of lack of provincial capacity by
earmarking funds to strengthen provincial management.

During provincial budget hearings in May I asked the national department
how, in the light of the difficulties provinces had experienced in spending
the HIV/Aids budget of R34 million, provinces were going to manage the
increased amount of R157 million. I suggested that provinces would need the
help of NGOs that, up till now, were finding it impossible to access
funding for community projects, which would address the HIV/Aids crisis and
render much-needed services. The answer, which should have been good news,
was that Government has put in place an NGO unit as from 30 May, which will
be in charge of all Government and donor funding.

In order to form this unit, however, Government has partnered with LoveLife
and the Kaizer Foundation, which are notoriously anti-family values, and
the ACDP is concerned that NGOs who promote family values will be further
discriminated against. Not only is all Government spending in the hands of
Planned Parenthood's LoveLife, but all donor funding for HIV/Aids from
outside the country is too. National Government is not, therefore, taking
any risk, but is ensuring that its policies are implemented through Planned
Parenthood's LoveLife.

LoveLife also receives a further R25 million per annum to implement its own
programme. Planned Parenthood's lifeskills education in schools receives a
substantial percentage of the Health budget and condoms take up as much as
18%. One-stop shops for service delivery for health service provision,
which are on the cards and promise to improve the health service delivery,
are being hijacked by Planned Parenthood to facilitate abortion and provide
another avenue whereby Planned Parenthood will access the Health budget,
which is fast becoming indistinguishable from Planned Parenthood itself.

While it is glaringly obvious that the war against HIV/Aids will only be
won by a dramatic change in sexual behaviour, Planned Parenthood and
LoveLife's offensive sex education in schools and through the media, and
the indiscriminate promotion of condoms will only exacerbate the situation.
Children need to learn about self-respect and dignity, not how to have sex,
lesbian oral sex, orgasm, how to access abortion clinics, masturbate and
gay cruise.

Promoting condoms as the answer to the pandemic is a blatant
misrepresentation. Statistics reveal that there are almost 15 failures per
100 sexual acts protected by condoms, and yet we are expected to believe
that the HI virus, 450 times smaller than sperm, can be blocked by a
condom.

Researchers confirm that the publicity given to the condom has led to
riskier sexual behaviour because of a false sense of safety. The SA Law
Commission is now recommending that children as young as nine be issued
with condoms and birth control pills. While we purport to be concerned
about child abuse, we find more and more ways to cover for those who abuse
our children by providing the so-called protection and terminations if
necessary, without parents knowing, and without reporting such abuse, which
is still called statutory rape, although one would not think it.

Paying lip service to abstinence, as some are doing, is a sham. Where is
the funding for organisations that not only promote the only real
prevention of Aids - sexual abstinence before marriage and faithfulness in
marriage - but believe our children are able to achieve such goals?

As much as 49% of the Health budget goes to maternal, child and women's
health, and this is where termination of pregnancy is not only implemented
but promoted. To date this nation who we voted, through their leaders, for
a constitution which allows for the callous murder of our unborn children,
and voted for politicians who support termination of pregnancy, have the
blood of more than 220 000 unborn babies on their hands. For this we will
face the wrath of God. Children in South Africa are being butchered and
thrown in the trash, even as we speak, and Government is paying for these
barbaric deeds with our tax money.

Previous termination of pregnancy hearings at Parliament were heavily
biased against prolife organisations, doctors and health workers, and, in
fact, targeted them as the enemy. But the hearings this year set an all-
time record. These hearings, funded, planned and presented by the
Reproductive Rights Alliance, allowed no prolife presenters to participate.
Prof Helen Rees, who heads up LoveLife, Planned Parenthood, the
Reproductive Rights Alliance and the Medicines Control Council, was the
keynote speaker. Her prodeath work in South Africa in fact earned her an
OBE, an award for service to the British Crown.

My question is: How exactly is aborting South African babies in the
national interest of Britain? Like the Minister and other proabortionists,
Prof Rees referred to abortion as saving women's lives. This gross
distortion of the facts cannot even be backed by their own statistics,
which show that backstreet abortions have not decreased, only infections
have, thanks to Prof Rees and the unregistered but readily available RU486
drug. Termination of pregnancy is no life-saver, but has taken the lives of
220 000 babies in the last five years, over and above those lives lost in
backstreet abortions. The ACDP will not condone these atrocities and once
again has no option but to vote against the Health budget on these grounds.

The ACDP is mindful of Government's pronouncement on 17 April. [Time
expired.]

Moh M A SEECO: Modulasetulo, UDCP e amogela tekanyetso-kabo eno ya Lefapha
la Boitekanelo. Re kopa gore bodiredi bo tokafale mo setshabeng. Go utlwisa
botlhoko mo metlheng eno go utlwa gotwe moimana o kgadiepeditswe abe a
kobiwa kwa bo okelong, go fitlha a belega ngwana mo koloing kgotsa kwa
seteisheneng sa ma podisa. Ke setho moimana o fiwa tlotlo. Maokelo le di
kliniki tse dingwe ga dina melemo le dijo. Ba boetse ba esetswa dijo gotswa
magaeng. Re gwetlha Tona gore di kliniki tse di tswalwang ka ura ya bone,
di okelediwe nako segolobogolo kwa metse magaeng. (Translation of Tswana
paragraph follows.)

[Mrs M A SEECO: Chairperson, the UCDP accepts the budget of the Department
of Health. We would like services to the nation to improve. It is
disheartening these days to hear that a pregnant woman was ill-treated and
chased away from a hospital, and that she gave birth in a car or at a
police station. It is humane to respect a pregnant woman. Some hospitals
and clinics do not have medicines and food. Patients receive food from
their homes. We appeal to the Minister that the time for clinics that close
at 4 o'clock should be extended, particularly in the rural areas.]

Dr Manto Tshabalala-Msimang should be applauded for receiving the award at
the 11th World Conference on Tobacco for outstanding leadership in tobacco
control. [Applause.] According to the budget speech of the Minister of
Health, health services were brought within easier reach of about 6 million
people through the building of 500 clinics since 1994. The UCDP appreciates
this but the snag is that not all are in use.

The aim of the Department of Health is to promote the health of all people
in South Africa through a caring and effective national health system,
based on the primary health care approach. Some 40% of all South Africans
live in poverty, and 75% of these stay in the rural areas where health
services are least developed, such as in Masutlhe and Mateteng in the North
West.
The Department of Health receives 32% of the total national appropriation
and should ensure that this Budget Vote performs the delegated functions. A
system is necessary to improve decision-making that would lead to a
reduction in the prevalence of malnutrition and to improved conditions in
our society that have an effect on malnutrition.

The UCDP supports the Vote. [Applause.]

Ms N F MATHIBELA: Madam Speaker, hon Minister and Ministers in the House,
hon members of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen, I am delighted to
participate in this debate today to celebrate the achievements of the
national Department of Health and the provincial health departments.

The principles of this Government, and its health policies in particular,
mark a major turning point in rural health. As we debate today, more
accessible health facilities have been put in place. Clean water is
provided, and more accessible telephone lines have been installed
throughout villages. Now, when staff at a remote clinic encounter a
complicated health problem or concern, they can get the information that is
needed quickly.

Our rural areas have been electrified, a hope that we never had in the
past. In the poverty-stricken rural communities we are now happy that our
water is clean, healthy and accessible. No longer is tap water a privilege
for a few in the urban or farming communities. We in the ANC believe that
clean water is a basic right. The rural communities of Tafelkop, Ga-
Masemola, Jane Furse and Kgalaopeng in the Sekhukhune district in the
Limpopo province are saying that they are very happy that they now have a
clean water supply.

Today I am proud that this ANC Government has made the right to accessible
health care a living reality. Clinics have been built where they are needed
most and they are improving the lives of our people. Now the rural poor,
expecting mothers, children and the elderly are attended to free of charge
at hospitals and clinics. The ANC Government has effectively removed the
barrier to health care.
St Peters is one hospital that was ill-equipped and neglected. Today St
Peters is electrified and has the best X-ray machines in the Sekhukhune
district. Where there were no doctors before, community service doctors and
Cuban doctors are now part of a caring and compassionate health staff who
provide vital medical services at facilities.

Allow me to turn to a topic that I am passionate about, namely mental
health. For years mental health was considered the Cinderella of health,
requiring more attention, more resources and appropriate legislation. The
Department of Health must be congratulated for its complete overhaul of
mental health in South Africa. Our new approach to mental health addresses
the needs of millions of our people and has huge individual, social and
economic consequences.

It is essential that we see health as a state of physical, mental and
social wellbeing, as without this approach we will never effectively deal
with illnesses, diseases and disability. Although it is estimated that
millions of people suffer from mental illnesses, and studies conducted in
our own primary health care facilities revealed that 20% to 30% of
attendees were suffering from a mental disorder, only a small proportion
receive even the most basic treatment. This is exacerbated because people
are victimised because of their illness, stigmatised and discriminated
against.

The increased risks in poor areas result in twice as many disorders as in
more advantaged areas. The cause of disorders is also related to
socioeconomic status, and this has a lot to do with the treatment gap
between rich and poor.

Two particular additional risk factors for mental health are problems of
violence and HIV/Aids. Both as a result of past violence and ongoing
violence, there are many South Africans, especially women and children, who
are suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder, which results directly
from trauma. HIV/Aids has huge psychological effects on the people
infected, their families and communities as a whole.

There are also differences in gender. While the total prevalence between
men and women tends to differ, there are major differences in the patterns
of their disorder. Depression and anxiety disorders tend to occur twice as
often in women as in men. On the other hand, substance abuse disorders and
personality disorders have a much higher prevalence amongst men.

Given the rise in prevalence, it is difficult to estimate the economic cost
of mental health problems in South Africa. In this regard I want to urge
the Department of Health to do a cost analysis of mental health, so that we
can be sure of how much is needed and what kinds of resources are required
to support our new policy.

We as parliamentarians will be the advocates for increased budgets and
resources in our mental health programmes. As we prepare to implement this
new mental health framework, I want to urge the Department of Health, its
provincial counterparts and us as parliamentarians to empower our people by
communicating to them how they will benefit from our new policy on mental
health.

Lastly, I want to thank the cadre of health professionals, who serve our
people tirelessly, for their dedication and hard work, often under heavy
pressure. The ANC supports this people-friendly budget. [Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, as we are debating the Health budget a very
important conference is taking place in Somerset West, called the African
Aids Vaccine Programme. This is an initiative by 15 African countries and
45 leading African scientists who came together two years ago under the
leadership of Prof Magoba, and this needs to be supported. The initiative
is also supported by the WHO, Unaids and our own Dr Tim Tucker of the South
African Aids Vaccine Initiative.

This initiative will protect the vulnerable African population against
exploitation by fly-by-night researchers who come to Africa and use Africa
as a test ground for their drugs. In line with the Pan-African Parliament,
we need to call on all African parliaments to support this initiative and
also request members of parliament in all the African parliaments to play
an active role in promoting the initiative. Members of Parliament must
participate in clinical trials so that we can show our own people that they
are not guinea pigs. I will certainly participate in a clinical trial once
they are started.

My concern is about discrimination and HIV/Aids, both regarding those
infected and those affected. The implications of discrimination against
positive people are vast. Discrimination is not only an obstacle to
preventative education, but also an obstacle to managing physical and
mental health. We must stop the ``them and us'' stigma. Who are we to talk
about ``them'' when we do not know our own status? The stigma and
misconception surrounding HIV/Aids prevent people from seeking counselling,
testing, support and treatment. We must mobilise HIV-positive people,
because it is only them that can save our country. It is only them that can
stop spreading the disease and therefore, instead of marginalising and
ostracising them, we must make them feel important. I also want to commend
the Treatment Action Campaign for the sterling work they have done in
fighting for treatment.

Finally, I want to take up the challenge of the hon the Minister of Health
that members of Parliament must become involved. We are ready to join hands
with her in the fight against this pandemic. Members of Parliament must
move past wearing red ribbons and lighting candles and go out there and do
more.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker and hon Minister, with regard to health,
South Africa is facing its worst concern, the Aids epidemic. Shocking
statistics show that it is rife and growing rapidly. Aids is found in all
sectors and the frightful reality is that, as it spreads, it is also
rapidly eating away our economy.

The ongoing situation of making the nevirapine drug available is endless.
However, the MF's view of the situation is that the Aids epidemic is eating
away at our society and that the need to protect our future leaders is of
vital importance. The MF also notes the excuse which the drug may give
irresponsible persons to engage in unprotected sexual activity. It is
amazing how ignorant people are, and how they underestimate their own
ability and the presence of Aids. Their adopting of an ``it will not happen
to me'' attitude is just as amazing. Aids is a reality. It kills and it is
eating away at Africa. So one should use one's brain and take the necessary
precautions.

An unhealthy nation also leads to a decline of our country as a tourist
attraction. A healthy nation reflects a safe nation and people want to feel
safe. It is logical. Tourists' advice about health risks in South Africa
lists common infections such as malaria, traveller's diarrhoea, cholera,
typhoid and other diseases. This is quite a mouthful.

The MF notes that it is virtually impossible to maintain a completely germ-
free country, as we are constantly at risk due to incoming and outgoing
visitors. However, we should seek measures to minimise these risks, so as
to boost confidence in travelling to South Africa, as we all know the
importance of tourism to revenue.

The MF is especially concerned about youth education on health risks.
Health issues need to be earnestly promoted at schools, especially in view
of Aids. Our constitutional proclamation to provide primary health care has
to be promoted by the establishment of far more health care facility
centres. The MF realises the pressure on the department to deliver, and
believes that the duty to promote better health is not only that of the
Department of Health, but is the responsibility of all South Africans.

The MF especially notes the assistance that the business sector could
provide in promoting better health. Earnest consideration and participation
in programmes such as Aids programmes may make an effective difference.
Thanks to the present health care, many a programme has reached our people,
especially in the rural disadvantaged areas.

The MF supports this budget.

Dr E E JASSAT: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, hon members, Aids in Africa has
reached such catastrophic levels that analogies with past wars or plagues
no longer drive home the present-day urgency. Aids on the continent is not
only affecting many millions but, even more catastrophically, adequate care
and treatment for HIV infection is essentially nonexistent in most African
settings. This is not a time for ``business-as-usual''.

We can refer to 46 million men, women and children worldwide who have been
infected with this deadly virus, the majority being in South Africa. Our
country has become the world capital of this infamous illness, with an
estimated five million infected individuals and a daily rate of 175 000. By
1999 there were an estimated 100 000 orphans in South Africa. We have been
told that since the beginning of this epidemic two decades ago 22 million
people have died throughout the world. These are horrible statistics.
However, this afternoon I want to speak about events which are unfolding
daily and which bring us hope and the possibility of containing this
epidemic, whose aim is to shatter the health and happiness of the people of
this globe.

There are three events I would like to focus on which I believe will have
an impact on the proliferation of this disease: Firstly, the research being
conducted on the production of an antiretroviral vaccine; secondly, the
global fight against Aids, TB and malaria; and thirdly, the manufacture and
availability of affordable antiretroviral drugs.

The search for a vaccine has become a priority in view of the fact that
research has shown that HIV prevention methods such as the promotion of
abstinence, mutual monogamy, sexual partner reduction, treatment of STDs
and condom use have not led to a substantial decrease in HIV/Aids in most
countries. The only method of prevention thus far has been behaviour
change, and since we know how difficult it is to change behaviour, we need
to look at other methods of prevention such as vaccines.

In 1996 an International Aids Vaccine Initiative (IAVI), a scientific
organisation, was founded. Its mission was to ensure the development of a
safe, effective, accessible, preventive vaccine for use throughout the
world. The IAVI focuses on four key areas: Accelerating scientific
progress; education advocacy; ensuring vaccine access; and creating a more
supportive environment for industrial involvement in HIV vaccine
development.

In a landmark move, African countries are getting together to meet the
challenge confronting us, and conducting vaccine trials on those affected
by the HIV pandemic. Phase one trials have already taken place in Uganda
and Kenya. We in South Africa have already considered the first protocols.

At this very moment the first African Aids Vaccine Programme Forum is being
held in Cape Town, in Somerset West, as has been mentioned by hon De Lille,
where delegates from all parts of Africa are deliberating on research into
and the production of a vaccine which will control and combat this threat
to our socioeconomic life in Africa. We must be realistic. In fact, the
vaccine will not be here today or tomorrow; it will only be available in
five or ten years' time.

During the early part of May this year, parliamentarians, scientists and
Aids activists met in New Delhi to assess what progress had been made with
research into an HIV/Aids vaccine, particularly in Asia and Africa. At the
end of the three-day meeting the Delhi Declaration on HIV/Aids was
unanimously accepted.

The South African Aids Vaccine Initiative, Saavi, was established late in
1999. Its aim and objective was to develop and test an effective,
affordable and locally relevant vaccine for South Africa. As the South
African epidemic is almost exclusively HIV subtype C, the focus of Saavi
activity is on producing and testing a novel HIV vaccine based on the
genetic material from South African isolates of subtype C.
At the urging of UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan and many other national
leaders, the concept of a global fund for Aids, TB and malaria was
unanimously endorsed in June 2001, at the first UN General Assembly Special
Session to focus on HIV/Aids.

In July 2001, a transitional working group for the fund was established,
consisting of 40 representatives of developing countries, donor countries,
NGOs, the private sector and the UN system. From Africa, South Africa,
Uganda, Nigeria, Mali and Mozambique participated in this event.

The fund's objectives are to finance effective programmes, balancing the
need for prevention, treatment, care and support, in order to alleviate
suffering, save lives and help end these diseases, by dramatically
increasing the global resources dedicated to fighting these three diseases.

Mr Annan has said that fighting these diseases will require between US$7
billion and US$10 billion by the year 2005. So far, US$2 billion has been
pledged to the fund. The cost of medication is one of several factors
limiting access to life-extending care for people living with HIV/Aids.

However, it is essential that as medicine prices are reduced, increased
levels of public and private funding will become available. This will lead
to more resources for quality and well-managed clinical care. It will
provide an additional incentive for improving people's access to voluntary
counselling and testing for HIV infections, an important element of
preventing HIV infection.

The World Health Organisation is working closely with its member states,
the UNaids secretariat and other United Nations systems and organisations,
together with generic producers as well as research-based pharmaceutical
companies, and with nongovernmental groups, including those representing
people living with HIV/Aids, to accelerate access to care.

The strategy is to pursue a range of options for lowering the price and
ensuring the quality of medicines and diagnostics, to increase financing of
care, to improve the distribution of commodities, and to promote best
practice in the provision of services for HIV/Aids care and treatment. The
World Health Organisation is exploring financial, regulatory, legal,
logistical and other practical aspects of propositions made by the
different parties involved in this endeavour. Given the intensity of the
concerted efforts now under way, the WHO anticipates that within the next
two years many more people affected by HIV/Aids will have access to
effective care.

I would like to conclude by quoting our much Aids-maligned president, who
already in October 1998 had this to say:


  HIV/Aids is with us in our workplaces, in our classrooms and our lecture
  halls. It is there in our church gatherings and other religious
  functions. HIV/Aids walks with us, it travels with us wherever we go. It
  is there when we play sport, it is there when we sing and dance. Many of
  us have grieved for orphans left with no one to fend for them. We have
  experienced Aids in the groans of wasting lives. We have carried it in
  small and big coffins to many graveyards. At times we did not know that
  we were burying people who had died from Aids. At other times we knew but
  chose to remain silent.

Mrs S V KALYAN: Madam Speaker, the HIV/Aids epidemic is dominating health
delivery in South Africa, and this is placing a severe strain on health
treatment facilities.

So it is indeed a positive sign that the amount of money allocated for
HIV/Aids has increased dramatically. In fact, it has almost tripled in the
recent budget, and at least 75% of these funds are being channelled to
provinces.

But the real test lies in whether the Minister will actually allow
provinces to use their own discretion when spending this money on HIV/Aids
programmes. It is a well-known fact that the Minister of Health has control
issues and that she always wants to have the final say. Two good examples
are KwaZulu-Natal and Gauteng. When these two provinces decided to roll out
nevirapine, based on the Health Systems Trust report, she literally threw
her toys out of the cot. [Interjections.]

Which brings me to her dogged refusal to roll out nevirapine nationwide,
despite an order by the High Court of Pretoria. She went on national TV and
made a public declaration that she had every intention of breaking the law
and would not comply with the court order. The Minister was riding a wave
of either bravado or utter foolishness! I leave it to members' imagination
to decide which.

The Minister has shifted ground repeatedly on the issue of nevirapine. In a
speech in November 1999, the Minister of Health acknowledged the safety of
nevirapine. With this in mind, 18 pilot sites were established and the
recent HST report, commissioned by the Minister, stated categorically that
there are no good reasons for delaying a phased expansion of PMTCT services
in all provinces.
So it was with much surprise that we witnessed the Minister's defence at
the appeal in the Constitutional Court roll out yet again the same tired
old arguments of toxicity, cost, registration, efficacy and lack of
infrastructure.

Actually, the Department of Health raised odd grounds of opposition in the
Constitutional Court, and at some stage in the proceedings there was even a
denial by the Minister's lawyer that the Minister of Health actually
represented national Government. I think there may be some truth to that,
because this Minister's attitude on the whole issue of nevirapine is
certainly not reflective of some of her colleagues in Cabinet. She is
definitely batting on her own here. [Applause.]

If the Minister is worried about the cost of antiretrovirals, perhaps she
should take note of the DP's proposal to declare HIV/Aids a national
emergency. This will allow South Africa to produce generic equivalents at a
fraction of the cost. But, of course, the Minister in her arrogance has
stated that she will not take advice from the DP. [Applause.]

One wonders, though, whether she will emulate Zimbabwe's action. Zimbabwe,
in the face of its own health crisis, has declared a six-month national
emergency and suspended import restrictions on drugs to treat HIV/Aids.

Let us go back to the Minister's control issues. The annual antenatal
report is researched annually between October and December and usually due
for release by March.

The Director-General for Health told the portfolio committee in April that
the report was ready, awaiting the Minister's approval before release. To
date, this report has not been released, and the question to ask is: Why?
The public has a right to know the state of the nation's health, but the
Minister of Health decides otherwise.

The Minister keeps saying that she is waiting for more research and
groundwork. The reality is that while she procrastinates on delivery,
hundreds of South Africans who might have lived long will have died because
of the Minister's inertia and lack of an adequate response by the South
African Government. Three years into the portfolio, all the groundwork
should be completed. We have an abundance of resources, both human and
financial, to promote and sustain a good health system, but to no avail.
The failure of our health system must lie squarely on the shoulders of the
Minister of Health. She has failed to pick up the ball and run with it, and
as long as she stands still and dithers, we will face a health crisis in
our country.

The goal of the Department of Health to provide quality of health to all
South Africans and achieve transformation of the health system in South
Africa has not been achieved to date. [Applause.]

Mr O S B BALOYI: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, and hon members, HIV/Aids
remains the most serious challenge facing the country and the health
services. The Department of Health envisages that the strategy for an
enhanced response to HIV/Aids and sexually transmitted infections will
complement the HIV/Aids Sexually Transmitted Disease Strategic Plan for
2000-05, which was launched in June.

A lot of work has gone into the establishment of structures in South Africa
to address HIV/Aids. I shall not go through the list. It is indeed a very
long list. Those structures total about 24, stretching from the Cabinet
right up to the Aids and STD directorate of the Department of Health.

The guiding principles in this document map out a brilliant strategic plan
with well-defined priority areas, namely, prevention, treatment, care and
support, research, monitoring and evaluation and human and legal rights.
This a good document with detailed action plans. It is a matter of concern,
however, that despite the establishment of these structures, role clarity
and relationship remain a problem. These sectors continue to work in a
disjointed manner. It is no wonder, therefore, that the HIV infection rate
continues to worsen as we speak.
The budget shows, for example, that conditional grants have risen from
R54,19 million to R157,2 million. The grant to my province, KwaZulu-Natal,
for example, has risen from R13,92 million to R39,26 million. Although this
may look like a sizeable increase, it should be remembered that KwaZulu-
Natal has undertaken to roll-out the mother-to-child-transmission programme
within the shortest possible time.

The provincial department of health, in its presentation last month to the
Portfolio Committee for Health, estimated that, this financial year, the
MTCT programme alone will cost the department upwards of R131 million. We
trust, therefore, that the department of health in KwaZulu-Natal will have
those funds made available to them.

It is further a matter of concern that, according to national Health, the
roll-out of the MTCT programme in other provinces has to wait until
December 2002. It is hoped, therefore, that strategic plans with clear
timetables, implementation programmes and budgets are now available to
inform the roll-out of this programme.

I am also aware that KwaZulu-Natal has a very sizeable component of trained
community health workers who are capable of being used to good effect, even
in this MTCT programme. NGOs can also be used as role-players. Our concern,
however, is that the budget on NGOs, which is about R50,5 million
countrywide, will be insufficient for this purpose. The Cabinet committee
itself, in its pronouncement of 17 April 2002, pledged to assist families
affected by the HIV/Aids epidemic. The amount of R94,5 million allocated
for this programme is appreciated. We trust that the department, at
national and provincial level, will be able to strengthen and support home-
based and community-based care. We also trust that the Department of Social
Development will, without delay, work closely with the Department of Health
to address the problem of Aids orphans, child-headed families and grants
for persons who have full-blown Aids.

The IFP welcomes the Cabinet decision to make treatment available to rape
victims. The high and shocking levels of rape demand that this service be
available. It is imperative that the department finalises the guidelines
for the use of antiretrovirals as post-exposure prophylaxis for rape. We
hope that the standardised national protocols are now in place as promised.

The challenge for this House is to review all the legal provisions to
protect the infected and the affected. If some Acts need to be amended,
certainly we must do this urgently. We must change the focus from desiring
to protect people's privacy to desiring to protect people's lives, even
within the present constitutional provisions.

The IFP supports the budget. [Applause.]

Mrs M M MALUMISE: Madam Speaker, and hon members, I would like to take a
few seconds to address the hon Kalyan on the issue of HIV/Aids being
declared a national emergency by the DP. That is very wrong. The ANC long
ago took that stance, for her information.

Our health system has undergone substantial transformation. This has
included the redesigning of the public health system, the reshaping of the
relationship between the public and private sectors, and the redistribution
and reprioritisation of health services.

In spite of the sheer magnitude of the reform process, the complexity of
the interrelationships and the substantial stakeholder interest which makes
implementation of our new system difficult, we have persevered. We are
getting value for our money. Paramount among our achievements is the switch
from institutionalised hospital-based care to primary health care. Our
major success has been in changing the paradigm and getting people to fully
embrace primary health care. Although we have strained under the weight of
dramatic and unprecedented transformation, stability and sound
administration have now been achieved.

Within the Health budget, we have been able to track the progressive shift
towards the reprioritisation of health services. Another important facet of
the health system involves the development of the district health system.
Although this has been a difficult and complex process, once complete,
primary health care will be rendered in a more effective and accountable
manner.

The Department of Health, together with the provinces, is embarking on a
policy of creating hospitals which are autonomous in terms of management
and administration, but accountable in relation to how the money is spent.
This will encourage better management of physical and human resources, and
will ultimately give better value for our money. It will create incentives
for hospitals to remain within their budgets and for them to manage their
capital expenditures in a more effective manner.

A key principle underlying all of current health policy is that of
reinforcing equity or fairness. This is intended to ensure that, where
health care is concerned, people will be allowed, as far as possible, to
contribute financially towards the health system according to their means,
and to use services according to their needs.

To achieve this objective, a range of mechanisms and strategies have been
adopted. At national level, the achievements of this Government include
ground-breaking legislation that took on some of the strongest interest
groups, such as those from the pharmaceutical and tobacco industries, with
the aim of making medicines available more cheaply to South Africans, and
minimising the devastation and health risks associated with smoking.

We saw the DP coming on board at the eleventh hour to support the medicines
control amending legislation, three years after it had been passed. But, as
the saying goes: better late than never.

Within the private sector we had to reregulate the medical schemes. The
former government did this country a great disservice. It allowed medical
aid schemes to discriminate against members on the basis of their health
status - a principle which is forbidden virtually in all health systems in
the world. The opposition parties had a chance to redeem themselves but
they voted against this Bill.

The opposition's approach to social policy continues to be to separate,
discriminate against and treat differently those who cannot fight back. The
DP have abdicated their social responsibility towards the people of this
country by placating commercial interests that have been tearing our health
system apart. Sies! It is nauseating to witness them, especially when they
champion those medical schemes which conduct their business as if health is
a profit commodity. [Interjections.]

Over the past few years the ANC has received much criticism for its
reforms, especially in the health sector. That the DP and its latest allies
even dare to comment, demonstrates the arrogance of a party without insight
and foresight. For the record, virtually all the enormous challenges that
are facing the Government were created by those sitting in the opposition
benches. Why do we say this? We say it because we inherited a distorted,
inequitable, inefficient and inaccessible health system. Today, whilst we
are fighting to reduce the gap between the haves and have-nots, it is
parties like the DP who still want to give heart transplants to the rich
while thousands of our people are dying of preventable and curable
diseases. Do we hear the DP advocating for the expansion of primary health
care?

Mr W J SEREMANE: No.

Mrs M M MALUMISE: Yes, you are right. Why? As if this was not enough, we
inherited a health system which had no information system; no acceptable
reporting systems and no financial management system; a backward stock
control system for everything from equipment to drugs; hopeless security;
demoralised and inadequate hospital management; and many other problems.
The list is not just long, it is very long. Today, do we hear the DP
acknowledging that we have come a long way and have made significant
progress in these areas? No. [Interjections.] But, we do not need their
accolades because we know that we can do the job.

The UDM member who spoke here should have listened properly to what the
Minister said. The following paragraph that I am going to read is going to
address the member's concern: ``When we look at physical planning, we find
that our public hospitals were allowed to deteriorate to the extent that we
now have to spend R8 billion just to keep them in good standing''. Do we
hear the DP acknowledging that this Government is putting money into the
revitalisation and rehabilitation of our hospitals, to the tune of R3,8
billion in three years? No, they only nag. What they know is just to nag,
nag and nag all the time. They are making us sick. But, our people know
differently because they can see change for the better.

As we continue to expand our vision for better health, we realise that we
will achieve more with the help of our communities. The ANC knows that
rebuilding South Africa is a partnership between all levels of government
and communities. Those members must listen. [Interjections.] I am talking
about the April letsema. Does that member know what a letsema is? Our
continuation thereof underlines the importance of us as political parties
not merely sitting on our high horses and criticising, as those members are
doing, but actually working in partnership with our people.
[Interjections.]

Members must listen to this one. In the Free State and other parts of the
country we launched successful food gardens. We supported community home-
based care for people who are infected with HIV/Aids, and conscientised our
people about HIV/Aids, the importance of immunisation for children, and so
on. We have been busy mobilising our people, not for votes, like those
members do. We are mobilising people around hope, not around despair and
not for votes. We are growing on the strength of our people to sustain us
and make us even stronger in our belief that all our people deserve a
quality life.

This Government has come a long way. We have made gigantic strides in
improving conditions for our people. We have introduced TB programmes that
work. We have introduced a new procurement and distribution system for
drugs, implemented an essential drug list to reduce drug costs and reduced
past inappropriate purchasing of drugs. We have upgraded clinics and built
clinics where they never existed before. We have turned years of
destruction into seven years of achievement. [Applause.] [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Madam Speaker, I am conscious of the fact that I
only have five minutes. I am therefore going to be very brief.

Okokuqala, ngicela ukubonga wonke amalungu ePhalamende akhulumile
namhlanje, ikakhulukazi lawo akhulume ngendlela eyakhayo. Ngicela ukusho
ukuthi kukhona amalungu ePhalamende aphindaphinda izinto osekukudala
sikhuluma ngazo. Enye yezimbangela zalokho ukuthi awayihambeli imihlangano
yekomidi. [Firstly, I would like to thank all members of Parliament who
have spoken today, especially those who spoke in a constructive manner. I
would like to mention that there are members of Parliament who keep
repeating things that we have been talking about for a long time. One of
the reasons is that they do not attend committee meetings.]

So, they come here and ask questions that have been asked and answered in
the committee meetings.

Njengoba-ke mina ngimfushane, angithandi neze ukumosa isikhathi sami.
Mayelana naleyo mibuzo engingakwazi ukuyiphendula manje, sesiyohlangana
ekomidini, siyiphendule khona futhi.

ILUNGU ELIHLONIPHEKILE: Ningabashayi.

UNGQONGQOSHE: Cha, ngeke ngibashaye. Mayelana nabanye abakade bekhuluma
lapha umuntu akazi ngisho nokuthi yini okufanele ayiphendule ngoba
izinkulumo zabo bezingenaluhlonze ngendlela yokuthi umuntu ngeke akwazi
ukusho lutho ngazo, ikakhulukazi kulolu hlangothi lweNdlu.

Enye into engifuna ukukhuluma ngayo ukuthi ngifisa sengathi uDkt Luthuli
noDkt Rabinowitz, njengoba bengabantu abavela KwaZulu-Natali, bengake
bethathe le ndoda bahambe behla benyuka nayo KwaZulu-Natali ukuze ibone
ukuthi kwenzekani. Akufanele ize lapha izokhuluma izinto engazazi. Amalungu
azoyibona ukuthi uma sesisuka la, izohamba iye kodla amanzi amponjwana.
Yiwona-ke lowo umsebenzi owenziya iyona. [Uhleko.] (Translation of Zulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Because I am short of time I do not want to waste it. Regarding those
questions that I cannot answer now, let us meet in the committee meetings
and we will answer them there.

HON MEMBER: Do not sleep there.

The MINISTER: No we will not sleep. Regarding the questions that have been
asked by others, really I do not know what to say because their speeches
have no theme; so much so that one cannot say anything about them,
especially the speeches which came from this side of the House.

Another thing that I want to say is that I wish Dr Luthuli and Dr
Rabinowitz, as people who come from KwaZulu-Natal, could take this man and
go up and down with him, showing him so that he can see what is happening.
He must not come here and talk about things that he does not understand.
Members will see, as he walks from here, he will go and drink a beer. That
is the job that he is doing. [Laughter.]]

In closing, I would really like to thank the Portfolio Committee on Health
of the National Assembly, and the Select Committee on Social Services of
the NCOP, for their constructive interest and, particularly, for the
perspective which they bring through their work in their constituencies.

My interaction with the chairpersons, the hon Mr Ngculu and the hon
Jacobus, is especially valuable. I would also like to express my
appreciation to my political colleagues, to President Thabo Mbeki who has
made time to attend key health events, to members of the Cabinet and more
especially my colleagues in the social cluster, to the MECs for Health of
the nine provinces and our counterparts in local government.

It is at times such as these that I find myself thinking of our colleague,
the late former Minister Steve Tshwete. His commitment to duty remains an
inspiration to me. He featured very large in my political life, from our
time in exile as a comrade, an advisor and an infallible source of
strength.

The Ministry enjoys a co-operative relationship with South African military
health services, and particularly with Surgeon-General Van Rensburg. I am
deeply honoured by their decision to accord me the rank of colonel in the
service. [Applause.]

Special mention should be made of our international partners for both their
financial and technical assistance, as well as for their spirit of
solidarity. In addition to the African agreements mentioned earlier, we
also signed agreements and declarations of intent with China, India,
Tunisia, Algeria and Brazil.
I also wish to extend my thanks to the health statutory bodies and to the
officials of the department, especially our Director-General Dr Ayanda
Ntsaluba. Perhaps my deepest appreciation should go to personnel in the
Ministry, especially my advisers. I also wish to thank my husband, comrade
Mendi Msimang, my family and my household support staff. I particularly
miss Sonto Dlangalala, my Pretoria housekeeper, who passed away earlier
this year.

As I take my seat, I would like to say to the nation's health service
providers that we - and I am sure I speak on behalf of this Assembly -
salute them and continue to expect only the best from them. Just before I
came here I visited the Red Cross Hospital, to bid farewell to Zinzi and
Zanele who will be leaving for Port Elizabeth tomorrow. As members will
recall, on 17 April these co-joined twins were successfully separated in an
operation that took 19 hours. [Applause.] They look healthy and bouncy. The
mother is very excited. We wish them well and we will see them in PE.
[Applause.]
Debate concluded.
                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 20 - Correctional Services.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Madam Speaker, hon members, our
national Commissioner Mr Linda Mti, our provincial commissioners who are
here today, members of the management of Correctional Services at all
levels, members of the judiciary and all stakeholders in partnership with
Correctional Services, in August 2000 a Correctional Services symposium,
attended by a wide range of role-players, focused on the following
objectives: To develop a clearly articulated national strategy to attain
the desired fundamental transformation of Correctional Services; to create
a common understanding of the purpose of the correctional system; to create
a firm foundation for coherent and cohesive role-playing by all sectors of
society; and to achieve a national consensus on the human development and
rehabilitation of all prisoners and their integration into the community as
productive and law-abiding citizens.
However, this task was arduous and it became very clear that due to the
lack of leadership and the legacy of the old management and leadership
style, the Department of Correctional Services was inadequately equipped to
pursue these objectives with the clear purpose and commitment it required.
Therefore, the President promised South Africans a reinvigorated senior
management, capable of transforming the department into a well-managed and
strategically focused entity, exhibiting good governance and appropriate to
the new vision of Correctional Services in a democratic South Africa.

Delivery on this promise began with the appointment of Mr Linda Mti as
Commissioner of Correctional Services in August 2001, and was reinforced
with appointments to long vacant posts in March 2002. I wish to inform
those who commented on representativity when we were here last year, that
women have now staked their claim in the senior management of Correctional
Services.

The past year has been auspicious for Correctional Services. I can
confidently say that the department is gearing itself on all fronts for
service delivery on its legal mandate, safe and secure custody, under
humane conditions, effective correctional supervision and rehabilitation of
offenders. But the department still faces fundamental challenges that must
be successfully addressed in the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework if the
current progress is to be sustainable.

An amount of about R6,8 billion is therefore being required to meet these
challenges during the current financial year. An amount of R4,5 billion,
which represents about 66,26% of the total budget, will go towards human
resources, as we are a labour-intensive department.

Whilst rehabilitation is now at the centre of our core business, we have
not yet achieved a common understanding throughout the department of what
we mean by rehabilitation, not that we do not know. A rehabilitation
concept document is currently being enriched within the department.
Rehabilitation is a voluntary process aimed at getting an offender to
assume responsibility for his or her life through active participation in
the rehabilitation process. It is an integral part of the sentence
experience, whether served in prison or the community, covering physical,
mental, spiritual, educational, work and recreational dimensions. All of
this is geared towards contributing to the rehabilitative mindset of the
offender. The department will spend an amount of about R353 million on
rehabilitation programmes during the current financial year, which
represents an increase of only 1% over the previous year. Nevertheless,
this is an increase.

Long-term success in rehabilitation requires changing the wealth gap in
South Africa as it is a major contributing factor to crime, eradicating
violence as a lifestyle of choice, and changing socioeconomic conditions
that put people at risk of criminality. At present there are three key
elements of Correctional Services that militate against this. These are
overcrowding, inappropriate recruitment of staff and a lack of retraining
of current staff in the new paradigm, as well as corruption and crime by
some of our Correctional Services members inside prisons and in the
department.

I must say, we have targeted these issues and they are in our sights. By
the end of the MTEF, we intend to proudly say that these obstacles to
rehabilitation have been reduced to manageable proportions, if not
eradicated.

If it is true, as someone once remarked, that the success of any democracy
can be measured by the state of its prisons, then our democracy still has a
long way go. The conditions in our prisons are far from satisfactory.
Overcrowding violates the human rights of offenders and results in the
overextension of our staff; crammed, poor and unhealthy living conditions
for offenders; and increased tension, aggression and sexual violence in
prison. These conditions are not conducive to rehabilitation. Therefore
this cannot be approached as a long-term project, but must be solved in the
current MTEF period.

South Africa had 178 998 people in prison at the end March 2002, with a
prison capacity of 109 106 prisoners. A large cause of overcrowding is the
55 500 awaiting-trial and awaiting-sentence prisoners, in other words pre-
sentence prisoners, although for the first time there is a decrease in the
2001 annual average when compared to 1999 and 2000. Alternative
accommodation of pre-sentence prisoners would not remove overcrowding, but
it would reduce overcrowding to a more manageable scenario.

More than a third of pre-sentence prisoners pose no threat to society and
are in prison merely because they are unable to afford bail. The cost to
the state of keeping them in jail is about R2 million a day, and the cost
to their families and to them as people is also unbearable.

Various mechanisms utilised to address the size of the pre-sentence
prisoner population between the justice, crime prevention and security
departments should be intensified. Some of these are to make greater use of
bail at police stations; plea bargaining and the payment of admission-of-
guilt fines; pre-trial diversion from the criminal justice system; better
information to determine bail suitability and conditions; expediting trials
through Saturday courts; the integrated justice system awaiting-trial
prisoner project; new justice centres; courts in prisons; better tracking
of prisoners for court appearances; preferential scheduling of trials
involving prisoners; the roll-out of section 63A, referring to release due
to prison conditions, which is happening in Western Cape and Gauteng
prisons, with Limpopo an obvious target to follow; and lastly, maximal use
of police holding cells for accommodating awaiting-trial prisoners.

The transfer of prisoners to prisons built under the Asset Procurement and
Operating Partnership System, commonly known as APOPS, continues according
to national Treasury guidelines to transfer the risk of accommodating high-
risk, maximum-security offenders from Government. Overcrowding is
contractually prevented in APOPS prisons, thus leaving the Department of
Correctional Services with the full burden of the overcrowding problem.

We have therefore set up an ongoing Department of Correctional Services
task team to decrease overcrowding on a day-to-day basis and to make
strategic recommendations to the Departments of Justice, Crime Prevention
and Security. Since the causes of overcrowding do not lie in the hands of
the Department of Correctional Services alone, the department has requested
the establishment of a justice, crime prevention and security overcrowding
task group that will resolve the cross-cutting responsibilities for
overcrowding, find longer-term solutions for Cabinet to deliberate on and
monitor the criminal justice processes in order to proactively address
generators of overcrowding.

The department's building programme is continuing. The Renovations and
Maintenance Programme, known as RAMP, on old prisons is making in-roads
into the conditions, particularly in prisons in the Eastern Cape. There are
plans to upgrade Tzaneen Prison to be a permanent brick-and-mortar
building.
We are drawing to a close on the 1994-97 prison-building programme and are
moving away from an infrastructure that is inappropriate to deliver on unit
management and rehabilitation.

The new generation design of prison that places emphasis on cost-effective
facilities, open facilities and unit management facilities will bear fruit
in three new prisons, that is Kimberley, Leeuwkop and Klerksdorp, that will
house another 9 000 prisoners.

We therefore plan to spend an amount of R1,3 billion during the current
financial year under Facility Management and Capital Works. This is 28%
more than our expenditure in the previous financial year.

The Department of Correctional Services faces a major recruitment and
training challenge. The shift from a punitive approach to addressing
recidivism, to one focused on humane detention in order to facilitate
rehabilitation of offenders, poses some problems for staff. Staff must
understand the effect of incarceration experiences on people. Our custodial
officials must be able to assist to restore or instil the values of human
rights, of human dignity and of caring for offenders incarcerated in our
care.

Those who have been trained as disciplinarians have to become caregivers
and guides of the lives that we are entrusted with. Every member who has a
direct interface with offenders either contributes to rehabilitation or
detracts from it. Our human resource development capacity still needs to be
equipped to deliver on this challenge. It is therefore our intention to
develop the Department of Correctional Services into an employer of choice.
Therefore, we intend spending R52 million to be adequately equipped to meet
this challenge.

As already indicated, the Department of Correctional Services is
beleaguered by the criminal activities of a component of staff - very
small, I must say - which is the third leg of our obstacles.

While there are staff members in our prisons whose criminal behaviour keeps
the wounds of corruption, substance abuse, sexual violence and crime inside
our prisons festering, rehabilitation cannot prevail. In the previous
financial year, up to March 2002, 236 reports on corruption were received
through the hotline for whistle-blowing in the Department of Correctional
Services. As a result, 23 officials have been dismissed, 76 officials
disciplined and 14 officials criminally convicted.

Propelled into action by the murder of a senior manager in Pietermaritzburg
last year, I requested the President to establish an independent
investigation. The President appointed Judge Thabani Jali to investigate
corruption, maladministration, violence and intimidation in nine management
areas. We have received the first two interim reports on Westville Prison,
and, in consultation with the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development, we will appoint a retired judge to head the internal
investigations on these recommendations.

The appropriate investigative and prosecutorial authorities have received
the reports for criminal investigation. The Jali Commission has moved on to
Pietermaritzburg, while simultaneously following up on other information
received.

Our National Commissioner is also ensuring that the response to the interim
recommendations results in the development of a sustainable and clean
investigative and disciplinary capacity within the department, to ensure
that internal regulatory policies are complied with, and that corruption,
gross negligence and crime are eradicated from the fabric of the
department.

But no investigative unit can solve the situation alone. I am therefore
asking management to ensure an appropriate style of management to close the
space for criminal activity and corruption within our department, because I
believe also that the Department of Correctional Services has a unique
niche in moral regeneration - we have a bigger role to play there. I
therefore call on Correctional Services' members to claim the moral high
ground of the department's mandate, and to adopt a zero-tolerance approach
to crime, violence and corruption no matter what the source is.

It has become clear that there are many systemic and structural obstacles
to efficient, effective and economic delivery on Mvelaphanda, the strategic
plan that must now be implemented. The department has therefore tendered
for consultants to investigate business processes, systems and structures.
This ``Gearing the Department of Correctional Services for Rehabilitation''
project will enable me to craft a department that can really deliver on our
mandate. It is therefore my intention to take the outcome of this process
to Cabinet for endorsement.

The ``Gearing the Department of Correctional Services for Rehabilitation''
project will also develop an approach to enhancing how each basic work unit
functions. The challenge is to focus on every component, no matter what its
location, title or function, in order to strengthen the department's
capacity for rehabilitation.
The Department of Correctional Services will revisit the White Paper as an
ongoing part of the policy development process and as a by-product of the
``Gearing the Department of Correctional Services for Rehabilitation''
process. The process will consolidate the consultation that has taken place
with communities, NGOs, educational institutions and other stakeholders
over the past few years.

The organisational culture that the Department of Correctional Services has
had, and in many cases still has, does not augur well for our core
business. The department needs a new culture that combines an attitude of
serving with excellence, and a caring and principled way of relating to
other people, be they offenders, the community or colleagues.

The Department of Correctional Services cannot yet be proud of our
financial management. We have had an unfortunately close relationship with
Scopa over the years - which was a very rough one.

Systematic work to tighten financial accountability, to train nonfinancial
managers on the Public Finance Management Act, and to ensure that the
financial systems result in improved financial management is being
conducted with the support of a dedicated audit committee and close
interaction with the Auditor-General's Office.

The Department of the Public Service and Administration and the Public
Service Commission reports on the Department of Correctional Services have
been carefully studied and steps taken to address the issues highlighted in
them. One of these initiatives is Operation Vukuza, which is aimed at
improving financial control, accountability and management at various
levels. The improvement of the internal audit capacity with appropriate
evaluation instruments to boost the tightening of controls within the
Department of Correctional Services is also an urgent requirement.

Whilst a multidisciplinary assessment tool to generate profiles of each
prisoner on admission to prison is used, and appropriate development
programmes to assist in the rehabilitation of offenders in both the prison
and community correction environments are taking place, the production
projects contribute to rehabilitation through providing skills to
offenders.

The agricultural, wood, steel and textile production projects continue to
produce against a set of target objectives, which are well met by
agricultural production, and wood and steel workshops. For instance, 17
Government departments have utilised the production projects of the
Department of Correctional Services during the past financial year, and
with upgraded marketing of our products, this can surely be extended. The
department continues to explore how these projects can be extended to
partnerships with other departments and institutions. These workshops and
production units can play a role in facilitating the reintegration of
offenders into the community.

Prisons, as a microcosm of South African society, reflect a significant
number of people without literacy skills and functional literacy. We
believe literacy is a foundation stone in rehabilitation, and therefore the
Department of Correctional Services has positioned itself to provide adult
basic education and training programmes. We aim to educate and train more
than 11 000 prisoners in Abet programmes and issue nationally recognised
certificates at this level in the current MTEF cycle. This constitutes
about 9% of the total sentenced prison population.

The last of the 14 planned skills training centres are nearing completion
in Polokwane, Odi, Johannesburg and Bethal. Training in basic technical
skills, as well as business skills, is provided at these centres. The
Department of Correctional Services also aims to train 11 500 prisoners in
basic occupational skills, and 7 800 in business skills in the current MTEF
cycle.

Embongweni, the Kokstad maximum security prison, officially opened last
week by the Deputy President, will serve as an admission and orientation
prison for serious violent offenders. It provides South Africa with a
prison appropriate for accommodating those who choose to put the community,
other inmates, Correctional Services members and law enforcement officers
at risk, and who are disruptive of rehabilitation in other prisons.

It is our intention critically to evaluate the implementation of the
rehabilitation approach in Embongweni to refine our approach for other
prisons. I must pause here to say that I am sure that hon members have been
reading in some of the newspapers in KwaZulu-Natal that we spent R2,4
million on a bash in opening that prison. This is a basic untruth, because
the amount that we spent there was about R25 000, with related costs. The
allegation that we spent R2,4 million is a fabrication of a callous mind. I
do not know what kind of propaganda that is, and what its intention is, but
it is a basic untruth.

HIV/Aids in prisons is an issue of deep concern. Prisoners tend to come
from a high-risk sector of our population, and enter prisons where current
conditions and offender behaviour, including violence and sexual violence,
can result in both HIV transmission and HIV becoming full-blown Aids.

Since no HIV prevalence survey has been conducted in South African prisons,
it is not possible scientifically to answer the burning question on the
extent of Aids in prisons. The antenatal survey of the Department of Health
of 2000 puts the HIV prevalence in South Africa at 24,5%. Therefore, the
recent speculation bandied about of a 60% infection rate in prisons is
highly questionable.

Our HIV/Aids policy has been presented to the Minister of Health, the
Deputy President and the core group of the SA National Aids Committee, or
Sanac, and we are entering the implementation stage of that policy. This
includes health awareness and health education; condom provision; voluntary
testing and counselling; screening for early treatment; management of
opportunistic diseases and sexually transmitted infections; discharge of
terminally ill prisoners; and management of information and reporting
systems, research and ongoing policy development.

The department will spend R586 million on general health provision and
physical care needs for offenders, who have increased in number over the
past year. This year's figure represents a 4,95% increase over last year's
figure.

The Department of Correctional Services is moving to study conditions in
communities of origin of offenders. The poverty levels, the world that
surrounds these communities, raptor-like crime bosses who target these
communities, and, increasingly, the youth, put poverty alleviation at the
centre of crime prevention in South Africa and therefore relates to our
responsibility.

This year's poverty alleviation programme took off in April when the Deputy
President and I launched a project at Zonderwater Prison, where the
offenders grow food for poor communities around. Offenders in Thohoyandou
have built additional classrooms and renovated Mutshalingana primary
school. We are also exploring how farm projects can assist in providing
sustainable support to the Departments of Health, and Agriculture and Land
Affairs for the food gardens programme. We are also concerned to ensure
that poverty alleviation is sustainable and not based on periodic handouts.

Poverty alleviation projects aim to draw the community closer to our
programmes of rehabilitation and develop a role for Correctional Services
in both urban renewal and rural development. The department has been
preparing for the implementation of decision-making parole boards with
community representation through the formulation of new regulations, the
identification of locations of the roving and nonroving boards, and
addressing staffing and logistical requirements. Judge Desai, as
chairperson of the National Council for Correctional Services, will, in the
near future, be involved with establishing the criteria for selection of
candidates from the community and setting up new parole boards throughout
the country. The new boards will be a significant monitoring mechanism over
sentence planning, case management within prisons, and reintegration
planning for parolees.

Partnerships with the community have also been extended to other
programmes, as we wish to establish strong alliances with the community in
ensuring the rehabilitation of criminals, and that they will pose no threat
to society upon their release. Partnerships with other civil society groups
are also being pursued to achieve this objective.

The Department of Correctional Services is a civilianised, hierarchical
security organ in which the ability to distinguish between staff, offenders
and the public, and between the levels in the chain of authority, is
necessary. We have also found it necessary to strengthen the corporate
culture and image of the department. We have finalised the proposed uniform
for Correctional Services members, and we have combined insignia that both
indicate the function and the post level of the wearer. We will present
this to the parliamentary committees and the National Council of
Correctional Services in due course.

Members will recall that I extended the term of office of the current
members of the National Council of Correctional Services. The council,
under the leadership of Judge Desai, continues to advise me on policy-
related matters. I would like to express my sincere appreciation to the
members of the council who, despite extremely busy schedules, find time to
attend to the work of the department and are proud, albeit critical,
friends of the department.

The judicial inspectorate under Judge Fagan has ensured a steady flow of
reports on the visits of prisons. The Annual Report of the Inspecting Judge
for 2001-02 has already been presented to the portfolio committee, to the
President and to me. We value enormously the sterling work done by the men
and women who serve as independent prison visitors, as well as the
leadership and hard work of Judge Fagan.

We have continued to sustain and develop international contacts in order to
share experiences and learn from best practices of others at correctional
systems. We have drawn from the experiences of Canada, the United States
and the United Kingdom in relation to prison design, unit management and
restorative justice.

We are developing closer relations with other developing nations in order
to benefit from their experiences and to find solutions to our specific
needs. Recently we joined a delegation led by the Department of Foreign
Affairs to Burundi and interacted with the Burundi head of corrections. Out
of this context, we envisage that training of Burundian correctional
management and custodial officials within South Africa may be considered.

I have also taken the initiative to try to convene a meeting of Southern
African ministers responsible for correctional services. It is my hope that
this meeting will begin to close an unfortunate gap in the multilateral
forums of the Southern African Development Community when it comes to
correctional matters.

Later this month South Africa is to host an extraordinary meeting of the
Commissioners of Eastern, Southern and Central Africa, or Cesca, to
consider strengthening correctional services interaction within Africa and
the provision of secretarial support for Cesca. The Department of
Correctional Services is responsible for the Cesca secretariat for two
years, and will aim to facilitate closer government-to-government
correctional services working relations through the African Union, and
particularly within the Southern African region.

In conclusion, I would like to express my profound gratitude to the
Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services for the guidance and
encouragement with which they have provided us during the past financial
year. It is my hope and belief that we shall continue to enjoy this support
during the current and future financial years. The wisdom, I must say, and
the empathy of the hon member Ben Fihla, who is the former chairperson of
the committee, will be sorely missed. To him I say: Siyabonga, Tata. [Thank
you, Sir.]

We welcome the new chairperson, Mr Ntshiki Mashimbye. We wish to express
our full confidence in his abilities, and trust that he will steer the ship
of Correctional Services in the direction which yields the results which
can only be in the best interests of the department. Siyacela kuTata. [We
beseech him.]

Lastly and finally, I wish to thank the management and staff of the
Department of Correctional Services at all levels, including all officials,
wherever they are. The greatest resource that any establishment can ever
have is its people. The coming years will only benefit the nation if all of
us pull together in the same direction. Let us use the weakness of the past
as a stepping stone to higher heights and resolve that together we shall
build a better Department of Correctional Services. [Applause.]

Mr J N MASHIMBYE: Madam Speaker, I have spent eight years in this
Parliament. When I first arrived in 1994 I was the youngest. I am no longer
the youngest.

The past eight years, I must say, have been very educational. It was a
wonderful eight years, but I think my future stay here in Parliament will
be even more challenging. The past four weeks, since I was appointed as
chairman of the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services, have been
very educational. The members of the portfolio committee have taken me
through a meticulous, informative and helpful process for me to understand
the issues in and around Correctional Services. [Interjections.] That is
right. That is fine as well.

I also wish to note the attendance in the National Assembly of key members
of the security cluster. I see the Deputy Minister of Defence, Minister
Sisulu and Minister Maduna. I think their attendance of the debate on
Correctional Services is very important, because Correctional Services is
the outpost of the justice system. It is the reservoir of a working,
successful justice system. So I am delighted at the attendance of the
Ministers. It augurs well for the workings of the cluster within Government
and within the political party to which I belong.

I am happy to report that in the past 30 days, since I was appointed, the
very first thing we sought to do was to invite all the stakeholders in
Correctional Services, from NGOs to human rights institutions, all
stakeholders that can contribute constructively and positively to
strengthening policy formulation in Correctional Services. We have gained a
lot from them and we will be putting the common approaches and ideas we
shared to good use, to make sure that our policy at Correctional Services
is the best and compatible with the new dispensation.

As hon members will understand, being new in Correctional Services, I had
to start from scratch in order to understand what this portfolio is all
about. So I will start from scratch.

It is nearly two centuries since the concept of incarceration for criminal
offenders was employed for the purpose of modifying human behaviour. It has
been at least 150 years since the paternalistic, dictatorial, autocratic
model of prison management was adopted. In all these years there has been
an abiding faith that the prison model would eventually fulfil its
rehabilitative function.

Public safety remains the number one priority of the South African criminal
justice system. The Department of Correctional Services, as one of the key
partners in this approach, will endeavour to focus on prevention as much as
on punishment, while distinguishing between those offenders who need to be
separated from society and those who could be better managed in the
community.

It looks as if in many countries there has been a change in attitudes
towards the use of imprisonment, a growing belief that prison is preferable
to other alternatives. These attitudes can be related to a number of
factors, such as fear of crime; a loss of confidence in the criminal
justice system; disillusionment with treatment measures; and the strength
of retribution and punishment. If this is the case, then what does it say
about any country that finds it necessary to lock up a high proportion of
its people?

Whatever one may think about these issues, a high prison population and
growth in the prison population invariably lead to overcrowding. The richer
countries - which we are not - do manage to build more prisons as the
numbers rise, but somehow there is still overcrowding. Overcrowded prisons
are a flagrant breach of international standards, and with this phenomenon
comes a host of other major problems: Not only restricted living space, but
also poor conditions of hygiene, poor sanitation and less time for outdoor
exercise.

The growing population of prisoners is the greatest influence on the
Department of Correctional Services' outputs and budget. The rapid rise in
the prisoner population has necessitated increased expenditure on providing
accommodation and other services.

The department, which, as I said earlier, is the last outpost in the
integrated justice system, has to ensure that it acquires increased
capacity and new ways of managing the offender population. This includes
the expansion of accommodation capacity, as in the case of the Qalakabusha
Prison in Empangeni and the Devon Pre-release Centre in Pretoria.

Another initiative is the building of two additional prisons, following the
securing of two separate partnership agreements between the public and the
private sectors, the Mangaung Maximum Prison at Bloemfontein and the Kutama-
Sinthumule Prison at Louis Trichardt. Central to the department's strategy
is to significantly increase prison accommodation to reduce overcrowding.

An added advancement in the struggle against overcrowding in our prisons
has been the new application, in terms of section 63A of the Criminal
Procedure Act, which calls for the amendment of bail conditions of certain
prisoners. This is particular to those accused persons where bail is fixed
at under R50 and upwards.

There is a growing awareness amongst South Africans that our current court
system is not always the best means of meting out justice. Our courts are
slow, expensive and at times not the best means of resolving conflict.
Perhaps that is why current initiatives are moving towards a restorative
system of justice. This is based on the belief that everyone affected by
crime, the victim, the offender as well as the community, must all be part
of the solution. Restorative justice puts the emphasis on accountability
rather than punishment and tries to promote healing within the community.

The department intends developing a framework document on restorative
justice within the context of the South African correctional system. Many
correction agencies are exploring using state-of-the-art offender tracking
systems that integrate mainframes, enhancing tracking of inmates from
reception to release. The Department of Correctional Services has also
embarked on an inmate tracking system that is jointly administered and
executed by the Department of Correctional Services, the SA Police Service,
the Department of Justice and the Department of Social Development. This
system captures data at their source, reducing paper and file duplication,
providing data for sharing and increasing data security and integrity.

The Minister referred to something that occurred in the recent past. I am
pleased to see Judge Fagan in the gallery. We did have a discussion on and
around HIV/Aids, and later on the department was asked to come and respond
to those issues. But we have managed to hold a very fruitful discussion
with Judge Fagan and it is my belief that we now do have a common approach.

The draft policy document on the management strategy of HIV/Aids in prisons
outlines the plan the department intends enforcing. Included in this plan
are the various principles and guidelines, such as confidentiality, HIV
testing and counselling, health awareness and information to offenders,
universal precautions, and management of STDs, promotion of rights of
offenders and personnel to protection, and partnership bonds with external
role-players.

An area wherein the department has made commendable effort is that of
rooting out corruption. I have asked my colleague Gert Oosthuizen to refer
in as much detail as possible to that subject. The creation of a culture of
good governance has seen the department take the lead with the appointment
of the Jali Commission. Unspeakable acts of corrupt practices are now being
disclosed. The department thus intends taking this a step further by
developing a risk management plan and a fraud prevention plan to reduce
corruption, crime, malpractices and maladministration within our prison
system, all of which reinforces the vision of the department, that of
striving to be the best in the world in delivering correctional services
with integrity and commitment to excellence.

The Department of Correctional Services has the unfair distinction of being
placed at the receiving end of the criminal justice system. The backlog in
processing cases at the courts results in the Department of Correctional
Services housing the large numbers of awaiting-trial prisoners. The impact
this has on the budget of Correctional Services is very unfortunate and
comes at the expense of developing bigger and better programmes.

Notwithstanding these challenges, though, the department remains committed
to finding solutions. The department is assisted in its challenge by many
unsung heroes. Those unsung heroes to me are the warders within the
Department of Correctional Services. One would agree that it is the least
enviable job. The stress, the environment and the fear of being in close
contact with, in some cases, very hardened criminals is very difficult, I
think.

We should acknowledge warders' efforts and thank them for their commitment.
In our capacities as members here in Parliament, and specifically as
committed members of the portfolio committee, we will strive to assist,
challenge and debate until we reach consensus, that through progressive
management, trained personnel, sound work ethics, performance management
and good governance we will definitely be the best in the world delivering
correctional services.

As a member of the ruling party, the ANC, and as chairman of the portfolio
committee, I have an offer to make to the Minister. That offer is that he
will have behind him a portfolio committee that is critical but
constructive, a portfolio committee that will endeavour to bring all the
stakeholders together in formulating, monitoring and implementing policy.

One of the offers that I make is to make sure Minister Maduna, Minister
Sisulu, Minister Madlala-Routledge, all of them, take seriously within the
peace and stability committee of the ANC, issues of Correctional Services.
As they have their first meeting this Sunday, I will make sure that items
of Correctional Services are on the agenda. I look forward to working with
the Minister and Linda Mti and many members of the management and staff of
Correctional Services. [Applause.]

Mrs P W CUPIDO: Madam Speaker, hon Minister and hon members of the House,
at this point I would like to assure the Minister that I really appreciate
all his good efforts. I acknowledge that. But as a member of an opposition
party I am faced with the realities and I have a role to play.

Correctional Services is indeed a department which is dealing with the
success or failure of the Departments of Justice, and Safety and Security.
I can therefore only stress the importance of ongoing deliberations and
negotiations within the integrated justice system. The growing population
of prisoners is the most important influence on the department's output and
budget.

The average number of prisoners has risen from 140 000 in 1997 and is
expected to increase to 225 000 by 2004. If this projection is correct, we
are facing major instability in this country still to come. This scenario
is by far the hon Minister's biggest challenge. If this New NP-ANC alliance
Government plans as it does to accommodate more prisoners, and the prison
numbers increase to the extent that I have just mentioned, I can tell the
Minister today that he plans to fail the people of this country because he
fails to plan properly. [Interjections.]

Ons moet beplan en begroot om die getalle van misdadigers af te bring.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Mnr D V BLOEM: [Onhoorbaar.]

Mev P W CUPIDO: As ons 'n toename in misdaad voorsien, beteken dit dat
hierdie Nuwe NP-ANC Regering niks voel vir die veiligheid en beskerming van
die publiek in die toekoms nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] Hul sê dan vir my dat die
ekonomie nie gaan groei nie, en dat werkloosheid gaan toeneem. Mense gaan
moor en steel om aan die lewe te bly. [Tussenwerpsels.] Werklose mans sal
as gevolg van ledigheid voortgaan om dogtertjies te verkrag.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

'n Verwagte toename in die misdadigerbevolking sê vir my dat die toekoms in
hierdie land, onder hierdie Nuwe NP-ANC Regering, baie donker lyk.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Hoekom oefen die agb Minister nie druk uit op die geïntegreerde
justisiesisteemvennote nie om misdaad in hierdie land werklik vas te vat,
en om wet en orde te handhaaf om hierdie land 'n veilige plek vir almal te
maak? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[We must plan and budget in order to reduce the number of criminals.
[Interjections.]

Mr D V BLOEM: [Inaudible.]

Mrs P W CUPIDO: If we are anticipating an increase in crime, then this
means that in future the New NP-ANC Government cannot be bothered with the
safety and protection of the public. [Interjections.] Well, they are
telling me that the economy will not grow and that unemployment is on the
increase. People will murder and steal to stay alive. [Interjections.]
Owing to idleness, unemployed men will continue to rape little girls.
[Interjections.] An expected growth in the criminal population tells me
that the future of this country, under this New NP-ANC Government, is
looking very dark. [Interjections.]

Why does the hon the Minister not put some pressure on the integrated
justice system partners to really clamp down on crime in this country, and
to maintain law and order in order to make this country a safe place for
all?]

The budget has grown rapidly between 1998 and 2002, at an average of 9,3%
per annum. How does the Government utilise this increase and the total
budget? This Government has failed the country in many ways since 1994 up
until today. [Interjections.] Believe me when I say: Failure is an
opportunity to begin again more intelligently. Too many failures are due to
lack of persistence and not lack of talent or ability.

Dit help nie ons probeer 'n mooi prentjie na buite skilder nie.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Hierdie Regering konsentreer deesdae op krisisbestuur.
[Tussenwerpsels.] [It is no use painting a nice picture to the outside.
[Interjections.] This Government concentrates on crisis management
nowadays. [Interjections.]]

Whilst the New NP-ANC Government is attacking the DP leaders in the media
for receiving or not receiving a donation of 100 000 Deutschmarks, the Jali
commission of inquiry has been established to investigate corruption,
maladministration and mismanagement in this department. Although the ANC
Government often appoints commissions of inquiry, we seldom see exposure of
the perpetrators of crime involving taxpayers' money.

Let us be honest and look at more facts that cast a shadow over this
department. I thank Judge Fagan for a very comprehensive report which
highlights several concerns.

The budget is still insufficient to meet the enormous demands of this
department. Show me a department that can accomplish less and less with
more and more money and I will show members a failure in the making.

Overcrowding caused by the excessive numbers of awaiting-trial prisoners
remains a major problem. [Interjections.] Listen to this: The statistics as
at 31 December 2001 show us that there are 175 290 prisoners, which means
that four out of every 1000 South Africans are in prison. The UK has one
person in prison per every 4 000, and two thirds of the world's countries
are below one and a half persons per 1000.

South African prisons are 70% overcrowded. Almost one third of our
prisoners, more than 55 000, are awaiting-trial prisoners. [Interjections.]
Overcrowding leads to major problems, which include restricted living
space, poor conditions of sanitation and personal hygiene, the spread of
disease, little outdoor exercise, unsatisfactory food, inadequate health
care, more tension and violence. [Interjections.]

There is a shocking shortage of staff, especially in our major prisons
around this country. The hon Dennis Bloem should remember that, as the
portfolio committee, we visited the Johannesburg Prison. What did we find
there? We found a prison cell built for 20 prisoners, but which can
accommodate 38 in case of serious overcrowding, which housed 105 prisoners
on the day of our visit. Only one of the four toilet facilities worked
occasionally. There were four warders responsible for the day shift and
only one scheduled for the night shift. It is a disgrace.

These circumstances give rise to high stress levels among staff members,
which results in many of them taking sick leave, which makes it almost
impossible for others to perform their duties successfully. This is so
true. How does the department manage this problem? I can only express my
appreciation for those staff members who continue to render good service,
often under these difficult circumstances. [Interjections.]

The increase of unsentenced prisoners from 20 000 in 1994, when the ANC
started governing, to 55 000 in 2001 shows us that there is alarming
irregularity in this Government's judicial system. [Interjections.] The
Minister is not even listening.

My last point to the Minister, and his biggest challenge in prisons, is the
rapid increase in HIV/Aids amongst prisoners. Known HIV/Aids cases
increased from 698 in March 1996 to 4 823 in March 2002. HIV/Aids deaths in
South African prisons increased from 186 in 1995 to 1 169 in 2001.

This country has a policy which says that HIV/Aids is not a notifiable
disease. The figures I mentioned are of prisoners who were voluntarily
tested and those who got terminally ill. This means that the reality of
HIV/Aids in prisons, bearing in mind the conditions under which prisoners
live, can be skyrocketing. [Interjections.] When is the hon the Minister
going to approve and release antiretroviral drugs for those suffering
prisoners? A kite cannot fly unless the wind is against it. What I am
saying, is that we only grow when we face and overcome challenges.
[Interjection.]

Is the hon the Minister allowed by the New NP-ANC alliance to do what he
has to do in his department? Life is in phases and men are in sizes - so
are the problems and challenges in the Department of Correctional Services.
There is always an enormous challenge for whoever will tackle it. The
Minister is responsible to the people of this country. He should take
ownership of his department and not wait for the New NP-ANC alliance's
instructions.

He should also not wait until the ship comes in; he should swim out to meet
it on the high sea. He should make a difference, and build confidence in
his department. [Interjections.] The Democratic Alliance says that he
should put the restorative justice programme in action, so that it can make
a visible difference in this department. He should also speed up the
electronic tracking device system.

In conclusion, we need a drastic turnaround in the Minister's department.
[Time expired.] [Interjections.]

Mr E T FERREIRA: Madam Speaker, I would like to start by tendering the
apology of Mrs Sybil Seaton to the House and to the Minister of
Correctional Services for not being able to take part in this debate. She
has unfortunately taken ill.

This year's budget of the Department of Correctional Services amounts to
R6,88 billion, which is 5,3% more than the R6,53 billion the department
received in the previous financial year. The budget increase of some R350
million is largely taken up by an increase of R290 million for facility
management and capital works. The IFP welcomes this increase in one of the
department's most important budget programmes.

However, I want to raise my party's concern about the position of
Correctional Services within Government's justice and protection services
cluster. A brief look at the budget figures tabled by the Minister of
Finance shows that this cluster receives about R48,7 billion out of the
Government's total proposed expenditure of R287,9 billion. Correctional
Services receives just 14% of the funding allocated to the cluster, while
Defence receives 37,8% and Justice and Safety and Security receive a
combined 48%.

These figures confirm what my party has consistently argued over the past
few years. Correctional Services are viewed as the Cinderella of the
overall criminal justice system. The IFP is very concerned that the
Correctional Services budget allocation is yet again inadequate to deal
with the problems and challenges facing the department.

Some of the problems are not of the department's making. For instance,
thousands of awaiting-trial prisoners and unsentenced offenders are still
causing serious overcrowding in our correctional facilities. They are there
because of delays and inefficiencies in the court system. The IFP,
therefore yet again, calls on the Minister of Justice and Constitutional
Development to urgently solve the problems in the court system that impact
negatively on correctional services.

It is an ironic twist of fate that the Department of Correctional Services
has become the victim of more successful policing in South Africa as more
and more criminals are being apprehended. If this success continues one can
assume that the prison population of about 180 000 people will soon break
the 200 000 mark. Unfortunately, this budget does not make sufficient
provision for an ever-increasing prison population.

I should hasten to add that not all is doom and gloom at Correctional
Services, notwithstanding the inadequate budget. The Minister and his
department must be congratulated for their hard work and dedication in
making numerous improvements in the correctional system.
I would like to highlight just two of the recent successes. Earlier this
year, I was part of a portfolio committee delegation that visited St Albans
Prison in Port Elizabeth and Kirkwood Prison. St Albans is 180% full, with
double the prescribed number of inmates per cell. Kirkwood Prison is also
badly overcrowded, with approximately 1 400 inmates in a prison made for
700 people. This is bad news and I am sure we are all aware of the health
and safety problems that result from overcrowding.

However, the good news is that other conditions are improving in these
prisons. The facilities are in a far better shape from an infrastructural
point of view and the morale of the personnel is much higher than it has
been in the recent years, especially in the mid to late 90s. At St Albans
Prison the improvements as a result of building alterations were obvious,
as was their success with a chicken and vegetable farm.

At Kirkwood Prison, farm products include meat, milk, eggs and fruit. In
fact, the farm products of this prison are already providing food to the
other prisons in the region. I am convinced that if farming at Kirkwood
Prison was further developed and production increased it could provide food
to many of South Africa's prisons.

Yet, these success stories rarely, if ever, get the credit and positive
publicity they deserve, especially in our newspapers. It is a fact that
many of South Africa's prisons are situated on very large tracts of land
that are eminently suited to farming. My party believes that a small
investment by Government in more and larger farms at correctional
facilities would guarantee a large return. Not only will inmates become
more productive, but prisons could become self-sufficient for food and
other products.

The IFP is also very excited about the introduction of the concept of
restorative justice in the correctional system. As a party, we welcome this
innovative alternative to imprisonment and congratulate the Minister and
the department for being on the way of implementing this. Restorative
justice has been very successful in, among others, New Zealand and
Australia, and there is no reason to believe that it would not be
successful in South Africa as well.

The system of restorative justice means that the victims of minor crimes,
their family members and the community have a say in the punishment meted
out to the offender and that the offender must make some form of reparation
to the victims of his crime. Obviously, this system would mostly be applied
to minor crimes and it is expected that younger offenders would benefit
most by not being incarcerated, but being punished in some other way.

Exercising this alternative sentencing option will not only alleviate
overcrowding in prisons, but it will also help with rehabilitation.
Importantly, the serious problem of minor offenders turning into hardened
and repeat offenders as a result of abuse suffered at the hands of long-
term inmates will be addressed. That should have positive spin-offs right
through the entire socio-economic spectrum of life in South Africa.
Corruption remains the bane of most Government departments, and the
Department of Correctional Services is unfortunately no exception, but we
are very happy and proud that the Minister and the department have tackled
corruption head-on and have made great strides in fighting this problem at
all levels of the system of corrections. We congratulate the Minister on
this tremendous achievement.

It is a fact of life that all Government departments face problems and
challenges, not least of which is inadequate funding. South Africa is not a
rich country. It is generally acknowledged that we have limited resources,
but I can state categorically and without fear of contradiction that the
budget allocation to correctional services is inadequate and has been
inadequate for some time.

Nevertheless, the Minister and the department must be congratulated for
doing a fantastic job with limited means. The system of corrections has
consistently improved over the past few years and we are looking forward to
more improvements and successes in the years to come.

Mr G C OOSTHUIZEN: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the hon Ferreira
for the positive remarks on corruption and I would like to join him in
congratulating the Minister and the department on that. I wish to say to
the hon members that we all acknowledge the budgetary constraints, but we
must also acknowledge that there is an increase and that more accommodation
was provided for over the past couple of months.

We also had the privilege of listening to the hon Cupido this afternoon.
She said to the hon the Minister that as opposition she has a role to play.
I want to say to that hon lady that one has to make choices in life. One
can either make a simple choice or a good choice. She has made a very
stupid choice by going on the ``fight-back'' campaign and trying again.
[Interjections.] She is a negative opposition, for ever breaking down
instead of being a responsible opposition that tries to build this country
and assists with creating a better life for all. [Applause.]

Die agb Cupido praat oor die toename in die - sy gebruik die ``buzzword'' -
misdadigerbevolking. Dit is mos nou as gevolg van beter polisiëring.
[Tussenwerpsels.] [The hon Cupido speaks of an increase in the - she uses
the buzzword - criminal population. This is ostensibly now the case as a
result of better policing. [Interjections.]]

Madam Speaker, is it permissible for this Harksen chihuahua to carry on
while I am making a speech? [Interjections.] Surely it is not.
[Interjections.]

Dit is mos as gevolg van beter en meer effektiewe polisiëring dat ons meer
mense in die tronke het. Maar wat is nou die geval? Hulle kan nou nie meer
loop en skinder in die buiteland, en vertel hoe sleg en swak die Regering
is, en hoe misdaad buite beheer is nie. Ons is 'n effektiewe Regering wat
'n misdadiger vonnis en in die tronk sit, en nie van hom vergeet as ons hom
in die tronk gesit het nie. Ons het hom nie vergeet nie; ons rehabiliteer
hom. [Applous.] Ons maak van hom 'n beter mens, en gee 'n beter mens terug
aan die gemeenskap. Agb lede moet hoor wat ons vir hulle sê. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[It is ostensibly because of better and more effective policing that we
have more people in the prisons. But what is the case now? They cannot go
and gossip overseas, and tell others how bad the Government is, and how
crime is out of control. We are an effective Government that sentences and
imprisons a criminal, and do not forget about him after imprisoning him. We
have not forgotten him; we rehabilitate him. [Applause.] We make a better
person of him, and give a better person back to the community. Hon members
must hear what we are telling them.]

The hon Cupido then goes on to say that the Government has failed the
country. No, it is the DP and the DA that have failed the very morals of
which they are the high priests. [Applause.] They are the people who are
preaching one thing and doing the other. [Interjections.]
Hulle is die mense waarvan die een hand nie weet wat die ander hand doen
nie. Ek sien die agbare regter Desai sit vanmiddag in die galery. Ek weet
nie of die agb Cupido haar mond verby gepraat het en of sy te vinnig
gepraat het nie, iets waarvoor sy bekend is. [Tussenwerpsels.] Maar dit
skyn my sy het vanmiddag 'n erkenning gemaak teenoor die agbare regter, en
dit is dat dit my skyn dat hulle wel DM100 000 ontvang het. Miskien sal ons
teen die einde van Oktober meer daarvan weet. [Tussenwerpsels.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[They are the people whose one hand does not know what the other is doing.
I see that the honourable Justice Desai is sitting in the gallery this
afternoon. I do not know whether the hon Cupido has allowed her tongue to
run away with her or whether she spoke too quickly, something for which she
is known. [Interjections.] But it seems to me as though she has made an
admission to the honourable judge this afternoon, and it seems to me that
they have indeed received the DM100 000. Maybe we shall know more about it
at the end of October. [Interjections.]]

I have paid enough attention to you now. You can now shut up. The reality
is that the more effectively the ANC-led Government's crime prevention
strategy is executed, the more customers Correctional Services has. This is
a reality we cannot really budget for.

While we are encouraging the police to do their duty through effective
policing, making South Africa a better place to live, and thus creating a
better life for all, the problem of overcrowding in our prisons persists.
We accept that there are no quick-fixes to the problem of overcrowding, and
we accept that, owing to budgetary constraints, as I have said, the
department will not be able to build its position out of overcrowding.

Having accepted this, overcrowding violates the human rights of offenders
and results in the overextension of the department's staff. We know and
welcome the approach of Correctional Services to move from a punitive to a
rehabilitative approach. We welcome this approach, because rehabilitation
is a long-term goal towards crime prevention. Overcrowding, however,
creates conditions that are not conducive to rehabilitation. The aim of the
Department of Correctional Services is to rehabilitate and prepare
prisoners for their successful reintegration into the community as
productive and law-abiding citizens. It is important, therefore, that the
Department of Correctional Services investigate other measures to combat
the problem of overcrowding in prisons, and to create a situation where
more humane conditions are prevalent.

Creative skills development in overcrowded prisons is hardly possible. To
achieve this, we would like to offer suggestions to the hon the Minister
and the department which could assist in alleviating the problems of
overcrowding. When we visit prisons, we see petty offenders and low-risk
inmates, some of them awaiting trial. I was wondering whether we cannot
make use of some of the army camps we have in this country - they are empty
and are not used to full capacity - and have those inmates taken out of
conditions which are not conducive, and have them there in much better
circumstances to be looked after. We are offering this suggestion.

The Minister himself touched on the issue of courts in prison. We would
like to encourage him to have courts in prisons, so that we can speed up
that very process. He also mentioned plea bargaining, and we agree with him
on that, but we would also like to urge him to see whether we cannot speed
up the process of community corrections.

Reference was made to the inspecting judge that tabled some information
before the Correctional Services Committee regarding and relating to
HIV/Aids. I would like to say that the statistics available and quoted then
are not scientifically based, and are thus a total distortion of the true
picture. Placing HIV infections in prisons at 60% is not only unrealistic,
but also exaggerating the situation.

I am saying this because such a message has serious repercussions since it
is not based on a scientifically conducted study, as observed by the judge.
Blowing the figure of HIV infections in prisons out of proportion and
context contributes to the social difficulties faced by released prisoners
and their families, as they will face potential stigmatisation and
rejection by the communities from where they come. We, as the ANC, want to
inform those communities that in known cases anti-retrovirals are given,
administered and distributed according to Government policy.

We are doing this because, by doing so, we are contributing to creating a
better life for all. [Applause.]

Mr F J VAN DEVENTER: Madam Speaker, the Department of Correctional Services
is often referred to as one of the most corrupt departments of state due to
a history that was very friendly towards the establishment of such a
perception. Changes in the top management structures of the department
undoubtedly improved the situation, but I am still not convinced that
corruption is effectively battled amongst the lower cadres of departmental
employees. Secondly, the intensity of corruption and maladministration
seems to differ from prison to prison. To change its bad image, the
department must consider investigating all prisons, and not only those in
KwaZulu-Natal, as is currently being done by Judge Jali.

I am really impressed by the open-door approach of the new Commissioner of
Correctional Services, Commissioner Linda Mti, but on his own, he cannot
solve all the problems of the Department of Correctional Services. The
Minister and this Parliament will have to assist him.

Ek doen 'n beroep op die Minister, omdat ek glo, anders as die nuutgekose
vriende van die IVP, dat hy beheer het oor sy departement. Dit is nie nodig
dat ek met hom moet raas om beheer te neem nie, soos mev Cupido gedoen het
nie. Hy is in beheer van sy departement en hy kan help om dit te
vergemaklik. Ek sal later hiernatoe terug kom.

Ek wil ook graag baie dankie sê aan die agb Fihla, die uitgetrede
voorsitter van die portefeuljekomitee vir die vriendelike manier waarop hy
ons daar geakkommodeer het. Ook aan die nuwe voorsitter, die agb Mashimbye.
Ek wil hom welkom heet en sterkte vir hom toewens met die ontsaglike groot
taak wat op sy skouers rus.

Wat die begroting betref, wil ek 'n paar opmerkings maak. Dit is baie
jammer dat die portefeuljekomitee vir korrektiewe dienste nie die
geleentheid gehad het om die begroting persoonlik met die Minister te
bespreek. Dit is sekerlik belangrik vir die parlementêre proses dat die
komitee die geleentheid moet kry om 'n forumdebat soos hierdie van die
betrokke Minister self te verneem wat sy insette rondom die begroting is.

Een ding wat die aandag trek in die begroting, is dat bykans die totale
vermeerdering op die begroting van 2001 en 2002 deur die twee
privaatgevangenisse te Bloemfontein en Louis Trichardt opgeslurp word.
Trouens, die departement moet met 'n vermeerdering van ongeveer R11 miljoen
die res van sy verpligtinge nakom.

'n Ander saak wat nadere ondersoek verdien, is oortydbetalings deur die
departement. In 2001-02 is R596,16 miljoen hieraan spandeer. Na verwagting
sal in die boekjaar 2002-03 R639,927 miljoen hiervoor gaan - dit is 'n
toename van R43,767 miljoen. Geen staatsdepartement kan 9,3% van sy totale
begroting aan oortydbetaling spandeer en dan nie bekommerd raak nie. Dit
laat die vraag ontstaan of personeelaanwending effektief is. Tweedens,
almal van ons weet dat waar oortydbetaling in al sy fasette ter sprake is,
geleenthede vir korrupsie toeneem. Die portefeuljekomitee sal hom moet
bemoei om bo alle twyfel vas te stel of kontrolemaatreëls effektief is en
of personeelaanwending op standaard is.

Die bedrag wat vir ``mediese hulp'' of Medcor begroot word, is R630,72
miljoen - 'n toename van R46,72 miljoen op die begroting van 2001-02. As
dit te doen het met mediese hulpskemas van gevangenispersoneel, dan behoort
dit toegevoeg te word tot personeeluitgawes, wat dan die verwagte
personeeluitgawes op R5,192 miljard te staan bring. As die verwagte
oortydbetaling van R639,927 miljoen as 'n persentasie van personeeluitgawes
bereken word, kan die departement dus sy voltydse personeel met ongeveer
12% vermeerder, sonder dat 'n addisionele las op sy begroting geplaas word.
Die personeeltekort vir 2002-03 sal na beraming 15% wees.

In 2001-02 is R43,456 miljoen aan mediese behandeling van gevangenes
spandeer. Op 31 Desember 2001 was daar 175 290 gevangenes, veroordeel en
verhoorafwagtend in Suid-Afrika se gevangenisse. Dit beteken dat R247,90
per jaar aan mediese behandeling per gevangene spandeer is. Die vraag is of
die vergoeding van professionele diensverskaffers hierby ingesluit is, of
word hulle vergoeding opgeneem onder die item vir professionele en spesiale
dienste?

Ek het slegs na 'n paar van die aantal aspekte verwys en daar is vele ander
wat met groot vrug in die departement onder oë geneem kan word. Korrektiewe
dienste is 'n eiesoortige departement wat unieke situasies moet hanteer en
wat deur geen ander staatsdepartement, behalwe miskien Verdediging, in
bepaalde omstandighede hoef te doen.

Gevangenes moet behoorlik geakkommodeer en gevoed word, hulle moet goeie
mediese behandeling ontvang en rehabiliterende sorg ontvang. Trouens, die
veilige aanhouding en rehabilitasie van gevangenes is, myns insiens, die
belangrikste take van dié departement. Nie een van die twee is moontlik met
oorvol gevangenisse wat noodwendig swak higiëne en gevolglik swak
gesondheidstoestande tot gevolg moet hê nie.

Tweedens is dit nie moontlik om onder sulke toestande behoorlike skeiding
te bring tussen veroordeelde gevangenes en verhoorafwagtendes nie.
Korrektiewe dienste kan ook nie sy siek gevangenes na hospitale sonder
bewaking stuur nie. Die departement moet dus daarna strewe om interne
gesondheidsdienste so doeltreffend moontlik te maak. Daarvoor moet hy
goedopgeleide en toegewyde mediese personeel tot sy beskikking hê.

Die departement kan ook nie gevangenes in dennehoutvervaardigde Wendyhuise
aanhou nie. Die strukture wat hy benodig, is duur en verg hoë
onderhoudskoste. Indien dit die erns van die regering is om die toestande
in gevangenisse werklik te verbeter en gevangenes te behandel volgens die
vereistes van die Handves van Menseregte, dan sal die regering moet besin
oor die vraag, of die begroting wat aan die departement toegesê is,
voldoende is. Tweedens sal 'n antwoord gevind moet word op die vraag, of al
die take wat nou aan die departement opgedra word, werklik alles die
verantwoordelikheid van die departement is.

Bykans 'n derde van ons gevangenes is verhoorafwagtend en kan nie in
rehabilitasieprogramme inforseer word nie. Weens 'n gebrek aan ruimte kan
hulle nie afsonderlik aangehou word nie, wat 'n legio probleme veroorsaak.
Ek wil aan die hand doen dat die departemente van Justisie en Veiligheid en
Sekuriteit die finansiële las moet help dra, om akkommodasie vir
verhoorafwagtendes te skep. Die verskaffing van geneeskundige dienste is
nie 'n lynfunksie van die Departement van Korrektiewe Dienste nie. Verder
is dit 'n hoogs professionele diens waarvan kundige versorging 'n uiters
belangrike element is. Ek kan werklik nie sien hoe die gevaar van siektes
en epidemies in gevangenisse uitgeskakel kan word as die Departement van
Gesondheid nie hierby betrokke is nie.

Ek wil afsluit, deur te sê die Nuwe NP sal hierdie begrotingspos
ondersteun, ten spyte van die tekortkominge wat daar nog in die departement
is. Maar ons sal die Departement van Korrektiewe Dienste - want vandag
wêreldwyd word gevangenisse gesien as 'n norm waaraan 'n land se respek vir
menseregte getoets word - in 'n situasie meebring dat ons nie Suid-Afrika
se naam skade aanrig nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[I am appealing to the Minister because I believe, as opposed to the newly
chosen friends of the IFP, that he has control over his department. It is
not necessary for me to scold him to take control, as Mrs Cupido has done.
He is in control of his department and he can help facilitate this. I will
come back to that later.

I would also like to thank the hon Fihla, the retired chairperson of the
portfolio committee, for the friendly manner in which he accommodated us
there. This also applies to the new chairperson, the hon Mashimbye. I would
like to welcome him and wish him everything of the best with the enormous
task which rests on his shoulders.

As far as the budget is concerned, I would like to make a few remarks. It
is a great pity that the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services did
not have the opportunity to discuss the budget personally with the
Minister. Surely it is important for the parliamentary process that the
committee should have the opportunity, in a forum debate such as this one,
to learn from the relevant Minister what his inputs regarding the budget
were.

One thing which draws one's attention in the budget is that virtually the
entire increase in the 2001-02 budget will be consumed by the two private
prisons in Bloemfontein and Louis Trichardt. In fact, the department must
meet the rest of its obligations with an increase of approximately R11
million.

Another matter which deserves closer inspection is overtime payments by the
department. In 2001-02 R596,16 million was spent on this. It is expected
that in the 2002-03 financial year R639,927 million will be spent on this -
that is an increase of R43,767 million. No Government department can spend
9,3% of its total budget on overtime payment and not be concerned. This
gives rise to the question as to whether staff are effectively utilised.
Secondly, we all know that where overtime payment in all its facets is at
issue, opportunities for corruption increase. The portfolio committee will
have to concern itself with determining beyond all doubt whether control
measures are effective and whether staff utilisation is up to standard.

The amount budgeted for ``medical help'' or Medcor, is R630,72 million - an
increase of R46,72 million on the budget of 2001-02. If this has to do with
medical aid schemes for prison staff, it should be added to personnel
expenditure, which would then bring the expected personnel expenditure to
R5,192 billion. If the expected overtime payment of R639,927 million is
calculated as a percentage of personnel expenditure, the department can
increase its full-time staff by approximately 12%, without placing an
additional burden on its budget. The staff shortage for 2002-03 is
estimated to be 15%.

In 2001-02 R43,456 million was spent on medical treatment for prisoners. On
31 December 2001 there were 175 290 prisoners, convicted and awaiting
trial, in South Africa's prisons. This means that R247,90 was spent on
medical treatment per prisoner per year. The question is whether the
remuneration of professional service providers is included in this, or is
their remuneration captured under the item for professional and special
services?

I have only referred to a few of the numerous aspects and there are many
others which could fruitfully be examined in the department. Correctional
Services is a unique department which has to deal with unique situations
which no other Government department, except perhaps Defence in certain
circumstances, has to do.

Prisoners must be properly accommodated and fed. They must receive good
medical treatment and rehabilitative care. In fact, the safe detention and
rehabilitation of prisoners is, in my opinion, the most important task of
this department. Neither of the two is possible with overcrowded prisons
which inevitably lead to poor hygiene and consequent poor health
conditions.

Secondly, it is not possible under such conditions to properly separate
convicted prisoners and awaiting-trial prisoners. Correctional Services can
also not send its sick prisoners to hospitals without guards. The
department must therefore strive to make internal health services as
efficient as possible. For that it must have well-trained and dedicated
medical staff at its disposal.

The department can also not detain prisoners in Wendy houses manufactured
from pine. The structures it needs are expensive and require high
maintenance costs. If the Government is serious about improving the
conditions in prisons and treating prisoners according to the requirements
of the Bill of Rights, then it will have to contemplate the question as to
whether the budget allocated to the department is adequate. Secondly, an
answer will have to be found to the question whether all tasks which are
now allocated to the department are truly the responsibility of the
department.

Nearly a third of our prisoners are awaiting trial and cannot be forced
into rehabilitation programmes. Due to a lack of space they can also not be
detained separately, which causes a legion of problems. I would like to
suggest that the Departments of Justice and of Safety and Security should
help to bear the financial burden, and create accommodation for awaiting-
trial prisoners. The provision of medical services is not a line function
of the Department of Correctional Services. Furthermore, it is a highly
professional service of which expert care is an extremely important
element. I really cannot see how the danger of diseases and epidemics in
prisons can be eliminated if the Department of Health is not involved in
this issue.

I would like to conclude by saying that the New NP will support this Vote,
despite the shortcomings which still exist in the department. But we will
have to bring the Department of Correctional Services into a situation in
which South Africa's name is not damaged, because worldwide prisons are
viewed as a norm according to which a country's respect for human rights is
tested.]

Mr N B FIHLA: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, hon members and distinguished
guests, firstly, I would like to ask Comrade Bloem this question: Does he
think that we should worry about the prophets of doom?

Mr D V BLOEM: No, no. Do not worry about them.

Mr N B FIHLA: Yes, I do not think that we need to worry much. Firstly, let
me congratulate the chairperson, Comrade Mashimbye, and tell him that he
should not worry much. The position taken by the Government and the
criminal justice system to get tough on crime has only succeeded in filling
up our prisons. This success has come at considerable financial, social and
human cost.

It would be underestimating the situation to say that efforts to reduce the
use of imprisonment have generally not proven successful. Politicians and
policy-makers should be informed about the functions and limits of
imprisonment. They should be shown that there are other options, and that
the economic and social benefits of replacing imprisonment with less
punitive measures outweigh the costs.

Prison may well be the right place for some offenders, but the wrong place
for others. In fact, when we visited New Zealand - I think that hon member
has a short memory - one official there said to us that there was no need
to keep minor offenders in prison. They said that out of 26 000 prisoners
there, only 6 000 were in prison, while 20 000 were out of prison. That is
why I am saying that we should not worry much about the prophets of doom.
We must find a solution also in South Africa for this question.

Prison may well be the right place for some offenders, but the wrong place
for others. With overcrowding being the greatest challenge facing the
Department of Correctional Services, it has been recognised that many low-
risk offenders can be dealt with more effectively in the community, where
they should live under appropriate supervision. Community supervision is
one of the most effective ways of reducing prison populations. That example
comes from New Zealand. They have succeeded in that.

For some individuals it may entirely replace imprisonment, most commonly as
an alternative sentence and under some terms of probation. For others it
may be used in combination with imprisonment, usually as part of parole
during the latter part of the sentence and after serving some time in
prison. The purpose of community correction is largely to help offenders on
conditional release to become law-abiding citizens by providing them with
assistance and service, and by ensuring that proper control is maintained
to minimise the risk of their committing new offences.

There are several advantages to maintaining accused or convicted offenders
in the community rather than holding them in prisons. It fits into the
human rights culture because it is far less restrictive. It avoids most of
the disadvantages of prisons, and it is far less expensive than
imprisonment. In the department's drive to seek alternatives to
imprisonment, the enhancement of community correction becomes vital.
Electronic monitoring is being introduced into community corrections to
provide an alternative form of control over offenders who are currently
subject to physical monitoring.

The department also foresees the development of an integrated support
system for probationers and parolees. The decentralisation of community
correction offices countrywide will further serve to highlight and inform
about alternatives to imprisonment. Spending on community correction will
grow at a rate of 6,8% per year to a total of approximately R319,5 million
in 2004-05. After the initial start-up costs, it is anticipated that
electronic monitoring will significantly reduce the average costs of
supervision. The department will be able to monitor 8 850 probationers and
parolees electronically by March 2004.

The application of section 63A of the Criminal Procedure Act of 1977, which
allows for the amendment of bail conditions of certain prisoners, thus
helping to reduce overcrowding in prisons, is a hard-won accomplishment for
Correctional Services. Further, section 62(f) of the Criminal Procedure Act
of 1977 also stipulates circumstances under which the requirement of bail
may be deleted, and the provision is substituted to allow awaiting-trial
prisoners to be placed under the supervision of a correctional official.

Some of the service delivery indicators targeted to be fulfilled by the
Department of Correctional Services are the following: the establishment of
at least one satellite or suboffice in every township and village where a
need is identified; the establishment of community forums; providing needy
prisoners with material and financial assistance, and presenting pre-
release programmes to prisoners. Clearly, community supervision is an
attractive and desirable practice for widespread adoption, provided that it
does not increase the risk to public safety. It is thus not surprising that
community supervision is seen as critical in the process of offender
reintegration by the Department of Correctional Services.

Continued public support for any part of the criminal justice system
depends on effectiveness. The financial and administrative advantages of
community supervision are negated if it allows offenders to continue or
repeat their crimes while they are under supervision. At the very least, it
must be shown that supervision programmes do not result in any increase in
risk to the public.

The number of people under the authority of community correction escalated
from a daily average of 55 556 in 1998-99 to 64 228 in 2000-01. It is
expected to increase to 67 900 by the end of 2001-02. The probability of
probationers and parolees absconding remains a reality. However, the
department experienced great success in tracing absconders. In 1998-99 8
735 offenders absconded, of whom 6 816 were traced, while in 2001 7 036
absconded and 5 912 were traced. The department envisages a 50% reduction
in the number of absconders by March 2005.

The main argument voiced by the public against the use of community
correction is that it is not as effective as imprisonment in preventing
offenders from committing crime. The media often presents the image that
prisons are, if not luxury hotels, at least places where people are treated
quite well and where prisoners are considerably better off than people
outside the prison walls. Such perceptions can easily be dismissed by
providing more balanced information on prisons.

The public is not aware of the problems faced by and in prisons. They are
not aware of the dangers of uncontrolled imprisonment, and they are not
aware of its human and financial cost. They are not aware that retributive
justice has in many parts of the world been found not to be the solution to
the problem, and that restorative justice is the solution. The remedy to
this is to expand the scope of community correction, with the support of
politicians. The Minister of Finance can be convinced to allocate more
funds to the programme.

I want to point out that imprisonment is expensive. It costs the department
R94,16 per day per prisoner. At this rate, and with the current number of
awaiting-trial prisoners numbering 20 692, the department spends close to
R2 million a day to keep these prisoners behind bars.

One of the ways we can overcome the negativity with which the public views
community correction is by providing the judiciary, police officers,
prosecutors and other practitioners with information on training, the
functions of community correction and on what is needed for its
implementation. For example, the judiciary could be provided with more
feedback on the impact of their sentences on the prison population. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, hon Minister, the ACDP agrees that the increase
in the departmental budget is insufficient. Whilst being supportive of
public-private partnership, the ACDP also shares concerns that the APOPS 25-
year contract will financially drain the department's budgetary increases
and that an urgent solution must be found for this dilemma. Severe prison
overcrowding and deplorable health conditions must continually be
addressed. Overcrowding remains a problem and is the root cause of health
problem and the spread of diseases such as tuberculosis and HIV/Aids.

However, the ACDP welcomes the announcement that the number of awaiting-
trial prisoners in custody declined for the first time since 1995, from 57
800 in the year 2000 to 53 748 in 2001. This decline is to be welcomed, as
it represents, inter alia, awaiting-trial prisoners who are not a danger to
society, but who are unable to pay bail, sometimes as little as R50. As of
January this year approximately 20 000 accused persons were found by
magistrates to pose no threat to the community and it is costing the state
almost R2 million per day to keep them behind bars, because they cannot
afford the bail set.

The ACDP also welcomes the successful implementation of section 63A which,
as has been pointed out, allows a magistrate to review bail set where
conditions in overcrowded prisons reach such a level that the health of
prisoners and warders is at risk. We trust that this programme will be
speedily rolled out to deal with those approximately 20 600 awaiting-trial
prisoners who pose no threat to society.

The social cost of locking up these persons, who are in law presumed to be
innocent until proven guilty, in these universities of crime is
inestimable.

In conclusion, the way forward must be the application of restorative
justice principles, which the ACDP has promoted and advocated for a number
of years. We commend the department and the Minister for implementing these
provisions. We support the Budget Vote. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Bishop L J TOLO: Mohlomphegi Modulasetulo, maloko a Ngwako, pele ga ge nka
tswela pele ke nyaka go laetsa setshaba ka moka sa Afrika-Borwa gore ge re
bolela ka fa Ngwakong, go na le bao ba somisago thereso le bao ba sa
somisego thereso. [Mr Chairperson, hon members of the House, before I
proceed, I would like alert the nation as a whole to the fact that, when we
speak in this House, there are those who tell the truth and those who do
not tell the truth.]

Wat ek wil sê aan die agb Cupido is dat ek die waarheid praat. Twee weke
terug het ons na die Limpopoprovinsie gegaan. Haar naam was op die hotel se
rekenaar. Ons het gewag en sy was nie daar gewees nie. Sy het nog nie eens
vir die komitee laat weet waar sy was nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] Die mense wat
hier sit dink sy praat die waarheid. Ons was saam met haar gewees en sy was
nie daar nie. Sy moet vir die mense sê waar sy was. Sy beweer sy was daar
by die Holiday Inn in Polokwane. Sy was nie daar nie. Ek was kameraad
Fihla, Diale en ons het haar selfoon gebel, maar dit was afgeskakel. Waar
was sy? Sy moet nou hier vir die mense kom vertel waar sy was.

Haar leier, ek het sy naam vergeet ... (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[What I would like to say to the hon Cupido is that I am telling the truth.
Two weeks ago we went to the Limpopo Province. Her name was on the hotel's
computer. We waited, but she was not there. She did not even let the
committee know where she was. [Interjections.] The people who are sitting
here think that she is telling the truth. We were with her and she was not
there. She must tell the people where she was. She claims that she was at
the Holiday Inn in Polokwane. She was not there. I was, as were Comrades
Fihla and Diale, and we phoned her on her cellphone, but it was switched
off. Where was she? She must now come and tell the people where she was.

Her leader, I have forgotten his name ...]

Mrs P W CUPIDO: Chairperson, on a point of order ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, are you rising on
a point of order?

Mrs P W CUPIDO: Yes, hon Chairperson. My point of order is that if the
member does not have a speech he should please sit down. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, that is not a
point of order. Hon members, I would like you not to rise on spurious
points of order. If members have points of order, then please rise on a
point of order.

Bishop L J TOLO: Baie dankie, Voorsitter. Die mense van Suid-Afrika het
gehoor dat sy nie saam met ons daar was nie. [Thank you, Chairperson. The
people of South Africa have heard that she was not there with us.]

Puku ya Genesis 1:6 e bontsha gore Modimo o ile a dira lenaneo la mosomo wa
gagwe, go tswetsa naga pele. O rile tse a di be gona le tse a di be gona.
Molaetsa wa ka ke gore mohlomphegi Motlatsa-Mopresidente wa rena, Mna Jacob
Zuma o thakgotse lenaneo ge a be a le kua gageso gore dinagamagaeng, moo go
lego bodiidi bjo bo hlotswego ke boCupido peleng, go be le tswelopele. Ge a
phethile modiro woo, mohlomphegi Tona, Mna Skosana o o tsere gomme a o
tswetsapele.

Ge re le fao, moo Mohumagadi Cupido a bego a se gona, ke ile ka makala ge
re hwetsa sekolo seo se agilwego ke bagolegwa. Seo se laetsa gabotse gore
Kgoro ya tsa Dikgolego e na le maekemisetso a go sokolla dikgopolo tseo di
tswilego tseleng.

Bagolegwa bao ba bontšhište gabotse gore ba kwela bana ba bona bohloko ge
ba tsenela sekolo ka fase ga mehlare. Ka gona, ba bone go le bohlokwa gore
ba ithaope gomme ba thuše Kgoro ya tša Dikgolego, ya mohlomphegi Morena
Skosana. Ba šetše ba agile dipoloko tše pedi. Mohumagadi Cupido o swanetše
go tseba gore go ka yona tsela yeo ka ge yena a be a se gona.

Seo ke ratago go bontšha mohlomphegi Tona ke gore kua Kimberley go na le
madirelo a botegniki, moo Kgoro ya tša Dikgolego e rutago batho ba gaborena
go lokiša dikoloi gore e re mohlang ba e tšwa dikgolegong, ba be le
mangwalwana-tsoko gore ba kgone go ka iphediš a. Ke gopola ge mengwageng
yela ya bo1950 mohlomphegi mohu Dr Verwoerd a ile a botšiša balatedi ba
gagwe a re: Waar staan ek? Gomme ba mo fetola ba re: U staan op die tafel.
Yena a latola a re: Nee, man! Waar staan ek? Ba buša ba mo fetola ba re: U
staan op die tafel. Yena a ba botš a gore: Nee man! Ek staan op die kaffir
se kop! [Disego.] (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[The book of Genesis 1:6 indicates that God performed His task of
developing the earth according to a programme. He said let this be and let
that be. My message is that the hon Deputy President, Mr Jacob Zuma, was
working according to a programme when he visited our areas, that is, the
rural areas, which are beset by abject poverty - caused by people such as
hon Cupido in the past - in an attempt to bring about development. When he
had finished his part, the hon Minister, Mr Skosana took up the cudgels and
pressed forward.

While we were there, in the absence of Mrs Cupido, I was surprised to find
a school that had been built by prisoners. This shows that the Department
of Correctional Services is intent on correcting wrong impressions. Those
prisoners showed clearly that they pitied their children who had to learn
under the trees. So, they decided to volunteer themselves to help the
Department of Correctional Services, which is under the leadership of
Minister Skosana. They have already built two blocks. Mrs Cupido needs to
be informed that this is what has happened, because she was not there.

What I would like to bring to the attention of the Minister is that, in
Kimberly there are technical institutions where the Department of
Correctional Services is training our people in motor engineering so that
when they are discharged from prison, they should have some certificates
which they may use to make a living. I remember that in the 1950s, the late
Dr Verwoerd asked his followers: "Waar staan ek?" They responded: "U staan
op die tafel." He rejected that response, saying: "Nee man! Waar staan ek?"
They answered him again, saying: "U staan op die tafel." Then he said to
them: "Nee man! Ek staan op die kaffer se kop!" [Laughter.]

Met ander woorde, na dertig jare sal 'n swartman nie weet of hy vorentoe
gaan en of hy teruggaan nie. [In other words, after thirty years a black
man will not know whether he is going forward or whether he is going
backwards.]
Lekgotla la ANC, leo le hlotšwego ke Modimo, leo A le kgethilego gomme le
sa kago la hwelela tseleng, le ile la tšwelela, la tšebisa gore le tlo ruta
batho bao ba konnwego thuto ke mebušo yela ya peleng le ge ba le
dikgolegong, go akaretšwa le bao ba sego dikgolegong, e le bao ba dikilego
ba gateletše ba bangwe.

Bagešo, mehleng yeno re a holega ge re etetše dikgolegong. Malobanyana mo
ke ile ka reka sekepe ge ke be ke etetše kgolego-tsoko. Ba bangwe ba rekile
dikoloi. Go fa mohlala, ge motho a ka lebelela dikgolego tša rena, o tlo
lemoga gore go na le bagolegwa bao ba ithutago ba le ka dikelaseng. Ba
bangwe ba bona ba swaragane le mphato wa marematlou, mola ba bangwe ba sa
le mephatong ya tlase moo ba rutwago go bala le go ngwala. Ge re be re
palelwa ke dilo tše mehleng yela ya maloba, e be e le ka baka la bona bao
ba itšego: Ek staan op iemand se kop; laat hy nie weet of hy gaan of afkom
nie. Ka gona, Mohumagadi Cupido o swanetše go tseba gore bothata bjo bja go
makatša ka tsela ye bo t šwa kae. Gabotse bo hlotšwe ke lekgotla la gabo. A
o a e tseba taba ya mohuta wo? [Legofsi.]

A ke gopotše mohlomphegi Tona gore kua Polokwane go na le lefelo leo le
hlaolet šwego modiro wa go hlahla bagolegwa. E sa le go bewa motheo wa lona
gomme ga go tšwelopele. Go laetša gabotse gore eo a abetšwego thendara ya
go le aga e sa le a tsena ka monga wa seloko. Ka gona, re be re duma ge
mohlomphegi Tona a ka šala temana yeo morago gore batho ba kgone go tšwela
pele ka tlhatlho.

Go ya ka Mmušo wo eteletšwego pele ke ANC, wo o tšwago go Modimo, gape o
tsebjago ke Modimo yo botho le borutho, e lego Mmuš o wo e lego gore le ge
o kwišitše motho bohloko o sa ntše o mo rata, bagolegwa ba bangwe ge ba
lokollwa dikgolegong ba tlo tš wa e le baruti. E fo re Moruti Meshoe ga a
gona ka mo Ngwakong. Yena o duletše go fo bolela motho wa batho. O iša
ebangedi go batho bao e lego gore ba lokile.

Pukung ya Mateo 25:36-40 Jesu Kriste o re: Gobane ke be ke babja, la tla la
ntlhola; ke le kgolegong, la tla la mpona. Gomme ge ba mmotšiša gore re go
diretše tšeo neng, Yena a fetola a re: Ruri, ke a le botša ge le be le
direla ba bangwe ba bana ba gabolena le be le di direla nna. Ge e le mošomo
wa Moruti Meshoe e no ba fela mo go lego salone.

ANC ke lekgotla leo le tšwelago setšhaba sa Afrika mohola. A ke bontšheng
gore kua Thohoyandou go lengwa dipotata, ditamatisi, le ka dikhabetš he.
Gape e bile profense ya Limpopo e na le difoka tše šsupago tša bokgoni bja
temo. Kua St Albans go lengwa lehea, go bile go na le dikgomo le dikgogo
tša nama, mafsi le mae gomme batho ba gaborena ba a ithuta. Le bjalo ANC e
sa na le mošomo wo mogolo wo e swanetšego go o phetha gobane bakgalabje ba
le bakgekolo ba ba swanetše go sokollwa dikgopolo. A ba se ke ba fela pelo!
Go le bjalo, balekgotla-kganetšo ba na le go fela ba latofatša Mmušo ka la
gore o senya tšhelete ka go e abela bagolegwa dikgoleng.

Ka boripana ke rata go laetša gore mohlomphegi Tona, Morena Skosana, o
swere gabotse. Re ema tekanyetšo ya gagwe nokeng. Kgoro ya gagwe e tšea
gabotse. Tšeo di senyegilego, ga se tša senywa ke kgoro ya gagwe eupša o di
hweditše gomme re tlo di lokiša. Se sengwe seo Tona a swanetšego go se
hlokomela ke gobane kua Pietersburg re hweditše ... [O tsenwa-ganong.]

Mna W J SEREMANE: Kwa Polokwane ... A o lebet ... e?

Bishop L J TOLO: Thobela! Le ge ke le biditše ka tsela yeo ga se molato.

Re hweditše dihlophana tša bagolegwa ba tsene sekolo kantle ga meago. Seo
se laetša gabotse gore go swanetše go ba le mafelo ao ba swanetšego go
ithuta go wona ka boiketlo. Ka boripana re leboga mohlomphegi Tona ...
[Nako e fedile.] [Legofsi.] (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[The ANC, which was established by God, which He has chosen and which did
not fall by the wayside, came forward and announced that it was going to
educate the people who had been denied education by previous regimes, even
when they are in prison, including even those who are not in prison, but
who are continuing to oppress others.

Nowadays we gain something when we visit prisons. Recently I bought a model
boat when I visited a certain prison. Others bought model cars. For
example, when one looks at our prisons one will realise that there are
prisoners who are studying in classrooms. Some are studying at
matriculation level, while others are at the more elementary level where
they are being taught how to read and write. The reason we could not
achieve these things in the past is that there were those who were saying:
"Ek staan op iemand se kop; laat hy nie weet of hy gaan of afkom nie."
Therefore, Mrs Cupido ought to know the source of all these serious
problems. Actually, it was caused by her party. Is she aware of this?
[Applause.]

Let me remind the hon Minister that in Polokwane there is an area that has
been earmarked for training prisoners. The foundation was laid long ago,
but since then there has been no progress. It is clear that the person who
was awarded the tender has disappeared. Therefore, we would like the
Minister to follow up on this matter so that the people can proceed with
the training.

According to the ANC-led Government, which is from God, which also knows
that He is a kind and warm God, a Government that, even when it has hurt
somebody, still loves that person. Some prisoners, on their release from
prison, will come out as ministers of religion. Rev Meshoe is not in the
Chamber today. The poor man says a lot here. He is actually preaching to
the converted.

In the book of Matthew 25:36-40, Jesus Christ says: "Because I was ill and
you visited me. I was in prison and you came to see me." When they asked
Him: "When did we do these things for you?" His response was: "Truly, I say
to you when you were doing these things for some of your people, you were
doing them for me." When it comes to the work of Rev Meshoe, it is only
seen where there is a hair salon.

The ANC is a party that benefits the nation. Let me indicate that at
Thohoyandou the people plant sweet potatoes, tomatoes and cabbages. Limpopo
Province has also won seven prizes for expertise in agriculture. At St
Alban's they grow mealies and there is also livestock and poultry farming
for the production of meat, eggs and milk and our people are being trained.
The ANC still has a long way to go because these old men and women need to
be mentally liberated. They must not lose patience! However, the opposition
parties keep on accusing the Government of wasting money by using it on
prisoners.

Briefly, I would like to say that the hon Minister, Mr Skosana, is doing a
good job. We support his Budget Vote. His department is working well. The
things that are not going well have not been caused his department. He
found them already like that and we are going to sort them out. Another
thing that the Minister must look into is that in Pietersburg we found ...
[Interjections.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: At Polokwane. Have you forgotten?
Bishop L J TOLO: Thank you! Even though I called it by that name, there is
nothing wrong.

We found groups of prisoners studying under the trees.  This clearly means
that there have to be proper facilities in which they may study
comfortably. Briefly, we would like to thank the hon Minister ... [Time
expired.] [Applause.]]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Mr Chairperson, consideration of Budget Vote 20 reflects a
slight increase over last year's, but a thorough analysis with needs in
mind brings to light that there is a shortfall of some R86 million.

Contrary to international experience and opinions, there are reservations
about the cost-effectiveness of private prisons. However, because the
approach is in its infancy we shall keep on watching developments. It is an
effort to put the public-private partnership initiative to use.

It strikes one that under the programme Administration, one of the policy
developments is the establishment of a good governance unit, yet a stone's
throw from the Department of Correctional Services head office in the
Pretoria CBD, a whole hotel rented by the department stands unused. Is it a
question of having all chiefs and no Indians in the department, where all
chiefs take decisions and give instructions, or is it proof that the dark
spot is underneath the candle?

We welcome the Jali Commission and hope that its mandate will be extended
to uncover the goings-on in the department and any other form of corruption
in the Department of Correctional Services.

The UCDP calls on the department to allow more religious leaders to visit
prisons. The projections the department has set itself on this matter
indicate that with the current prison population in mind each prisoner
will, on average, have only seven visits by a religious leader in a year.
This is not enough if we are well-meaning in rehabilitating these people
spiritually and psychologically. Surely they must leave prisons with their
heads, hearts and hands trained, so that they may get back into society as
useful people.

Whether the Department of Correctional Services is on course will be
determined by the response to the hon Minister's call this afternoon that
the department set the pace on moral regeneration. It was a pleasure,
however, to see some inmates sing so beautifully at the launch of the Moral
Regeneration Movement. There is hope that much can be done. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, you are making a
little too much noise. Will you please come to order.

Mr L N DIALE: Chairperson, hon Minister of Correctional Services Mr Ben
Skosana, members and comrades ...

Ka segagešo madume ga a fele. Ke lethabo go nna go kgatha tema mo
ngangišanong ya sekhwama sa bagolegwa ba Afrika Borwa. [According to my
culture, greetings never cease. It is a pleasure for me to participate in
the debate on the Budget Vote of the Correctional Services department.]

I will speak on the rehabilitation of prisoners.

According to the hon Minister Ben Skosana rehabilitation will now be put at
the centre of all activities of the Department of Correctional Services.

In the strategic plan, Mvelaphanda, of the Department of Correctional
Services, for the period 1 April 2002 to 31 March 2005, the department
intends to involve the community and the victims of crime in the
rehabilitation process, and therefore calls on everyone's active
participation in the rehabilitation programmes.

Whilst this is an exciting proposal, spending on rehabilitation is
nevertheless determined by the rising prisoner population in our prisons.
Overcrowding impacts on the development of rehabilitation programmes,
because spending on it limits the growth of spending on rehabilitation. To
be more specific, in prisons in Thohoyandou and Polokwane, there is a
glaring absence of training centres, educational centres and recreational
facilities and, most importantly, a lack of personnel.

Nevertheless, the importance of rehabilitation has meant that the
programme's budget has increased by an average of 16,5% per year from 1998-
99 to 2001-02. [Interjections.] At the heart of the department's
rehabilitation plan is restorative justice, which puts the emphasis on
accountability rather than punishment, and tries to promote healing within
the community. The benefit of those programmes is that they free up limited
resources for more serious offences and reduce the workload for the courts.
They are aimed at people who have committed minor, usually nonviolent,
offences and who can be more effectively dealt with outside the court
system.

A number of programmes are associated with restorative justice. One of
these is victim-offender mediation, which uses trained mediators to bring
victims and their offenders together in order to discuss the crime and the
steps needed to make things right. Conferencing programmes are similar to
victim-offender mediation, but they do not only involve the offender and
the victim, but their family members and community members as well. Another
programme is the victim assistance programme, which provides services to
crime victims as they recover from crime and proceed through the criminal
justice process.

Part of the department's strategy is the development of a framework
document on restorative justice within the context of the South African
correctional system, a policy document on victim empowerment and public
education programmes on the role of restorative justice in ensuring a
decrease in the number of returning prisoners.

In the budget allocations for the rehabilitation programme for the MTEF
period, 2002-03 to 2004-05, rehabilitation spending grows from
approximately R297 million in 2001-02 to approximately R320 million in 2004-
05.
This is but a meagre allocation for what the department intends doing
around rehabilitation. Let me give members an idea. Programmes include,
firstly, the development and implementation of a ``model of intervention''
for assessing and evaluating prisoner and probationer rehabilitation needs;
secondly, the enhancement of needs-based programmes; thirdly, training on
design and programme development and evaluation of needs-based
rehabilitation programmes; fourthly, the development of incentive and
compensation schemes for prisoners and probationers participating in
rehabilitation programmes; fifthly, expanding the scope of rehabilitation
services to include after-care services; and sixthly, enhancing the self-
sufficiency of the prison system through food production. On this point, I
have to commend the department for already making great strides to become
self-sufficient in food production, as well as assisting in poverty
alleviation programmes in communities such as Thohoyandou and assisting
communities around Kirkwood, Boksburg and Drakenstein prisons. Further
programmes include increasing productivity and expanding the capacity of
production workshops; the establishment of formal links with non-
governmental and community-based organisations involved in poverty
alleviation; and finally, the development of civil works, building and
agricultural projects for rural development.

Other areas of great concern are women offenders, youth, people with
disabilities and sexual offenders. It is essential that programmes and
services for each of these categories of prisoners are specific and unique
to the needs of these groups. Rehabilitation programmes, and actions
associated with them, are directed towards creating the conditions for the
reintegration of an offender's spirituality, and the creation by him or her
of values and norms of civilisation and human dignity.

This is a fundamental philosophy that underpins our Government's approach
to correctional services. It is a philosophy that is based on the
Constitution, and the inherent dignity and equality of all people. Anybody
who argues otherwise, argues against the Constitution and human dignity.
For the ANC, this is a key and fundamental starting point in contributing
towards a crime-free society. Effective rehabilitation has the potential to
improve the mental health, knowledge and skills of prisoners, and thus make
them productive and law-abiding citizens.

The ANC supports the Budget Vote. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson and hon Minister, it is not an unknown fact
that the prisons of South Africa are overcrowded, a clear depiction of the
poor moral values our society harbours, moral values and standards set by
gang leaders that earn status as martyrs and Robin Hood role-models for
juveniles.

Our young are being socialised in communities where reality is based on
gangsterism as a part of life and a means for survival. Our courts adopt a
system in terms of which retribution, rehabilitation, prevention and
reformation stand as the core intents of punishment.

South African prisons are viewed as hotels. The harsh realities of
imprisonment have to be made public and brought into the primary
socialisation of our minors. Excursions should not only be to museums and
Parliament, but to our prisons too. Not only would our youth be able to see
that their role-model gangsters are not living like kings in prison, but it
would assist as a tool in preventing crimes.

In view of the overcrowding of prisons, minor crimes should be
differentiated and receive punishment in the form of strict reformative
programmes that would sustain reform and prevent recurrence. Mere community
service and psychological treatment are not enough.

The MF is aware of the rights upheld in the national Constitution of the
Republic in respect of law-breakers and shares a belief in the potential
for reformation and rehabilitation. The MF is also aware of the challenges
that the department is faced with, notes its progress and is confident that
it shall continue to strive to maintain and protect a just, peaceful and
safe society by enforcing court-imposed sentences and detaining prisoners
in safe custody.

The hon the Minister's task is not an easy one.

Inzima le mithwalo yakhe. Ngithi makaqhubeke aze afike ngasekugcineni lapho
azofike athulule khona le mithwalo yakhe. [His burdens are heavy. I would
like to say that he must forge ahead until he gets to a place where he can
lift them off.]

The MF supports the Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Mnr D V BLOEM: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek wil die nuwe Kommissaris, mnr Mti,
baie gelukwens met sy aanstelling. Ek wil ook vir regters Desai en Fagan
wat hier teenwoordig is, hartlik welkom sê. [Applous.] Daar is egter 'n
probleem. Ek dink die regter het nie reg gemaak om vandag hier te wees nie,
want die banke aan hierdie kant is leeg. Dit is 'n groot, groot probleem.

Ek het altyd gewonder hoekom dit is dat wanneer ek gevangenisse besoek, die
gevangenes altyd kla. Die eerste klagte, sodra ek net in die gevangenis
kom, is: Die bewaarders eet ons kos op. Ek het myself afgevra of dit die
waarheid is of nie. Ek begin half te glo, want na vier maande wat mnr Mti
in sy posisie is, kyk hoe lyk hy nou. Hy was skraal toe ons hom aangestel
het. [Gelag.] Miskien kan ek dit glo. Ons sal dit ondersoek.

Ek wil oor vier dinge praat. Die eerste is die paroolbeleid; tweedens, jeug
in die gevangenisse; derdens, die Boulevard-hotel; en die vierde is
korrupsie en Apops. Ek gaan baie min tyd spandeer op Apops en op die
Boulevard-hotel. Ek wil dit net onder die Minister se aandag bring dat iets
gedoen moet word aan hierdie twee projekte.

Ek kom nou by die paroolbeleid. Ek weet die Minister het gesê die
aanbeveling word aan regter Desai gestuur, maar hy weet self die regter is
nou baie druk besig met ander dinge. [Gelag.] Ek vra my af hoe lank mense
nou nog in die tronk op parool gaan wag. Laat ek vir agb lede sê waarom ek
dit vra.

Ek gaan 'n voorbeeld maak van die Boesak-saak en die Babeile-saak. Elke
provinsie het sy eie paroolbeleid. Ek weet dit. Dit is uiters dringend
nodig dat ons so gou as moontlik kyk na hierdie beleid sodat die tronke
landwyd dieselfde beleid uitvoer wanneer dit by parool kom, want ons sit
met baie mense daar en hulle is nie so gelukkig soos Boesak en Babeile nie.
Ons moet daarna kyk.

Ek kom nou by korrupsie. Ek wil oor korrupsie in die tronk praat.
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr D V BLOEM: Mr Chairperson, I would like to congratulate the new
commissioner, Mr Mti, on his appointment. I would also like to extend a
warm welcome to judges Desai and Fagan who are present here. [Applause.]
However, there is a problem. I do not think the judge was right in coming
here today, because the benches on this side are empty. That is a big, big
problem.

I have always wondered why it is that whenever I visit prisons, the
prisoners are always complaining. The first complaint, as soon as I arrive
at the prison, is: The warders are eating our food. I have asked myself
whether this is true or not. I am almost beginning to believe this, because
after the four months that Mr Mti has been in this position, take a look at
him now. He was slender when we appointed him. [Laughter.] Perhaps I can
believe it. We will investigate this.

I would like to speak about four things. The first is the parole policy;
the second, youths in the prisons; the third, the Boulevard Hotel; and the
fourth is corruption and Apops. I am going to spend very little time on
Apops and on the Boulevard Hotel. I would just like to bring it to the
Minister's attention that something must be done about these two projects.

Now I come to the parole policy. I know that the Minister has said that the
recommendation is being sent to Judge Desai, but he himself knows that the
judge is now very busy with other things. [Laughter.] I then ask myself,
how long will people still have to await parole in prison? Let me tell hon
members why I ask this.

I am going to make an example of the Boesak case and the Babeile case. Each
province has its own parole policy. I know this. It is extremely, urgently
necessary that we look at this policy as soon as possible in order that
prisons countrywide may implement the same policy when it comes to parole,
because we are sitting with many people there and they are not as lucky as
Boesak and Babeile. We have to take a look at this.

I now come to corruption. I would like to talk about corruption in prison.]

Mr M J ELLIS: You know all about it? [Interjections.]

Mnr D V BLOEM: Wag, laat ons eerste van die jeug praat ... Daardie agb lid
weet natuurlik ons gaan hom in die tronk sit. Hy is nie ver nie!
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Die jeug in die tronke ... [Tussenwerpsels.] Laat ek die Huis wys. Ek praat
van die jeug. Ek het hier 'n koerantopskrif wat lui: ``Serial killer was
born in jail.'' Hierdie jong man is 27 jaar oud. Hierdie jong man is binne-
in die tronk in Kroonstad gebore. Sy ma is in hegtenis geneem vir dagga.
Wanneer? In 1973, toe hulle hierdie land geregeer het. [Tussenwerpsels.] In
1973! Hulle het moordenaars en misdadigers van ons mense gemaak.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Laat ons nie dieselfde pad volg wat hierdie mense geloop het nie.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Laat ons met die jeug werk wat daar binnekant in die
tronke sit. Daar is te veel jeugdiges wat daar sit vir geringe oortredings.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Ons moenie veroorsaak dat hierdie jeugdiges daar uitkom
en verhard is nie. Hierdie man, Tshediso, sit daar. Hy het in die tronk
grootgeword.

Ek kom nou by korrupsie. Die Jali-kommissie ... [Tussenwerpsels.] Daardie
agb lede skree nou, maar dit is hulle dinge wat die Jali-kommissie nou
uitbring. Daar is 'n klomp dinge wat in die tronk gebeur het. Hulle het
mafias in die tronk gehad. Mense is gekoop om ander mense dood te maak.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Die agb mnr Lee praat so van Kroonstad, maar hy weet nie
eens waar Kroonstad is nie! [Gelag.]

Ons het die gevangenisse oorgeneem. As ons nou kyk na hierdie mense wat
hier agter sit, is hulle 'n toonbeeld van hoe in beheer ons van die
gevangenisse is. Die agb Minister moenie luister na wat die agb lid mev
Cupido vir hom sê nie. Hy is in beheer. Kyk net hoe mooi lyk hierdie mense
wat hier agter sit! [Applous.] Daar is nou dissipline in die tronk, van die
kommissaris tot by die laaste lid.

Dit was nie so nie. Daar was chaos in die tronke. [Tussenwerpsels.] Dit was
'n deurmekaarspul. Mense het mekaar nie gerespekteer en geëer nie, maar
vandag weet ek as mnr Mti by 'n tronk inloop, wéét hulle hy is die
kommissaris. [Tussenwerpsels.] As enigeen by 'n tronk inkom, weet hulle
daar is nie kriminele in die departement nie.

Ons wil die agb Minister bedank vir die aanstelling van die Jali-kommissie.
Daar gaan nog baie dinge uitkom. Ons gaan die tweede Desai-kommissie oor
hierdie storie van die tronke hê, want groot mense se name gaan uitkom.
[Applous.] Groot mense se name gaan uitkom wat mense saans uit die tronk
gaan haal het om banke te beroof en mense te gaan doodmaak. Dit is die
korrupsie. Ons is so trots op die ANC-regering wat openlik uitkom en ons
wys wat gebeur het, want ons staan nie vir korrupsie nie. Ons wil korrupsie
uitroei. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Die Moruti het gevra waar was die agb lid mev Cupido. [Gelag.] Ek vra dit
ook. [Tussenwerpsels.] Sy woon nie die vergaderings by nie en sy weet nie
wat in die komitee aan die gang is nie, maar vandag kom praat sy hier asof
sy 'n koningin is. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Ons sê hierdie ANC-regering ... [Tussenwerpsels.] Ons weet dat ons hierdie
land gaan ... Die mense wat nou voor die Desai-kommissie is; ek sal vir
hulle selle regmaak daar in die tronk. As hulle kan ingaan, dan vat ons
hulle. Pollsmoor is te vol. Ons vat hulle na die Goodwoodgevangenis of na
Malmesbury toe. Dis mooi tronke. Hulle sal daardie oranje klere aantrek as
die regter met hulle klaar is. Ons weet daar is mense wat gaan sink.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Die agb Lee moenie gou praat nie, want miskien is hy een
van hulle wat gaan sit. Ek wil aan die agb Minister sê ...
[Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr D V BLOEM: Wait, let us talk about the youth first ... That hon member
knows, of course, that we are going to put him in prison. He is not far
from it! [Interjections.]

The youth in prisons ... [Interjections.] Let me show the House. I am
speaking about the youth. I have here a newspaper headline which reads:
``Serial killer was born in jail.'' This young man is 27 years old. This
young man was born in prison in Kroonstad. His mother was taken into
custody for dagga. When? In 1973, when they governed the country.
[Interjections.] In 1973! They made murderers and criminals of our people.
[Interjections.]

Let us not follow the same path these people followed. [Interjections.] Let
us work with the youth who are sitting in the prisons. There are too many
youths sitting there for minor transgressions. [Interjections.] We should
not cause these youths to come out of there hardened. This man, Tshediso,
is sitting there. He grew up in prison.

I now come to corruption. The Jali Commission ... [Interjections.] Those
hon members are screaming now, but it is their issues that the Jali
Commission is now bringing to the fore. There are a number of things that
have happened in prison. They had mafias in prisons. People were bought to
murder other people. [Interjections.] The hon Mr Lee is speaking like that
of Kroonstad, but he doesn't even know where Kroonstad is! [Laughter.]

We have taken over the prisons. When we look at these people who are
sitting over here at the back, they are an example of how in control we are
of the prisons. The hon the Minister should not listen to what the hon
member Mrs Cupido is saying to him. He is in control. Just look at how
beautiful these people look sitting here at the back! [Applause.] Now there
is discipline in prison, from the commissioner down to the last member.

It wasn't like that. There was chaos in prisons. [Interjections.] There was
utter confusion. People did not respect or honour one another, but today I
know that when Mr Mti enters a prison, they know he is the commissioner.
[Interjections.] When anyone enters a prison, they know there are no
criminals in the department.

We would like to thank the hon the Minister for the appointment of the Jali
Commission. Many things will still come to light. We will have the second
Desai Commission with regard to this story of the prisons, because the
names of prominent people will come out. [Applause.] The names will be
disclosed of prominent people who fetched people from prison at night in
order for them to rob banks and kill people. That is the corruption. We are
so proud of the ANC Government that has openly come out and shown us what
has happened, because we do not stand for corruption. We want to eradicate
corruption. [Interjections.]

The Moruti has asked where the hon member Mrs Cupido was. [Laughter.] I am
also asking that. [Interjections.] She does not attend the meetings and she
does not know what is happening in the committee, but today she speaks here
as if she is a queen. [Interjections.]

We say that this ANC Government ... [Interjections.] we know, regarding
this country that we are going to ... The people who are currently before
the Desai Commission, I will prepare their cells for them in prison. If
they can go to prison, then we will take them. Pollsmoor is too crowded. We
will take them to the Goodwood Prison or to Malmesbury. Those are nice
prisons. They will dress in orange clothes when the judge is finished with
them. We know there are people who will sink. [Interjections.] The hon Lee
must not talk too soon, because perhaps he is one of them who will sit. I
would like to say to the hon the Minister ... [Interjections.]]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order! [Interjections.] Hon
members, order! Hon member, are you rising on a point of order?

Mnr T D LEE: Ek gaan met u Afrikaans praat, want die agb lid het in
Afrikaans gepraat. [I will speak Afrikaans to you, because the hon member
spoke in Afrikaans.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, I first want to
know: Are you rising on a point of order?

Mr T D LEE: Yes, I am rising on a point of order.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: What is the point of order?

Mnr T D LEE: In sy rede nou het hierdie lid aangevoer dat ek 'n krimineel
is en dat ek een van daardie is wat sal tronk toe gaan. Ek dink dit is
onparlementêr. [Tussenwerpsels.] [In his speech the member asserted that I
was a criminal and that I was one of those who would be going to prison. I
think that is unparliamentary. [Interjections.]]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, did you make that
allegation? Would you please withdraw it.

Mr D V BLOEM: Nee, Voorsitter, ek het nooit gesê dat hierdie lid 'n
misdadiger is nie. Ek het gesê: Miskien is hierdie lid ... daar stem sy
kollegas agter hom saam. Ek het nooit gesê hy is 'n krimineel nie. [No,
Chairperson, I never said that this member was a criminal. I said that
perhaps this member ... there his colleagues behind him agree. I never said
he was a criminal.]

Mrs P W CUPIDO: That was the implication.

Mr D V BLOEM: Jy met jou ``implication'', ek sal jou nou ``implicate''.
[Applous.] [You with your ``implication'', I will ``implicate'' you!
[Applause.]

Mr T D LEE: Voorsitter, miskien verstaan u nie Afrikaans so goed soos ek
nie. Die lid het definitief gesê dat ek een van daardie is wat miskien sal
tronk toe gaan. [Chairperson, perhaps you do not understand Afrikaans as
well as I do. The member definitely said that I was one of those who would
perhaps go to prison.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, what I will do, is
I will look at the Hansard and if there is any allegation that refers
directly to you, that will have to be withdrawn.

Mnr D V BLOEM: In die laaste paar sekondes wat ek oorhet, wil ek net
asseblief weer by die Minister pleit vir die salarisse van hierdie lede,
wat sulke belangrike en goeie werk doen. Ek dink hulle kom dit toe dat ons
hulle salarisse opskuif. Hulle werk met gevaarlike mense, wat hierdie Huis
gearresteer wil sien. Die mense daar buite sê ook: Hulle moet gearresteer
word. Ons moet nie hierdie lede behandel soos derdeklasmense of as nikswerd
nie. Hulle het iets nodig. Ons moet sorg dat hulle trots is, sodat wanneer
hulle werk toe gaan, hulle dit met ywer doen. Hulle moet met ywer kan sê:
Ons gaan ons land dien. [Applous.] [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr D V BLOEM: In the last few seconds I have left, I would, again, like to
make an appeal to the Minister for the salaries of these members who do
such important and good work. I think it is owed to them that we increase
their salaries. They work with dangerous people whom this House wants to
see arrested. The people out there also say that they must be arrested. We
must not treat these members as third-class people or as if they are
worthless. They need something. We must see to it that they are proud, so
that when they go to work they do so with diligence. They should be able to
say with enthusiasm that they will serve their country. [Applause.] [Time
expired.]]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, at some point in
your speech you made a reference to the physical attributes of an official
of the Department of Correctional Services. [Interjections.] I am not quite
certain what it is that you were trying to say, but I would like to reserve
the position of the Chair. I think you might have been out of order. For
the sake of the whole House, members may make reference to themselves, to
the political parties or those that are within the House. Members may make
complimentary remarks regarding officials, but anything else would be
completely out of order. If that is the situation, I would ask you to
withdraw. Let me also check on that.

Mnr D V BLOEM: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek wil hierdie woorde terugtrek. Die
kommissaris eet nie die gevangenes se kos op nie. Ek trek dit terug. Maar
kyk net hoe vet is hulle almal. [Gelag.] [Tussenwerpsels.] [Mr Chairperson,
I would like to withdraw these words. The commissioner does not eat the
prisoners' food. I withdraw that. But just look at how fat they all are.
[Laughter.] [Interjections.]]

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, firstly, I would also
like to acknowledge the presence of Justice Desai and Justice Fagan over
there, and some of their colleagues who are with them. [Applause.] I did
mention them in my speech. But I must also say in response to the debate -
I think it was positive - that most of the issues raised by members here
were issues that ought to be discussed in the portfolio committee, if we
are going to mount a programme to resolve them.

Otherwise, I thought most of the members were positive in terms of wanting
to guide us and raise their issues. For instance, I think the chairperson,
Mr Mashimbye, is correct when he says that we should also place emphasis on
prevention rather than incarceration, and that has been what we were trying
to do most of the time. And, yes, this will also increase the expenditure.
Once we embark on that programme, it does not mean that we will stop
incarceration. It is an additional method, which means that we will have
additional expenditure also. But these are things that members have also
promised to help us with.
The points that hon member Cupido raised are points that we have been
systematically dealing with, from the side of the Auditor-General, the
Department for the Public Service and Administration, the Public Service
Commission and the Jali Commission. Those are the issues that we are
dealing with systematically. This means that we are on top of the problems
ourselves. But then I think it was the spirit in which she raised them
which made people feel that she was simply running amok. [Laughter.]

Responding to the hon Mr Ferreira, yes, I think we are and have been trying
to deal with this issue of disparity in terms of the budgets, or the money
received by Correctional Services. I think this is going to be one of the
tasks of the Commissioner to pursue this point, but again, we should also
remember that it is a question of where Government places some of the
priorities, whether it is on health, housing, education and so on.
Correctional Services or the prison system then ends up being last, but
this is a phenomenon happening in most countries. In some countries they do
not even talk about the prison system, because their budgets do not even
allow them to talk about the prison system. I am talking about some
countries in the East, the West and even on the continent. They do not talk
about a prison system because they have no money for that, so if one
commits a crime it is one's own responsibility.

To Mr Ferreira I also say that we are also striving towards self-
sufficiency in production, especially food production. I think at the
moment about 72% of our food is produced by prisons and only the balance
comes from our budget from Government.

I think the hon member Mr Oosthuizenÿ ... [Interjections.] ... was correct
to link rehabilitation and crime reduction in the long run. This is how we
see it ourselves. That is why we have also established this programme or
approach of restorative justice, because we believe that these are
intertwined. One cannot reduce crime if one is not going to make sure that
those who leave prison, in fact, are rehabilitated and they can begin
reintegrating into society without reoffending. But again, one also needs
to change drastically the mindset of the public, which means constant
public education about ex-offenders, otherwise the public continues to
stigmatise them and a few months later they believe that hijacking cars was
better than having nothing. So they begin hijacking cars, assaulting and
stealing and going back to prison.

The hon member Van Deventer has left. He raised the issue of budgetary
constraints, which I believe also need to be dealt with in the portfolio
committee. Again, it touches on the priorities of Government allocation, in
terms of what we need as Government at that point in time.

The hon Mr Fihla is right - as long as the criminal justice system is
successful it must impact on the prisons. This means that the member is
right to say that we must constantly search for noncustodial sanctions,
which he calls community corrections and so on. I think it is also a very
good approach to pursue. The hon Mr Swart also touched on the sufficient
budget increase and we agree with him.

Regarding the question of Apops - Asset Procurement and Operating
Partnership Systems - I did say in the morning that we want to put it on
the agenda of the portfolio committee so that we can deal with that issue
in detail, because there are pros and cons and some talk about whether they
are economically viable.

I do not know whether one has in any country a prison system which is
economically viable, because once one has prisoners they are the
responsibility of the state - from the shoes upward to the head,
medication, housing, everything. If one wants to rehabilitate them one has
to buy books, raw materials and everything. It is not like taking one's
child to school and buying him books, clothing and so on. A prisoner
becomes the state's responsibility perpetually, until he leaves prison. So
one cannot have an economically viable prison. However, we would have to
look at that in terms of the overall economy of the country.

Bishop Tolo, e, ke a dumellana le wena ka moral regeneration ena. Jwaloka
ha o boletse le wena hore Motlatsa Moporesidente o re buletse mohlala a
fumana hore Correctional Service ke yona e leng mahareng a moral
regeneration ho lokisa batho, empa re qale ho ba lokisa hona mane
diteronkong. Ke a dumellana le wena he, haholo moo ntate. [Honourable
Bishop Tolo, yes, I do agree with you regarding this moral regeneration
issue. As you mentioned, the Deputy President gave us a perfect example
when he discovered that Correctional Services is at the centre of moral
regeneration in rehabilitating people, but that we need to start
rehabilitating them right there, in prisons. I'd like to agree with you on
that point, hon member.]

I also agree with the hon Mr Mfundisi that we need to have our budget
increased. He touched on the subject of private prisons. I think that
debate must go back to the portfolio committee. Mr Mfundisi also spoke
about the boulevard structure. I think that is another debt which we owe
the portfolio committee, to in fact explain what the whole background is
behind the story of this boulevard structure. We need to do that very soon,
because I believe it would simply get out of hand if we do not do that.

The member has also touched on prison visits by religious leaders. I think
we will want to entertain that also, because when we talk about moral
regeneration and restorative justice, we cannot run away from religious
leaders visiting prisons. We need to engage that issue, otherwise we would
be talking out of turn if we want to rehabilitate prisoners, and then shut
religious leaders out of the system.

The hon member Mr Diale, like other members, also touched on the subject of
rehabilitation and community involvement, which is what we are also
advocating very strongly at this point in time. That is why I was saying
that if the community is not ready to deal with ex-offenders and deal with
others who are on parole and probation, then we still have a problem there.
Community involvement in many of our projects has become imperative now.

The hon member Rajbally, like the rest, also touched on the subject of
overcrowding. That one is a monkey on our shoulder forever. I do not see us
making a strong impact in the short time that we have been dealing with
these problems.

However, I also enumerated a number of efforts we are embarking on, which
involve the courts, the police and other stakeholders, to deal with the
issue of overcrowding.

With regard to gangsterism, we may want to go back to that issue as well.
We do have gangsters in some of our prisons, but so far they are not posing
the kind of problem one sees in other countries, especially in the United
States.

The hon member Mr Bloemÿ ... [Interjections.]

Mr T D LEE: He's a thief!

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Who said that?

HON MEMBERS: Mr Lee!

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Will you please withdraw that,
and I think there was someone else.

Mr T D LEE: I withdraw it, Chairperson.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Yes, and someone else.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Well, Mr Chairman, you have already
come to the rescue of my commissioner.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! And hon Minister, I give you
just about 50 seconds to wind up. We are over our time.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, I am saying that you
have already come to the rescue of my commissioner. Otherwise, I was going
to be very strict on the other man.

The hon Bloem mentioned Boulevard and Apops. I think we are placing those
issues on the agenda of the portfolio committee. With regard to the parole,
also, I think it is a question of a transition. Yes, the present parole
boards are working, but we know that they are not working effectively.
There are a number of flaws in them. That is why we are changing to the new
system. However, the question of transition is giving us some problems
there, but I think the honourable judge will take us through that.

The last issue that the hon member mentioned was corruption. I think it has
been mentioned throughout the debates here. I said a lot about that and
about how we want to deal with that in my speech.

Lastly, Mr Chairman, I simply want to thank everybody who has participated
and debated, as well as those who stayed in the House to listen. I do not
want to detain members any further. I think the people from community
corrections have made some food and I will not make this assembly a
detention. Members can go and have some food at community corrections out
there. I know there are those, like myself, who have not cooked. Therefore,
members do not have to cook tonight. We have cooked. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, you are invited
to take advantage of the preparations made by the Department of
Correctional Services.

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 19:17.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                             MONDAY, 3 JUNE 2002

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:
Papers:

1.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism:


     (a)    The Convention for the Protection, Management and Development of
         Marine and Coastal Environment of the East African Region and
         Related Protocols (Nairobi Convention), tabled in terms of section
         231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention.


     (c)    The Convention for Co-operation in the Protection and
         Development of the Marine and Coastal Environment of the West and
         Central African Region and Related Protocols (Abidjan Convention),
         tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (d)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention.

2.    The Minister of Labour:


     Annual Report and Financial Statements of the Unemployment Insurance
     Fund for 2000, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for the year ended 31 December 2000 [RP 207-2001].

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs on
     the Planning Profession Amendment Bill [B 76 - 2001] (National Assembly
     - sec 75), dated 23 May 2002:


         The Portfolio Committee on  Agriculture and Land Affairs, having
         considered the subject of the Planning Profession Amendment Bill
         [B 76 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and
         classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill,
         reports the Bill with amendments [B 76A - 2001].

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works on study tour to
     provinces, dated 21 November 2001:


     The Portfolio Committee on Public Works, having undertaken a study tour
     to the nine provinces between 23 July and 1 August 2001, reports as
     follows:


     A.     Introduction


         The Committee undertook the study tour to monitor progress that
         was being made in restoring infrastructure that was damaged by
         floods, as well as to view community-based projects. The Committee
         also investigated measures that had been taken to safeguard
         infrastructure against future floods and to investigate how the
         provinces maintained state-owned properties.


         The Committee was divided into three delegations, consisting of
         five members each. Each delegation concentrated on three
         provinces. The delegation to the Northern Province, Gauteng and
         North West consisted of Mr B A Radebe, Hosi C J Hlaneki, Mrs T P
         Shilubana and Mr A S van der Merwe.


         The Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal and Mpumalanga delegation
         consisted of Inkosi M W Hlengwa, Mr E M Sigwela, Mr N E Magubane
         and Mr J Schippers.


         The Free State, Northern Cape and Western Cape delegation
         consisted of Ms P S Sekgobela, Ms N M Twala, Mr S E Opperman and
         Kgoshi Mothiba. Each delegation had support staff provided by the
         Committee Section.


     B.     Findings - Northern Province


         1. Meeting with MEC and officials of Department of Transport,
              Roads and Public Works


              The MEC provided general background on flood relief funding
              and a progress report. It was felt that the national
              government had allocated too little funding to the province.
              The funds were allocated to all departments to be shared for
              flood-damage repairs. Most of the money had already been spent
              in a number of critical areas. Some of the funds that were
              allocated to the Department of Transport, Roads and Public
              Works, were distributed between the Community-Based Public
              Works Programme (CBPWP) and the Northern Province Road Agency
              (NPRA). However, most of it had been used for reconstruction
              of roads and bridges. The department had requested R1,396
              billion for reconstruction of roads and bridges, but only R13
              million was granted. Despite this small amount, the department
              was trying very hard to address the backlogs.


         2. Report from Northern Province Road Agency (NPRA)


              (a) Financial and physical report


                  The total recorded expenditure from the time of the
                  floods up to 29 June 2001 was R325 million. This amount
                  consisted of R313 million spent on projects detailed in
                  this report and R12 million spent from the NPRA budget. A
                  total of 25 projects out of 27 had been completed. Road
                  D3675 had not been completed and the final completion
                  date had been revised to 27 July 2001. The final
                  completion of Road D3537 had been revised to 20 July
                  2001. Project NPRA/45/1/2000 had been completed, except
                  for the road markings. This had been temporarily halted
                  in order to allow the chemicals from the seal work to
                  evaporate.


              (b) Road repairs, bridge approaches and bridge repair
                  contracts


                  Out of 19 projects, 15 had been completed and the
                  remaining four had practically reached completion. NPRA
                  project TO88/9/2000 had been completed, but the final
                  work had been impeded by the liquidation of the
                  contractor. Another contractor had been appointed to
                  complete the work. Affirmable Business Enterprise (ABE)
                  contractors had done 28% of the work in respect of road
                  repair, bridge approaches and bridge repair package of
                  contracts.


                  The following projects needed special attention:
                  * NPRA/T088/4/2000 (Roads D523, 589 and 673). Poor
                    progress had been made on the final finishing of the
                    site. The completion date had been revised to 20 July
                    2001.


                  * NPRA/T088/10/2000 (Road D3685). Poor progress on the
                    final finishing of the site. Practical completion was
                    achieved on 20 June 2001 and final completion had been
                    set for 31 July 2001.


                  * NPRA/T088/15/2000. The project managers had indicated
                    that the work had not been satisfactorily completed.
                    The contractor was back on the site to complete the
                    remaining work.


              (c) The Committee was able to visit some of the completed
                  projects:


                  * Piling had been completed on nine bridges.


                  * Beam placement on Bridge 1 (Doornspruit River) had been
                    completed and deck casting preparation was progressing.


                  * One of the five spans on Bridge 2 (Nzhelele River) had
                    been replaced.


                  * Five beams of the nine spans on Bridge 3 (Nzhelele
                    River) had been replaced.


                  * The beams for the five spans on Bridge 4 (Hanthabalala:
                    Klein Leteba River) had been replaced and preparation
                    of the bridge deck for casting was progressing.


                  * Construction of the first abutment and pier on Bridge 5
                    (Mbokota-Mashamba: Klein Letaba River) had been
                    completed, and the shuttering of the first two decks of
                    the six spans was progressing.


                  * Construction on the deck of Bridge 6 (Karringmelk
                    River) and half of the balustrades had been completed.
                    Construction on the remaining balustrades had started.


                  * Both abutments and piers on Bridge 7 (Malavhuwe-
                    Tshivhivhi) had been completed and two beams for the
                    three spans had been placed.


                  * Bridges 8 and 12 (Indermark A-B and Mogalakwena River)
                    had been completed.


                  * Bridge 9 (Moeketsi River) had been completed, except
                    for the balustrades.


                  * Construction on the abutments and piers of Bridge 10
                    (Middle Letaba River) had been completed. The
                    construction of the first three of the seven spans of
                    the deck had also been completed.


                  * Progress on Bridge 13 was halted as a result of a
                    member of Stefanutti & Bressan/GDL JV, Labor (Pty) Ltd,
                    being liquidated. Stefanutti & Bressan had undertaken
                    to complete the project. The bridge was completed and
                    the earthworks were progressing.


                  * The casting of beams at the CONCOR pre-cast yard in
                    Louis Trichardt had continued. A total number of 120
                    beams out of 133 had been completed.


                  * The work done by Affirmable Business Entrepreneurs
                    (ABE) made up 17% of the total value of work done on
                    the bridge contracts.


              (d) Discussions


                  The N1 National Road that ran to neighbouring countries
                  was an additional problem. Damage caused by trucks from
                  these countries was severe and as a result the costs of
                  repairing and maintaining them were high. Trucks that
                  came from other countries or provinces bypassed the N1
                  into Routane and Middelburg, causing costly damage. The
                  following proposals were made to address this problem:


                  * Roads must be classified.
                  * Some regional roads should be transferred to the
                    district municipality.


                  * Other roads should be transferred to the Provincial
                    Road Agency.


                  * Roads that cut across the province and led to other
                    countries via the N1 should be transferred to the
                    national Department of Transport.


                  A further problem was a shortage of diesel that caused
                  delays in completing projects. The provincial department
                  requested assistance from the Committee to register the
                  Northern Provincial Road Agency by amending the National
                  Road Agency Act.


                  The department indicated that the backlogs the MEC had
                  referred to could only be addressed by increasing the
                  budget. There was a shortfall of R700 million as only
                  R539 million had been allocated to the NPRA. This amount
                  had been spent on provincial roads only and not on local
                  roads. The road to the airport could not be repaired
                  since it belonged to the SANDF, which did not want to
                  repair it as it was not considered a priority. The NPRA
                  was considering taking responsibility for the road and
                  the Committee needed to assist it in this matter.


                  The Trans-Limpopo Corridor brought economic spin-offs due
                  to discussions between Matebeleland in Zimbabwe and the
                  province. This kind of initiative needed to be
                  strengthened. Bilateral discussions that encouraged
                  economic development should be supported.


         3. Community-Based Public Works Programme (CBPWP)


              (a) Background


                  The CBPWP was initiated in the 1994-95 financial year and
                  was kick-started by the Community Empowerment Programme
                  and carried out by the Independent Development Trust
                  (IDT). The CBPWP was administered by the provincial
                  administration and NGOs. The programme was targeting the
                  poorest communities, women, youth and disabled persons.


                  The programme received its funding from the national and
                  provincial Departments of Public Works. The national
                  department had consolidated the strategic projects to
                  forge partnerships and co-ordination between stakeholders
                  to improve the lives of the poor.


              (b) Strategic Projects and Allocations


                  Community Production Centres (CPCs)


                  The CPCs were established to promote production
                  activities for the market. The basis for the success of
                  the CPCs is effective co-ordination, partnership, and the
                  blending of policies and strategies by the government,
                  private organisations and communities.


                  In the Northern Province, this programme is managed in
                  partnership with the Department of Agriculture, with the
                  IDT as implementing agent. The following two areas were
                  identified with their allocations:


                  *  Elandskraal production center (R2,5 million)


                  *  Upper Oliphants production centre (R5 million)


              (c) Clean and Green programme


                  South African Breweries is sponsoring this project and is
                  targeting unemployed youth in urban areas where there is
                  no waste management system. People are contracted to
                  provide cleaning and greening services in their own
                  communities. Local authorities are encouraged to budget
                  for this service. This programme is implemented by the
                  IDT. The following areas were identified with their
                  allocations:


                  * Nylstroom Clean and Green (R700 000)
                  * Thohoyandou Clean and Green (R700 000)


              (d) Youth working towards environmental accessibility


                  This programme was implemented in 2000-01 as a
                  partnership between the National Youth Commission and the
                  Office on the Status of Disabled Persons. The following
                  were the objectives of this project:


                  * Making public properties and buildings accessible to
                    the disabled.


                  * Providing training for the construction of facilities
                    for the disabled, youth and women.


                  * Maximising the utilisation of the youth, women and
                    disabled persons.


                  * Achieving socio-economic development and empowerment
                    through training, the appointment of service providers
                    and the provision of sustainable facilities.


              (e) HIV/Aids Infrastructure Support Programme


                  This is a new programme aimed at building, repairing or
                  upgrading infrastructure which will benefit rural
                  communities to offset the devastation caused by HIV/Aids.
                  The national department has contributed R10 million for
                  this cause to five provinces. The Northern Province
                  received R4 184 264 and for the coming two years it will
                  receive R2 607 878.


              (f) Multi-purpose Community Centres (MPCCs)


                  The purpose of MPCCs is to provide one-stop service
                  centres within rural areas for government services to the
                  community. The following departments and parastatals
                  provide services to communities:


                  * Local government, through district councils in rural
                    areas, for water supply, municipal services, local
                    administration and maintenance.


                  * Department of Welfare, for pension and disability grant
                    pay-outs.


                  * Department of Health, for clinics and primary health
                    care.


                  * Department of Education, particularly for adult
                    education.


                  * Post Office, for postal services.


                  * Telkom, for telephone services, payments and fault
                    reporting.


                  * Eskom for electricity services, payments and fault
                    reporting.


              (g) Provincial CBPWP Projects


                  The following projects were funded in 2000-01:


                  Tshituni/Pfumbada                           R842 083,40
                  Mayeke School                               R710 083,30
                  Makoxa Cultural Village Phase 1        R947 083,30


                  The funds were transferred to the former Northern
                  District Council, which is an implementation agent. The
                  establishment of the new district councils caused delays
                  in the implementing of the projects in that funds had to
                  be re-transferred from the old district council to the
                  new council. This has been addressed. A business plan for
                  Makoxa is in place and the overall planning process for
                  the projects has been finalised.


                  The following projects were funded in 2001-02:


                  Moletji Production Centre  R235 294
                  Pfuka Rixile Poultry Phase 1     R847 059
                  GaChuene Tourism (Basadi ba Bapedi)    R829 412
                  Makoxa Cultural Village Phase 2  R588 235


                  District municipalities experienced delays in
                  implementing the programme. However, an NGO has been
                  appointed as implementing agent.


              (h) National CBPWP Projects


                  The district municipalities have signed a contract with
                  the national department for the next three financial
                  years. The allocations are as follows:


                  Sekhukhune District Municipality (NP8)


                  * 2001-02       R8,5 million
                  * 2002-03       R11,3 million
                  * 2003-04       R12,47 million


                  Waterberg District Municipality


                  * 2001-02       R6,8 million
                  * 2002-03       R2,5 million
                  * 2003-04       R2,6 million


                  Vhembe District Municipality


                  * 2001-02       R10,09 million
                  * 2002-03       R13,37 million
                  * 2003-04       R14,35 million


                  Capricorn District Municipality


                  * 2001-02       R24,6 million
                  * 2002-03       R18,8 million
                  * 2003-04       R20,2 million
                  Eastern District Municipality


                  * 2001-02       R5,6 million
                  * 2002-03       R7,4 million
                  * 2003-04       R7,9 million


                  Mopani District Municipality


                  * 2001-02       R7,59 million
                  * 2002-03       R10,03 million
                  * 2003-04       R10,76 million


              (i) Problems Encountered
                  *   Lack of municipal capacity to implement the
                       programme.


                  *   The process of transferring assets to municipalities
                       without a maintenance budget.


                  *   The national department did not provide funds for
                       electrification projects.


                  *   Start-up funding on productive assets was needed to
                       sustain the projects.


         4. Status Report on Asset Register and Maintenance Backlogs


              (a) Background Information


                  The asset register for the Northern Province Department
                  of Public Works was established in 1999 and since that
                  time progress has been made in updating the information
                  in the asset register.


                  The Northern Province inherited poor records, and there
                  was no smooth handover of functions and asset registers
                  from the homeland governments.


                  The aim of the asset register is to capture all fixed
                  properties belonging to the Northern Province government.
                  Initially no proper records were kept regarding the
                  properties belonging to the provincial government.
                  Currently, in the former homelands the property
                  information is incomplete due to the unavailability of
                  title deeds. In the former homelands State properties
                  were not registered with the Deeds Office, hence there
                  were no title deeds. This impeded the process of
                  compiling the asset register.


                  The provincial government assets that are known are
                  recorded in the register. The register contains
                  additional information on each property, such as the
                  title deed number and the date of acquisition.


                  There may be some government properties that the
                  department is not aware of. The department is carrying
                  out a deeds search to identify all properties named "RSA"
                  in the Northern Province. The known properties will be
                  checked against the list and will be registered. A check
                  will be done to ascertain whether the remaining
                  properties belong to the national government or not. Any
                  remaining properties will then be assumed to belong to
                  the province. To facilitate the vesting and disposal
                  processes, the department has installed two invaluable
                  tools, the Aktex system that is linked to the Registrar
                  of Deeds in Pretoria and a system linked to the
                  Department of Land Affairs.


              (b) Problems encountered with compiling Asset Register


                  The system linked to the Department of Land Affairs is
                  not reliable in terms of being fully operational. The
                  information on backlogs captured by the Land Affairs
                  Department is not readily available. The Deeds Office
                  does not recognise section 287(1) certificates issued by
                  the MEC in terms of the Northern Province Land
                  Administration Act.


              (c) Remedial measures
                  In order to ensure uniformity of the type and quality of
                  information captured in the asset register, a standard
                  template has been introduced for use by all regions. This
                  template is more detailed and information will be
                  classified according to the type of property, district
                  and municipality to which it belongs. It is anticipated
                  that 80% of the work will be completed by the end of
                  December 2001. There is proper supervision of regional
                  staff in capturing property information in the asset
                  register.


              (d) Maintenance backlogs


                  *   Background information


                       Insufficient emphasis was placed on the maintenance
                       of State property and as a result too little funding
                       was allocated for this purpose. This has resulted in
                       a serious deterioration of State infrastructure.


                  *   Maintenance backlogs


                       It must be noted that the budget for preventative and
                       maintenance activities is controlled by individual
                       user departments, with the exception of government
                       offices. Residential accommodation and road camps are
                       administered by Public Works.


                       The Building Management Services Directorate of
                       Public Works therefore serves as the project manager
                       responsible for developing maintenance programmes and
                       for providing building advice to departments. It also
                       protects departments in their dealings with external
                       consultants and contractors. Preventative maintenance
                       and rehabilitation have been classified into two
                       components, namely social and economic components.


     B.     Findings - Gauteng


         1. Report of Public Works and Management Services Branch of
              Department of Public Transport, Roads and Works for 2000-01


              (a) Report Focus


                  *   Poverty alleviation programmes


                  *   Job creation


                  *   Maintenance management of provincial fixed assets and
                       properties asset management
                  *   Provincial asset register


                  *   Identification of properties that fall within the
                       provincial ambit


              (b) Vision of Department of Transport and Public Works
                  To establish an integrated transport system and a client-
                  centred Public Works service which satisfies the needs of
                  the people, while supporting and facilitating social and
                  economic growth and developing all the people of Gauteng.


              (c) Mission of Department of Transport and Public Works


                  To promote accessibility, safety and affordable movement
                  of people, goods and services and render efficient and
                  cost-effective Public Works services in Gauteng.


              (d) Departmental strategic priorities


                  *   To sustain delivery for economic growth and
                       development


                  *   To target areas and groups for poverty alleviation,
                       social and economic upliftment


                  *   To maintain capital infrastructure investment for
                       optimal resource utilisation


                  *   To enhance financial accountability through budget
                       control and elimination of fraud and corruption


                  *   To secure alternative funding and resources for
                       sustainability
                  *   To develop mechanisms for communication, monitoring
                       and feedback


                  *   To implement institutional transformation through
                       targeted programmes of affirmative action and human
                       resource development.


         2. Discussion on progress in areas of operation


              (a) Department of Transport and Public Works Programmes


                  Professional ServicesMaintenance and CBPWPManagement
                  Services and Administration
                  Transport InfrastructureStrategic PlanningTransportation
                  ManagementTwo of the six programmes are transversal
                  programmes (Management Services and Administration, and
                  Strategic Planning). There are two programmes that fall
                  under the Transport Branch (Transport Infrastructure and
                  Transportation Management). The remaining two programmes
                  fall under the Public Works Branch, and these will be the
                  subject of this report, namely Professional Services and
                  Maintenance, and CBPWP.


              (b) Branch focus areas


                       In line with departmental strategic priorities, each
                       of the two branches had to identify annual focus
                       areas to fulfil the mandate of the department in
                       relation to provincial government priorities for the
                       current term of government. These are briefly
                       outlined below:
                  *   Review of Gauteng Public Works Operating Model


                       To fundamentally challenge and transform the approach
                       of the department towards the delivery of public
                       works functions in order to deliver a cost-effective
                       service to clients.


                  *   Asset management


                       To create an asset management, asset control, asset
                       maintenance, asset utilisation and monitoring system
                       for the province to ensure optimum utilisation of its
                       fixed assets and sustained values.


                  *   Maximisation of incomeTo ensure the development of
                       systems to maximise the income potential of the
                       department through improved revenue collection
                       mechanisms.


                  *   Procurement reform


                       To implement an affirmative procurement strategy to
                       ensure SMME development and black economic
                       empowerment within the framework of quality service
                       delivery to the public of Gauteng Province.


                  *   Economic reform


                       To pro-actively intervene in training and development
                       of small business units in the private sector. The
                       department should guide them into the mainstream of
                       the economy.


                  *   Fraud awareness and anti-corruption drive
                       There is a need to constantly develop and improve
                       systems to ensure the early identification of fraud
                       and corruption and putting in place measures to
                       correct weak points or loopholes in systems or
                       processes.


                     • Job creation


                       To increase the job creation potential of the
                       infrastructure delivery programmes of the department.


                  *   Proposed model for department


                       This model is in line with financial management
                       reform at national level. The Gauteng Department of
                       Public Transport, Roads and Works has embarked on a
                       process of developing a business model for the public
                       works branch. This process is centred around the
                       repositioning of the public works functions that
                       improve the way it delivers services to various
                       client departments.The new business model will
                       involve the creation of business units for
                       maintenance services and professional services. It is
                       envisaged that these should operate on commercial
                       principles and a service fee basis. The department
                       has already entered into service delivery agreements
                       with the various client departments. The purpose of
                       the service delivery agreements is to regulate
                       service delivery and the relationship between the
                       department and the various client departments in the
                       province.


                  *   Job creation programmes


                       The Cabinet Lekgotla of April 2001 mandated the
                       Department of Public Transport, Roads and Works to
                       concentrate on job creation. This entails developing
                       a series of programmes aimed at increasing job
                       creation potential through infrastructure delivery
                       programmes.


                  *   Human resources development


                       The department has, through the Ministerial and
                       Members of Executive Council Committee (MINMEC)
                       developed a template for skills development in the
                       public works sphere.
                  *   Provincial hostels


                       In 1999, four hostels were transferred from the
                       Department of Housing to the Department of Public
                       Transport, Roads and Works. These included George
                       Goch, Denver, MBA and Wolhuter/Jeppe Hostels. There
                       are a number of developments and challenges facing
                       these hostels. A short-term intervention strategy was
                       implemented during the 2000-01 financial year and
                       this included the following three interventions:


                       - Forensic audit of the management of the above-
                         mentioned four hostels.


                       - Technical audit to verify the extent of upgrading
                         and renovation to be carried out in these hostels.


                       - Social status quo analysis to verify the number of
                         people who are currently occupying these hostels.


                       The problems identified required the department to
                       implement a combination of both medium and long-term
                       strategies.The medium-term strategy entails getting a
                       property management company to take over the
                       management responsibilities of the four hostels. This
                       is aimed at minimising the financial risks to the
                       provincial government.


                  *   Community-Based Public Works Programme
        The Gauteng CBPWP is a special programme for communities that want
        to do something for themselves. The programme involves conception,
        planning and construction of community infrastructure such as
        schools, multi-purpose centres, frail-care centres and workshops
        for the physically disabled.


         3. Visit to Projects


              (a) Chris Hani Baragwanath Hospital (CHBH)


                  The casualty and admission ward of CHBH was overcrowded.
                  This is because most other provincial hospitals refer
                  their patients to it unnecessarily. This hospital was not
                  intended to be a full-time hospital, but for
                  recuperation. Some of the old wards are being renovated.
                  The CHBH is the biggest hospital in the region and takes
                  referrals from neighbouring countries and other
                  provinces, as well as community health centres.


                  At present the hospital has 2 200 beds. They would like
                  to cut that down so that people can be treated at home or
                  stay for shorter periods. Patients are received at one
                  point, whether critical or not, but this is about to
                  change due to renovations that are taking place.


                  The hospital authorities established a partnership with
                  the British government for funding. There are other
                  partners operating in this hospital; for example,
                  Witwatersrand University and Johnson & Johnson. If the
                  condition of the hospital does not improve, it could lose
                  partnerships like Witwatersrand University and will
                  collapse.


                  There is no allocation for maintenance. It takes a long
                  time before actual maintenance can be done. The hospital
                  has been raising funds so that they can repair the
                  floors, doors and walls of the hospital. When the
                  department budgets for buildings, it does not budget for
                  maintenance.


                  The renovation of the hospital has boosted the morale of
                  the staff. They see that things are falling into place
                  and want to give their best, even though they are short-
                  staffed.


              (b) Ennerdale Multi-Purpose Centre


                  This project is called the Khotso employment project. The
                  South African Breweries has donated a brick-making
                  machine to the centre. Training for making bricks is
                  being provided on site. Prior to the establishment of the
                  project, the community had approached NGOs and businesses
                  for funding. The Department of Public Works built the
                  main structure of the centre. Spoornet provided dry and
                  dividing walls. The project has been supported by
                  government departments, parastatals and NGOs; workshops
                  were conducted by the Departments of Public Works,
                  Housing and Local Government.


                  The local council and the churches were also approached
                  for assistance and they had done well in assisting the
                  project. The church helped in smoothing race relations
                  between communities living in Ennerdale. The project will
                  render services such as HIV/Aids counselling, gardening
                  and selling cooked food.


              (c) Community Hall in Palm Springs


                  The project provides training in leadership skills. The
                  project is under Ipelegeng leadership. It has been
                  running since April 2001. Ipelegeng pays R500 for rental.
                  Church services are also conducted in the hall. The
                  steering committee is responsible for maintaining the
                  hall. More rooms are needed for a library and offices. A
                  problem the steering committee is faced with, is theft of
                  electric boxes.


              (d) Ikhwezilokusa Home for the Disabled


                  The project started operating in 1994 in a small house.
                  AngloVaal Limited erected some of the structures and
                  renovated the home. The Public Works Department had
                  allocated R1,5 million to the project. The Social
                  Services Department had donated land to the project.


                  Fifty-two children are accommodated in this home. The
                  administrator of the home is attempting to get 74
                  children with different disabilities. Children stay in
                  the dormitories with care-givers. When a child reaches
                  the age of 21, he or she is sent to another centre. Some
                  of these children are taught subjects that are taught in
                  the mainstream schools, as there are classrooms. This
                  project is non-racial.


              (e) Discussion at Pretoria Regional Offices


                  A CSIR team briefed the committee on professional
                  services. This team is working on the Gauteng Facilities
                  Management System (GFMS). They indicated that there is a
                  need to endorse this system so that it can be used at
                  national level to improve communication between
                  departments. This system can be applied to the whole
                  country. The system was developed in 1987 by the CSIR.


                  The GFMS is a computer system for management of public
                  facilities and maintenance of assets. The system is based
                  on the PRIMS 2000I web-enabled facility and maintenance
                  management system, developed by the CSIR and BMT for the
                  public sector in South Africa.


              (f) Objectives of GFMS


                  *   Integrated and co-ordinated interdepartmental
                       planning and management.


                  *   Computerised fixed asset register, for which Gauteng
                       carries the responsibility.


                  *   Setting and allocating maintenance and operational
                       budgets.


                  *   Optimisation of operational and maintenance
                       expenditure.


                  *   Benchmarking.


                  *   Management and control of property ownership, leasing
                       and rentals.


                  *   Optimum utilisation of facilities and resources.


                  *   Increased transparency of and accessibility to
                       property-related information.


                  *   Improved interdepartmental communication.


              (g) Benefits of GFMS PRIMS


                  *   Operational


                       A single integrated property database for all
                       departments with full life-cycle management and up-to-
                       date information on property for strategic and
                       operational management.


                  *   Financial


                       -   Realistic annual departmental budgets, based on
                           current estate requirements.


                       -   Accurate budgeting for preventative, day-to-day
                           and backlog maintenance and operating budgets.


                       -   Prioritisation and scheduling of maintenance
                           activities based on technical and financial
                           considerations.


                       -   Factoring for impact of cost of neglect.


              (h) Pretoria Academic Hospital


                  *   Population characteristics


                       The catchment population of the Pretoria region is
                       over seven million. The areas included in the Tshwane
                       region are Hammanskraal, Ga-rankuwa, Winterveld,
                       Mabopane, Bronkhorstspruit and Cullinan. Pretoria
                       Academic Hospital also serves for referral from
                       provinces such as Mpumalanga, North-west and the
                       Northern Province. Internationally it serves Malawi,
                       the Democratic Republic of Congo, Angola, Zambia and
                       Tanzania.


                  *   Services offered by provincial tertiary hospitals


                       For efficient healthcare service delivery, the
                       Gauteng Strategic Plan has identified that the bulk
                       of health problems be dealt with through the district
                       health system. Regional hospitals manage the majority
                       of patients who need admission and specialist care.


                       Central/tertiary hospitals offer tertiary or super-
                       specialist care, reserved for a small proportion of
                       patients referred from other institutions within
                       Gauteng and beyond, people who require technically
                       complicated care. These facilities receive patients
                       from and provide specialist support to a number of
                       regional hospitals. This is mostly level III and IV
                       care, requiring the services of expert clinicians
                       working as super-specialists. As Pretoria Academic
                       Hospital is a tertiary hospital, it is anticipated
                       that there will be no chronic patient level beds.
                       There is an indication that currently primary health
                       centres services are delivered at appropriate levels
                       of care and Pretoria Academic Hospital is servicing
                       the tertiary level and level 2.


                  *   Condition assessment and suitability of the Old
                       Pretoria Hospital


                       According to a CSIR audit report presented in 1996,
                       only 65% of the buildings were in maintainable
                       condition; the remainder was in need of upgrading or
                       replacement. As for the suitability, the buildings
                       had originally been built for different functions and
                       the design and the fabric of the buildings did not
                       lend itself to modern clinical protocols. The
                       evidence of rust on iron in the older buildings is
                       not conducive for environmentally sound health care.


                       The scattered facilities of the estate are extremely
                       resource-intensive in terms of maintenance, energy
                       requirements and staffing. Over a period of time
                       buildings of all kinds have been inserted in the
                       nearest available open space. As a result of the
                       above, departments requiring expansion have not had
                       the space to do so, and have added remote annexes. As
                       a result, many departments which for management,
                       quality control, staffing and economic reasons ought
                       to be self-contained, cohesive units, have been
                       fragmented over time across the campus. This has
                       resulted in the following duplication of services (at
                       great running costs):


                       16 kitchens
                       10 intensive care units
                       12 out-patient departments
                       9 pharmacies
                       12 sterilising departments


                       Furthermore, without major capital investment the
                       current buildings will contravene the legal
                       requirements of the Occupational Health and Safety
                       Act, thereby opening the province to increased legal
                       suits.


              (i) New Pretoria Academic Hospital


                  *   Planning of new hospital


                       Regular building maintenance was stopped with the
                       decision to build a new academic hospital in 1982.
                       The reason for this was to curtail fruitless
                       expenditure and to maximise the funds available for
                       the new hospital. As the H F Verwoerd Hospital was to
                       have been sold off soon after the anticipated
                       completion of the academic hospital in 1989, the lack
                       of maintenance would not have had a significant
                       impact. However, with the maintenance long overdue,
                       the adverse effect of the backlog was beginning to
                       manifest itself in various ways, to such an extent
                       that it was costing increasingly more to
                       rehabilitate, with an ever-increasing exponential
                       effect.


                       The lack of maintenance was beginning to seriously
                       compromise patient care at the existing hospital. The
                       existing hospital had 1 058 beds. The CSIR
                       commission, appointed by the Patriotic Health Forum
                       in 1994, had recommended that the new structure be
                       completed to accommodate 750 to 800 patients. A
                       planning exercise recently undertaken by the Gauteng
                       Department of Health revealed that, with the
                       reduction of the number of beds and the consolidation
                       of facilities in a new structure under one roof,
                       operational budget rationalisation would be achieved.


                  *   Construction of proposed new hospital


                       Due to the magnitude of the project and the Gauteng
                       Board requirements, the construction programme had
                       been phased in and the execution unbundled into
                       various contracts. The planning of the academic
                       hospital has been subjected to a review under the
                       Gauteng Health Facility Strategic Plan, with a
                       reduction of the number of beds to 777.


                  *   Job Creation and Training


                       The total number of jobs created for all contracts
                       from 1994, including D1 level, was 5 167.


              (h) Roodeplaat Dam - Kubakhi Project
                  This project has been awarded to an emerging contractor.
                  The project deals with the paving of the road that goes
                  into the resort. The paving of the road started in May
                  2001, the entire dam project having been started in 1994.
                  After five years, the project was opened to tender. There
                  are seven companies contracted on this programme. The
                  total cost of the project, including labour and material,
                  was R3 million.


                  The labour consists of men and women and it is labour
                  intensive. These workers are trained on the site for
                  paving, project management, finance and quality control.


     C.     Findings - North West


         1. Meeting with MEC and PWD officials
              The MEC for Public Works indicated that the province did not
              have an asset register. The department only has a list of
              properties that are neither provincial nor national. The
              reason for this is that the list lacks some elements of an
              asset register. The process of compiling this list was done in
              consultation with the national department. Evaluation has been
              done on the housing component, since this had been a
              problematic area. The problem of State houses was inherited
              from the previous homeland government.


              There were no recordings or information on these properties. A
              decision had been taken to sell properties not needed. The
              value would be market-related. Priority would be given to
              current occupants. There was an increasing need to evaluate
              all functional government assets and couple them with
              maintenance allocations.


              Regarding roads, the department launched the "Roads 2000"
              programme. This programme incorporated CBPWP models. The
              programme was allocated R150 million for projects. The 31
              projects have employed aproximately 1 500 people.


              The road between Ventersdorp and Lichtenburg was completed,
              and 120 people from the local community had been employed.
              This was a labour-intensive project. A bridge that joined two
              communities had been built. The programme this year focused on
              roads, bridges and the upgrading of educational facilities.
              The second major focus will be on health, and R40 million has
              been allocated for clinics. Tenders will be issued at the end
              of August 2001. Clinics that are targeted, are in the rural
              areas.


              The department experienced problems with the client
              departments and budget administration. Communication needed to
              be improved between ministries so that projects could be
              implemented speedily. There were payment delays, but these
              have been partially resolved. The expedition of payments lies
              with constructors, and the department verifies payments. The
              Treasury misdirected funds, and the feeling of the department
              was that funds should be functionally based.


              The department was under pressure to outsource some services.
              However, this had to be done, considering the provisions of
              the Labour Relations Act, in consultation with staff. It
              should be noted that outsourcing did not lead to budget
              decreases only, but could also increase the budget.


              The R8 million budget for the CBPWP did not address the
              problem of maintenance backlogs. The NPWP has been financing
              the CBPWP to a tune of R20 million and this at least increased
              the impact of delivery. This allocation was geared mostly
              towards community gardens and parks which did not have much
              impact on the basic needs of the community. The poverty
              alleviation programmes must be line-functional, and the
              Department of Agriculture should get an allocation for poverty
              alleviation.


              The Department of Public Works had a budget of R17 million
              divided between itself and the Department of Agriculture, with
              the latter getting R9 million. This problem needed to be
              addressed since it hindered the department to deliver
              optimally.


              A project that has been problematic was the Zamile Clinic in
              Winterveldt. This project was never finalised. The contractor
              was removed but was recalled due to support from the
              community. The structure of the clinic was completed, but is
              now used as a gymnasium and hair salon. The contractor claimed
              that he was never paid properly, which the department denied.
              The contracting company (New Generation) was owned by local
              councillors, including Colleen Chauke. This company
              subcontracted the whole project and never paid the
              subcontractor. The clinic was being rehabilitated.


         2. Visit to projects


              (a) Montshiwa Clinic


                  The building of the clinic was awarded to a woman
                  contractor who had recently laid the foundation of the
                  clinic. The Department of Health will supply the clinic
                  equipment. The line department is responsible for payment
                  of the construction. A possible delay might be
                  experienced due to late payment, since workers do not
                  report to work if not paid, as was the case when the
                  delegation visited the clinic.


              (b) Lonely Park School
                  The school project consists of 10 classrooms. There will
                  be two additional classrooms and a staff room, and the
                  school will be supplied with running water and
                  electricity. The project started three months ago, and
                  was to be finished by the end of August 2001. No women
                  labour was employed on this project, since they were to
                  be employed to wash windows and clean floors once the
                  project was completed. Employees were paid R3,00 per
                  hour. The cleaning contract was scheduled to run for six
                  months.


                  The foundation of the school structure was cracking, as
                  it had been built too fast. This could endanger pupils'
                  lives, and the delegation suggested that the solution
                  would be to redo the project with clear specifications
                  from the department. The contractor building the school
                  was Mugabe Construction Company, who employed foreigners.
                  The owner of the company was from Zimbabwe.


              (c) Bodibe Clinic


                  The community and health workers initiated this project.
                  The clinic is new and it covers dental services,
                  comprehensive care and maternity. There are five
                  professional nurses who serve the clinic. The clinic will
                  be handed to the community in September. Health care will
                  now be accessible to the people. Previously they had to
                  walk long distances on very bad roads. The community
                  built the clinic together with an emerging contractor.
                  The committee was delighted to see this clinic.


              (d) Bophelong Hospital


                  The Bophelong Hospital is being renovated and maintained
                  by the provincial Department of Public Works. The
                  reception area and eight wards have been renovated. The
                  intensive care unit has been upgraded, and new equipment
                  has been installed. There are four new and functional
                  theatres. The hospital has electrical back-up in case of
                  a power failure. It services approximately 5 000 local
                  people, as well as referrals from district hospitals and
                  community health centres.


                  Air-conditioning in the theatre is uncontrollable and
                  ranges from very hot to very cold. The roof of the
                  theatre shows defects, which may lead to infections.
                  There is also evidence of water leaks in this section.
                  Water leaks outside the hospital are very bad and need
                  urgent attention. The doors of the wards and theatres are
                  built from a light type of wood often and break. Panel
                  heating and other heaters have never worked, not since
                  installation.


                  Hospital authorities indicated that they have reported
                  this to the department but that no acknowledgement has
                  been received. Maintenance is a serious problem, and if
                  not attended to, will have huge financial, health and
                  safety implications. The Chief Director promised to give
                  special attention to these problems.


              (e) Doctors' Houses in Old Vryburg Hospital


                  This project started in February 2001. The houses were
                  built for foreign doctors, and the project was to be
                  completed by the end of July 2001. Unfortunately, there
                  were a few problems, some of which were in connection
                  with the specification of the buildings and the
                  subcontracting of the project. Rain and late supply of
                  material caused further delays. The contractor was an
                  emerging subcontractor.


                  Little maintenance has been done to the old houses. The
                  new houses are substandard. The beneficiaries were not
                  consulted in the design phase, although their rent was
                  paid, R2 000 per month.


                  The hospital is very old. Some of the equipment needs to
                  be replaced. The ceiling is collapsing, the taps are
                  dripping and water is leaking from the roof. Some
                  renovation is, however, taking place.


              (f) Ganyesa Tong Comprehensive School


                  The total number of new classrooms amounted to 12,
                  thereby totalling 24 classrooms. The school has built two
                  additional classrooms as part of the projects. During the
                  past seven years, pupils used to share classrooms and
                  teachers taught on a "first come, first served" basis.
                  Each classroom now has a ratio of 1:45.


                  The school fee is R100 per year, with an additional R50
                  for security guards. The community has been intensively
                  involved in building the school, having built three
                  classrooms. The school is equipped with computer, science
                  and typing laboratories. The computers are connected to
                  the Internet.


              (g) Temoso Special School (Ganyesa)


                  The school was completed in three months and handed over
                  on 21 July 2001. The school accommodates physically and
                  mentally disabled children. The school does not
                  accommodate children who are over 20 years old. There are
                  47 children and seven teachers. The Department of
                  Education pays the teachers.


                  Most of the parents are also physically and/or mentally
                  handicapped and have no income to pay school fees. The
                  school operates on a grant received from the government.
                  It also provides a feeding scheme.


              (h) Mogwase Testing Station
                  Construction on Mogwase Testing Station started in
                  January 2001, and was completed in June 2001. It included
                  paving and the marking out of parking lots. The total
                  cost for the construction was R3,535 million. The
                  contract was awarded to a joint venture between black and
                  white contractors.


                  The testing station will test all vehicles, with the
                  exception of motorcycles. Officials are waiting for the
                  IT section to install computer cabling. The testing
                  station is properly accredited. Prior to its
                  construction, people had to travel to Rustenburg for
                  testing.


                  It was alleged that women were not involved in the
                  construction because the work was "too heavy" for them.
                  The committee disputed this, stating that women had been
                  involved in all kinds of construction, and that the
                  allegation was just an excuse to discriminate against
                  women.


              (i) Rabokala District


                  The community and the local government authority
                  initiated beehives and market stores. The cost of the
                  project was R1,032 million. Building started in May 2001
                  and were to be completed in August 2001. The contractor
                  employs 35 people, including women. Women from the
                  previously disadvantaged community do the plumbing for
                  the project. The project is impressive and appears to be
                  a case of money well spent.


              (j) Moretele District


                  The committee was shown a newly built access road that
                  leads to the main road. Initially there was no road and
                  people had to go through the bush, making them vulnerable
                  to criminals. The road construction cost R1,75 million.
                  The work force included youths and women. Taxis and buses
                  can now ferry people to where they could not go before.
                  The other new road leads to the graveyard. A fence has
                  also been erected around the graveyard as part of the
                  project.


              (k) Mabopane Testing Centre


                  The old Mabopane Testing Station is being revamped. The
                  construction of the testing station has been awarded to a
                  black contractor. The testing station will be used to
                  test vehicles and buses, as well as to issue drivers'
                  licences. The building contract included paving and
                  parking lots. Twenty-eight people were employed on the
                  project.


                  The cost of the project was R1,6 million, which included
                  consultancy fees. Female students were trained on site.


                  The Department of Public Works helped the contractors by
                  arranging loans for them from the African Bank in order
                  to buy equipment.


     D.     Findings - KwaZulu-Natal


         1. Meeting with MEC for Public Works


              On 26 July 2001, Rev C J Mthethwa, the MEC for Public Works,
              addressed the delegation. Rev Mthethwa mentioned that a co-
              operation agreement had been entered into between the national
              Department of Public Works and provincial Departments of
              Public Works. According to the agreement, the role of the
              provincial department was to facilitate, co-ordinate, monitor
              and evaluate community-based Public Works programmes and to
              alleviate poverty.


              The CBPWPs were meant to be joint ventures between the
              national and provincial Departments of Public Works and
              district municipalities. He highlighted that municipalities
              were receiving funds directly from the national Public Works
              Department. He pointed out that this was a problem as the
              national department took shortcuts by overlooking provincial
              departments and going straight to district municipalities.


              This procedure tended to be expensive, as consultants were
              involved, while the provincial department had skilled
              personnel. The funds that were used to hire consultants could
              have been utilised for other programmes.


         2. Visits to Projects


              (a) Zululand District Municipality


                  Mashona Taxi Rank has been partially completed. The total
                  project budget was R1,165 million. Construction of new
                  welfare offices and housing amounting to R14,196 million
                  were not yet completed.


                  The Nkonjeni Cluster Project consisted of a market centre
                  and Nkonjeni hall. Both projects have been completed,
                  R1,008 million being spent on the market centre and R565
                  910 on the hall.


                  Nyokeni Cluster (The Royal Household) is yet to be
                  completed. The project includes mechanical maintenance,
                  retro-active hatching of IsiGodlo, providing new catering
                  facilities, repairing the main house, building an access
                  road, landscaping, a sports field upgrading and water
                  supply. The total project budget is R2,3 million.


              (b) Mkhanyakude District Municipality


                  The provincial Public Works Department maintained the
                  Cape Vidal access road to the value of R9,5 million. The
                  road is in the St Lucia Wetland, which was proclaimed a
                  World Heritage Site.


                  The 24-hour Zamimpilo market stalls, valued at R1
                  million, were erected.


              (c) Uthungulu District Council
                  Dondotha Community Light Industry      R  589 843
                  Dondotha Arts and Crafts
                  Market Stalls   R  218 318
                  Dondotha Primary School    R  439 915
                  Dondotha Taxi Rank    R1 545 774
                  Port Durnford Project, comprising:
                  Electricity Supply    R  225 495
                  Multi-Purpose Community Centre   R  527 248
                  Créche construction   R  306 653
                  Sports field facilities    R1 534 632
                  Skills Training Centre     R  353 000
                  Fencing    R  431 989


              (d) Inkosi Albert Luthuli Hospital


                  The delegation visited the hospital on 28 July. It was
                  previously known as the New Durban Academic Hospital.


                  The total upgrading value is R719 million. The hospital
                  is located in Cato Manor on a site bounded by Bellair
                  Road, Edwin Swales Drive and the N2 Outer Ring Road.


     E.     Findings - Mpumalanga


         1. Visits to Projects


              The delegation conducted an assessment of community-based
              projects and visited areas that were ravaged by floods that
              occurred between February and March 2000.


              (a) Nkomazi Region


                  Tonga Taxi Rank was still under construction. The value
                  of the project amounted to R894 341. Actual progress was
                  at 95% and the amount spent on community labour was R73
                  230. A total of 33 persons was employed, consisting of 26
                  youths, one disabled person and 18 women.
              (b) Mbuzini Access Road


                  Phase 1 of the project, valued at R15,1 million, had been
                  completed. 302 jobs were created, while 252 persons
                  received training. Phase 2 was valued at R25 million and
                  would create 364 jobs, consisting of 62 men, 91 women and
                  211 youths.
              (c) Mbangwane Multi-purpose Centre


                  The project, valued at R1,7 million, was completed. Jobs
                  created amounted to 47, while nine people had been
                  trained. As part of this project, people were
                  manufacturing burglar bars and furniture, while tourism
                  classes, baking and related activities were conducted in
                  conjunction with the Department of Labour.


              (d) Siboswa Taxi Rank


                  The project, valued at R600 000, was completed, while 26
                  jobs were created and 24 persons were trained.


              (e) Chuene Poultry Farm and Community Garden


                  In total, R569 181 had been spent on this project, while
                  R39 150 had been spent on community labour. A total of 11
                  persons were employed, consisting of five youths and six
                  women. The project has about 2 000 chickens.


                  R340 424 was spent on the Chuene Community Garden. R27
                  650 was spent on community labour, while 20 jobs were
                  created, consisting of seven youths, one disabled person
                  and 11 women.


              (f) Shabalala Cluster
                  The project entailed gardening and market stalls, and was
                  valued at R1,48 million. A total number of 104 jobs were
                  created, consisting of 39 men, 49 women, 15 youths and
                  one disabled person.


                  In addition to visiting community-based projects, the
                  delegation decided to do an inspection on roads and
                  bridges ravaged by the floods of February and March 2000.


                  *   Ngodini bridge was under construction and would be
                       completed around November 2001.


                  *   Khumbula bridge (valued at R4,9 million) was under
                       construction and would be completed at the end of
                       October 2001.


                  *   Ndludluma bridge (R2,4 milliom) was being constructed
                       and would be completed in early September 2001.


                  *   Numbi access road was being constructed at a cost of
                       R20 million. R18 889 had been spent on community
                       labour, while 21 jobs had been created, consisting of
                       four youths, one disabled person and 21 women.


     F.     Findings - Eastern Cape


         1. Visit to Alfred Nzo District Municipality


              The delegation was informed that 38 projects had been
              completed since 1 June 2001.


              (a) Progress with financial administration


                  The district municipality was in the process of
                  transferring all retention monies to a district municipal
                  account so that the funds could be spent.


              (b) Progress with implementation


                  All projects have been completed. The 30% local labour
                  and 50% women employment was not achieved, since this
                  requirement was officially introduced later during the
                  implementation phase of the programme.


              (c) Social impact


                  The total number of new jobs amounted to 2 355, of which
                  41% were women and 30% youths.


                  The delegation also visited the Pakade and Ku-bha
                  Projects. The latter entailed a taxi rank, parking and an
                  access road, market stalls, a community hall and a
                  childcare centre, while the Pakade Project entailed water
                  infrastructure, a taxi rank, a market stall and a health
                  centre and community hall.


         2. Visit to Chris Hani District Municipality


              (a) Ntabethemba - Rockland Irrigation
                  Scheme, Access Roads  R308 683


              (b) Tentergate Irrigation Scheme      R138 982


              (c) Bolotwa Access Road and
                  Irrigation Scheme     R960 376


              (d) Ilinge Multi-purpose Hall   R623 504


         The total number of jobs created in respect of these projects was
         476.
     G.     Findings - Free State


         Visits to projects


         (a)     National District Hospital


              The orthopaedic section was renovated. Renovation started on
              14 June 2001 and were to be completed by February 2002.
              Fifteen men and three women were employed.


              However, maintenance programmes were not in place and a
              backlog existed on the infrastructure side. Between R30
              million and R40 million would be needed to complete full
              renovation.


         (b)     Pelonomi Hospital


              The hospital raised its own funds to upgrade water pipes in a
              public/private partnership. The tower block building has been
              vacant for five years, due to a lack of funds to proceed with
              reconstruction. R65 million was required for reconstruction.


              The hospital faced numerous problems. Insufficient funds
              caused delays in completing renovations, and a lack of
              security resulted in losses (non-waterproofed toilets and poor
              quality extractor fans being some of the examples).


         (c)     Botshabelo Multi-purpose Community Centre


              The Department of Public Works handed over the centre to the
              community five years ago. It also maintained the centre which
              serves over 300 000 people. A number of departments, including
              Labour, Social Welfare and the GCIS use the facility. The ANC
              constituency office is located in the centre.
              The project is a partnership between South African Breweries
              and the national Department of Public Works. Funds are
              generated from registration fees and the leasing of the
              satellite college. The building is also used as a computer
              training centre, a centre for the disabled, a library, a
              bakery and a surgery.


              The management of the centre intends introducing more
              computers, but this is impossible at present because of a lack
              of security. The computer training centre teaches computer
              skills and offers a course in communication. Examinations are
              written every six months. The centre is linked to Bloemfontein
              College.


              The bakery is not functional due to equipment that is not in
              working condition. The delegation was surprised to hear that
              there is only one person responsible for cleaning the centre.


         (d)     Clean Green Project


              This project is a partnership between the Department of Public
              Works and South African Breweries. Thirty-six people are
              employed in this community project which has benefitted 8 000
              households. The IDT is successfully playing a facilitating
              role.


         (e)     Ratlau Crèche Zone 1


              The Crèche is under construction, 25 men being employed.
              Unspecified financial problems were experienced during
              construction, but progress was made.


         (f)     Thaba Nchu Military Camp


              The land used to be owned by the Moroka family. The buildings
              were occupied by the military. The camp can accommodate ninety
              persons.


              The buildings are currently vacant as new tenants have not
              been identified. They are under military guard. The community
              hall can accommodate 1 000 persons.


              Representatives from Thaba Nchu Technical College had appealed
              to the Department of Public Works to approve their tender to
              occupy the camp. A college representative said the building
              could accommodate students from the merged Bloemfontein
              Technikon and Tlaga College.


              The MEC, Mr Malebo, said that the decision on who should
              occupy the buildings would be revisited and he welcomed a
              short briefing from college representatives.


         (g)     Namahali Multi-purpose Centre


              The Departments of Welfare, Health, Minerals and Energy and
              Home Affairs rendered services at the offices. The renovated
              building was officially opened on 29 November 2000. The
              Department of Public Works assisted with funding while the
              National Parliament assisted with the actual construction.


              A machine to generate application forms for birth and death
              certificates had arrived recently but is not yet in use. The
              centre was also awaiting installation of telephones and other
              facilities by Telkom. A manager will be employed and Public
              Works will co-ordinate the operation of the centre.


              The centre was very cold, especially when it snowed.
              Applications for birth and death certificates were processed
              manually. As a result production was very slow. A lack of
              resources has affected the provision of services. The centre
              is experiencing pressure from Phuthaditshaba residents who
              visit in large numbers. There is also a need for partitioning
              to create offices. R30 000 was required for this work.
              Furthermore, the attitudes of officials who came late for work
              and took early lunch breaks needed to be addressed.


         (h)     Namahali Bridge briefing


              The bridge had to be split for large pipes to be fitted. Sixty
              jobs were created during this operation. The main contractor
              is a developing contractor. The Department of Public Works
              held workshops to assist with the tendering process. However,
              the problem of "fronting" needed to be addressed.


         (i)     Flooded Areas


              Public Works was the leading department in dealing with
              construction in damaged areas, including roads. In November
              2001, R34 million was received from the National Parliament to
              cover areas affected by the floods.


         (j)     Naledi Thukulata Bridge


              The project of R230 000 was community based and labour
              intensive, but people and cars were still unable to cross the
              bridge when it rained.


         (k)     Elizabeth Ross Hospital


              The hospital was very old and in need of renovation. Mr J
              Mofokeng is the contractor for the renovation project. Thirty-
              three men and 8 women were employed. The maternity ward and
              parking area were also under construction. The project started
              in June 2001 and will be completed before June 2002.


              Problems facing the hospital included cracks in the main
              building and poor electric power supply. The solution was to
              renovate the entire building.


         (l)     Ntsoanantsatsi Crèche


              The crèche was completed in 1999 and was handed over to the
              community by the Minister of Communications, Ms Matsepe-
              Cassaburri. Eskom donated toys to the crèche. The crèche
              catered for children between the ages of 5 and 6. The cost of
              fencing amounted to R64 000. The centre runs a toy library.
              Other crèches in the area have access to it.


              People who participated in completing the project have not
              been paid, resulting in a loss of confidence in the
              Department. Toilets for adults were installed instead of
              toilets for pre-school kids.


         (m)     Maluti bus service


              The Free State government took the initiative and established
              a public/private partnership. Sixty tenders were received,
              including Maluti. The Department of Arts and Culture owns 60%
              of the operation, while the Free State Development
              Corporation, the former Maluti Company, owns 40 %. Currently,
              the Maluti Bus Service runs 35 new buses and they have been
              operating since 2000.


              104 people were employed while services were rendered at an
              affordable cost. Clients now pay less than before for
              services. Maluti had a bus specially made for the disabled. It
              accommodates eight wheelchairs with two safety belts. It has
              an electric wheelchair lifter and is equipped with TV and
              radio. The costs for transforming the special bus were below
              R40 000.


              The company intended to expand services on certain days like
              Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Saturdays to areas such as Qwaqwa.


         (n)     Reitz Petsana Crèche


              The project started in March 2000 and twenty-four women and
              five males were employed. The building had to be redesigned,
              as the material for the roof was too expensive. The Department
              of Public Works took over the project and is now at the roof
              phase. The target date for completion is 1 October 2001 after
              which it will be handed over to the community.


              However, R100 000 had been misused. The case was referred to
              the authorities. Due to mismanagement, delays were experienced
              in this project, while it should have been completed in 1998.
              Funds were apparently transferred into a person's private
              account and were only later transferred into the community's
              account. The Public Works Department was now responsible for
              the monitoring of funds. Documents that could support the
              investigation were still missing. A member of the standing
              committee was said to be withholding these documents.


     H.     Findings - Northern Cape


         1. Meeting with Members of Standing Committee on Public Works and
              Transport


              The delegation met with members of the standing committee and
              the Head of the Department of Public Works, Mrs P Mokhali.


              (a) Findings


                  *   The Department of Public Works and the Department of
                       Transport were brought together into one portfolio.


                  *   A few government buildings falling under Public Works
                       were rented from the private sector.


                  *   Market rental for buildings in Kimberley is R28 per
                       square metre, but government is paying up to R40, 00
                       per square metre.


                  *   The Department of Public Works decided to purchase
                       buildings, as it was too expensive to rent.


                  *   The department tried to make all government buildings
                       accessible to the disabled. Private sector buildings
                       were not yet accessible.


                  *   Government offices are spread throughout the city,
                       which at times makes it difficult for public access.


                  *   In 1999, R69 million was received from the government
                       for a new complex. The site was chosen to link the
                       township with the city. Sixty persons are employed.
                       Murray & Roberts and the MC Builders Forum are
                       involved in the construction, and it will be
                       completed in 2002.
                  *   R12 million has been received to upgrade roads.


              (b) Problems / Challenges


                  *   The problems facing the province include a lack of a
                       vibrant private sector.
                  *   There is a shortage of young skilled professionals.
                       The Premier has offered funds for people to apply for
                       training finance.


                  *   Delays in service delivery.


                  *   Non-existence of facilities for the disabled.


         2. Visits to Projects


              (a) Galeshewe Street Paving Project - Ext. 5


                  A total of 120 jobs were created, mainly for women. The
                  Department of Public Works was striving to sustain the
                  project and is in the process of raising funds.


                  The reason for using paving bricks was because it was
                  easy to remove and replace them in case of damage. The
                  paved road was more feasible than a tarred road as its
                  construction was more labour intensive.


                  Two of the major problems faced by the project were that
                  bricks were stolen and a general lack of security.


              (b) Galeshewe Cleaning Project


                  This is an ongoing project that created 80 jobs for 50
                  female youths and 30 male youths. Part of the project was
                  to encourage residents to keep the area clean. Waste is
                  taken 10 km away from town.


              (c) Provincial Legislature Building


                  The project began in August 2001 and will be finalised at
                  the end of August 2002. The building will be used as the
                  Provincial Legislature and offices for the Premier and
                  Ministers.


                  A total of 33 jobs were created with 33% women and 60%
                  men. Murray & Roberts and the Northern Cape Builders
                  formed a joint venture for the contract. The whole
                  structure costs R69 million and the first phase costs R16
                  million.


                  Skills are developed as members of the community are
                  selected to learn new skills. Sheltered parking
                  facilities will form part of the complex.


              (d) Kimberley Hospital (R5 000 000)


                  The hospital is 30 years old, with its facade built 18
                  years ago. It was formerly divided into White and Black
                  sections with far more facilities in the White section.


                  The hospital is 400 km from Bloemfontein and provides
                  secondary and tertiary healthcare services. The hospital
                  has four main functions, viz. a medical clinic,
                  gynaecology, orthopedic and surgery. The hospital serves
                  300 to 400 patients per day.


                  The main phase of construction is intended to upgrade the
                  theatre for outpatients. Eleven emerging contractors will
                  be contracted for a number of different functions. The
                  construction will include building a security gate at the
                  entrance that used to be the Black section, upgrading the
                  gynae and surgery areas and new waiting rooms.


                  Construction on the front part of the hospital started in
                  April 2001 and will be finished in September 2001.
                  Already ramps have been flattened to accommodate the
                  disabled and the casualty ward was painted, the floors
                  and ceiling were renovated and doors were fitted.


              (e) Mocwaledi Primary School (R6, 5 million)


                  The school is situated 1 km from the North West border
                  and serves children from across the border. The school
                  has ramps at every door entrance to accommodate the
                  disabled. Overall, the entire school is accessible for
                  the disabled, as it has no stairs and all the classes are
                  on the ground level. The windows have rolling blinds with
                  burglar bars. A fence surrounds the very well cared for
                  facility.


              (f) Warrenton Access Road (R500 000)


                  The Municipality of Warrenton requested funds from the
                  Department of Public Works for this paving project. The
                  completed paved road is less than 1 km long, but created
                  more than 50 employment opportunities.


              (g) Mosaipoa Crèche


                  The crèche uses an old building with row classes. The
                  kitchen and staff room are in the middle of the row of
                  classes to avoid noise from one class being transmitted
                  to others. Parents pay a monthly fee of R80,00 per child,
                  but the creche receives no support from government.


              (h) Breipaal Crèche - Douglas


                  When the crèche was handed over to the community there
                  was no one to manage it, but teachers from the community
                  volunteered to assist with management.


                  Still, there is a lack of expertise and training among
                  the volunteers. The Department of Public Works assisted
                  with some funding, but otherwise the crèche depended
                  entirely on donations. Businesses were not willing to
                  make donations and when the project co-ordinators
                  requested funding they were referred to the new
                  government.


              (i) Prieska Access Road - Siyathemba Municipality (R380 000)


                  This road project suffered from delays due to poor
                  planning. However, contractors such as Stuart & Co were
                  co-opted by Max plan to execute the project. The District
                  Council and the Provincial Government supplied machines.
                  Max plan and members of the community have been drivers
                  of the project since 2001. It is expected that the
                  project could be completed at the end of September 2001
                  if water tanks and pipes were provided timeously. The
                  project is very labour intensive.


              (j) Prieska Youth Centre


                  The building used to be an old-age residence and is now
                  being renovated. The Department of Public Works provided
                  R50 000 and the municipality also provided R50 000. The
                  centre has spent R70 000, and R30 000 is still available
                  from Public Works. One of the rooms will be used for
                  computer training. Members of the community felt the need
                  to create a multi-purpose centre as the building was
                  deserted.


                  Still, some problems existed. The plastic floor tiles
                  needed to be replaced and there was a lack of funds to
                  formally hand over the project to the community. The
                  centre is well looked after by members of the community,
                  especially those who stay near the centre.


              (k) Oasis School in Upington


                  In 1994 women from Upington established a women's forum
                  consisting of retired teachers and physiotherapists. The
                  project is aimed at mentally and physically disabled
                  students. In 1999 a lease was signed with Public Works.
                  Students are taught to make bangles, hats and woodwork
                  articles. They are also taught to care for animals.


                  Although the centre accommodates students from the ages
                  of 13 to 20, there are other people who want to join but
                  accommodation is a problem. There is also a need for a
                  hall to accommodate youth activities.
                  The school is the only one for disabled persons in the
                  area. The nearest other school is in Kimberley, almost
                  400 km away.
                  The school faces a number of problems. These include:


                  *   Squatters on the land do not want to be a part of the
                       development forum.


                  *   The only means of income is the R60 school fee and
                       R60 transport fee.


                  *   Business plans were submitted to the Department of
                       Public Works in February 2001. A reply is still
                       awaited.


                  *   Transport costs are prohibitive.


                  *   Only one toilet is available for 30 people.


                  *   Poor electricity supply.


                  *   The building needed fencing.


                  *   A shortage of wheelchairs and a shortage of beds for
                       massages as students spend long hours in the
                       wheelchairs.


              (l) Marcus Mbeta Sindela Centre


                  The Department of Public Works contributed R6,8 million
                  to this centre for juvenile delinquents. It houses 38
                  children between the ages of 14 and 15, mostly from the
                  Springbok, De Aar and Upington areas. The Department of
                  Education leased the building from the Department of
                  Public Works and provided three permanent teachers, funds
                  and resources.


                  Some of the problems experienced include children having
                  to travel in police vans to attend workshops or training;
                  a special education curriculum was needed as the children
                  often lost interest in basic education; the children come
                  from abnormal family situations; peer pressure existed as
                  some of the kids came from the same community or gang;
                  only one social worker was provided for the whole centre.


              (m) Pella Access Road (R10 million)


                  The road is still under construction.


              (n) Lungile Bakery Project


                  The building used to be owned by the Department of
                  Education. After it became vacant it was converted into a
                  bakery and handed over in 1998. The initial project cost
                  was R44 000. A further R50 000 was received and an amount
                  of R36 000 is available. The contractor was from Upington
                  and labour came from the community.


                  The project will officially be opened in August 2001 with
                  20 employees. The only other bakery is 6 km away from
                  town. However, a major problem is being experienced with
                  poor electric power supply.


              (o) Springbok Youth Centre


                  The project has not been formally handed over. Namakwa
                  Station wants to make use of the centre as a broadcasting
                  station. Public Works intended to give the building to
                  radio stations but this is still being negotiated. The
                  centre was previously utilised until the community
                  stopped using it because of the distance involved. The
                  centre has fitted pine cupboards, counters and a geyser.


                  However, the centre is very far from the community, it
                  has been vandalized and there is no fencing or security
                  personnel.


     I.     Findings - Western Cape


         1. Visits to Public Works properties


              (a) Somerset Hospital


                  The north block of the building had been partially
                  renovated. Maintenance costs amounted to R10 million.
              (b) Wingfield Naval base


                  Public Works maintained the stores area.


              (c) De Novo Rehabilitation Centre


                  The centre catered for adults on a property spanning 192
                  hectares. It is a fully funded institution and draws
                  clients from as far as the Northern Cape.


              (d) Bloekombos School


                  The department owned 360 hectares of the property. The
                  school has nine classes that accommodate 150 students.
                  The maintenance costs over a period of 3 months amounted
                  to R150 000. There is, however, a shortage of
                  accommodation.


              (e) Wallacedene - Kraaifontein
                  The site consists of informal settlements. Four secondary
                  schools are to be built in the area.


              (f) Kuilsriver Technikon


                  The Technikon has 100 staff members.


              (g) College Of Education


                  The hostels at the college can accommodate 600 students.


              (h) Mfuleni Village


                  There are 3 hectares available to build a primary school
                  and 2 hectares for a secondary school.


              (i) Khayelitsha opposite Site C


                  People from Khayelitsha and Site C are illegally
                  occupying the land. The matter has been handed over to
                  the police for further investigation.


              (j) Mandalay High School


                  The total cost to build the school amounted to R1,8
                  million. It took 12 months to complete the school.


              (k) Kwakufa Lower Primary School - Crossroads


                  There are 1 184 pupils in the school that accommodates
                  pupils from grade 1 to grade 7. One teacher is
                  responsible for 48 pupils instead of 40 in a class. There
                  is a security gate at the school and the playground is
                  inside the building.


                  A number of problems were evident. The school was built
                  on a small site. There are only 24 classrooms and the
                  building has no passages. Furthermore, classrooms on the
                  second floor are warm in summer and very cold in winter.
                  The classrooms are not waterproof and as a result some
                  cannot be used during the rainy season. The building has
                  cracks.


                  A complaint had been submitted to the contractors, but
                  they felt the problems were not their responsibility, but
                  that of the Department of Public Works.


              (l) Ottery Youth Care Centre


                  There was no clarity on the ownership of the centre and a
                  lack of maintenance was evident.


              (m) Porter School


                  The property spanned 1 418 hectares and the school
                  accommodated 250 children. The school provided
                  rehabilitation courses and discipline training over a
                  period of three months. It has three hostels that need
                  upgrading. The Department of Education in the Western
                  Cape, Public Works Property Management and the Department
                  of Correctional Services play an important role in the
                  success of the school.


                  However, there is no security at the school and upgrading
                  will cost about R1 million.


         2. Meeting with Head of provincial Public Works Department


              Mr Peters, the head of the department, presented the
              department's structure and vision. He also stated that the
              department aimed to provide a full in-house service through co-
              operation with stakeholders and that partial outsourcing of
              functions had occurred. The following other issues were also
              highlighted:


              (a) Considerable vandalism occurred in Public Works properties
                  and it was unclear whether pupils or members of the
                  community committed the acts. The communities were
                  encouraged to look after their schools.


              (b) Many Public Works properties were vacant. The department
                  was trying to ensure that these properties are occupied
                  in order to prevent vandalism.


              (c) Other properties were not yet registered as there was
                  confusion between the municipality and Public Works
                  regarding the ownership.


              (d) The province was faced with maintenance backlogs due to
                  inefficient funds and it was incapable of raising funds
                  to complete certain projects.


              (e) In 1996, maintenance costs to lifts in Groote Schuur
                  Hospital amounted to R6 million.


              (f) In 2000, R19 million was granted for maintenance. In 2001,
                  R69 million was granted for maintenance services. The
                  2002 maintenance budget fell to zero.


              (g) The E-works programme will assist the department to
                  calculate the amount to be budgeted for maintenance in
                  the next financial year. The system will provide the
                  exact location of the project and the time frame within
                  which the project will be completed. The system was in
                  the development stage.


              (h) The department was busy with a Management Information
                  System (MIS). The project will be completed within six
                  months and will be accessible to other provinces.


              (i) The Western Cape had 16 000 state properties. The asset
                  register was 99% complete, but delays were experienced in
                  registering properties due to unclear procedures. It will
                  take six to eight months to receive the certificates of
                  the registered properties.


              (j) The department had also introduced GIS to collate
                  information on registered properties.


              (k) The department needed about R320 million to R340 million a
                  year to maintain buildings without addressing the
                  backlogs. The department should receive 2 to 3% more than
                  what is currently the case for maintenance.


         3. Discussions with Standing Committee on Public Works


              The Chairperson, Mr D Silke (DA), welcomed everyone present
              and members introduced themselves. The Standing Committee
              covered the following portfolios: Economic Affairs, Transport,
              Agriculture and Public Works.


              The Committee delegation informed the Standing Committee about
              its tour around Public Works properties in the province and,
              in particular, its expectation that it would also have visited
              rural areas. The Head of Department explained that there had
              been a misunderstanding about the exact areas to be visited.
              As a result rural areas did not form part of the programme.


              The delegation felt that the province has not done enough to
              empower Blacks and the disabled as part of job creation. It
              was the opinion of the delegation that community involvment in
              projects was non-existent. The Standing Committee promised to
              follow up on the issues raised.


              The delegation was impressed with the Department's ability to
              provide financial statements on a monthly basis and holding
              weekly meetings to give updates and progress reports.


              Ms Mqulwana proposed that the Standing Committee organise an
              intensive follow-up visit to rural areas with members of the
              Department. This was agreed to.


              The delegation was surprised by the excessive backlogs the
              Department had inherited. The Standing Committee informed the
              delegation that the reasons for the backlogs were mainly
              historic.


              The chairperson informed the delegation that he had just
              joined the Committee and promised to share any information
              before the next Annual Report. He confessed that the committee
              has not done enough since it had not been involved in
              departmental projects.


              The delegation was informed that the Standing Committee had to
              perform an excessive amount of work with only a few members.
              The committee was experiencing serious difficulties in coping
              with its oversight function.


              The question of community-based projects was unclear to
              members of the committee as the delegation had to explain what
              it meant and also gave examples from other provinces,
              including the involvement of the youth in these projects. The
              Standing Committee mentioned that these community-based
              projects were not new but because there were regular changes
              in provincial ministries, development was affected.


              Ms Sekgobela mentioned that a report would be made available
              to the standing committee as soon as it became available.
     J.     Recommendations


         1. Northern Province


              (a) The Departments of Transport and Defence must resolve the
                  issue of maintenance of the Getaway Airport road in
                  Pietersburg. This road should be handed over to the NPRA
                  for repairs as it has been budgeted for.


              (b) R700 million should be allocated to the province in order
                  to address the repair backlogs for roads and bridges
                  damaged by floods.


         2. Gauteng


              The allocation of funds to Chris Hani Baragwanath Hospital,
              compared to other hospitals, was not justifiable since it
              served a large number of patients. The Department of Health
              should attend to this matter.


         3. North West


              (a) The Department of Public Works (Regional Office) in North
                  West should do in loco inspections before a project
                  starts and after the completion of that project. Examples
                  included the Lonely Park School and Bophelong Hospital.


              (b) The province should justify the discrepancy between money
                  allocated to contractors and project results.


              (c) A follow-up visit to the North West Province must be
                  undertaken.


         4. KwaZulu-Natal, Eastern Cape and Mpumalanga


              (a) The Committee must develop a mechanism for revisiting
                  projects that were completed in previous years.


              (b) Continuous discussions with the Standing Committee,
                  Provincial Department, District Councils and general
                  public must be encouraged.


              (c) Mechanisms must be developed for projects to become self-
                  sustaining.


              (d) Contractors who were at fault for not completing projects
                  should be fined.


              (e) Public properties and buildings must be accessible to
                  disabled persons.


              (f) Co-ordination and management of projects should be
                  intensified in terms of skills development and
                  departmental exchanges should be encouraged.


              (g) Medium and long-term programmes for the sustainability and
                  expansion of projects should be integrated into training.


              (h) Main contractors should be monitored so that they could
                  fulfill their obligations.


              (i) The employment conditions of workers at main and
                  subcontractor level must be monitored to ensure adherence
                  to applicable standards.


              (j) Employment conditions must be based on government
                  policies.


         5. Free State


              (a) Government structures needed to improve their service
                  delivery.
              (b) Mr Lekoro, Control Works Inspector from Reitz Petsana, was
                  mandated to submit a report on the progress of the
                  investigation to the Head of the Department.


         6. Northern Cape


              (a) Government structures needed to improve their service
                  delivery.


              (b) Financial support was needed from government.


              (c) Mr Norter, Consulting Engineer in Prieska, was requested
                  to train members of the community so that when contracts
                  ended, they would have skills.


              (d) Officials from the Department of Public Works should
                  assist with community training.


         7. Western Cape


              The Committee wishes to investigate whether any funding was
              allocated by National Parliament to assist the province with
              CBPW programmes.


         8. General recommendations for national Department of Public Works
              and provincial Departments of Public Works


              (a) The National Department of Public Works should consider
                  adopting the Gauteng Facilities Management System (GFMS)
                  for assessing and maintaining state properties.


              (b) The provinces should copy the CBPWP model of the Gauteng
                  Province.


              (c) The National Department of Public Works should assist
                  provinces in terms of standardisation and management of
                  projects.
                            TUESDAY, 4 JUNE 2002

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Labour:


     (a)    Annual Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation
         Commissioner for 1999-2000 [RP 208-2001].


     (b)    Annual Report and Financial Statements of the National Skills
         Fund for 2000-2001, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements for 2000-2001.

National Assembly:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker:


     (a)    A review of South Africa's National Anti-Corruption Agencies,
         Public Service Commission [RP 216-2001].


     (b)    Ethics Survey for 2001 - Ethics in Practice, Public Service
         Commission.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Communications on the Electronic
     Communications and Transactions Bill [B 8 - 2002] (National Assembly -
     sec 75), dated 3 June 2002:


         The Portfolio Committee on Communications, having considered the
         subject of the Electronic Communications and Transactions Bill [B
         8 - 2002] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and
         classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill,
         reports the Bill with amendments [B 8A - 2002].


         The Committee recommends further that, notwithstanding the
         amendments to the Bill, the South African Law Commission continue
         the work it was originally mandated to perform.


     Report to be considered.

