---
title: 'National Assembly - 19 March 2002'
layout: debate
year: 2002
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2002/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2002-03-19
---

TUESDAY, 19 MARCH 2002
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 10:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members  to  observe  a  moment  of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

            DISCUSSION OF REPORT OF OBSERVER MISSION TO ZIMBABWE

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, before we start with  today's  proceedings,
I wish to acknowledge the presence in our midst of  the  joint  chairpersons
and representatives, including South Africa's Ambassador  to  Brussels,  who
are here for the meeting of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly. You are welcome,  and
we are glad you joined us for this debate. [Applause.]

Ms N N MAPISA-NQAKULA: Firstly, I must  express  my  gratitude  and  sincere
appreciation to this House and to Madam Speaker in particular  for  allowing
me to lead this delegation to Zimbabwe.

The Zimbabwean election has come and gone.  A  president  of  that  country,
Robert Mugabe, has been inaugurated. I believe that  what  is  uppermost  in
the  minds  of  the  greater  majority  of  that  country's  population   is
Zimbabwe's  future.  Everything  that  has  happened  in  that  country  has
happened to them directly. They had to confront want and deprivation in  the
face of food shortages and the death of social services.  They  have  become
victims of political instability that, at times, spills  into  violence  and
they are certainly asking the question: When will it all  come  to  an  end?
That question is repeated all over the world. When will  stability  come  to
Zimbabwe? But we in South Africa, particularly we who are  members  of  this
Assembly, should say, as  we  ask  that  question,  that  we  are  ready  to
contribute to the pursuit of peace and  stability  in  Zimbabwe.  We  cannot
turn our backs on that country for the  obvious  reason  that  we  would  be
deeply affected as a country were Zimbabwe to collapse.  As  we  attempt  to
help that country and her people, we must never dictate to them  what  needs
to be done and how it should be done. In  the  end  it  is  the  Zimbabweans
themselves who should chart the way forward as they rebuild their country.

When our parliamentary delegation left for Zimbabwe on 22 February, we  were
very united. We were also united as we carried out the task that  Parliament
had given us. Our commitment to that cause could not be faulted  by  anyone.
In fact we received praise from all  sides  of  the  political  spectrum  in
Zimbabwe.

Our observations of what was happening on the ground were  similar  in  most
respects, as  is  confirmed  by  the  report  that  we  are  tabling  before
Parliament today. It is my view and has been my position since  arriving  in
Zimbabwe that elections extend over three phases:  The  first  is  the  pre-
election phase, followed by the actual poll and the  postelection  phase.  I
want to  argue,  therefore,  that  when  we  do  an  overall  assessment  of
elections, it is proper to look at the whole picture. I am mentioning  these
things because the delegation may not necessarily be united on the  ultimate
pronouncement  regarding  the  Zimbabwean  election.  I  believe  that   our
difficulty relates to our failure to assess, in  the  same  way,  the  three
phases and the total picture I have referred to.

Allow me to then address the House on the phases. It is true that  the  pre-
election phase was marked by incidents of violence in Zimbabwe. It  is  also
necessary to say that there were widespread allegations  of  violence,  some
of which we were able to verify.  Others  were  not  confirmed.  I  want  to
indicate to the House that not every corner of  Zimbabwe  was  wracked  with
violence. In fact, even in areas where there were incidents of violence,  it
did not permeate right through those centres.

I was part of the observer mission that  this  House  sent  to  observe  the
parliamentary elections in Zimbabwe. I am certain we  will  not  forget  the
media images of the violence that happened on that occasion,  especially  as
farms were forcefully  occupied  and  farmers  attacked,  with  many  people
falling victim to that situation. I did not feel, this time round, that  the
level of  intensity  was  the  same  as  that  experienced  earlier  by  our
delegation in 2000. Of course, there was violence that was mostly  sporadic.
There has been no evidence, though, that the violence and  intimidation  had
any effect on the voters.

The massive turnout at the polls on each of the three  days  set  aside  for
the election  testifies  to  this.  Nobody  can  fault  the  enthusiasm  and
determination of the Zimbabweans to vote and choose their leadership.

There were many unfortunate remarks that were made before, during and  after
the election by some commentators, including some leaders  of  some  of  the
countries of the West. It is extremely unfortunate that  the  British  Prime
Minister, Mr Tony Blair, in particular was amongst world  leaders  who  made
negative observations about the Zimbabwean leadership, to the point that  he
said that he would not recognise the outcome of the election if Zanu-PF  was
declared the winner. That was  not  only  unfortunate,  but  also  extremely
dangerous coming, as it did, from a head of a colonial  power  of  Zimbabwe.
[Applause.]

It was also  unfortunate  that  the  MDC  leader,  Morgan  Tsvangirai,  when
addressing the international observers, categorically stated that  he  would
not accept the outcome of the election if he did not win. [Interjections.]

To us, as the ANC, the total picture of what happened in Zimbabwe  convinces
us that the election result was a credible expression of  the  will  of  the
people of that  country  and  thus  deserves  our  respect.  [Applause.]  It
deserves our respect.

As I have already said, the post-election problems of Zimbabwe  will  impact
on  us.  The  crises,  the  people  and  the  leadership  in  that  country,
politically and otherwise, including civil society, will have  to  be  faced
and  resolved  by  the  Zimbabweans  themselves,  in  the  first   instance.
[Interjections.] But, surely, they will need a lot of  assistance  from  all
well-meaning people right across our globe.

We do not have the luxury, as  South  Africans,  to  choose  to  be  hostile
observers in that situation. We have a direct interest  in  the  matter  and
must ensure at all times that all  our  neighbours,  including  Zimbabweans,
are peaceful and stable. Therefore, we cannot watch Zimbabwe going down  the
path of self-destruction. [Applause.]

The  challenge  of  the  sociopolitical  reconstruction  of  Zimbabwe  is  a
challenge that the country's people must face.  They  must  unite  at  every
level of their human  interaction  and  endeavours  so  that,  as  a  united
nation, they can defeat the enemies they have been facing for a  long  while
now, of poverty, landlessness, unemployment and disease. [Interjections.]
Zimbabwe is a  highly  polarised  country.  This,  in  the  first  instance,
relates to the urban-rural divide. This divide is historical. It has  to  do
with the fact that the peasantry headed the motive forces  of  the  struggle
for liberation in that  country.  That  is  why  the  question  of  land  in
Zimbabwe is such a sensitive matter and should be handled as such.  That  is
also the main reason for Zanu-PF's predominance in the rural countryside.

The polarisation in that country is palpable. Even  the  media  are  divided
along political lines. National unity and  reconciliation  are  an  absolute
necessity. [Applause.] Fortunately for us, we have the experience  in  South
Africa that we can contribute to the ideal of peace and  nation-building  in
Zimbabwe. Despite different political programmes and orientation,  we  still
engage  in  dialogue,  as  South   Africans,   because   of   the   enormous
responsibility entrusted to us by our people from all walks of life.

The struggle to reposition Zimbabwe does not belong to  Mugabe  and  Zanu-PF
only. It belongs to Tsvangirai and the MDC and  all  other  leaders  of  the
respective formations in that country.  [Applause.]  But,  I  must  keep  on
emphasising that it is a struggle which  they  should  not  be  expected  to
conduct alone, in isolation. The world must help and South  Africa  must  be
at the top of the list of those who render that assistance. [Applause.]

We would be extremely na√Øve if we were to believe that Zimbabwe's future  is
not linked to ours. It is, in major material respects. I do not have  to  go
into the history of that country to make my point. All of us here know  that
quite well.

There are commentators, both in South Africa and abroad, who have  said  the
experience  in  Zimbabwe  will  detrimentally  affect  Nepad  and  that  the
President, Comrade Thabo Mbeki, must act in a manner  that  will  save  that
programme. In other words, it is suggested that he should support  sanctions
against Zimbabwe and  other  punitive  measures  that  have  been  suggested
against that country and Mugabe personally to get help in regard to Nepad.
I believe that the world leaders who  have  committed  themselves  to  Nepad
will indeed participate in this programme  unconditionally.  They  will  not
want to use Nepad as a measure  to  blackmail  our  people.  [Applause.]  We
believe in the morality of their judgment on  all  developmental  questions,
and we therefore do not doubt their commitment to participating in Nepad.

I think it is proper that I should thank all hon members who  were  with  me
in the delegation to Zimbabwe. At this point we may have come  to  different
conclusions about what has happened to Zimbabwe, but I think that it is  the
honourable thing to thank all the hon members  for  the  support  that  they
rendered to one another and  for  the  manner  in  which  we  conducted  our
business as MPs with integrity and professionalism. I believe that  what  is
tabled in the report as a conclusion is not something that  can  lead  to  a
division in the delegation. It is absolutely necessary  to  put  the  record
straight in this House that in fact the substantive matters in  the  report,
the entire content of that report which is tabled before hon members,  is  a
product of a collective effort. We sat yesterday, from  nine  o'clock  until
eleven o'clock in the evening, and agreed on the substantive matters in  the
report. [Applause.]

Mr E K MOORCROFT: Madam Speaker, I should begin by  paying  tribute  to  the
manner in which the hon Chief Whip of the Majority Party led the  delegation
in Zimbabwe. If Parliament had been a little more generous with my  time,  I
could be more generous in my appraisal of the  way  in  which  she  led  us.
[Applause.]

The DP was represented on the Parliamentary  Observer  Mission  by  the  hon
Andries Botha and myself. According to our instructions from Parliament,  we
and the mission had to assess whether conditions existed for the  conducting
of an election that could demonstrate the general will of  the  Zimbabweans.
Among other issues, we  were  to  observe  and  consider  the  freeness  and
fairness  of  the  political  environment;  whether  political  parties  had
unrestricted access to voters; whether  the  rules  regulating  the  process
were being adhered to by the parties; and whether there had  been  incidents
of electoral violence and how they had been dealt with.

In all of these matters, we had to take into account  much  more  than  what
happened on the polling days of 9 and 10 March  2002.  We  had  to  consider
whether in the pre-election period, which stretched back for at least  until
the latter half of  2001,  conditions  for  a  sufficiently  free  and  fair
election had prevailed.

It is our  considered  opinion  that  in  all  of  the  above  matters,  the
elections fell lamentably  short  of  what  could  even  be  considered  the
rudiments  of  a  free  and  fair  election.  [Applause.]  The  presidential
elections cast a long shadow. Since its defeat in the 2000  referendum,  the
ruling Zanu-PF party has relied on a campaign of merciless  intimidation  to
subdue its opponents.

This strategy was stepped up in both intensity and brutality in  the  recent
elections.  It  consisted  of  a  campaign  of  state-sponsored,  nationally
orchestrated violence, torture and destruction of property. It was aimed  at
retaining the ruling party's hold on power at all costs, even if this  meant
the destruction of the economy. In the process it rode roughshod over  human
rights;  it  subverted  the  rule  of  law  and  cynically   exploited   its
legislative powers. Nothing was sacrosanct, not even  racism,  tribalism  or
the emotive land issue. All were cynically exploited regardless of the long-
term consequences to the country.

The campaign of terror was spearheaded by the so-called war vets  and  youth
militia, both of whom seemed to vie with one another to prove who  could  be
the most ruthless and brutal. There is a considerable and ever-growing  body
of evidence to substantiate this claim. It was this violence which,  in  our
estimation, was responsible for the creation of a climate in which free  and
fair elections could not take place. All evidence points to the  fact  that,
although both parties were responsible for acts of violence, it was  members
of the MDC who were massively the victims of the violence.
The other factors which militated against  the  holding  of  free  and  fair
elections were the provisions of the legal constitutional framework and  the
abuses of the electoral system which took place. With regard to the  latter,
mention need only be made of the tens of thousands of disclosed persons  who
were denied their right to vote, because they had been forced to  leave  the
constituencies in which they had been registered, or  the  further  tens  of
thousands who were unable to vote because of  the  deliberate  reduction  of
polling stations in the urban areas, creating conditions of  congestion  and
chaos in which people either  left  the  polls  in  despair,  or  else  were
dispersed by the riot police.

One further feature of the elections which is deserving of  mention  is  the
fact that they were held  in  a  climate  in  which  the  rule  of  law  had
effectively broken down. The most obvious  manifestation  of  this  was  the
shameful way in which the police deliberately adopted  a  partisan  approach
with regard to Zanu-PF. In case after recorded case, the police  refused  to
take action against members of the ruling party  who  were  responsible  for
acts of violence against the opposition. The first and  most  pressing  task
of any democratic government which might  in  the  future  take  control  of
Zimbabwe will be to restore the rule of law.

For all of the above reasons, and for many more, which I do  not  have  time
to address, but which my colleagues  will  also  touch  on,  the  DP  cannot
endorse the 2002 Zimbabwean presidential elections  as  having  been  either
free and fair or as representing the will of the Zimbabwean people.

Vho R S N·∏íOU: Mulangadzulo wa Mufumakadzi, vhahulisei  vha  Phalamennde,  na
khonani dzashu dzine ra vha nadzo fhano. Na n·πãe ndi mu·πÖwe wa vhathu vhe  vha
vha vho ya hangei Zimbabwe, u  ya  u  lavhelesa  mafhungo  a  dzikhetho  dza
·∏Ωene·∏Ωo shango. Ndi ngoho ro swika hangei Zimbabwe nga dzi 22 dza  ·πÖwedzi  wo
fhelaho.

Tshe ra wana tshone ri tshi swika, ho vha uri  zwine  zwa  khou  ambiwa  nga
vhathu na nga vha midia vha fhano Afurika Tshipembe,  a  ri  ngo  zwi  vhona
rine hangei Zimbabwe. Na mafhungo ane  a  khou  ambiwa  nga  vhathu  nga  ha
kudzulele kwa vhathu vha Zimbabwe, u tambula kana u sa vha na mulayo  havho,
a si zwone.

Arali ra tou zwi sedza zwavhu·∏ìi, vhathu vhane vha amba uri Zimbabwe  a  huna
na tshithu na tshithihi tsho lugaho, ndi vhatshena, a si vhathu vharema.  Na
hanengei Zimbabwe arali vha nga ya, vha ·∏ìo wana vhathu vhane vha amba  hezwo
vhe vhatshena.

A si vhathu vharema vhane vha amba hezwo. Vhathu vha  Zimbabwe  hezwo  zwine
zwa khou  ambiwa,  a  vha  zwi  ·∏ìivhi.  [U  dzhenelela.]  Zimbabwe  yo  wana
mbofholowo nga  1980,  nga  murahu  ha  zwenezwo,  ho  vha  na  dzikhakhathi
shangoni ·∏Ωa Zimbabwe musi hu tshi vha na nndwa nga  tshavho.  Ho  fa  vhathu
vhanzhi nga hetsho tshifhinga. Fhedzhi-ha, vhenevho vhathu  vhane  vha  khou
ambesa ·πãamusi, a vha ngo amba tshithu nga vhathu  vho  faho  nga  tshenetsho
tshifhinga, ngauri ho vha hu vhathu vharema vhane vha khou fa.

Musi hu tshi tou fa muthu muthihi wa bulasini wa mutshena, hu vuwa  ha  vuwa
na vhatshena vha Amerika, vha sa athu u vhuya vha swika fhano kha shango  ·∏Ωa
Afurika. Vha ima nga milenzhe, fhedzi vha hashu vha  tshi  fa,  a  vha  ambi
tshithu. [U dzhenelela.]

Mugabe a si mu·π±aluli nga muvhala  ngauri,  musi  a  tshi  lwela  mbofholowo,
muvhuso wa Smith wo vha u tshi  khou  vhulaha  vhathu  vhanzhi  nga  maan·πãa,
vhana vha·π±uku-·π±uku na vhasadzi. Fhedzi Mugabe o ri  u  wana  muvhuso,  havho
vhathu vhothe a si vha fare. Na ·πãamusi vha khou tshimbila vho vhofholowa  na
u  khetha  vha  a  khetha,  vha  tshi  dovha  vha  ·π±ongela  honou·∏Ωa  o   vha
vhofhololaho. Zwino ndi zwifhio zwine na khou amba zwone?

Nga nn·∏ìa ha hezwo, zwe ra wana zwone hangei Zimbabwe, ndi  u  dzhenelela  ha
Tony Blair kha mafhungo a Zimbabwe. Honoho u dzhenelela ha  Tony  Blair  kha
mafhungo a Zimbabwe, zwi khou tou sumba zwauri ha  khou  ambela  vhathu  vha
Zimbabwe, u khou amba mafhungo awe a uri vha hashu vhatshena,  vha  khou  ·∏ìo
tambula, ngauri shango ·∏Ωa Zimbabwe tshe ·∏Ωa vhofholowa, 4 200 ya mabulasi,  i
tshe zwan·∏ìani zwa vhatshena. Vhatshena a vha shoni. Vha  vhona  zwo  fanela.
[U dzhenelela.] Vha amba nga u vhusa nga mulayo kana rule of law.  Hufhio  u
vhusa nga Mulayo? Ngauri u vhusa nga mulayo ho ·∏ìiswa  nga  Mugabe  na  Nkomo
hafho Zimbabwe. Ho vha hu si na u vhusa nga  mulayo.  Seller  Scouts  ndi  u
vhusa nga mulayo. Ndi amba Selous Scouts. [U vhanda  zwanda.]  Ndi  u  vhusa
nga mulayo u vhulaha vhathu vha si na mulandu? Hu ri dimokirasi  yeneyo  ine
ya vha hone ine na khou amba yone musi  ni  tshi  ri  vhudza  nga  misi,  yo
pimiwaho ya dzitshakha kha dimokirasi, zwo·π±he zwenezwo zwine na amba  zwone.
[U dzhenelela.] A ni ngo vhuya na ri ·πãea heyo dimokirasi vhoinwi. A huna  na
muthu na muthihi o ri ·πãeaho dimokirasi.

Fhedzi, Mugabe na Nkomo ndi  vhone  vho  ·∏ìisaho  dimokirasi  kha  shango  ·∏Ωa
Zimbabwe. [U vhanda zwan·∏ìa.] A i ngo ·∏ìiswa nga Tony Blair na Harold  Wilson.
Yo ·∏ìiswa nga Mugabe na Nkomo dimokirasi kha he·∏Ωo shango. Zwino, a ri koni  u
funziwa rine nga vha vhukovhela nga ha dimokirasi ye vha sa ri fhe yone,  ye
ri·πãe ra tou i lwela. Ndi rine  vhane  vha  tea  u  funza  havha  vhathu  nga
dimokirasi. Ri tea u  vha  funza  zwauri  dimokirasi  ndi  mini.  [U  vhanda
zwan·∏ìa.] Ndi ri·πãe ri  ne  ra  ·∏ìivha  zwauri  dimokirasi  ndi  mini.  A  huna
dimokirasi ine vha nga ri vhudza yone.

Vha amba nga milayo ya dzitshakha ya dimokirasi.  Ifhio  ya  dzitshakha.  Ho
vha na khetho zwenezwino Amerika, ha mbo ·∏ìi vha na u dzhavhula muvhuso,  nga
vhanna vha khothe, vha dzhenisa mu·πÖwe muthu. [U  dzhenelela.]  Kha  vha  pfe
ngeno vhone vho khotsimunene, zwine vha khou amba zwone, a  vha  zwi  ·∏ìivhi.
Rine ri zwipondwa zwa u tambula.

Ro dzheniswa dzikhothoni nga vha hanu. Vha tshi ri fara vha  tshi  ri  pfisa
vhu·π±ungu. A ni ngo vhuya na amba tshithu.

Nga 1976 musi vha tshi ri vhulaha a ni ngo vhuya na amba tshithu. No vha  ni
tshi ri ndi u vhusa nga mulayo. U vhulawa hashu ndi u vhusa  nga  mulayo.  U
vhulawa hashu, ndi u vhusa nga mulayo. [U vhanda zwan·∏ìa.] A si  zwone  hezwo
lini. Vhathu kha vha gude u amba ngoho, vha litshe u vha vhaswaledzi  shango
·∏Ωo·π±he. Kha ri ambe ngoho ya uri musi ri  tshi  vhulawa,  no  vha  ni  ngafhi
vhoinwi vhane na khou kona u amba ·πãamusi.
Ro ni ·πãea mbofholowo hei ine na khou  amba  ngayo.  A  ri  khou  ri  tshithu
ngazwo. Vha·πÖwe vhanu arali ra nga tou ni tevhelela, ni na milandu. Ndi  rine
vhe ra bvisa ngoho. [U dzhelela.] Ndi ri·πãe  ro  zwi  itaho  uri  hu  vhe  na
Khomishini ya Ngoho  na  Vhupfumedzani  nahone,  ra  sa  fare  na  muthu  na
muthihi. Fhedzi, ndi tshi·∏ìahela shagoni ·∏Ωanga. A thi ngo  wela  milambo  ndi
tshi ya kha shango ·∏Ωa mu·πÖwe muthu.

Ndi khou amba zwauri, zwe Tony Blair a ita zwone, na zwi·πÖwe a khou  zwi  ita
zwino, zwi tea uri zwi karuse Afurika yo·π±he, [Tshifhinga  tsho  fhela.]  kha
zwauri havha vhathu, a vha imi na  ri·πãe  nahone  vha  nndwani  na  ri·πãe.  [U
vhanda zwan·∏ìa.] (Translation of Tshiven·∏ìa speech follows.)

[Mr R S NDOU: Madam Speaker, hon members and our friends who are here, I  am
also one of those people who went to Zimbabwe as an  election  observer.  It
is true, we arrived in Zimbabwe on 22 March.

What we found there on our arrival was that  what  was  being  said  by  the
South Africans and their media was not what we saw  in  Zimbabwe.  Even  the
rumours that are being spread by the people about the standard of living  of
the Zimbabweans, their suffering or their lack of morals, are not true.

If we look at this very carefully, we see that the  people  who  are  saying
that there is nothing good in Zimbabwe are the whites, not blacks.  Even  if
one goes to Zimbabwe, one will find that the people who are saying that  are
the whites. It is not  the  blacks  who  are  saying  that.  The  people  of
Zimbabwe are not aware of what  is  being  said.  [Interjections.]  Zimbabwe
gained its independence in 1980 and after that there were  riots  and  civil
war. Many people were killed during that time.  But  those  people  who  are
talking so much today said nothing about those who  died  during  that  era,
because it was the black people who died.

If  one  white  person  dies,  it  causes  whites  from  America  to  react,
especially those who have never been to Africa. Then  they  stand  on  their
feet, but if our people die, they say nothing. [Interjections.]

Mugabe is not a racist, because  when  he  fought  for  freedom,  the  Smith
government was killing lots  of  people,  young  children  and  women.  When
Mugabe came to power, he did not arrest those people. Even today,  they  are
still walking free, voting and looking down on  the  very  same  person  who
emancipated them. So, what is it that those hon members are saying now?

Another thing that we found in Zimbabwe was the interference of  Tony  Blair
in Zimbabwe's affairs. The interference of Tony Blair  showed  that  he  was
not speaking on behalf of the people. They  might  think  that  it  was  his
fellow whites who were suffering. Since the liberation of  Zimbabwe,  4  200
farms are still in the hands of the whites. The whites are  shameless.  They
see this as the right thing to do. [Interjections.] They speak of  the  rule
of law. Is the way of the Seller Scouts, their rule of law?  I  mean  Selous
Scouts. [Applause.] Is the killing of innocent people the rule of law?  Even
the democracy that the opposition is always  telling  us  about  is  racist.
[Interjections.] Those hon members did not bring that democracy  to  us.  No
one gave us that democracy.

But, Mugabe and Nkomo brought democracy to Zimbabwe. [Applause.] It was  not
brought about by Tony Blair or Harold Wilson. Democracy in that country  was
brought to them by Mugabe and Nkomo. The  Western  people  cannot  teach  us
about democracy and they did not bring it to us  -  we  were  the  ones  who
fought for it. We are the ones  who  must  teach  them  what  democracy  is.
[Applause.] We are the  ones  who  know  what  democracy  is.  There  is  no
democracy which they can tell us about.

They talk about the international laws  of  democracy.  Which  international
laws? There were elections not too long ago in America, which resulted  into
a coup d'√©tat by the court  officials  and  somebody  was  put  into  power.
[Interjections.] I want the hon member to listen to me, as he does not  know
what he is talking about. We are the victims of hardship.
We were imprisoned by the hon member's own  people.  We  were  arrested  and
tortured, but then they said nothing about that. In 1976, when  they  killed
us, the hon members said nothing. They called that  the  rule  of  law.  Our
killings were then the rule of law. [Applause.] That was  not  fair.  People
must learn to speak the truth. The whole country must not consist of  liars.
Let us speak the truth about where those hon  members  were  while  we  were
being killed. Where were the hon members who are speaking today?

We gave them the freedom which they are talking about. If we  look  at  some
of them,  they  are  guilty.  We  exposed  the  truth.  [Interjections.]  We
insisted that there should be a Truth and Reconciliation Commission  and  we
never arrested anyone. But, I  am  still  regarded  as  a  fool  in  my  own
country. I did not cross the river, going to somebody else's land.

What I am saying is that what Tony Blair did, and  what  he  is  doing  now,
should awaken the whole of Africa. They are the people that are  against  us
and are also fighting us. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]
Chief M  W  HLENGWA:  Madam  Speaker,  first  of  all  may  I  register  our
appreciation for the opportunity we enjoyed of being led by  the  hon  Chief
Whip of the Majority Party. [Applause.]  The  IFP  does  not  wish  to  bury
Zimbabwe, neither do we praise them. We merely wish  to  examine  the  facts
and put the whole matter in the proper perspective.

I wish to start by quoting what  my  leader,  Prince  Mangosuthu  Buthelezi,
stated in a press release that appeared early on the morning  of  13  March,
and I quote:


  I have kept silent for  a  long  time  about  the  rapidly  deteriorating
  economic, social and political situation in Zimbabwe  in  the  hope  that
  this week's elections could heal these problems. I have  not  ignored  or
  denied these problems and I have regarded them as a clear example of  how
  a lack of democracy, freedom and liberties can disintegrate a country and
  become the greatest possible curse to its people. I have  prayed  in  the
  hope that things could be turned around.


  I am very saddened to receive reports  from  independent  observers  that
  seem to indicate that things have not gone well enough during an election
  which can no longer be regarded as free and fair. It must  be  understood
  that in the Zimbabwe electoral system the one who passes the  post  takes
  all and the one who is defeated takes nothing. If one were faced  with  a
  vast disproportion of votes, allegations of  impropriety  would  be  less
  relevant. But, in a situation in which the reported spread of  difference
  in votes between the two  candidates  is  so  small,  any  allegation  of
  impropriety which departs from the standards  of  democracy  and  freedom
  tilts the scales in a very significant fashion,  which  alters  the  real
  will of the people.


  Apparently there is consensus among the independent observers on some  of
  the many problems observed, some of which are relevant to our  perception
  of the Zimbabwe elections. Reportedly, the  voters'  roll  was  adversely
  affected by the requirement of long-term residence in the voting district
  when many people were forced out of their habitual  places  of  residence
  and others were induced to leave the country on  account  of  their  dual
  citizenship.


  The state-controlled media has also been reported as showing overwhelming
  support and bias in favour of one of the candidates and the police forces
  have been reported as playing a supportive role to one of the candidates.


  Similarly, it has been reported that one  of  the  candidates'  electoral
  teams had the exclusive use of all the schools  across  the  country  for
  their logistical support. Moreover, on  Monday  many  people  wishing  to
  enter the parameters of voting stations  were  not  allowed  in,  thereby
  becoming disenfranchised.


  We cannot ignore these reported problems, and we cannot isolate them from
  the many problems which we have seen taking place in the  run-up  to  the
  elections, which have highlighted how democracy and freedom  in  Zimbabwe
  have progressively disintegrated. The very notion of the rule of law  and
  all the values which our democracy professes to hold dear have long  been
  in jeopardy in our neighbouring  country.  We  cannot  but  be  extremely
  concerned, saddened and worried about this further turn of  events  which
  seems to plunge Zimbabwe even deeper into a crisis.


  We must express our support to the people of Zimbabwe, who are the  final
  arbiter of their destiny and who will have to find the strength,  courage
  and inspiration to deal with the historic  misfortune  of  their  present
  circumstances.

The leader of the IFP issued this  press  statement  on  the  basis  of  the
report he received from the SADC Parliamentary Forum, which  concluded  that
the  Zimbabwean  elections  did  not  comply  with  SADC's  minimum  ethical
standards, for  the  holding  of  free  and  fair  elections.  We  must  ask
ourselves why this important report has been ignored  by  all  and  was,  in
many respects, suppressed in the public debate. The Chairperson of  our  own
IEC,  Brigalia  Bam,  has  spoken  frankly  and  openly,  stating  that  the
elections were neither free nor fair.

The time has come for this House to raise its  voice  to  condemn  the  many
irregularities in the long run-up to and  during  these  elections,  in  the
strongest possible terms. Former President Mandela called the government  in
Harare a ``tyranny'', and  no  better  word  can  describe  the  progressive
disintegration of the  rule  of  law,  ...  [Applause]  ...  the  systematic
violation of fundamental rights and  liberties  and  the  disintegration  of
proper governance. This tyranny is oppressing  our  closest  neighbours  and
friends, and indirectly, is oppressing our own people.

We had to write off billions of rands of our people's  money  in  loans  and
credit guarantees because this tyranny has bankrupted a country  which  just
a few years ago the world looked at as a possible Switzerland of Africa.  We
are even supplying Zimbabwe with electricity at a much lower  cost  than  we
do to our own people.

Because of the tyranny in Zimbabwe, the dream  of  an  African  Renaissance,
flowing from Nepad, may be  shattered.  We  cannot  divorce  democracy  from
development and if we are not serious about promoting democracy and  freedom
wherever they are threatened, the world will not be committed  to  promoting
our development.

Zimbabwe has become the typical example of Africa's self-inflicted  injuries
because of its unwillingness to to stand firm by the principles  of  freedom
and democracy. We must make sure that  this  House  does  not  hesitate  nor
falter in its qualified condemnation of  the  entire  Zimbabwean  democratic
degeneration which culminated in a flawed election.

We must condemn, but not sanction.  The  IFP  has  always  opposed  economic
sanctions because they punish the innocent and affect  the  poorest  of  the
poor. We must plead with democratic countries of the  world  not  to  impose
economic sanctions, which will be an ineffective effort to deter  those  who
abuse power, but starve their victims. The  economic  collapse  of  Zimbabwe
has thus far not deterred the ruling regime and sanctions will not force  it
out of its ways. Sanctions will not work.

In the past we kept silent in the hope that honey  could  catch  more  flies
than vinegar, but it has clearly  not  worked.  These  elections  have  been
unfair from the beginning, as they took  place  after  years  of  unlevelled
playing fields and were the product of extensive gerrymandering.

Only an unquestionably free and fair election could have turned the  tables.
It did not happen. Zimbabwe has gone further down the same path.

We must now express our moral indignation  and  condemn  what  has  happened
last week and what has been happening for the past two  years.  We  need  to
speak up to save our own continent and our own democracy in order  to  avoid
the impression that we would ever regard elections like  those  in  Zimbabwe
as free and fair if they were run in South Africa.  The  standard  we  adopt
today to judge Zimbabwe must be the same as we would adopt to  preserve  our
own democracy. [Applause.]
Finally, the IFP rejects the conclusion in the report espoused  by  the  ANC
component that the Zimbabwe election is a credible expression  of  the  will
of Zimbabwe's people, and we confirm our minority  party's  conclusion  that
the Zimbabwe elections cannot be endorsed as being genuinely free and  fair.
[Applause.]

Mr M I SCOTT: Madam Speaker and hon members, it is an  honour  to  speak  on
this important  debate  on  Zimbabwe.  The  elections  attracted  a  lot  of
interest in the internal and international arena.

Zimbabwe is a country that  is  experiencing  serious  problems.  Since  the
failure of its structural adjustment programme, the  social  revolution  has
been undermined, the gains in education and  the  health  sector  have  been
eroded, the economy is under stress, the  inflation  rate  stands  at  112%,
unemployment is estimated at 60%, the exchange rate has doubled,  there  are
serious shortages of foodstuffs, a big chunk of land is still in  the  hands
of white farmers and it is a country that is going through  a  very  serious
social crisis.
Zimbabwe is highly polarised. It is worse with  both  print  and  electronic
media. All parties, including the ruling party, agree that the  constitution
of the country, which emanated from the  Lancaster  House  negotiations,  is
flawed and needs to be rewritten.

Zimbabwe experienced a low-intensity conflict within itself  over  the  past
two years and this  was  exacerbated  by  the  land  question.  All  reports
suggest that late last year there was  an  establishment  of  militia  youth
camps all over the country, sometimes  referred  to  as  ``green  bombers''.
They have been involved in acts of intimidation and violence.  According  to
reports most of  these  acts  are  committed  at  night  against  opponents.
Violence and intimidation have resulted in no-go areas and  some  areas  are
either under Zanu-PF or the MDC.

It is important to highlight that there is no side  that  is  clean  in  the
Zimbabwean situation, particularly with regard to Zanu-PF and the MDC.  What
is worrying is that the carrying out of these acts of violence is done  with
impunity. There are very few prosecutions that have resulted from all  sorts
of acts of violence on both sides in that country.

People have been forced to carry party  membership  cards.  People  used  to
carry two, one for the MDC and one for Zanu-PF. Depending  on  who  controls
the stronghold, they would produce the one necessary for safety and this  is
really unacceptable. In the farm areas violence has caused  the  problem  of
displacement of people all over the country.

As I was preparing my speech, I tried to confine myself to Zimbabwe, but  at
the same time I think it is important to note that whatever  happens  there,
as all speakers have said, it is important that we also look  at  ourselves.
Some people have been talking as though things are very clean here.  If  one
goes to KwaZulu-Natal, there  are  no-go  areas  today.  [Applause.]  As  we
speak, the problem of displacement  of  people  has  still  not  been  fully
resolved today. If I go to Kwa-Nongoma to  try  to  hold  a  rally,  I  will
either be killed or shot. That is the fact of  the  matter.  [Applause.]  We
really have a responsibility to get rid of the problem  that  face  us,  the
things that are happening in some African countries.  Those  are  challenges
that face all of us. [Interjections.]

I must, at the same time, indicate to hon members that it was not true  that
violence was widespread. Most observers felt welcome in all  provinces,  and
what is happening in Zimbabwe is not right for the people  of  Zimbabwe.  We
have a responsibility to ensure that we help Zimbabweans to  rid  themselves
of all the problems and challenges facing them.

Zimbabwe is our neighbour, it is a member  of  SADC.  Stability,  peace  and
sustainable economic development are of paramount importance. It is  in  our
national interest to ensure that Zimbabweans  succeed  in  their  quest  for
national unity and reconciliation, and in addressing their problems. I  know
some members on my left are howling because they have no interest at all  in
Zimbabwe. For some of them their interests lie in  Europe,  not  in  Africa.
That is unfortunate. [Applause.]
It was interesting to note that most people and the  media  tended  to  take
Zimbabwe as Harare: that Zimbabwe starts and ends in  Harare.  It  is  worth
noting that Harare is only in one of the provinces and is where there was  a
tripartite election. Harare is where we saw and witnessed  those  very  long
queues. One of the reasons for that, which was never reported  for  whatever
reason in our newspapers and on TV, is that there  was  a  tripartite  vote,
which meant that people had to vote for the president, vote  for  the  mayor
and vote for the ward councillor. [Interjections.]

I must also point out that in nine of the provinces  voting  proceeded  with
very few problems. In fact, the voting was finished by lunchtime on  Sunday.
Voting took one and a half days - in nine provinces. If  one  looks  at  the
registration of voters, a big part of the registration  process  took  place
in all those provinces compared to Harare. And that is a fact. That  is  not
something I sucked from my thumb. We have to look at Zimbabwe in  the  total
context when we judge whether the elections went the way we  feel  would  be
credible, and so on.
We must note that as South Africans we have a responsibility  to  contribute
and assist countries to move towards good governance and  adherence  to  the
rule of law. The creation of this environment is going to be  a  process.  I
think we have witnessed that this is not only a problem in Africa. There  is
the problematic Israel/Palestine situation, the  Afghanistan  situation  and
the Bosnian situation. There are processes that have been put in  place,  in
which all parties are  involved  in  ensuring  that  there  is  development,
stability, good governance and the rule of law in those areas.

I think we  also  have  that  responsibility.  We  should  not  short-change
ourselves by thinking that just because we are Africans it will  just  be  a
case of a blue and a red button which one just presses  and  things  happen.
Things are a process and one has to be part of that process and engage  that
process in order to ensure that one  moves  towards  a  situation  in  which
there is development, peace, sustainable economic  growth  and  development,
and in which, at the end of the day, we as South Africans, as  SADC  and  as
Africans - all of us - can benefit in terms of the wellbeing of our  people.
[Applause.]

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Madam Speaker, I rise on  a  point  of  order.  During  the
previous speaker's input, first Mr McIntosh referred to the hon Mr Scott  as
a puppet and thereafter the hon Mr  Davidson  referred  to  Mr  Scott  as  a
racist. I submit that both of those remarks  are  unparliamentary  and  that
both members should withdraw them.

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, I heard the word  ``puppet''  but  I  could
not identify the person. Mr McIntosh, it has  been  alleged  that  you  said
those words. If you used them, would you please withdraw them.

Mr G B D McINTOSH: Madam Speaker, I said the word ``puppet''. I  would  like
a ruling from you as to whether it is unparliamentary ...

The SPEAKER: It is unparliamentary.

Mr G B D McINTOSH: ... because to me it is a very  curious  word.  It  is  a
good, healthy, Anglo-Saxon word. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! [Interjections.] It  has  previously  been  held  to  be
unparliamentary. So accordingly, I am ruling it unparliamentary.

Mr G B D McINTOSH: Madam Speaker, under those circumstances I withdraw  that
the member was a puppet. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Thank you.

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Madam Speaker, I would like to apologise  to  Mr  Davidson.
It has been drawn to my attention that in fact he did  not  utter  the  word
``racist''. That word was in fact also uttered by Mr McIntosh, if  he  could
withdraw that word as well.

Mr G B D McINTOSH: Madam Speaker, I did not call him a racist. I  asked  him
a question. I said: ``Are you a racist?'' I am happy to withdraw it.
The SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon member.  [Interjections.]  Order!  Hon
members, please let us now proceed with this debate.

Mr A Z A VAN JAARSVELD: Madam Speaker, it is really a pity that the  hon  Mr
Ndou chose to drag  this  debate  into  a  black  and  white  confrontation.
[Interjections.] I will not fall into the same trap.

The  seriousness  with  which  South  Africa  regards  the  rights  of   the
individual and the human dignity of the people of this country is  reflected
in the fact  that  a  special  day,  Human  Rights  Day,  is  set  aside  to
acknowledge the rights of every individual, and to acknowledge the  inhumane
sufferings of many people of this country during the days of  apartheid  and
the struggle for freedom.

Many people in this House have experienced such  suffering,  and  are  still
suffering from the wounds that were inflicted on them, both  physically  and
mentally, by the protectors of the government. Some of us  have  only  heard
of the gruesome encounters  with  these  torturers,  who  saw  it  as  their
rightful  duty  to  protect  the  apartheid  regime  against   the   ``total
onslaught'', and we can never condone those actions.

The end to this very long, dark period in the history of  South  Africa  did
not come through more violence and intimidation. No, the rebuilding of  this
country started with an election in 1994 that indicated to  the  world  that
peace and stability could be obtained through a legitimate process that  was
acceptable to all the people of South Africa. South Africa has  since  grown
into the leader of Africa, the big brother, the one to give guidance to  the
rest.

Together with these factors, and the  knowledge  that  the  world  was  once
again looking to South Africa, the Chief Whip of the Majority  Party  moved,
on 14 February 2002:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that presidential elections are due to take place  in  Zimbabwe
       from 9 to 10 March 2002; and


  (2) resolves -


       (a)  to send a multiparty parliamentary delegation to  observe  these
           elections;


       (b)  that the terms of reference of the delegation are to observe the
           election campaign in the run-up to the election, the casting  of
           votes during the elections  and  subsequently  the  counting  of
           votes; and


       (c)  that the delegation must, after the completion of  its  mission,
           present a full report to the House.

This resolution served as the mandate of  the  South  African  Parliamentary
Observer Mission.

The seriousness and the enormity of the challenge to us as  a  parliamentary
observer team was contained in a motion without notice that  was  agreed  to
in this House on 21 February, and it went as follows:


  The Chief Whip of the Majority Party moved without notice: That the House
  -


  (1) notes that the multiparty parliamentary observer team will leave  for
       Zimbabwe tomorrow to observe the Zimbabwean presidential elections;


  (2) believes that it is in the interests, not only of  Zimbabwe,  but  of
       all the people in the Southern African  region  that  the  people  of
       Zimbabwe should have the opportunity to elect their president  in  an
       atmosphere  free  from  violence  and  intimidation  and  through  an
       electoral process that is genuinely free and fair;


  (3) also notes the undertaking made by the government of Zimbabwe at  the
       SADC extraordinary summit on 14 January 2002 in Blantyre, Malawi,  as
       contained in the final SADC communiqu√© on the Zimbabwean presidential
       elections;


  (4) believes that the adherence to the SADC undertaking should form  part
       of the basis on which the freeness and fairness of these elections is
       determined;


  (5) further notes -


       (a)  the concern expressed by  the  SADC  summit  over  the  previous
           statement made by the Zimbabwean army  on  the  outcome  of  the
           election and the summit's urging the government of  Zimbabwe  to
           ensure  that,  in  accordance  with  the  multiparty   political
           dispensation prevalent in SADC, political  statements  are  made
           not by the military, but by political leaders; and


       (b)  that this concern is consistent with the OAU position  regarding
           the conduct of the military in political affairs; and


  (6) further believes that -


       (a)  it is in the interests of both the people of  Zimbabwe  and  the
           people of South Africa that  the  parliamentary  delegation,  in
           conjunction with other delegations from South Africa,  undertake
           their task with responsibility, impartiality and integrity; and


       (b)  the presence of the multiparty parliamentary  observer  team  in
           Zimbabwe will make a constructive contribution towards  ensuring
           that the election process is free and fair.

This was agreed to in this House.

The New NP believes that  it  was  against  this  backdrop  that  the  South
African parliamentary observer mission had to operate and had  to,  firstly,
assess whether conditions existed  for  the  conduct  of  an  election  that
demonstrated the general will of the Zimbabwean  people;  secondly,  whether
Zimbabwean voters had sufficient access to cast their votes in  secret;  and
thirdly,  whether  the  election  was  conducted   within   the   Zimbabwean
constitution and the electoral legislative framework.

I believe that the observer mission has stuck to its task  with  vigour  and
conducted itself in an exemplary manner  under  the  capable  and  inspiring
leadership of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party, for which I  would  like
to thank her personally. I think she did a tremendous job. [Applause.]

We, in the New NP, are satisfied that this report tabled  before  Parliament
today is a comprehensive report that covers all the necessary  aspects  that
could have influenced the various stages and processes of the election.  The
contents of the report indicate that there were at least 12 core areas  that
had a negative impact on various  stages  of  the  elections,  whereas  only
three areas impacted positively on the election.

In the light of the above, the New NP cannot  endorse  the  outcome  of  the
election in Zimbabwe as we believe that any decision to the  contrary  would
be an  endorsement  for  the  future  violation  of  human  rights,  as  was
experienced  during  the  election  where  there  was  no  regard  for   the
constitution of Zimbabwe by the  very  persons  and  organs  of  state  that
should be the custodians of the  instrument  that  ensures  the  freedom  of
speech, freedom of assembly and freedom of association and movement.

The New NP believes that the position that this Parliament will take on  the
outcome of the elections will not only determine the future of  the  African
Renaissance or the progress of Nepad, but that it will  also  determine  the
attitude of future investors in South Africa and the region as a  whole,  as
it will be an indication of  our  commitment  to  principles  of  democratic
governance and the values enshrined in the African Renaissance and Nepad.
Finally, I have a picture here of people who were taken by  the  police  and
kept for 24 hours. [Interjections.] I  would  like  to  ask  whether  it  is
possible that we, as a people who know the grief  and  suffering  caused  by
disregard for human rights, could condone these  acts  of  violence  by  the
police against their own people, in which the people were  locked  up  in  a
wire cage for more than 24 hours without food or water  ...  [Interjections]
... and in which men  and  women  were  locked  up  together  without  being
charged. Would we allow that to happen in the new  South  Africa  which  has
brought new hope to its people? I believe not. How could we then  not  speak
out against such atrocities on our doorstep?

Mr D G MKONO: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, hon members,  in  our  view,  the
report before us substantially captures the issues  surrounding  the  recent
presidential election in Zimbabwe.

In our opinion, the pillars of a democratic election include  the  following
broad principles: respect for human rights and respect for the rule of  law.
Therefore we condemn the occurrence of violence and intimidation during  the
run-up to the election. Similarly, we cannot condone instances in which  the
above two principles appear to have been compromised. The time has come  for
international bodies such as SADC, the African Union and the United  Nations
to agree on a binding formula for free and fair  elections,  which  must  be
observed by all member states.

In  our  own  experience  here  in  South  Africa,   we   have   encountered
intimidation and lack of freedom of association and choice in the run-up  to
and during elections. However, in the national  interest  we  have  accepted
the IEC verdict that those elections were free and fair.

The Zimbabwe election was not unique in being characterised by conflict  and
intimidation. We have to focus on the bottom line, which is that  life  must
go on during the post-election period  and  that  reconciliation  must  take
precedence over party differences. It is vital that all Zimbabweans and  all
South African stakeholders now join hands to rebuild that country  in  order
to  avoid  large-scale  suffering  and  starvation  amongst  the  people  of
Zimbabwe who must be our first and foremost concern.

Zimbabwe, as has indeed been the case with all of us on the  continent,  has
emerged from a violent and undemocratic historical milieu.  It  is  expected
that democratisation is  a  process  which  cannot  be  achieved  overnight,
especially against the background of polarised  communities  and  historical
imbalances. We have to admit that none of us is  perfect.  Previous  regimes
handed down a legacy of violent suppression. If we  recognise  these  facts,
we must accept that we are going through a learning process.

The Zimbabwe elections were imperfect, just as our own elections  have  been
imperfect. Let us give them the benefit of the  doubt,  but  also  encourage
them to build for the future. In this  context  the  UDM  associates  itself
with the majority view of the report that  the  elections  were  a  credible
expression of the will of the people of Zimbabwe. [Applause.]

Ms N R NTSHULANA-BHENGU: Madam Speaker, hon members, my speech is  going  to
focus on the legislative framework relating  to  the  polling  stations  and
their impact.

Registration, according to the laws  of  Zimbabwe,  is  an  ongoing  process
which could continue even during polling days but a cut -off date is set  in
terms of the law for the purpose of the elections.

The voters' roll was printed on 7 March 2002, but  was  not  made  available
for inspection by the public, although part four, sections  17  and  18,  of
the Act provides for the  voters'  roll  to  be  kept  by  the  constituency
registrars and be open to inspection.

As at 27 January 2002, the number of registered voters as per  voters'  roll
inspected and declared  by  the  registrar-general  was  4,6  million.  This
number, compared with the 2000 general elections, showed an increase of  400
000.

On Wednesday 6 March, we met with the  Registrar-General  of  Zimbabwe,  who
carries overall responsibility for administration of elections to  find  out
whether the registration of voters and the compilation of the  voters'  roll
had taken place. The registrar was unable to indicate the  total  number  of
registered voters. This  caused  a  great  deal  of  confusion  amongst  the
observers about their preparedness.

The existence of publicity  around  the  final  record  after  supplementary
registration  created  more  confusion  which  resulted  in  people  neither
appearing on the actual nor the supplementary roll.

Regarding the polling stations, it was  reported  by  the  registrar-general
that there were 4 548 polling stations in the country. When compared to  the
2000 general elections, for the 2002 presidential elections  the  number  of
polling stations were increased by 6 044. The increase in  polling  stations
was greater in the rural areas as opposed to the urban areas. The  rationale
behind this was that people in the rural areas had to  walk  long  distances
before reaching the nearest polling station. We noted the  distance  between
the polling stations and we discovered that there were no  polling  stations
that were less than 10 km apart. We commend the government of  Zimbabwe  for
taking into consideration the hardships of the people  in  the  rural  areas
who would have had to walk long distances.

The Electoral Supervisory  Commission  announced  that  121  computers  were
allocated to areas which had tripartite elections. These were  going  to  be
used to assist in the verification of names. However,  our  observation  was
that there were no computers in most of  the  polling  stations  in  Harare.
There were 140 command centres, one in each constituency.

Election  staff  and  party  agents  in  general  were  very  receptive   to
observers. The efforts they made to ensure the continuance of  the  election
process is commendable. We even watched the closing of a polling station  in
the Mashonaland central area. Our observation was that the  tension  between
the MDC and Zanu-PF was rather  exaggerated  in  the  sense  that  when  the
polling station was closing, members of the MDC who were  party  agents  and
members of Zanu-PF were joking amongst themselves.  They  were  sealing  the
boxes, joking and were going to observe and sit there throughout the  night.
So, the tension that has been reported in the media was rather  exaggerated.
There were isolated incidents reported of nonco-operative electoral staff.

I want to take this House back to what happened  in  the  1994  election  in
South Africa. In our  situation,  particularly  in  KwaZulu-Natal,  election
staff were killed on the day before the election. Some  people  were  killed
just  for  putting  up  voter  education  material  and  campaign  material.
Therefore,  we  cannot  say  that  the  incidents  of  violence  that   were
experienced in Zimbabwe were anything compared  to  the  violence  that  was
experienced in South Africa during the 1994 elections. [Applause.]

Two days, 9 and 10 March 2002, were proclaimed voting days. The opening  and
closing times were set to be 07h00 and 19h00 respectively. On the first  day
of the polls, the opening was reported to  have  been  on  schedule  at  all
centres. During midmorning, reports  were  received  that  in  urban  areas,
especially in Harare,  the  process  was  very  slow.  Towards  midafternoon
anxiety amongst voters about the possibility of not  voting,  especially  in
Harare, was registered.

The office of the registrar-general considered  extending  the  voting  time
beyond 19h00. At about 18h00 assurance was communicated to the  effect  that
voters who were already in the queues would be attended to. It was  reported
that voting carried on until the early hours of the  morning.  It  was  also
clear that there was  uneven  implementation  of  this  undertaking  by  the
registrar that people who were in queues would be allowed to vote.

On the second day, the voter turnout proved to  be  beyond  expectation.  By
late afternoon, it was clear that another extension of the time  had  to  be
done. The MDC applied to the High Court for  the  extension  of  the  voting
period by a day. The court ruled in favour of the applicant.  The  following
day, when  the  Minister  of  Justice  and  the  registrar  announced  their
intention to oppose  the  court  ruling,  a  great  deal  of  confusion  and
uncertainty was created.

On the third day, it was reported that not  all  polling  stations  were  on
schedule at the  opening  time.  There  was  confusion  as  to  whether  the
stations  would  open.  Enquiries  revealed  that  this  was  due  to   poor
communication of the court's decision to extend the  voting  period  by  one
day.

While isolated cases of intimidation were reported,  on  the  whole  it  was
quiet and peaceful and the exercise of a secret ballot  was  observed.  With
regard to the impact of  the  legal  and  constitutional  framework  on  the
election, failure to announce polling stations and to make the voters'  roll
a public  document  seven  days  before  the  polling  day  contravened  the
Electoral Act. The increase of the polling stations in the rural  areas  had
a positive impact in addressing the problem of voters who had to  walk  long
distances.

In conclusion, the people  of  Zimbabwe  have  spoken  and  that  should  be
respected. South Africa cannot walk away from the people  of  Zimbabwe  when
they need us  most  to  help  them  rebuild  their  country.  They  are  our
neighbours and whatever happens in Zimbabwe will  affect  South  Africa.  We
need to show  solidarity  and  assist  Zimbabwe  to  achieve  stability  and
economic prosperity. [Applause.]

Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: Madam Speaker, it is said that a people without a  vision
is a people without hope, and a people without hope is a  people  without  a
future and will always return to their past. Zimbabwe is a case in point.

The liberator has become the oppressor. In an attempt to  remain  in  power,
the  Zanu-PF  government  has  returned  to  violence  and  lawlessness   by
implementing draconian laws and executing gross human rights  violations  on
the very people they are meant to protect and defend.
I was in Zimbabwe, and definitely not on Mars. I did not have  blinkers  on,
nor did I have a muzzle over my mouth.  Working  within  the  scope  of  the
mandate given by Parliament, I am able to verify some of  the  incidents  in
which I was personally involved.

I can verify allegations of the  brutal  beating  and  torture  of  two  MDC
supporters trying to campaign in no-go areas such as Marondera.  One  had  a
broken collarbone and the other knife carvings of MDC on  his  back  and  on
his face. They had been beaten  severely.  Both  men  were  threatened  with
death if they should return to the  area.  They  were  moved  to  places  of
safety in Harare.

I witnessed an attack by 150 Zanu-PF youth supporters on one  MDC  supporter
after a cancelled MDC rally in Marondera, in full view  of  eight  policemen
who, when approached by myself and Mr Van Jaarsveld to  intervene,  told  us
that they could not see.  Their  unwillingness  and  blatant  disregard  for
performing their duty to defend and protect, fly in the face of justice.
The  legal  constitutional  framework  gave  the  ruling  party  an   unfair
advantage and placed constraints on the voting process that led to  hundreds
of thousands of people being disenfranchised. President Mugabe, a  contender
in this election, was the coach, the player and  the  referee.  He  set  the
rules of the game, which clearly prejudiced the opposition in the run-up  to
the elections, as well as on the polling days. Section 158 of the  Electoral
Act gave President Mugabe  extraordinary  powers  to  validate  any  law  or
regulation that he deemed fit.

The flawed legal framework included the following - I  will  mention  but  a
few: Firstly, militarising the election by broadening the provision  in  the
Electoral Act with regard to  public  servants  to  include  army  personnel
under the definition of a state employee; secondly, excluding civil  society
from being election monitors and drawing monitors  from  the  ranks  of  the
army, education and home affairs;  thirdly,  demanding  proof  of  residency
through  presentation  of  water,   electricity   and   rent   bills,   thus
disenfranchising thousands of voters;  and  fourthly,  drastically  reducing
the number  of  polling  stations  in  the  urban  areas  and  significantly
increasing rural mobile and other  polling stations.

In  the  absence  of  a  gazette,  the  unprocedural  extension   of   voter
registration was done without  the  knowledge  of  the  opposition  parties.
President Mugabe invoked section 158 of  the  Electoral  Act  to  legitimise
this process. I was at the court ruling. The Public Order Security  Act  was
struck down by the court but was reintroduced through section  158,  and  it
included, firstly, refusal of  permission  by  the  police  to  hold  public
rallies. It became a criminal offence to  criticise  the  President  despite
him being  a  candidate.  However,  he  could  criticise  others.  Secondly,
failure to produce identity documents at rallies  was  a  criminal  offence.
This clause reminded me of the dark days  of  apartheid  where  people  were
arrested for not carrying their ``dompasses''.

Citing some of the aforementioned issues, and  taking  into  cognisance  the
content of the South African  Parliamentary  Observer  Mission's  report,  I
cannot, in all true conscience, pronounce the election in Zimbabwe free  and
fair. I would be betraying the people of  Zimbabwe,  South  Africa  and  the
continent of Africa if I did not accurately  and  factually  report  on  the
atrocities and irregularities witnessed, which can  be  verified  by  myself
and my team, as part of what we witnessed and experienced over the  20  days
we spent observing the 2002 presidential elections in Zimbabwe.

President Mugabe has validated the saying: ``Power  corrupts,  and  absolute
power corrupts absolutely!''  Remember,  it  is  Zimbabwe  today  and  South
Africa tomorrow! Be warned! [Applause.]

Let me say something about the ink that was used in the  voting  process.  I
would say that it was flawed. Yes, there were claims that the ink  was  used
to get unsuspecting voters not to  vote.  Passing  the  ultraviolet  lights,
some people were turned away and then arrested and locked up in a  cage.  It
is disgusting! I cannot see  how  we  as  the  South  African  Parliamentary
Observer Mission actually validated this election  as  free  and  fair.  The
ACDP says it was unfree and unfair. [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Mev die  Speaker,  hierdie  verslag  is  die  produk  van  'n
kompromis. Gelukkig was die VF nie deel van hierdie kompromis nie en kan  ek
die VF se standpunt onbevange stel.

Die gevolgtrekking waartoe die ANC-meerderheid in die waarnemersmissie  kom,
is die volgende: ``It will therefore be appropriate to  pronounce  the  2002
Presidential elections as credible expression of the will of  the  people.''
``Credible'', nogal, ``mind you''. Die ANC verklaar en bevind  dus  dat  die
uitslag ingevolge waarvan Mnr Mugabe as President herkies is,  wel  die  wil
van  die  kiesers  van  Zimbabwe  weerspie√´l  het  in  die  proses.  Wat  'n
belaglikheid!

Die kiesers van Suid-Afrika, die mense van Zimbabwe  en  die  internasionale
gemeenskap wil net een ding by President Mbeki en die  Parlement  van  Suid-
Afrika weet: ``Wat s√™ julle? Was die verkiesing vry en  regverdig  -  ja  of
nee?''
Enige mens met 'n klein bietjie wysheid en integriteit  weet  mos  dat  daar
geen vrye en regverdige verkiesing in Zimbabwe was nie. Daar is net te  veel
voorbeelde van vergrype  deur  die  magshonger  Mugabe-regime.  Partye  moes
gelyke toegang tot die openbare media gehad het. Dit het nie gebeur  nie  en
tog is die ANC tevrede dat die uitslag die wil van die mense  weerspie√´l  en
by implikasie dus vry en  regverdig  was.  Tydens  my  eerste  toespraak  in
hierdie plek 14 jaar gelede het ek 'n aanhaling gebruik van prof  Busia  van
Ghana oor demokrasie en ek wil dit vandag weer aanhaal. Dit  is  vandag  nog
net so waar. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, this report is the product of  a  compromise.
Luckily the FF was not a party to this compromise,  and  I  can  impartially
state the view of the FF.

The conclusion which the ANC majority in the observer  mission  reached  was
the following: ``It will therefore be  appropriate  to  pronounce  the  2002
Presidential elections as credible expression of the will of  the  people.''
``Credible'', mind you. The  ANC  therefore  declared  and  found  that  the
outcome, in terms of which Mr Mugabe was re-elected as  President,  did,  in
fact, reflect the will of the  voters  of  Zimbabwe  in  this  process.  How
ridiculous!

The South African voters, the  people  of  Zimbabwe  and  the  international
community would only like to know one thing from  President  Mbeki  and  the
Parliament of South Africa: ``What do you say? Was  the  election  free  and
fair - yes or no?''

Surely anyone with a little wisdom and integrity knows  that  there  was  no
free and fair election in Zimbabwe. There are  just  too  many  examples  of
transgressions by the power-hungry Mugabe regime. Parties  should  have  had
equal access to the public media. That did not happen, and still the ANC  is
content that the outcome reflects the will of the  people,  and,  therefore,
by implication, was free and fair. During my first speech in this  place  14
years ago I quoted Prof Busia of Ghana  on  democracy,  and  today  I  would
again like to quote him. Today it still rings just as true:]
  A democracy in the last analysis depends on the character  of  individual
  men and women and the moral standards of the community.  Rules  governing
  elections may be made, freedoms may  be  provided  in  constitutions  and
  Bills of Rights may be passed. They will make arbitrary  acts  easier  to
  resist publicly, but they will not by themselves secure democracy.  There
  are other  rules,  which  are  unwritten,  such  as  honesty,  integrity,
  restraint and respect for democratic procedures.

Those are the things that were absent in Zimbabwe and  from  the  elections,
and yet the ANC wants to pronounce them free and fair.

Daar kom 'n tyd wanneer 'n mens onbevange die waarheid moet  praat.  Wat  is
die ANC se probleem? Dit is baie waar wat  'n  bekende  Amerikaanse  senator
onlangs oor die ANC oor televisie ges√™ het: Julle wil vriende wees  met  die
vyand van die VSA en die Westerse w√™reld, maar julle wil ook  ons  geld  h√™.
Dit is die waarheid. Die ANC wil vriende wees met die Mugabes, die  Castros,
die Gaddafis, die Sadam Husseins, maar aan die ander kant wil hulle geld  en
hulp  -  en  sommer  baie  daarvan  -  van  die  VSA  en   die   Weste   h√™.
[Tussenwerpsels.] In Afrikaans is daar 'n bekende spreekwoord  wat  lui:  'n
Mens word aan jou vriende geken. Dit geld ook vir  die  ANC.  Dit  geld  vir
President Mbeki.

H√™ 'n slag die moed en doen wat gedoen behoort te word  in  die  belang  van
Suid-Afrika, dan sal dit  baie  beter  met  ons  gaan.  Die  VF  bly  by  sy
standpunt dat die verkiesing onregverdig en onvry was  en  die  ANC  is  met
dwaashede besig. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[There comes a time when one must speak the truth with an  open  mind.  What
is the ANC's problem? What  a  well-known  American  senator  recently  said
about the ANC on television was very true: You want to be friends  with  the
enemy of the USA and the Western world, but you also want  our  money.  That
is the truth. The ANC want to be friends with the Mugabes, the Castros,  the
Gaddafis, the Sadam Husseins, but on the other hand they want money and  aid
- and lots of it - from the USA and the West. [Interjections.] In  Afrikaans
there is a well-known saying to  the  effect  that:  one  is  known  by  the
company one keeps. That also applies to the ANC. That applies  to  President
Mbeki.

For once, have the courage to do what must  be  done  in  the  interests  of
South Africa, then we will fare much better. The FF stands by its  viewpoint
that the election was unfair and not free, and  the  ANC  is  involved  with
foolishness. [Applause.]]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker and hon members,  our  observer  mission  was
thrown into the deep end during the elections in Zimbabwe. The world  looked
forward to having the  successful  candidate  doing  it  cleanly.  The  pre-
election phase was characterised by torture,  intimidation  and  harassment.
The two contending parties, Zanu-PF and the MDC were slogging  it  out,  but
the MDC was on the receiving end most of the time.

That people tend to do right through fear, and not from a sense of  justice,
was realised in Zimbabwe when ordinary people we  spoke  to  in  Mashonaland
West kept saying that they did not want to  die  nor  did  they  wish  their
families to suffer, and therefore, they would  vote  Zanu-PF.  This  is  one
province that has clear no-go areas for other parties. Zanu-PF is  the  only
party that operates  freely  in  that  province.  The  MDC  voter  education
sessions had to be conducted under police guard, or even on a  boat  on  the
Lake Kariba, pretending to be a church group.

It is clear that the playing field was not even at all. The Daily News,  the
newspaper that biased towards the MDC, cannot be read freely and  openly  in
Mashonaland West and some parts  of  Zimbabwe,  especially  in  Chinoyi  and
Karoi, whereas the Herald, a  Zanu-PF-inclined  paper,  is  obtainable  with
ease.

While we agree that people need land, we also feel that  land  grab  in  the
guise of Third  Chimurenga,  by  the  Mugabe  regime,  is  one  factor  that
alienates people of goodwill.

The conduct of the Zanu-PF youth, the militia or ``green bombers''  as  they
are commonly known, as well as that of the war veterans,  left  much  to  be
desired in as far as the preparation for the elections were concerned.  They
molested people  who  could  not  show  proof  of  Zanu-PF  membership  with
impunity. This  affected  even  Zanu-PF  members  who  were  caught  in  the
crossfire.

While we differ with the ANC on the conclusion to  our  report,  we  are  in
agreement  that,  in  up  to  13  points,  the  campaign  period   for   the
presidential election in Zimbabwe was fraught  with  contraventions  of  the
country's electoral Act. The result is that the elected  candidate  received
53% of the vote that  was  cast  by  40%  of  the  60%  of  the  voters  who
registered.

Some voters in the Harare and Chitungwisa could not vote because  there  was
no time for them to  do  so  because  of  the  Zanu-PF-controlled  electoral
commission's gerrymandering. They  tampered  with  the  voting  stations  to
ensure that there were hurdles strewn on the opposition's playing field.

While the MDC considered that  they  had  a  hand  in  violence  by  way  of
fighting back, Zanu-PF kept denying knowing  about  any  violence  that  had
been  perpetrated.  They  denied  any  knowledge  of  militias  or   ``green
bombers''. To them war veterans  are  honourable  and  peaceful  souls.  The
marauding youth are said to be doing community service.

It is unreasonable to compare the violence in  KwaZulu-Natal  in  1994  with
that in Zimbabwe, when in the former instance it was a  dawn  of  democracy,
while Zimbabwe has been in their democracy for the past 22 years.

In the light of this and the issues raised even  by  other  members  of  the
delegation, on behalf of the UCDP, I have to make  and  pronounce  that  the
presidential  elections  2002  in  Zimbabwe  were  neither  free  nor  fair.
[Applause.]

Mr E M SIGWELA: Madam Speaker,  the  Greek  philosopher,  Plato,  who  lived
between 437 BC and 347 BC had a passion for  establishing  the  truth  about
everything before giving it a description. He also believed  that  the  only
way we can make true statements about things we saw around us  was  when  we
know exactly what their basic structure was. He advanced the theory that  it
was only when we  had  analysed  the  various  elements  of  an  object  and
determined the interconnections between those elements that we could make  a
thesis about the objects, lest we be deceived by the outward appearances  of
objects and make false statements about them.

Even in the case  of  the  elections  in  Zimbabwe  and  the  whole  social,
political and economic climate surrounding them, we need to  know  something
about that country. That will give us  a  magnifying  glass  with  which  to
examine all the processes that have been associated with those elections.

The situation in Zimbabwe has its origin in the history  of  the  people  of
that country, black, white, African and European. Before  Cecil  Rhodes  and
his British South Africa Company colonised Zimbabwe in 1889, the  indigenous
people of that  country  lived  peacefully,  managing  their  land  and  its
fullness freely. Colonisation by the British South Africa  Company  in  1889
and subsequently directly by Britain in 1923 led to a significant change  in
social relations in Zimbabwe. [Interjections.]

The indigenous inhabitants of that country  were  driven  off  the  land  of
their birth through the barrel of the  gun.  Their  resistance  under  their
kings was ultimately suppressed by the end of the 19th century, opening  the
way to rule of the people of  that  country  as  a  colony.  The  people  of
Zimbabwe had by then lost authority over their land. They had  lost  freedom
to govern themselves. They were governed by a few thousand Europeans in  the
name of Britain. Their country was named Rhodesia.

It stands to  reason  that  no  people  on  earth  who  respect  themselves,
including us, the indigenous people of South Africa,  can  allow  themselves
to  be  perpetually  subjugated.  We  will  not  allow  this  to  happen  to
ourselves.  [Interjections.]  It  was  in  that  context  that  the  African
National Congress of Zimbabwe was formed in 1934 to pick  up  the  struggle,
through the political mobilisation of the indigenous people of Zimbabwe,  so
that they could wage a political struggle to regain their country and  their
autonomy.

When the Zimbabwean ANC was banned in February 1959, its  leadership,  under
Joshua Nkomo, formed the National Democratic Party  in  January  1960.  When
the NDP was banned in  December  1961,  Joshua  Nkomo  formed  the  Zimbabwe
African People's Union. This was also banned - in  September  1962.  I  hope
people are listening. [Interjections.] The intransigence  and  the  lack  of
tolerance of African opinion!

In August 1963 Rev Ndabaningi Sithole and Robert Mugabe formed the  Zimbabwe
African National Union, after a split with Zapu.  This  political  formation
was also banned - in August 1964 - only  four  months  after  the  Rhodesian
Front, under Winston Field, had taken over the reins of government.

I  am  recalling  this  history  of  political  formation  in  Zimbabwe   to
demonstrate the level of  political  repression  that  the  people  of  that
country experienced at the hands of white colonialists.  The  various  white
prime ministers, from Garfield Todd to  Edgar  Whitehead  and  from  Winston
Field to Ian Smith, were not prepared to recognise  the  African  people  of
Zimbabwe as worthy of governing their own country and themselves.

The repression was even worse after Smith declared  unilateral  independence
on 11 November 1965. There were no options left for the  Zimbabwean  people.
They took up arms. The armed struggle is  what  resulted  in  the  Lancaster
talks and the Lancaster  constitution  which  governs  the  country  at  the
moment.

But this was already at a late stage. The damage had been  done.  The  rigid
black-white attitudes had developed and become  entrenched.  It  is  against
this background that we must see the  annoyance  with  Prime  Minister  Tony
Blair's open support for the MDC,  which  has  actually  heightened  tension
between Zanu-PF and the MDC.

It is in that light ... [Interjections.] It is against that background  also
that the support received by the MDC from  white  farmers  has  led  to  the
resharpening of the  conflict  in  Zimbabwe.  It  is  that  background  that
brought the land question to the centre  stage  of  elections  in  Zimbabwe.
[Interjections.] But now that the  people  of  Zimbabwe  have  chosen  their
president, the world should not divide them any further, but  should  assist
them, through negotiations, to resolve their conflicts.

As for this nonsense that we go along with the Castros,  the  Mugabes,  etc,
they are our friends. Yes, they are our comrades, comrades in arms. We  have
been with them in the trenches, fighting against a similar  system  to  that
which Mugabe defeated in Zimbabwe in 1979. [Interjections.]

We also want to put the record straight. We never said  that  the  elections
in Zimbabwe were free and fair. [Interjections.] We  said  they  produced  a
credible result. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, are you rising on a point of order?

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, no, it is not a point of order. I  would  like
to ask the hon member a very easy question. [Interjections.]  He  still  has
some time left.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Unfortunately his time has expired.

Dr C P MULDER: His time has expired?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately, yes.

Dr C P MULDER: That is a big pity.

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, I also want to  commend  the  leader  of  the
delegation, the Chief Whip of the Majority Party, for  the  leadership  that
she has shown in this difficult task. I must also put  on  record  that  she
was the only leader  of  an  observer  mission  in  Zimbabwe  that  did  not
prejudge the situation - the only  leader.  [Applause.]  The  South  African
Government observer mission that prejudged  the  elections  has  compromised
South Africa. It put us, as observers in the  country,  under  a  tremendous
threat. We were called liars at some of the polls, because of the  statement
by the South African Government observer mission.

An HON MEMBER: By who?

Mrs P DE LILE: By the voters of Zimbabwe. The hon member  should  have  gone
to Zimbabwe.

I just want to say that a lot has been said about the election process.  The
challenge now is for South Africa, the region, and Africa, to  wait  on  the
people of Zimbabwe to give leadership and to  find  a  solutions.  Our  role
must be to complement whatever the people of Zimbabwe decided as  a  way  of
resolving the problem in their country.

As a mechanism for healing the wounds of the past in this country,  the  PAC
proposes a process of mediation that can help  the  people  and  parties  to
come together. As South Africans, we now need  to  support  any  request  by
Zimbabwe to rebuild the country and the nation.

As observers, we did not go to Zimbabwe in  solidarity  with  any  political
party, but in solidarity with the people of Zimbabwe. And  our  mandate  was
very clear. We needed to be impartial and to be independent.  Therefore,  It
is crucial that we are  brutally  honest  with  ourselves  when  making  any
pronouncement. As an observer, I base my judgment  on  the  legal  framework
that placed several constraints on the electoral process, and  that  led  to
the disenfranchisement of many of the voters - a list of  all  those  issues
are attached to our report.

But most painful to me was a piece of legislation, section 158, dating  back
to  the  old  Smith  regime  era,  that  gave  the  president  of   Zimbabwe
extraordinary powers to make laws, to strike down court rulings and to  make
regulations. No parliament anywhere in the world can delegate its powers  to
make laws to anybody, including the president. It  was  fatally  flawed  for
the Zimbabwean government to reduce the  elections  to  a  string  of  court
orders. The court actually stepped in and saved the elections.

Finally, because of the constraints  placed  by  the  legal  system  on  the
elections, I cannot,  if  I  must  be  honest  with  myself,  say  that  the
elections were free and fair. I just want to appeal to  all  of  us  in  our
country to stand behind the people of Zimbabwe and give them  support.  They
need us now, more than ever before. Let us put the elections behind  us  and
look at the future. [Applause.]

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Madam Speaker, the fact that 3,1  million  people  voted
in Zimbabwe is used as the main reason to come  to  a  conclusion  that  the
election result represents the majority will of the people of Zimbabwe.

However, if we take into account the findings of the report by  the  members
of this Parliament, of the intimidating  actions  throughout  the  campaign,
and the constant interference of the  ruling  party  and  their  supporters,
which favoured their presidential candidate,  and  the  fact  that  a  large
number of opposition supporters and actions were disrupted,  the  conclusion
can, justly, be questioned.

Die  hele  verslag  wemel  van  berigte   oor   ongerymdhede,   intimidasie,
ontwrigting, benadeling van opposisiepartye en van  hul  verkiesingsveldtog.
Daar  is  geweld,  aanranding  en  doodeenvoudige  moedswilligheid  van  die
regerende party. Hoe die meerderheidsparty in Suid-Afrika se waarnemers  tot
die  gevolgtrekking  kan  kom  dat  die  wil  van  die  mense  onder   sulke
verkiesingstoestande gese√´vier het, gaan my verstand  te  bowe.  Miskien  l√™
die antwoord vir hierdie onverstaanbare besluit in een  van  die  opmerkings
wat in die aanhangsel van die verslag gemaak is, naamlik:


  It's an offence ...

Ingevolbge die Public Order Security Act -


  ... to criticise the President, despite him being a candidate, but he may
  criticise other candidates.

Dit lyk vir my of die regerende party in Suid-Afrika in sy oordeel  oor  die
verkiesingsuitslag  in  Zimbabwe  aan  dieselfde  vooroordeelsiekte  as  die
Zimbabwiese   meerderheidsparty   ly.   Die   FA   steun   dus    nie    die
meerderheidsverslag nie. Ons vind die gebeure in Zimbabwe 'n  terugslag  vir
demokrasie en vir die ontwikkeling van Afrika. Die wyse waarop hierdie  hele
aangeleentheid deur die Suid-Afrikaanse Regering gehanteer is,  strek  Suid-
Afrika nie tot eer nie. Ongelukkig moet ek dit s√™, maar president Mbeki  het
weer eens 'n diplomatieke toets gedop. Hy  het  nie  geslaag  om  vir  Suid-
Afrika die  staatmanskap  te  wys  wat  ons  kan  lei  in  'n  nuwe  Afrika-
ontwikkeling nie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The entire report bristles with reports  of  irregularities,  intimidation,
disruption, and prejudice  with  regard  to  opposition  parties  and  their
election campaign. There  is  violence,  assault  and  wilfulness  pure  and
simple on the part  of  the  governing  party.  How  the  observers  of  the
majority party in South Africa could come to the conclusion  that  the  will
of the people prevailed under election conditions such as  these  is  beyond
me. Perhaps the answer to this incomprehensible decision lies in one of  the
remarks made in the annexure of the report, namely:


  It's an offence ...

... According to the Public Order Security Act -


  ... to criticise the President, despite him being a candidate, but he may
  criticise other candidates.

It seems to me as if the governing party in South  Africa,  considering  the
election result in Zimbabwe, suffers from the same illness of  prejudice  as
the Zimbabwean majority party.   Therefore  the  FA  does  not  support  the
majority report. We find that the events  in  Zimbabwe  were  a  setback  to
democracy and to the development of Africa. The way  in  which  this  entire
matter was handled by the South African Government is not to South  Africa's
credit. Unfortunately I have to say  it,  but  President  Mbeki  once  again
failed a diplomatic test. He did not succeed in  showing  South  Africa  the
statesmanship which can lead us in a new African development. [Applause.]]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, they say if one is a politician one  has  to
have extra-large shoulders, in order to take criticism in one's stride.

A lot of controversy surrounds the Zimbabwean election. We see a  split,  in
the views of the South African observers and the Deputy President about  the
election. It has been reported that the hon the Deputy President viewed  the
election as legitimate, valid, free and fair, while  some  observers  viewed
it as legitimate, but admit that it has not been free and  fair.  Now,  what
puzzles the MF is not only the split in opinion, but also the fact  that  if
the election is regarded as not having been free and fair, how it  could  be
legitimate?

Owing to the concerns around  the  situation  in  Zimbabwe  earlier  in  the
month, which have had major repercussions, and noting the  various  negative
receptions of the results  of  the  Zimbabwean  election  globally  and  the
position of South Africa in Nepad in terms  of  resolutions,  the  MF  feels
that there are many issues  which  need  to  be  addressed  immediately,  ie
reconciliation, the economic situation, the land invasions,  the  return  to
rule of law, and how the widely accepted  view  of  South  Africa  being  an
honest  broker  will  be  affected,  and  what  we  can  do  to   contribute
positively.

The MF notes the complexity of the situation and seeks the meeting of  minds
to institute a strategised plan of action in handling this  predicament.  We
call for national unity, and that  both  parties  come  together  to  create
political stability and put people first - Batho Pele. We as South  Africans
have a responsibility to assist Zimbabwe as our neighbouring country in  the
best way we can.

The MF wishes to thank the Chief Whip of the Majority  Party,  who  so  ably
led the observer delegation to and from Zimbabwe. [Applause.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Madam Speaker, the Zimbabwe  elections  have  come  and
gone. What remains is  our  interpretation  of  the  outcome.  Reports  that
emanate from the OAU, SADC ministers  and  our  own  observer  mission  have
declared the election legitimate. Azapo is convinced that these  reports  by
African leaders, not  by  any  other  person,  reflect  the  truth  of  what
transpired during the elections, and we accept that. [Applause.]

Despite these authentic reports crafted  by  black  Africans  who  have  the
interests of the continent and those  of  Zimbabwe  at  heart,  non-Africans
have condemned these elections. Azapo is not surprised. [Interjections.]  We
are not surprised. History has shown that former colonisers  are  often  not
the best champions and interpreters of events in Africa ...  [Applause]  ...
and elsewhere where they were defeated in wars of liberation.

When the American people elected their president  with  a  33%  turnout  and
Gore cried foul, the European Union never declared the  elections  not  free
and fair. [Applause.]

What is surprising to Azapo is that  the  European  Union  observer  mission
left Zimbabwe before the election, and yet they would  like  us  to  believe
that their  declaration  is  authentic,  as  opposed  to  our  own  people's
declaration. [Applause.] It is obvious to  Azapo  that  they  left  Zimbabwe
early ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon  Nefolovhodwe,  will  you  take  a  question?
[Interjections.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: No, Madam Speaker, I do not want to take a question.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!  Please  take  your  seat,  hon  Van  der  Merwe.
[Interjections.] Order!

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: It is obvious to  Azapo  that  they  left  the  country
because they saw that they would not be able to  declare  the  elections  as
not being free and fair. So they left, having already made up  their  minds.
[Interjections.]

The Zimbabwe elections were even extended to allow voters to exercise  their
democratic rights. They did so, and it is reported that the  three  days  on
which they cast their votes were peaceful.

The people of  Zimbabwe  have  spoken,  and  non-Zimbabweans  should  simply
respect that. Gone are the days when the opinions of the  white  world  were
paramount. [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon Mulder, what is your point of order?

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, the hon member who just  spoke  concluded  his
speech by making a racist statement. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Go on, hon member. [Interjections.] Speak,  hon  member,
I am listening.

Dr C P MULDER: Thank you,  Madam  Speaker.  The  hon  member  concluded  his
speech by saying the days are over when white  opinion  was  of  any  value.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Please allow the member to make  his
point.

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, as an African I  would  like  you  to  make  a
ruling on that racist remark.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, I listened  to  the  hon  member.  He  said:
``Gone are the days when the opinions of the white  world  are  paramount.''
[Interjections.] He said ``the white  world''.  [Interjections.]  I  do  not
believe that that statement necessarily referred to members of  this  House.
[Interjections.] Therefore I rule that that statement  was  not  necessarily
racist. [Applause.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Madam Speaker, history and our  own  experience  of  having
struggled  for  a  nonracial,  democratic  society   has   placed   enormous
responsibilities and tasks on the shoulders of South Africa.

We are endowed with a Constitution that we can be proud of and  that  should
continue to guide our actions  in  order  to  uphold  sacred  constitutional
imperatives, such as the freedom of belief, the freedom of  association  and
the freedom of expression, including tenets such as  the  rule  of  law  and
allowing,  periodically,  for  free  and  fair  elections.   The   creation,
nurturing and sustaining of a nonracial human  rights  environment  are  not
matters to be taken lightly.

Zimbabwe is indeed our neighbour. Zimbabwe is a fellow member  of  the  SADC
fraternity. Given the various observer missions which have been to  Zimbabwe
to observe the presidential elections,  one  would  expect  that  our  South
African parliamentary observer mission would  live  up  to  the  challenging
demand to pronounce not only a correct report  of  their  findings,  but  to
take on  also  the  responsibilities  of  a  vanguard  and  torchbearer  for
democracy, justice and the protection of human rights.

Zimbabwe has gone to the polls. The very  election  process  was  under  the
spotlight of many nations the world over. Much has been reported  about  the
tension, strife and pain that have befallen the citizens of Zimbabwe.

Could there have been a free and fair election with, firstly, the amount  of
violence and intimidation that took place over a period of time long  before
the actual polling day, despite the belated and  seemingly  calm  atmosphere
that prevailed a few days before polling day;  secondly,  with  the  delayed
and belated signing of a code of conduct by some of the contestants  exactly
one day before the polling day; thirdly, with the  removal  of  voters  from
the  voters'  roll  for  spurious  and  dubious   reasons,   including   the
manipulation of the location of polling stations, that  is,  decreasing  the
number in urban areas and increasing them in  rural  areas;  fourthly,  with
the state monopoly and use of public media  as  a  propaganda  tool  to  the
advantage  of  the  government,  totally   disadvantaging   the   opposition
candidates; and, fifthly, with the intensive hate speech and  strong  racist
stereotyping of opponents by Zanu-PF?

With  these  few  mentioned  malpractices,  amongst  many,  the   Zimbabwean
presidential elections cannot be said  to  have  been  free  and  fair.  Any
pronouncement contrary to recognising these factors, which  impeded  a  free
and fair election process, will  sound  like  a  fraternal  and  sentimental
closing of ranks and will  be  totally  or  deliberately  oblivious  to  the
undemocratic practices that definitely impeded the process  of  a  free  and
fair election.

Fraternal cover-ups will only serve to undermine the cause of democracy  and
the hard-won freedoms of the people of Zimbabwe. South Africa, whilst  being
passionate about African unity and the betterment  of  the  welfare  of  all
people, and rightly so, cannot afford  to  be  ambivalent  on  matters  that
demand that the  state  protect  its  citizens  and  uphold  each  citizen's
rights.

We have to admonish even our own brothers and sisters when  they  rule  like
despots and anarchists, when they merely mouth democratic rhetoric, but  act
contrary to what we ourselves  hold  dear.  The  presidential  elections  in
Zimbabwe, in fairness to all, were very unfree and very unfair. [Applause.]

Mr L T LANDERS: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, it was a privilege  and
an honour to have been a member of the South African parliamentary  observer
mission to Zimbabwe. It was also a privilege and an honour to have been  led
by the hon Chief Whip of the ANC, Comrade Mapisa-Nqakula. We thank  her  and
commend her for her leadership.

According to  the  Zimbabwean  Council  of  Churches,  Zimbabwe  is  not  an
industrialised country. Essentially, therefore, the  violence  taking  place
in Zimbabwe emanates from the land issue, which was not adequately  resolved
at the Lancaster House talks. Other than the land, there  is  no  system  in
Zimbabwe which provides a livelihood for the people.

It must also be noted for  the  record  that  according  to  the  Commercial
Farmers' Union of Zimbabwe,  white  farmers  collectively  own  8,5  million
hectares of farm land,  which  comprise  some  of  the  best  farm  land  in
Zimbabwe.

Mr G B D McINTOSH: Luwellyn, you are not well informed.

Mr L T LANDERS: Well, you should be better informed. You  are  a  Rhodesian.
[Laughter.]

Any discussion or debate on Zimbabwe would be skewed or  imbalanced  without
this background. It is also against this background that I wish  to  address
this House ...

Mr G B D McINTOSH: Madam Speaker, the hon Minister or  Deputy  Minister  ...
No, he is not a Deputy Minister any more, is he? That was  in  the  previous
regime. [Interjections.] The hon member Landers has just said that  I  would
know what the position of the land question is because  I  am  a  Rhodesian.
[Interjections.] I am not a Rhodesian, and I have never had  any  connection
to Rhodesia. I believe he used that as  an  insult.  [Interjections.]  Madam
Speaker, I would like a ruling from you on that and  ask  that  he  withdraw
that statement. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Landers, you referred to the hon member as  a
Rhodesian. I am not sure what that means. He  regards  that  as  an  insult.
[Interjections.] Hon member, I do not know where you get  your  facts  from.
Mr McIntosh has requested that you withdraw that statement because  he  says
he is not a Rhodesian. I would really like you to do so.

Mr L T LANDERS: Madam Speaker, the hon Graham McIntosh is not  a  Rhodesian.
[Laughter.]

It is against this background that I  wish  to  address  the  House  on  the
legislative  and  constitutional  framework  within  which  the   Zimbabwean
elections were held. There are four pieces of  legislation  which  determine
how elections in Zimbabwe are run. These are, firstly, the  constitution  of
Zimbabwe, which is the constitution agreed to  in  terms  of  the  Lancaster
House Agreement and which has  subsequently  undergone  several  amendments;
secondly, the Electoral Act; thirdly, the General Laws Amendment Act,  which
came into operation on 4 February 2002; and the Public  Order  and  Security
Act.

I must mention that two of  South  Africa's  esteemed  judges  conducted  an
audit of the constitutional and legal framework of Zimbabwe's laws  as  they
related to the electoral process. As part of  their  mandate,  they  engaged
members of the Zimbabwean Bench, the judiciary, the  Zimbabwean  prosecuting
authority and senior police officials on these laws. The expected report  on
their audit should make interesting reading.

At the outset, it must  be  stated  that  the  Zimbabwean  electoral  system
grants considerable power and discretion to the president,  including,   and
in particular, the  power  to  change  electoral  law  by  issuing  what  is
referred to, in Zimbabwe, as  a  statutory  instrument,  which  we  normally
refer to as a proclamation.

In terms of the General Laws Amendment Act,  large  numbers  of  Zimbabweans
who would have been outside the country for more than 12 months  were  taken
off the voters' roll and disenfranchised.  This  matter  was  taken  to  the
supreme court, which duly struck down this provision.

A few  days  before  election  day,  President  Mugabe  issued  a  statutory
instrument invoking section 158 of the Electoral Act which  regularised  the
appointment of civil servants as monitors as opposed  to  members  of  civil
society.

In terms of the Public Order and Security Act, application must be  made  to
the police in order that political parties or candidates may  hold  rallies,
public meetings, etc. According to the Minister of Justice of Zimbabwe,  the
number of refusals  of  such  applicants  was  negligible.  [Interjections.]
According to the opposition,  the  true  figure  is  in  the  region  of  60
refusals during the election period.

Now, enshrined in the Zimbabwean constitution in terms  of  section  21,  is
the right to freedom of assembly  and  association.  The  provision  in  the
Public Order and Security Act requiring permission from the police  to  hold
election rallies must be measured  against  section  21  of  the  Zimbabwean
constitution. In other words, according to  our  two  esteemed  judges,  the
only way to make a judgment as to whether the right to freedom  of  assembly
and association may have been trumped or infringed upon by the Public  Order
and Security Act would be to ascertain exactly how  many  such  applications
were indeed refused.

Whilst we were not  in  the  position  to  make  this  verification,  it  is
important  that  we  raise  our  serious  concerns  about  this   particular
provision. In my view, one of  the  most  draconian  pieces  of  legislation
introduced as part of Zimbabwe's  electoral  laws  is  section  158  of  the
Electoral Act. Section 158 of the Electoral  Act  goes  as  follows,  and  I
quote:


  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act ...

[Interjections.] Yes, the hon member knows everything. I quote as follows:


  Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  this  Act,  but  subject   to
  subsection 2, the president may make such  statutory  instruments  as  he
  considers necessary or desirable to ensure that any election is  properly
  and efficiently conducted and  to  deal  with  any  matter  or  situation
  connected with, arising out of or resulting from the election.

The effect of this provision is that the president is empowered to  legalise
any electoral fraud or irregularity. Indeed,  this  provision  empowers  the
president to overturn decisions and rulings of the Zimbabwean courts.

I am aware of four such instances in which President Mugabe invoked  section
158 in order to overturn a decision of the Zimbabwean high  court  and  even
the supreme court. I am not sure of my facts, but there  may  have  been  10
such instances. It would be an abrogation  of  our  duty  to  remain  silent
about the draconian provisions of this clause. Indeed, if there is  anything
about the Zimbabwean  electoral  process  that  must  be  taken  up  at  the
appropriate level, then it has to be section 158 of the Electoral Act.

Three million Zimbabwean voters representing 55%  of  the  electorate,  more
than in any election held in Zimbabbwe since 1980, duly had  an  opportunity
to cast their votes. We in the ANC accept the outcome of this  election.  It
is time now for Zimbabweans to move forward. It is time for  Zimbabweans  to
reach out to one another in a spirit of national unity  and  reconciliation.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! As I call on the next speaker, I  would  like  to
recognise the former hon member and now His Excellency Jannie  Momberg,  who
is sitting in the gallery. [Applause.]

Mnr A J BOTHA: Mev die Speaker, mnr Agrippa Madlela, die leier van  ZAPU  in
Zimbabwe, het ons versoek om asseblief ons o√´ oop te hou,  en  dan  aan  die
w√™reld die waarheid te vertel van d√≠t wat ons gesien het.  Hy  het  ons,  as
Afrikane, gesmeek om nie weer eens die mense van Zimbabwe in  die  steek  te
laat nie. Die DA, tesame met die meeste  lede  van  die  opposisie  wat  die
verkiesing in Zimbabwe namens die  Parlement  gaan  waarneem  het,  dra  ons
gevolgtrekking op aan Mr Madlela, en al die martelare wat deur die  owerheid
in Zimbabwe getraumatiseer en gemarginaliseer is.

Die uitstaande kenmerk van Zimbabwe die afgelope twee jaar is  ontkiesering.
Daardie bevolking is op  'n  ongekende  skaal  ontkieser  deur  intimidasie,
geweld en moord. Hulle  is  ontkieser  deur  wetgewende  en  administratiewe
misbruik.  Zanu-PF,  onder  die  leiding  van  president  Mugabe,  het  soos
roofdiere in die nag jag gemaak op 'n  weerlose  bevolking.  Die  natuurlike
naggeluide van die bos is vervang met die angs- en  pynkrete  van  martelare
wie se verslae ons bestudeer het,  en  wie  se  wonde  ons  waargeneem  het.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr A J BOTHA: Madam Speaker, Mr Agrippa Madlela,  the  leader  of  ZAPU  in
Zimbabwe, has requested us please to keep our eyes open  and  then  to  tell
the world the truth about what we have seen. He begged us, as Africans,  not
to let the people of Zimbabwe down once again.  The  DA,  as  well  as  most
leaders of the opposition, who went to observe the election in  Zimbabwe  on
behalf of Parliament dedicate our conclusions to  Mr  Mandela  and  all  the
martyrs who have been traumatised and marginalised by those in authority  in
Zimbabwe.

The most noticeable characteristic of Zimbabwe over the past two  years  has
been disenfranchisement. That population  has  been  disenfranchised  on  an
unparalleled scale by means of intimidation, violence and murder. They  have
been disenfranchised  by  legislative  and  administrative  abuse.  Zanu-PF,
under  the  leadership  of  President  Mugabe,  preyed  upon  a  defenceless
population like predators in the night. The natural sounds of the  night  in
the bush were replaced by the cries of anguish and  pain  of  martyrs  whose
reports we have studied, and whose wounds we have observed.]

The reign of terror visited  upon  the  majority  by  a  minority  gang  was
enabled by Zanu-PF subjugating the police force to pseudo war veterans,  who
went about destroying  human  lives  as  well  as  the  cornerstone  of  the
Zimbabwean economy. The present food shortages  and  looming  famine  are  a
direct result of the destructive stupidity of this anarchy and  has  nothing
to do with the present drought, severe as it is. The effects of the  drought
will only become evident when this season's crop is harvested.

Even state-employed youth gangs order the police about. On top of  this,  it
is quite clear that elements in  the  police  join  in  the  fray.  Tens  of
thousands of farmworkers have been displaced together with  their  employers
by these war vets and could not  vote  in  their  constituencies.  What  the
effect of torture on voter choice was, we can only speculate  on  and  never
calculate accurately. What is certain, however, is  that  the  normalisation
of civil society will take generations.

The voters' rolls, which only surfaced on the  day  of  the  election,  were
prostituted  by  legislative  attempts   and   administrative   malpractice,
especially  during  the  last  two  months  before  the  election.  Our  own
judiciary  calculates  that  up  to  3  million  voters  could   have   been
disenfranchised by this gerrymandering.  This  exactly  matches  the  number
that actually managed to vote.

The DA rejects this electoral charade, as we reject the ANC's  craven  claim
that 3 million ballots are sufficient proof that  the  people  have  spoken.
Our mission went to Zimbabwe to serve the people  of  this  country  and  of
Zimbabwe. We hope that in a very small  way  we  did  serve  the  people  of
Zimbabwe, whose courage and fortitude defy belief. We did not  go  there  to
enable diplomatic manoeuvring by statesmen.

History will not be kind to the ANC  in  this  affair.  Some  of  the  ANC's
debaters today appear to believe that  they  observed  the  1980  liberation
election. Some appear to believe that Tony Blair was  a  candidate  in  this
election, hellbent on recolonising our neighbour. [Interjections.]

Some marvel at the apparent calm and normality that they observed.  This  is
tantamount to claiming that the apparent calm and normality in South  Africa
during the worst excesses of the apartheid era  disproved  the  darkness  of
those days. Also, this could be compared  with  our  Cabinet  Ministers  who
disputed rape statistics because they observed no incidences of  rape  while
standing on the street corner for more than 26 seconds.

I would like to thank the mission leader for the way that she conducted  the
mission in Zimbabwe. She did very well and she led us very well. I  am  very
sorry about her contribution in this debate today. [Applause.]

Mr N H MASITHELA: Madam Speaker, I would to thank the  Chief  Whip  for  the
contribution she made yesterday. If she was not there, this team would  have
been polarised, as happened in Zimbabwe. We thank her  very  much  for  what
she did yesterday. [Applause.]

The mission's aim was not to  judge  Zimbabwean  government  policy  nor  to
judge the legal framework in Zimbabwe, but to observe the  presidential  and
mayorial elections in Zimbabwe.

In regard to this mission, I think we diligently accomplished  our  mission.
One of the speakers alluded to that fact. It was the hon Patricia de  Lille.
In fact, not only the leader of the mission, but the  entire  South  African
parliamentary observer team excellently observed the elections  in  Zimbabwe
and did so impartially. We moved from this area, having different views  and
opinions, but there is no way that we could come back and report on what  we
have observed against the background of our political beliefs, as the DP  is
doing. [Interjections.]
It is very unfortunate that two or three days before we  went  to  Zimbabwe,
some of the media people picked on the candidate for president in  Zimbabwe,
let alone hon member Mr  Tony  Leon,  who  did  that  before  we  left  this
country! [Interjections.]

The reality of the situation is that we went there to observe  the  election
without fear. What I saw there was that the  media  in  Zimbabwe,  including
our South African electronic media, are highly polarised. Our  public  media
were covering the  election  in  Zimbabwe  as  if  they  were  purporting  a
particular candidate to win the elections. It is a problem. It  is  a  thing
that all of us, as members of Parliament, and  as  South  Africans  have  to
correct.

The  unfortunate  situation  is  that  that  situation  caused  tension   in
Zimbabwe. It is important that South  Africans,  international  communities,
and the media, in particular, understand that  Zimbabweans  need  a  healing
period. It is important for South Africans to  understand  that  we  do  not
need Zimbabwe the way it is today.

To  declare  the  election  free  and  fair  is   a   political   statement.
[Interjections.] Before I do that, let me clarify  that  Africa  is  on  her
own, and that nobody  will  help  her.  Zimbabwe  is  part  of  the  African
continent.  [Interjections.]  Like  one  of  the  leaders  of  our   African
organisation, Azapo, the late Steven Bantu Biko, said: ``Black man, you  are
on your own.'' The two are not mutually exclusive. Africa, you are  on  your
own and nobody will assist you when you fall ...  [Interjections.]  Let  me,
therefore, declare the elections ... [Interjections.]

Let me give this House  my  opinion  about  the  election.  [Interjections.]
Notwithstanding the problems that we were confronted  with  in  Zimbabwe,  I
think  the  elections   were   relatively   free   and   fair.   [Applause.]
[Interjections.]

Lastly, I think it is only fair to respond to what members have said. It  is
important, Mr Botha, to understand  that  the  police  did  their  job  even
though we were not quite satisfied with what they  did.  [Interjections.]  I
was with the hon Botha in Bulawayo. We both followed the  police  and  spoke
to them. They reported to us that they were  monitoring  the  situation  and
that they had arrested some of the  people  who  were  causing  problems  in
Zimbabwe. [Interjections.] He does not report about  that  because  he  does
not like it.

It is very well for Mrs Southgate to pronounce that the  ink  was  meant  to
prevent people from voting, particularly suspect people. But, how would  one
have known that this was a Zanu-PF member or an MDC member?  [Applause.]  No
one could see that.

I  think  it  is  important  to  reflect  on  what  Mr   Inkosinathi   said.
[Interjections.] He had forgotten to quote what Prof Itumeleng  Mosala  said
in the newspapers, but he  remembered  to  quote  Dr  Brigalia  Bam.  It  is
important to balance the equation. [Interjections.]

In conclusion, I think it is  important  for  South  Africans,  particularly
those who do not agree, to see that  Zimbabwe  is  a  unitary  state.  [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! On behalf of the Speaker and  myself,  we  really
thank the hon members of the mission, including the staff  that  accompanied
them, for the work they did in Zimbabwe. We thank them specifically for  the
very painful process of putting the  report  together,  which  took  them  a
whole day and half a night. We think that that is really commendable.

Of course, in the  true  spirit  of  South  Africa,  hon  members  expressed
themselves and,  where  they  differed,  those  differences  were  put  very
honestly. We believe that that is what democracy is all about and  we  would
like to commend members for that. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Business suspended at 12:13 and resumed at 14:03.
                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Rev A D GOOSEN: Madam Speaker, I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that 25 interdenominational churches came under the  banner  of
       the Exodus Initiative to fight crime in Port Elizabeth;


  (2) believes that this move by the  religious  fraternity  is  a  fitting
       response to the call of Vukuzenzele by the President; and


  (3) welcomes  the  initiative  by  these  churches  to  fight  crime  and
       expresses appreciation for the overwhelmingly  positive  response  to
       the Letsema Campaign by South  Africans  of  all  races  and  of  all
       political and religious persuasions.

Mnr G A J GROBLER: Mev die Speaker, hiermee gee ek kennis:
  Dat die Huis -


  (1) kennis neem dat -


       (a)  die ANC-beheerde Beaufort-Wes Munisipaliteit ernstige finansi√´le
           probleme  ondervind  as  gevolg  van  politieke   inmenging   en
           finansi√´le wanbestuur; en


       (b)  die persoonlike inmenging van die ANC-burgemeester in  die  dag-
           tot-dag bestuur van die munisipaliteit, en die  burgemeester  se
           miskenning van  die  verantwoordelikhede  en  funksies  van  die
           amptenare, die grootste faktor is wat tot die krisis gelei  het;
           en


  (2) 'n beroep doen op -


       (a)  die Minister vir Provinsiale en Plaaslike Regering in  die  Wes-
           Kaap om dringend aandag aan die krisis te gee; en


       (b)  die ANC om, ter wille van die  armstes  van  die  armes  in  die
           Karoo, ontslae te raak van hulle burgemeester.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr G A J GROBLER: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the ANC-controlled municipality of Beaufort West is experiencing
           serious financial problems as a result of political interference
           and financial mismanagement; and


       (b)  personal  interference  by  the  ANC  mayor  in  the  day-to-day
           management of the municipality, and the  mayor's  disregard  for
           the responsibilities and duties of the  officials  is  the  main
           factor that has led to the crisis; and


  (2) appeals to -


       (a)  the Minister for Provincial and Local Government in the  Western
           Cape to pay urgent attention to the crisis; and


       (b)  the ANC, for the sake of the poorest of the poor in  the  Karoo,
           to get rid of their mayor.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Madam Speaker, I give notice that I shall move on  behalf
of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) acknowledges the fact that the people of South  Africa  have  had  to
       endure the effects of no-go areas for a long time;


  (2) realises that such no-go areas were not confined to KwaZulu-Natal  as
       some individuals now tend to claim, thus  distorting  the  facts  for
       political expediency; and


  (3) therefore calls upon members of the House to refrain from adopting  a
       holier-than-thou attitude and to realise that  such  actions  do  not
       assist the process of reconciliation  which  is   sine  qua  non  for
       nation-building.

Ms M A MOLEBATSI: Madam Speaker, I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that a pilot project has been initiated at a number  of  police
       stations throughout the country where victims of crime will receive a
       card containing the name and contact numbers of  their  investigating
       officer as well as the case number;


  (2) recognises  that  this  ground-breaking  project  aims  at  improving
       communication between police and victims  of  crime  with  regard  to
       progress on their cases; and


  (3)  commends  the  SAPS  for  its  innovative  approach  to   increasing
       transparency, accountability and efficiency, and wishes  the  project
       every success.

Mnr J J NIEMANN: Mev die Speaker, ek gee kennis dat ek sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) met afgryse kennis neem van die sinlose moord op 'n kommersi√´le  boer
       naby Harare;


  (2) van oordeel is dat -


       (a)  die sinlose  daad  die  direkte  gevolg  is  van  die  onwettige
           besetting van plase in Zimbabwe; en


       (b)  die oppergesag van die reg onmiddellik in Zimbabwe herstel  moet
           word; en
  (3) daarvan oortuig is dat sodanige dade van geweld 'n afskrikmiddel  sal
       wees vir enige potensi√´le beleggers in die streek.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr J J NIEMANN: Madam Speaker, I give notice that I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) takes note with horror of the senseless murder of a commercial farmer
       near Harare;


  (2) is of the opinion that -


       (a)  this senseless act is the  direct  consequence  of  the  illegal
           occupation of farms in Zimbabwe; and


       (b)  the supreme authority of the law should be restored in  Zimbabwe
           immediately; and


  (3) is convinced that such acts of violence will serve as a deterrent for
       any potential investors in the region.]

Ms O N MNDENDE: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the  next  sitting  day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) welcomes the reinstatement by Metrorail of 84 trains  in  Cape  Town,
       which were stopped last November;


  (2) notes the threat to this victory by Cosatu's potential  mass  protest
       action if the rail needs of workers and the poor  were  not  suitably
       addressed;


  (3) further notes the budgetary constraints of Metrorail, which  one  way
       or another is passed on to hard-pressed commuters; and


  (4) calls on all participants to continue in the  spirit  of  yesterday's
       negotiations to ensure amicable working solutions through  bargaining
       in  good  faith  between  labour,  business,  the  Unicity  and   the
       Government.

Mr M J MAHLANGU: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I  shall  move  on
behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that projects have been approved  to  the  value  of  over  R30
       million in terms of  integrated  service  delivery,  providing  much-
       needed infrastructure for the  Sekhukhukune  district,  for  projects
       ranging from installation and repair of boreholes to the provision of
       sports facilities;


  (2) believes that capital  investment  of  this  nature  is  an  integral
       component of stimulating the economy and fighting poverty; and


  (3) commends the ANC Government for its commitment  to  service  delivery
       and infrastructure development that will in  the  short  term  create
       jobs and in the long term pay dividends in bettering the lives of our
       people.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting  day
of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) strongly condemns the brutal murder of another farmer, Terry Ford, by
       Zimbabwe's war veterans, who dragged him from his home in  the  early
       hours of the morning, beat him senseless and  placed  him  against  a
       tree before executing him;


  (2) notes that this barbaric deed justifies the call by Zimbabwe's  trade
       unions  for  a  three-day  national  strike  to  protest  the   post-
       presidential election victimisation and harassment of the  people  of
       Zimbabwe;
  (3) notes with great concern that some political parties  in  this  House
       have intimidated and prohibited their own members who  were  part  of
       the observer mission from telling the truth about what  they  saw  on
       the ground;


  (4) welcomes the intention to reverse the verdict given by the leader  of
       the South African observer mission  to  Zimbabwe  who  said,  without
       consulting other observers, that the results were legitimate; and


  (5) approves and applauds the courageous stand by the  deputy  leader  of
       the mission, Dr Brigalia  Bam,  who  strongly  rejected  the  interim
       report by the leader of the mission.

Mrs M A SEECO: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice  that  I  shall  move  on
behalf of the UCDP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  trains are used by people who earn very low  salaries  and  that
           they also help reduce road accidents;


       (b)  the Government is doing all that is possible to ensure that rail
           infrastructure is upgraded; and


       (c)  such upgrading will be done at the Mabopane railway station -


           (i)    accepting  that  the  upgrading  will  provide  jobs   to
                 deserving people in the area; and


           (ii)  while appreciating that the contract has been  awarded  to
                 the South African Rail Commuter Corporation; and


  (2) commends the Minister of Transport for making R15  million  available
       for the upgrading of the station.

[Applause.]

Mr P J GOMOMO: Madam Speaker, I give notice that I shall move on  behalf  of
the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that  Chief  Nonkonyana,  an  ANC  member  of  Parliament,  was
       involved in a car accident over the weekend;


  (2) further notes that he is currently in  the  intensive  care  unit  in
       hospital; and


  (3) wishes Chief Nonkonyana a speedy recovery.

Ms J A SEMPLE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1)  notes  the  DA's  commitment  to  looking  after  the  interests  of
       disempowered members of the fishing industry;
  (2) congratulates the DA on its success in having -


       (a)  South African pelagic fish resources reserved for South  African
           fishermen by getting Namibian fishing boats  excluded  from  our
           waters; and


       (b)  snoek removed from the line-fish sector,  thereby  protecting  a
           valuable protein source  and  an  essential  lifeline  of  local
           fishing communities;


  (3) commends the Government  for  recognising  the  need  to  make  these
       changes; and


  (4) expresses the hope that the South African fishing community, of which
       the Western Cape forms the largest part,  prospers  as  a  result  of
       these changes.

Mr J H SLABBERT: Madam Speaker, I  hereby  give  notice  that  on  the  next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:
  That the House -


  (1) appreciates the introduction of  the  Legal  Spoornet  i  Train,  the
       mobile legal assistance train, aimed at  helping  people  who  cannot
       afford and access legal advice;


  (2)  hopes  that  this  legal  empowerment  exercise  will  benefit   the
       communities of  Newcastle,  Howick,  Durban,  Isipingo,  Tongaat  and
       Stanger as the train spends six days in each of the said areas; and


  (3) believes that this initiative  serves  to  consolidate  our  hard-won
       democracy, thus contributing to attempts at building a free society.

Mr R P ZONDO: Madam Speaker, I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that since the advent of democracy, the  South  African  Police
       Service has adopted a  creative  and  innovative  approach  to  crime
       prevention and eradication;


  (2) recognises that the integrated strategy to combat  crime  is  proving
       correct and is beginning to pay dividends;


  (3) welcomes the introduction of the Morphotouch  device,  a  gadget  the
       size of a cellphone, which at the touch of a suspect's  fingers  will
       reveal whether a person has a criminal record; and


  (4) commends Minister Tshwete and the SAPS for the introduction  of  this
       state-of-the-art equipment which  will  further  assist  in  bringing
       criminals to book.

Mnr P UYS: Mev die Speaker, hiermee gee ek kennis dat  ek  by  die  volgende
sitting van die Huis sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) kennis neem dat 'n studie van Idasa die  volgende  skoksyfers  bekend
       gemaak het -


       (a)  60% van kinders in  Suid-Afrika  se  lewensomstandighede  is  te
           armoedig om 'n gesonde en geborge lewe te lei; en


       (b)  byna 3,8 miljoen van die 60% armoedige kinders ses jaar  oud  en
           jonger is;


  (2) glo -


       (a)  dit is 'n skande dat die meerderheid van die  kinders  in  Suid-
           Afrika in sulke haglike omstandighede leef; en


       (b)  dat 'n bord kos vir 'n kind nie 'n voorreg moet wees  nie,  maar
           'n reg; en


  (3) 'n beroep doen op die Regering, die Parlement,  die  Departement  van
       Maatskaplike Ontwikkeling en alle ander rolspelers om te verseker dat
       die jeug wat die toekoms van ons land is, s√©lf ook die toekoms  gegun
       word wat elke kind in Suid-Afrika verdien.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr P UYS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting  day
of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1)  notes  that  a  study  by  Idasa  revealed  the  following  shocking
       statistics:


       (a)  the living conditions of 60% of children in South Africa are too
           impoverished to lead a healthy and secure life; and


       (b)  nearly 3,8 million of the 60% of poor children are 6  years  old
           and younger;


  (2) believes -


       (a)  it is a disgrace that the majority  of  the  children  in  South
           Africa live under such terrible conditions; and


       (b)  that a plate of food should not be a privilege for a child,  but
           a right; and


  (3) appeals to the  Government,  Parliament,  the  Department  of  Social
       Development and all other role-players to ensure that the youth,  who
       are the future of our  country,  are  themselves  not  begrudged  the
       future which every child in South Africa deserves.]

Ms N MAHLAWE: Madam Speaker, I give notice that I shall move  on  behalf  of
the UDM on the next sitting day of the House:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the ``Heritage  at  Risk''  report  which  was  compiled  by  a
       nongovernmental group and released yesterday;


  (2) further notes that this  report  identified  various  world  historic
       monuments and sites, and is complementary to Unesco's List  of  World
       Heritage in Danger, amongst  which  Table  Mountain  and  traditional
       South African architecture are listed;


  (3) concurs with the warning  against  short-term  fashionable  pressures
       such as the wholesale alien vegetation removal on the  slope  of  the
       historic landscape of Table Mountain;


  (4) calls on the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism to  ensure
       that these heritage sites are protected from over-zealous  uninformed
       participants, and that all governmental policy be drafted taking this
       report into account; and


  (5) urges all South Africans to assist in protecting  and  promoting  our
       rich and diverse heritage, so that our children can  inherit  it  and
       understand where they come from.

     REPORT OF SOUTH AFRICAN PARLIAMENTARY OBSERVER MISSION TO ZIMBABWE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House:


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the report of the South African Parliamentary Observer Mission;


       (b)  that 3,1 million people cast their  votes  in  the  presidential
           elections; and


       (c)  the conditions described in the  report  of  the  South  African
           Parliamentary Observer Mission and the polarisation that  exists
           in Zimbabwe; and


  (2) resolves -
       (a)  to call on all Zimbabweans to  work  together  towards  national
           unity and reconciliation of the people of Zimbabwe; and


       (b)  that the 2002 Presidential elections are a  credible  expression
           of the will of the people of Zimbabwe.

[Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I move as an amendment:


  To omit all the words after ``That'' and to substitute: the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)   the  overwhelming  proof  of  election  irregularities  in  the
           Zimbabwe elections; and


       (b)  that it was accordingly impossible for Zimbabweans to cast their
           votes in a free and fair manner; and


  (2) resolves not to endorse the elections in Zimbabwe as being  genuinely
       free and fair or as representing the will of the people.

[Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, I move as a further amendment:


   That the following words be  substituted  for  the  words  in  paragraph
   (2)(b): ``that the elections in Zimbabwe cannot be  certified  as  being
   free and fair.''

Amendment moved by Mr L M Green negatived.

Amendment moved by Mr M J Ellis put.

Division demanded.

The House divided:


  AYES:-70: Andrew, K M; Aucamp, C; Bakker, D M; Baloyi, O S B; Bell, B  G;
  Beukman, F; Bhengu, G B; Biyela, B P; Blaas, A; Blanch√©, J P I; Clelland-
  Stokes, N J; Da Camara, M L; Dhlamini, B W; Ditshetelo, P H K;  Dowry,  J
  J; Dudley, C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Gore, V C; Gous, S J; Green, L  M;
  Greyling, C H F; Grobler, G A J; Groenewald, P J; Heine, R J;  Herandien,
  C B; Hlengwa, M W; Jankielsohn, R; Kalyan, S V; Kgauwe, Q J; Le  Roux,  J
  W; Lee, T D; Lowe, C M; Madasa, Z L; Maluleke, D  K;  McIntosh,  G  B  D;
  Meshoe, K R J; Mfundisi, I S; Moonsamy, K; Moorcroft, E K; Morkel,  C  M;
  Morobi, D M; Mpontshane, A M; Mulder, C  P;  Ndlovu,  V  B;  Ndou,  R  S;
  Niemann, J J; Pillay, S; Rabie, P  J;  Redcliffe,  C  R;  Roopnarain,  U;
  Schippers, J; Seeco, M A; Semple,  J  A;  Sibiya,  M  S  M;  Simmons,  S;
  Slabbert, J H; Smith, P F; Sono, B N; Southgate, R M; Swart, P S;  Swart,
  S N; Uys, P; Van der Merwe, A S; Van der Merwe, J H; Van Jaarsveld,  A  Z
  A; Van Niekerk, A I; Vos, S C; Woods, G; Zondi, K M.
  NOES:-196: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Balfour, B M N; Baloyi, M R; Baloyi, S
  F; Benjamin, J; Bhengu, F;  Bloem,  D  V;  Booi,  M  S;  Botha,  N  G  W;
  Buthelezi, M N; Cachalia, I M; Chalmers,  J;  Chiba,  L;  Chikane,  M  M;
  Chiwayo, L L; Chohan-Khota, F I; Coetzee-Kasper, M  P;  Cwele,  S  C;  De
  Lange, J H; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Dithebe, S L; Dlali, D M; Dlamini, B
  O; Doidge, G Q M; Douglas, B M; Duma, N M; Dyani, M M Z;  Fankomo,  F  C;
  Fazzie, M H; Fihla, N B; Frolick, C T; Gandhi, E; Gcina, C I;  George,  M
  E; Gerber, P A; Gillwald, C E; Gogotya, N J; Gomomo, P J;  Goniwe,  M  T;
  Goosen, A D; Gumede, D M; Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Hlaneki, C
  J M; Hlangwana, N L; Jassat, E E; Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R;  Kannemeyer,
  B W; Kasienyane, O R; Kati, J Z; Kgarimetsa, J J; Kgauwe, Q J; Kgwele,  L
  M; Komphela, B M; Koornhof, G W; Kota, Z A;  Kotwal,  Z;  Landers,  L  T;
  Lekota, M G P; Lishiva, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Luthuli, A N; Lyle,  A
  G; Mabe, L; Mabena, D C; Mabuza, D D; Madlala-Routledge, N C;  Magazi,  M
  N; Magubane, N E; Magwanishe, G; Mahlangu, M J; Maimane, D S; Maine, M S;
  Makanda, W G; Malebana, H F; Maloney, L; Malumise, M M; Maphalala,  M  A;
  Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A  D;  Maseka,  J  T;  Maserumule,  F  T;
  Masithela, N H; Masutha, M T; Mathibela, N F; Maunye, M M; Maziya,  A  M;
  Mbombo, N D; Mbulawa-Hans, B G; Mguni, B A; Middleton, N S; Mkono,  D  G;
  Mnandi, P N; Mndende, O N; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnumzana, S K; Modisenyane, L
  J; Modise, T R; Moeketse, K M; Mofokeng, T R; Mogoba, M S; Mohamed, I  J;
  Mohlala, R J B; Molebatsi, M A; Molewa, B  G;  Moloi,  J;  Moloto,  K  A;
  Mongwaketse, S J; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Moropa, R M; Morutoa, M R;
  Moss, M I; Mothiba, L C; Mothoagae, P K; Motubatse,  S  D;  Mpaka,  H  M;
  Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B; Mtsweni, N S; Mutsila, I;  Mzondeki,  M  J  G;
  Nair, B; Nash, J H; Ncinane, I Z;  Ncube,  B;  Ndou,  R  S;  Ndzanga,  R;
  Nefolovhodwe, P J; Nel, A C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, N
  E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngculu, L V J; Ngubane, H; Ngubeni, J M; Nhleko, N P;
  Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M A A; Nobunga, B J; Nqakula,  C;  Nqodi,  S  B;
  Ntshulana-Bhengu, N R; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M B; Ntuli, S B; Nzimande, L  P
  M; Oliphant, G G; Pahad, A G H; Pahad, E G; Phadagi, M G; Pheko, S  E  M;
  Phohlela, S; Pieterse, R D;  Radebe,  B  A;  Rajbally,  S;  Ramgobin,  M;
  Ramotsamai, C M P; Rasmeni, S M; Reid, L R R; Saloojee, E;  Schneeman,  G
  D; Schoeman, E A; Scott, M I; Sekgobela, P S; Serote, M W;  Shilubana,  T
  P; Sigcawu, A N; Sigwela, E M; Skweyiya, Z S T; Smith, V G;  Solo,  B  M;
  Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B;
  Tinto, B; Tolo, L J; Tsheole, N M; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R
  P Z; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Wyk, A (Annelize); Van Wyk, J F; Van Wyk, N;
  Xingwana, L M T; Zondo, R P.

Amendment accordingly negatived.

Motion moved by the Chief Whip of the Majority Party put.

Division demanded.

The House divided:


  AYES:-198: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Balfour, B M N; Baloyi, M R; Baloyi, S
  F; Benjamin, J; Bhengu, F;  Bloem,  D  V;  Booi,  M  S;  Botha,  N  G  W;
  Buthelezi, M N; Cachalia, I M;  Carrim,  Y  I;  Chalmers,  J;  Chiba,  L;
  Chikane, M M; Chiwayo, L L;  Chohan-Khota,  F  I;  Coetzee-Kasper,  M  P;
  Cwele, S C; De Lange, J H; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Dithebe, S L;  Dlali,
  D M; Dlamini, B O; Doidge, G Q M; Douglas, B M; Duma, N M; Dyani, M M  Z;
  Fankomo, F C; Fazzie, M H; Fihla, N B; Frolick, C T; Gandhi, E; Gcina,  C
  I; George, M E; Gerber, P A; Gillwald, C E; Gogotya, N J;  Gomomo,  P  J;
  Goniwe, M T; Goosen, A D; Gumede, D M; Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom,  D
  A; Hendrickse, P A C; Hlaneki, C J  M;  Hlangwana,  N  L;  Jassat,  E  E;
  Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R; Kannemeyer, B W; Kasienyane, O R; Kati,  J  Z;
  Kgarimetsa, J J; Kgauwe, Q J; Kgwele, L M; Komphela, B M; Koornhof, G  W;
  Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekota, M G P; Lishiva, T E; Louw,  J
  T; Louw, S K; Luthuli, A N; Lyle, A G; Mabe, L; Mabena, D C; Mabuza, D D;
  Madlala-Routledge, N C; Magazi,  M  N;  Magubane,  N  E;  Magwanishe,  G;
  Mahlangu, M J; Maimane, D S; Maine, M S; Makanda, W  G;  Malebana,  H  F;
  Maloney, L; Malumise, M M; Maphalala, M A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N;  Martins,
  B A D; Maseka, J T; Maserumule, F  T;  Masithela,  N  H;  Masutha,  M  T;
  Mathibela, N F; Maunye, M M; Maziya, A M; Mbombo, N D; Mbulawa-Hans, B G;
  Mguni, B A; Middleton, N S; Mkono, D  G;  Mnandi,  P  N;  Mndende,  O  N;
  Mngomezulu, G P; Mnumzana, S K; Modisenyane, L J; Modise, T R;  Moeketse,
  K M; Mofokeng, T R; Mogoba, M S; Mohamed, I J; Mohlala, R J B; Molebatsi,
  M A; Molewa, B G; Moloi, J; Moloto, K A; Mongwaketse, S J;  Montsitsi,  S
  D; Moonsamy, K; Morobi, D M; Moropa, R  M;  Morutoa,  M  R;  Moss,  M  I;
  Mothiba, L C; Mothoagae, P K; Motubatse, S D; Mpaka, H M; Mshudulu, S  A;
  Mthembu, B; Mtsweni, N S; Mutsila, I; Mzondeki, M J G; Nair, B;  Nash,  J
  H; Ncinane, I Z; Ncube, B; Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A;  Nefolovhodwe,  P  J;
  Nel, A C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, N E;  Ngcengwane,  N
  D; Ngculu, L V J; Ngubeni, J M; Nhleko, N P; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M A
  A; Nobunga, B J; Nqakula, C; Nqodi, S B; Ntombela, S H; Ntshulana-Bhengu,
  N R; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M B; Ntuli, S B; Nzimande, L P M; Oliphant, G  G;
  Pahad, A G H; Pahad, E G; Phadagi, M  G;  Pheko,  S  E  M;  Phohlela,  S;
  Pieterse, R D; Radebe, B A; Rajbally, S; Ramgobin, M; Ramotsamai, C M  P;
  Rasmeni, S M; Reid, L R R; Saloojee, E; Schneeman, G D;  Schoeman,  E  A;
  Scott, M I; Sekgobela, P S; Serote, M W; Shilubana, T P;  Sigcawu,  A  N;
  Sigwela, E M; Skweyiya, Z S T;  Smith,  V  G;  Solo,  B  M;  Solomon,  G;
  Sonjica, B P; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tolo, L  J;
  Tsheole, N M; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der  Merwe,
  S C; Van Wyk, A (Annelize); Van Wyk, J F; Van Wyk, N; Xingwana,  L  M  T;
  Zondo, R P.


  NOES:-70: Andrew, K M; Aucamp, C; Bakker, D M; Baloyi, O S B; Bell, B  G;
  Beukman, F; Bhengu, G B; Biyela, B P; Blaas, A; Blanch√©, J P I; Botha,  A
  J; Clelland-Stokes, N J; Da Camara, M L; Dhlamini, B W; Ditshetelo,  P  H
  K; Dowry, J J; Dudley, C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Ferreira, E T; Gore, V
  C; Gous, S J; Green, L M; Greyling, C H F; Grobler, G A J; Groenewald,  P
  J; Heine, R J; Herandien, C B; Hlengwa, M W; Jankielsohn, R; Kalyan, S V;
  Le Roux, J W; Lee, T D; Lowe, C M; Madasa, Z L; Maluleke, D K;  McIntosh,
  G B D; Meshoe, K R J; Mfundisi,  I  S;  Moorcroft,  E  K;  Morkel,  C  M;
  Mpontshane, A M; Mulder, C P; Ndlovu, V B;  Ngubane,  H;  Niemann,  J  J;
  Pillay, S; Rabie, P J; Redcliffe,  C  R;  Roopnarain,  U;  Schippers,  J;
  Seeco, M A; Semple, J A; Sibiya, M S M; Simmons, S; Slabbert, J H; Smith,
  P F; Smuts, M; Sono, B N; Southgate, R M; Swart, P S; Swart, S N; Uys, P;
  Van der Merwe, A S; Van der Merwe,  J  H;  Van  Jaarsveld,  A  Z  A;  Van
  Niekerk, A I; Vos, S C; Woods, G; Zondi, K M.

Motion accordingly agreed to.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: The IFP  wants  to
place on record that although we believe that ``voting in Zimbabwe  was  not
free and fair, we believe that this voting is free and fair. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! That is definitely on record.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 18 - Social Development:

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Speaker, hon members, MECs of  the
Department  of  Social  Development,  distinguished   guests,   ladies   and
gentlemen, the central question that President Mbeki posed to all of us  and
our people in this country in his state of the nation  address  was  simple,
clear and very direct. It was whether what we are doing in the  legislature,
the executive, the judiciary and civil society was helping  to  uplift  from
the  shoulders  of  our  people,  the  intolerable  burden  of  poverty  and
underdevelopment.

All of our people  have  an  individual  and  collective  responsibility  to
reflect upon this question, to provide honest answers and to  work  together
to implement agreed programmes. As Minister for Social Development and as  a
member of this  Parliament,  it  will  be  remiss  of  me  to  pass  on  the
opportunity to address this important and fundamental question.

The approach that the Ministry of Social  Development  has  adopted  in  its
work in various Government clusters has been to focus on  creating  a  world
fit for children. The  Department  of  Social  Development  principally  its
largest programme, social security, continues  to  put  children  first.  It
continues to be my  experience  that  the  overwhelming  majority  of  South
Africans are actors in the struggle to eradicate  poverty  and  to  build  a
caring and people-centred society.

During my visits to various parts of the country over the last two years,  I
witnessed scores of people, especially women and  volunteers  who,  even  in
difficult circumstances, are doing a sterling job to give hope  and  meaning
to the lives of children who are suffering.

We have,  in  the  gallery,  women  like  Margaret  Kolbe  of  the  Tafelsig
Rehabilitation Centre in Cape Town who, over the last two years and  despite
many difficulties, increased by six times the number of children  under  her
care, from 60 to 360. Mama Margaret has the deep and enduring  gratitude  of
us as Government. [Applause.]

I would also like to acknowledge the  selfless  efforts  of  Sister  Deborah
Kudisang of the Chance Children's Home in Springs, Miss Ria Stanton  of  the
Salem Baby Care Centre in the Eastern Cape, Mrs  Willeminah  Bodibe  of  the
Tembisa and Phomolong Child Care Centre in Gauteng and Mama Mazibuko of  the
Orlando Children's Home in Soweto. They, too, are heroes who, through  their
unwavering commitment, have given hope to  hundreds  of  children  who  have
been orphaned, abandoned or abused.

There are thousands of  unsung  heroes  like  them  across  the  length  and
breadth of our country. The example set by these heroes  is  reassuring  and
inspires confidence and hope. People from all walks of life  are  mobilising
to fight poverty, Aids and child abuse.  They  exemplify  the  response  our
people are making to the call of Vukuzenzele.

Let me take this opportunity  to  acknowledge  all  those  people  who  have
worked tirelessly during the International Year of the Volunteer to  support
and promote volunteering. They do our nation proud. To all of  them  I  say:
Nangamso! [Thank you!] [Applause.]

Our priority this year is to ensure that we  provide  support  to  all  such
volunteer initiatives through our poverty relief,  HIV/Aids,  community  and
home-based care programmes and our social security programmes. To  this  end
we  will  continue  to  work  even  more  closely   with   the   faith-based
organisations, NGOs, community-based organisations, the business sector  and
organised labour.

I want to take this opportunity also once again  to  thank  the  faith-based
organisations, specifically the churches, and also the Muslim community  and
all the other faiths that have  made  a  difference  in  the  lives  of  our
people. Since 1994 our concern, as the ANC-led Government, has been to  make
democracy  work  for  children.  Our  activities  have   been   focused   on
entrenching children's rights and  improving  children's  access  to  social
security and social services.

The SA Law Commission has, for some time, been working on the  complex  task
of drafting a new comprehensive child care Act, which will provide  a  sound
legal basis and legal  framework  to  protect  children  and  their  rights,
especially those who are made vulnerable through poverty  and  circumstances
not of their own making. The SA Law Commission has published for  comment  a
discussion paper on which the new legislation will be based. We  expect  the
Bill to be introduced in this  Parliament  later  this  year.  Key  to  this
legislation will be comprehensive protection of children from all  forms  of
abuse. We would appeal to all members of this Parliament, from all  parties,
to look into that proposed legislation and make their comments  so  that  we
will be able to produce a better Act and a better Bill.

If we are a moral and ethical people, then our society should  not  tolerate
or condone the sexual  abuse  of  our  children.  I  therefore  applaud  the
initiative taken by this Parliament to hold public hearings on  this  issue.
Last week the House heard of the  harrowing  and  painful  experiences  that
some of our children have  been  put  through.  From  the  submissions  made
during these hearings, it is clear that eradicating the  scourge  of  sexual
abuse of children  requires  the  collective  effort  of  Government,  civil
society and communities. The abuse  of  our  children  is  unacceptable.  It
requires decisive, immediate and unrelenting action from all of us.

A number of Government departments, both national and provincial, have  been
working together with the nongovernmental sector to combat the  problems  of
child  abuse.  The  Department  of  Social  Development  has   briefed   the
parliamentary task group on the actions taken  to  date,  for  example,  the
establishment of a child protection register.  The  sad  reality  about  the
sexual abuse of children is that, in many cases, the  perpetrators  are  not
strangers but people who  are  known  to  and  trusted  by  the  child.  The
incidence of sexual abuse is gnawing at the moral fibre of our  society  and
moral renewal is an urgent imperative.

I call on all members  of  this  House  to  work  with  Government  and  the
religious sector to build a moral order that underpins our  Constitution.  I
also call on business, labour, civics, NGOs and  CBOs  to  be  part  of  the
process of redefining our society through active participation in the  moral
regeneration processes, starting with the summit later this  year.  We  have
to send a message to perpetrators of child  abuse  that  the  wellbeing  and
safety of our children are non-negotiable.

The President announced in his state of the nation address that we would  be
mounting a national effort to  register  all  people  who  are  eligible  to
receive social grants. The planning of this national effort  is  well  under
way and we have drawn in other departments such as Home Affairs  and  Health
to participate. The total number of current social  grant  beneficiaries  is
now 4,3 million.

The child support grant and the care  dependency  grant  for  children  with
severe disabilities are a vital source of income to care-givers with  little
or no other income. The aged persons' grant  is  vital  to  the  grandmother
caring  for  her  grandchildren.  Although  we  will  be   registering   all
beneficiaries, the children will be the focus of  our  efforts  during  this
first year.

Over the past year the number of children receiving  payment  has  increased
by  500  000,  to  just  over  1,5  million.  While  the  growth  has   been
substantial, we must reach many more children in the  poorer  parts  of  our
country. We will be calling on our partners  in  various  sectors  of  civil
society to support the  campaign  and  I  hope  that  parliamentarians  will
assist their constituencies as they have done in the past. All of us have  a
duty to ensure that we reach every  house,  street,  location,  village  and
community in both the rural and urban areas of our country.

In addition to grants, children  and  families  affected  by  HIV/Aids  have
received  support  through   the   home-based   and   community-based   care
programmes. Over the past year the department  has  supported  185  projects
and an estimated 50 000  children  have  benefited  from  the  programme.  A
number of these projects have been initiated by communities  themselves  and
faith-based  organisations  which,  through  their  selfless  efforts,  have
improved the material and social conditions of these children.

We will expand these programmes significantly during the new financial  year
through the R48  million  budget  allocation  made  to  the  provincial  and
national departments of social development.

The  Government  programme  of  building  a  better   life   for   all   and
consolidating a caring society through improved service delivery  continues.
The Minister of  Finance  has  announced  grant  increases  that  are  above
expected inflation rates this year and will come into effect  from  1  April
this year. These increases will be implemented in conjunction with a  number
of measures to improve our social security system.  These  measures  include
enforcing national norms and standards for social security, training  1  500
social security officials,  improving  infrastructure  and  introducing  new
information technology. All of this will help to improve  the  accessibility
and quality of social security services.

Furthermore, Cabinet has made a decision to set  aside  R2  billion  to  pay
beneficiaries who have been disadvantaged by the  month  limitation  on  the
accrual of arrears. Our decision was based on our belief that  beneficiaries
should not  be  penalised  for  the  shortcomings  in  legislation  and  the
administration of our social  security  system.  Every  beneficiary  who  is
entitled to an arrears payment will receive his  or  her  payment.  We  will
soon be communicating with all beneficiaries on how  the  payments  will  be
made. A  comprehensive  campaign  to  this  effect  is  being  finalised  in
conjunction with the provinces, and we  will  work  very  closely  with  the
local authorities as well as the community structures in this regard.

When making this payment, we must be sure and  ensure  that  the  safety  of
beneficiaries, at all times, is well spelt out. We  must  also  be  vigilant
and guard against fraudulent claims. Officials will be informed  that  swift
disciplinary action will be taken against public  servants  who  ignore  the
Batho Pele principles in serving our people. I also call on members  of  the
community and all the public servants to join us in  making  sure  that  all
beneficiaries are reached and that any attempt  to  defraud  the  system  is
exposed and prevented.
The committee of inquiry into comprehensive social  security  has  completed
its investigation and has made presentations  to  the  Minister's  committee
for consideration. A special Cabinet meeting is to be held soon  to  discuss
the whole report and decide on the way forward.

I am pleased to announce the establishment of assessment panels to  expedite
the processing of disability grant applications.  I  trust  that  this  will
alleviate the  misery  experienced  by  many  applicants,  especially  those
living in rural areas with no access to district surgeons.

We continue to make steady progress with the poverty relief  programme,  and
in the past year we have established 350 poverty relief projects around  the
country. These are in addition to projects that we continue to support  from
previous years. In the coming financial year, the poverty relief  allocation
will increase to R100 million.

The question  is  often  asked  whether  the  poverty  relief  programme  is
targeting the poor and making a difference. Our information shows that  most
of the projects are located in the three provinces with the highest  poverty
rates, namely, the Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal and Limpopo.

The poverty relief  programme  targets  vulnerable  groups,  namely,  women,
children, the youth, the elderly and people with disabilities.  We  estimate
that over  a  three-year  period,  60¬†000  people  will  have  earned  wages
generated through the poverty relief projects. The war against  poverty  can
only be won when it is intensified on all fronts  in  an  integrated  manner
and, over the next year, we will focus on our poverty relief efforts in  the
node of the Integrated  Sustainable  Rural  Development  Programme  and  the
Urban Renewal Programme. We will also build  institutional  capacity  within
communities and within the departments to ensure the sustainability  of  the
projects.

The National Development Agency has a critical  role  to  play  in  the  war
against poverty through its support to  community-based  and  nongovermental
organisations.  As  members  of  this  House  may  be  aware,  the  National
Development  Agency  has  been  transferred  to  the  Department  of  Social
Development and we are finalising amendments to the legislation to  complete
the transfer. The Poverty  Relief  Programme  is  intended  to  support  the
poorest and  most  vulnerable  members  of  our  society.  Any  attempts  by
individuals and officials to enrich themselves and defraud  the  state  will
be dealt with in the most severe way.

We cannot hope to redress the social and economic  imbalances  of  the  past
unless we respond to the inequalities and injustices  experienced  by  women
in this country. We have sought to empower women  economically  through  the
Poverty Relief Programme and the flagship programme and  our  social  grants
support women in their roles as primary care-givers.

The victim empowerment programme provides support to women  and  victims  of
domestic violence, and the department works closely with the  Department  of
Justice and the SAPS with regard to all forms  of  violence  against  women.
[Applause.] Women are drivers of many community initiatives and it  is  time
that we, as men, treated them with due respect and pride. [Applause.]

The department's budget allocation will  increase  from  R190  million  last
year to  R409  in  this  financial  year.  Most  of  the  increases  in  the
allocation are to transfer payments to benefit communities  in  the  poverty
relief programme, the  home-based  community  care  programme  and  to  fund
projects  of  the  National  Development  Agency.  Funding  has  also   been
allocated to improve the  social  security  system  and  to  strengthen  the
capacity of  the  department.  This  increased  budget,  together  with  the
substantial  allocation  for  social  grants,  reflects  this   Government's
commitment to the poorest sector of our society.

We are nearly midway through the implementation  of  the  10-point  plan  to
make the sector responsive to the needs  of  the  poor  and  the  vulnerable
members of our society. I believe that we have made progress in many  areas.
We are turning the corner on the implementation of  the  10-point  plan.  We
have increased the number of social grant beneficiaries by over one  million
since April 2000, and we are proceeding with improving the  social  security
system on a number of fronts.  We  have  managed  to  resolve  many  of  the
problems with the poverty relief programme  and  our  programme  to  support
children and families affected by HIV/Aids is expanding.

The Disaster Relief Board has paid R49,7 million to  victims  in  this  year
alone and has completed the processing of over 19¬†000  claims  from  victims
of last year's floods, specifically in  the  Western  Cape.  We  have  built
partnerships with community-based organisations,  faith-based  organisations
and the volunteer sector, and continue to work  very  strongly  and  closely
with the nongovernmental sector. The  department  has  registered  over  800
nonprofit organisations over  the  past  two  years,  and  has  trained  650
organisations in governance matters during the past year alone.

We are making progress in the implementation  of  the  recommendations  that
emerged  from  the  report  on  abuse  of   the   elderly.   Many   of   the
recommendations related to the payment  of  pensions  and  these  have  been
taken up in the programme to improve social security.  The  audit  of  homes
for the  aged  is  close  to  completion,  and  provincial  departments  are
following up on the many complaints received by  the  ministerial  committee
in the course of their hearings. A new policy and legislation on the  status
of older persons will also be completed this year.

Over the past few years, we have been working with the  business  sector  to
provide concrete support to our programmes and later this year  we  will  be
holding round table discussions with the business sector.

I take  this  opportunity  to  thank  Messrs  Cyril  Ramaphosa  and  Raymond
Ackerman for lending their support to  this  important  initiative.  I  also
thank the House of SCB,  Billington  Mines,  Ikageng  Trust,  AngloGold  and
Erikson for working with us to invest in social development and  to  make  a
difference. I urge other companies to follow suit.
We do not take comfort in the progress we have made  so  far.  There  are  a
number of critical issues that need to be addressed before we can  say  that
we have turned the corner and are in the final stretch. Most urgent  amongst
these issues is the poor  infrastructure  for  social  development  in  many
provinces. The conditions at pension paypoints and  local  offices  are  not
conducive to providing good services.  Many  offices  lack  basic  equipment
such as telephones and computers and offer  no  privacy  to  people  seeking
assistance. The problem is compounded by  the  human  resource  constraints,
especially in the poorer provinces.

We are committed to accelerating the  transformation  of  welfare  services.
Poor people living in rural areas and in informal settlements  have  limited
access to social services. The transformation  programme  must  include  the
introduction of new or revised legislation to replace the inadequate  pieces
of legislation predating the transition to democracy in 1994.

We  must  also  provide  better   financial   support   to   nongovernmental
organisations  and  emerging  community-based  organisations.  The  National
Development Agency has a critical role to play in this regard.

Although we have increased the number of secure  care  facilities  over  the
past two years, they are insufficient to accommodate the number of  children
awaiting trial in  police  cells  and  in  correctional  services  and  care
facilities. Establishing additional facilities will not solve  the  problem.
It is, therefore, imperative that we expand our  diversion  programmes,  the
one-stop justice centre, specifically the one in  Port  Elizabeth,  and  the
probation services.

The  interdepartmental  team  made  up  by  Social   Development,   Justice,
Correctional Services and the SA Police Service continues  to  work  closely
together in order to reduce the number of children awaiting trial  in  adult
facilities.

Although we have had some successes in responding to the needs of the  youth
in a number of our  programmes,  we  are  still  some  way  from  having  an
integrated  youth  development  strategy,  as  envisaged   in   Government's
national youth development framework. We need to enhance  the  linkages  and
co-ordination between our efforts  and  those  of  Umsobomvu,  the  National
Youth Services and the National Youth Commission.

In his state of the nation address, President  Mbeki  raised  the  issue  of
social equity and justice for disabled people. While  we  have  amended  the
regulations in order to  improve  access  to  disability  grants,  I  remain
concerned that we are  not  reaching  disabled  children  whose  care-givers
should receive the care dependency  grant.  In  addition  to  ensuring  that
these children have access to social grants, we must also ensure  that  they
have access to other support services. I will be establishing  a  review  of
services to disabled children, especially in the rural areas.

Many of the problems that we deal with, such as violence against  women  and
children, occur against the background of  drug  and  alcohol  abuse.  I  am
requesting the Central Drug Authority to prioritise programmes for  children
and youth. While the Central Drug  Authority  and  law-enforcement  agencies
will undoubtedly do their utmost on this issue, we have  an  individual  and
collective responsibility to combat drug and alcohol abuse in our midst.

In conclusion, many individuals and organisations have worked with  us  over
the past year to build  a  caring  society,  and  I  thank  them  for  their
invaluable contribution. I  would  also  like  to  thank  our  international
partners, including Save the Children of the  UK,  the  governments  of  the
Netherlands, France and Germany, and the  various  agencies  of  the  United
Nations.

I thank the MECs of social development and the  officials  in  the  national
and  provincial  departments  for  their  commitment  to  improving  service
delivery over the past year. All of our work  and  efforts  are  helping  to
lift the  intolerable  burden  of  poverty  and  underdevelopment  from  the
shoulders of our people.

If we are to eradicate the  legacy  of  poverty  and  underdevelopment,  our
children, who are the present and the future of our nation,  must  be  given
the  opportunity  to  grow  up  in  a  healthy,  caring,  loving  and   safe
environment. Protecting children is everybody's business, and I call on  all
to lend a hand and make this country a better place for children.  Abantwana
kuqala! Kinders eerste! Bana Pele! Children first! [Applause.]

Mr E SALOOJEE: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, hon members, I rise  to  support
the Budget Vote of the Department of Social Development.

A number of Government initiatives are particularly focused on  enabling  us
as South Africans within  the  context  of  our  continent  to  re-establish
control over our own destiny and to fulfil our own potential,  as  has  been
our vision from the start of our fight against  oppression  and  inequality.
One of them is the Nepad initiative through which we as Africans  will  take
the  lead  in  eradicating  the  scars  of  poverty,  hunger,  disease   and
underdevelopment.

It is in the spirit of our quest for self-fulfilment that we heed  the  call
by the President in his state of the nation address that we  must  stand  up
and act. It is in this context that I want to join the Minister in his  call
on all of us to fight together in  order  to  push  back  the  frontiers  of
poverty.

Approximately half of all South  Africans  are  poor.  But  in  rural  South
Africa, home to about 48% of all South Africans, at least 71% of people  are
classified as poor,  compared  to  29%  in  the  urban  areas.  Despite  the
impressive advances which we  have  made  with  fiscal  discipline  and  the
reshaping of our economy to ensure that it remains on the growth  path,  the
poverty gap has grown, with the richest 20% of all  South  Africans  earning
52,5% of income, while the poorest 20% earn only  3,1%  of  total  household
income.

Therefore we recognise the fact that we must continue to provide  some  form
of safety net to the most vulnerable sections of our society. In fact,  more
than 90% of the consolidated budget for social development is spent  on  the
provision  of  social  security  benefits.  This  means  that  direct   cash
transfers to the value of R18 billion this year alone will be paid  to  some
of the poorest households in South Africa. When  compared  to  middle-income
developing countries across the globe, this forms one of the most  effective
forms of direct poverty relief.

This year the increases in the social grants, as the  Minister  has  pointed
out, are well above the rate of inflation. The old age  grant  increases  by
more than 8% from R570 to R620 per month,  while  the  child  support  grant
increases from R110 to R130, an increase of nearly 18%. These increases  are
also being brought forward from July to April.

Although our social security provisions are relatively good, they  still  do
not reach vast sections of those who have little or no access to  the  basic
means of survival.  This  is  one  of  the  problems  that  the  ministerial
committee of inquiry into a comprehensive social security system  for  South
Africa was tasked to address. We are hoping  that  out  of  the  committee's
deliberations some policy will come to target that group  which  is  falling
outside the net that we are already providing.

Let us note clearly that the debate around the basic citizen's income  is  a
debate  that  was  started  by  the  ANC's  social  partners,  not  by   the
opposition. Whether this Government accepts the notion  of  a  basic  income
grant or not, let us lead the  process  of  finding  some  route  of  making
provision for some  of  those  who  now  have  no  means  of  providing  for
themselves.

Even as we struggle to find a formula for a  comprehensive  social  security
system, we must wage a battle to ensure that the benefits that we  are  able
to offer  are  used  to  the  greatest  possible  effect.  We  cannot  allow
administrative inefficiencies to stand in the way  of  our  people  claiming
their rights.

It is not acceptable that the old, the frail and the disabled  are  made  to
wait for their grants at payment points, where  they  are  not  offered  any
shelter or access  to  ablution  facilities,  or  access  to  some  form  of
refreshment. It is not acceptable that old  people  should  be  turned  away
from paypoints time after time and be told: ``There  is  no  money  for  you
this month''.

I know that the Minister has deep concerns  around  this.  If  this  is  the
result of weak administration, it must be addressed as a matter of  urgency.
If it is matter of dishonesty and corruption  amongst  officials,  then  our
message must be equally  clear:  we  will  not  tolerate  it.  We  join  the
President in his call to all public servants  that  our  service  to  people
must be respectful of their dignity and that it must  be  delivered  on  the
basis of Batho Pele.

Our vision for our country is one in which our people are  able  to  provide
for themselves through meaningful employment and economic activity. This  is
why we must support the Government's sustained  programme  of  investing  in
human capital through the Integrated  Rural  Development  Strategy  and  the
Urban Renewal Strategy. We believe that the allocation to the Department  of
Social Development must be focused specifically on  providing  opportunities
to the poorest and the most vulnerable sectors of  our  society,  especially
single mothers, the disabled and  those  most  affected  by  the  impact  of
HIV/Aids.

There have been considerable problems in the  past  years  in  spending  the
money allocated to the department for the  purpose  of  poverty  eradication
programmes, and we were particularly  concerned  that  the  money  spent  on
projects was not sufficiently targeted at the development  of  capacity  and
long-term sustainability. However, we are now confident that these  problems
are being addressed on an ongoing basis.

We must now be able to move forward with projects  into  a  phase  in  which
there are clear strategic plans for long-term sustainability  and  in  which
the support that the department can and must give a  project  is  clear  and
accessible. In this regard, we are frustrated about the fact that  there  is
still doubt about the precise role of  the  Independent  Development  Trust,
the NDN and the National Development Agency, and that of the provincial  and
national governments, in identifying and supporting  projects  that  receive
funding.

Let me now turn to the area of social services. We want  to  remind  members
that less  than  10%  of  the  consolidated  social  development  budget  is
available for developmental  work.  We  are  doing  tremendously  well  with
regard  to  social  security,  programmes  aimed  at  services   that   will
strengthen the lives of  older  people  protecting  children  in  vulnerable
families, empowering persons with  disabilities,  and  healing  persons  who
struggle with substance abuse. I do not  want  to  suggest  that  the  money
spent on social security must be reduced, by no means,  but  I  do  want  to
plead for  a  larger  allocation  of  resources  for  the  tasks  of  social
development.

Questions  relating  to  the  protection  of  our  children  are  especially
important, as the debate will also reveal later today. Since  we  came  into
Government, one of our constant themes has been that the laws that  we  have
to protect our children need critical reform.

When we became a signatory to the African Charter on the Rights and  Welfare
of the Child, we committed ourselves  to  the  introduction  of  legislation
that is rights-based and responsive to  the  particular  needs  of  children
within the context of their families and communities.

Therefore, we  must  now  be  very  serious  about  finalising  the  SA  Law
Commission's review of the Child Care Act. I think we must  accept  that  we
will not be able to write the ultimate statute in one  fell  swoop,  but  we
must come up with a comprehensive piece of legislation that encompasses  our
vision for the children of our country.

It has taken a considerable amount of time to  advance  this  process.  But,
when one peruses the discussion document produced by the SA Law  Commission,
it becomes clear that their work covers a vast amount of research  and  that
it contains some critically important insights. We now want to say  that  it
is encouraging that we  should  have  draft  legislation  before  Parliament
hopefully by the middle of the year.

We also need to make real advances  in  developing  policy  and  legislation
that will adequately address the needs of older people.  There  has,  for  a
considerable time, been a  particular  weakness  in  the  department  around
addressing  the  needs  of  the  aged.   This   has   contributed   to   the
recommendations of the ministerial committee of inquiry into  the  abuse  of
older persons not being fully implemented.

We want to see legislation in this Assembly that  will  be  appropriate  for
the needs of all our older persons, and particularly those in  disadvantaged
communities.  We  cannot  afford  to  continue  focusing  narrowly  on   the
provision  of  institutional  care  for  essentially  a  minority  of  South
Africans.

This legislation must assist us in making progress with  the  transformation
of  existing  residential  care  facilities,  and   the   establishment   of
appropriate service centres in communities so that older  persons  can  play
an active role and be seen as a valuable part of the community.

Without the effort of voluntary organisations,  we  would  not  be  able  to
provide a fraction of the care and services needed in very many of our  most
disadvantaged communities. Therefore, I would like to  pay  tribute  to  the
role that the volunteer sector plays in social development.

And because the development component of this Vote is  so  limited,  we  are
increasingly dependent  on  the  role  of  NGOs  and  CBOs.  However,  these
organisations are experiencing a crisis in relation to funding  and  we  are
running the risk of losing their valuable contributions.

Subsidies have had to be reduced and  many  organisations  are  battling  to
secure sufficient contributions from the private sector to be able to  carry
out their  functions.  There  has  been  significant  confusion  around  the
funding of such organisations, and we urge the  department  to  finalise  an
appropriate financing policy. It is  now  imperative  that  this  sector  is
treated as full partners in enhancing the development work,  and  that  they
are adequately funded.

There  was  some  expectation  that  the  National  Lottery  would  make   a
substantial amount  of  money  available,  specifically  for  the  nonprofit
sector in social development. Organisations have had real hopes  that  their
fundraising efforts would be  complemented  by  funding  from  the  National
Lottery, but that funding must be expedited.

We have seen and established that, in some cases, it  is  the  untransformed
organisations that have been with us from the  days  before  democracy  that
benefit most from the lottery funding. Some of the  decisions  just  do  not
make sense. So, we plead  with  the  distributing  agency  for  the  welfare
sector to be much more transparent about how  funding  decisions  are  made,
and to ensure  that  they  proactively  engage  with  those  community-based
organisations that so desperately need funding.

For the first time in our country, and especially in the  rural  areas,  one
sees that community organisations that are emerging  are  going  to  play  a
critical role in the social development of our people in those areas  and  I
think they should be funded.

But those organisations of civil society  that  provide  social  development
services also have to think of their own role in responding to the needs  of
our communities. Have they reshaped themselves in terms of their  programmes
and their governing bodies in such a way  that  they  are  able  to  provide
services to a very different South Africa than the one  many  of  them  were
designed to serve? We can no  longer  have  the  situation  that  one  major
organisation functions far from where  the  communities  are  located.  This
does not create the circumstances under  which  effective  services  can  be
provided. Organisations must be effectively rooted  in  the  community  they
serve. They must further allow for a balance between  therapeutic  work  and
development work, and ensure that new social development workers  are  given
the opportunity to contribute meaningfully to the  building  and  empowering
of communities.

In closing, I return to a point that I made  at  the  start  of  my  speech.
Social security contributes to social stability and to the consolidation  of
democracy. However, how well it does this will depend on what else we do  to
eradicate the gnawing sense of hunger and frustration that has been the  lot
of too many of our people. Let us, together, create a setting in  which  all
our people will be able to live creative and fulfilling lives. [Applause.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: Madam  Speaker,  for  the  majority  of  children  in  South
Africa, life since democracy  is  still  grim.  Five  million  children  are
desperately poor in the sense  that  they  live  in  households  with  self-
reported hunger.

The child support grant received a mere R20 increase this  year.  Translated
into real terms, the increase is R11,80 since its  introduction  four  years
ago. The uptake rate is 50% and is limited to  children  from  zero  to  six
years. This age range is too narrow to provide adequate social  support  for
children and families.

It took a TV documentary,  in  August  2001,  on  the  links  between  child
malnutrition and the difficulties of accessing the child support  grant,  to
generate some action from the Department  of  Social  Development  in  Mount
Frere. What about those areas where there is no TV exposure?  They  continue
to suffer in silence.

A study by Idasa shows that by raising the age to 12 years,  thousands  more
children can benefit from the  child  support  grant  at  relatively  little
additional cost. In fact, the cost of an extension could be as low  as  R2,9
billion. The  Social  Development  budget  does  not  adequately  reflect  a
commitment to children,  as  90%  of  the  budget  is  utilised  for  social
security  benefits.  While  it  is  acknowledged  that  social  security  is
perceived as one of the most  effective  tools  to  address  poverty,  other
necessary and essential services are not equitably funded.

At a recent hearing on child abuse,  each  presenter  highlighted  the  fact
that there was simply not enough money for NGOs to do their  work  properly.
For example, on average, only 48% of child welfare services  are  funded  by
Government. The ideal should be 75%.

There  also  appears  to  be  great  confusion  over  the  department's  new
financing policy and the Government's approach to the  support  of  children
orphaned  by  HIV/Aids.  Failure  on  the  part  of  the  state  to  provide
nevirapine and post-exposure prophylaxis is  criminal.  Research  has  shown
that post-exposure prophylaxis will halve the number of orphans.  Orphanhood
in South Africa is predicted to be about 2 million by  2010.  Again,  recent
TV coverage on the orphan crisis in one area of  KwaZulu-Natal  resulted  in
an immediate promise of R2,5 million from the provincial budget.
Yet, the foster care grant is being  denied  to  thousands  of  grandparents
looking after their orphaned grandchildren. They  are  told  that  once  the
policy is finalised, they will be able to  access  the  foster  care  grant.
Hungry children cannot wait for policies to be finalised.  Also,  the  state
subsidy for residential child care is  far  below  inflation.  In  2001  the
grant per child increased  by  10,4%  after  remaining  unchanged  for  four
years. No mention is made of this in this year's budget.

Furthermore, assistance devices are not catered for at all in  this  budget.
The promise  of  the  first  call  for  all  children,  especially  disabled
children,  remains  largely  pie  in   the   sky.   Immediate   improvement,
finalisation and consistent implementation at both national  and  provincial
levels of the  financing  policy  is  vital  for  improved  social  security
delivery. Current trends suggest that the social security system is  failing
the poorest of the poor, given that an  estimated  26,9  million  people  in
South Africa live below the absolute poverty line and only  approximately  4
million access income support.
In conclusion, according to the Constitution,  everyone  has  the  right  to
have  access  to  social  security  and  to  support  themselves  and  their
dependants. The state has an  obligation  to  realise  this  right.  The  DA
suggests that the state considers  the  United  Nations'  20/20  initiative,
which encourages donor governments and institutions to  give  a  minimum  of
20% of their resources to social spending, if we are ever to push  back  the
frontiers of poverty. [Applause.]

Mrs I MARS: Madam Speaker,  the  hon  the  Minister  of  Social  Development
actually added a theme to this year's budget  debate,  namely  pushing  back
the frontiers of poverty. It is in this context  that  we  wish  to  examine
various aspects  of  this  budget,  to  see  to  what  extent  the  budget's
allocations and the implementation of funded projects make  this  theme  not
just a vision but a reality.

The aim of the department, and I quote, ``... is to contribute to  improving
the quality of life of the poor, the vulnerable and the marginalised  within
South African society, through an integrated and  caring  system  of  social
development grants and services. The social grant  system  is  to  date  the
most effective way in which to reach the most marginalised households.''

Nationally the total number of all grants amount to 4 333 454.  Taking  into
account  the   difficulties   experienced   in   accessing   these   grants,
particularly in the rural areas, and taking into account the number of  poor
and very poor individuals, estimated at 26,9 million, there is  a  desperate
need to inject more relief into these households and communities.

All of us should be active participants in the  development  of  new  ideas,
participating in debates with civil society as  to  how  we  can  assist  in
finding solutions. We really have to take action, also to assist  all  those
who are eligible for relief actually to receive it. We know  that  there  is
much support for the idea of BIG, the basic income grant. The concept  of  a
basic income grant was first mooted after the publication and debate of  the
Ford Foundation's poverty report. It came to the  fore  again,  gaining  the
support of trade unions, churches and NGOs.

The Minister said in an interview with Heather Robinson on 16 January  2001,
and I quote: ``We  are  sitting  on  a  time  bomb  of  poverty  and  social
disintegration'' and you also said ``After finding  the  terrible  state  of
affairs in rural areas, I was sure that the grant would go  a  long  way  to
address the concerns of the poorest of the poor.'' We wholeheartedly  agreed
with him and hoped that the assurances given in this  interview  would  bear
fruit, namely that various departments such as Social  Development,  Labour,
Finance and Health would research the proposal of a basic income  grant  and
find a way of overcoming  the  inherent  shortfalls  of  the  European  dole
system, which everyone agrees, has many weaknesses.

We sincerely hoped, and I am sure the  Minister  also  hoped,  that  a  new,
innovative approach could be found in order to pump cash into the homes  and
communities of our most disadvantaged citizens. When we became aware of  the
huge support this proposal was receiving  from  concerned  institutions,  we
believed that this matter was receiving  attention  and  we  were  therefore
surprised to have this matter disposed of  by  accusing  its  proponents  of
macro populism.

However, we acknowledge that the hon the Minister of Finance stated that  if
such a grant could be fiscally sustainable, he could be persuaded about  its
economic soundness. My party discussed this matter a year and half  ago  and
we now challenge our colleagues in the DP, NGOs, trade unions and others  to
find a sustainable mechanism for the delivery  of  such  desperately  needed
relief. Because of our own deliberations,  we  understand  the  Minister  of
Finance's concern and reluctance to commit to BIG. We  in  the  IFP  support
the principle of the basic income grant as  a  poverty  alleviation  concept
and hope that ways and means can be found to implement it.

This House recently passed a R2 billion Appropriation Bill.  Many  thousands
of pensioners and other grant recipients welcomed the judgment  obtained  in
the Transvaal Division of  the  High  Court,  setting  aside  a  ministerial
directive limiting the  backpay  of  pension  to  three  months  before  the
pension grant  actually  being  implemented.  The  prompt  response  by  the
Treasury  in  making  a  R2  billion  conditional  grant  available  to  the
provinces is very commendable.

During the debate on this Appropriation Bill concerns about the  ability  to
disburse these funds were raised. Our portfolio committee could  be  briefed
from time to time as to the progress made on this  matter,  particularly  in
view of the disturbing reports last week on the pension  issue  in  Limpopo,
in which it was claimed that Government had no funds  available  to  process
164 000 pension applications. The IFP wishes to commend the Black  Sash  and
others for the tenacity with which they pursued this  matter,  proving  that
justice shall prevail.

The recently announced increases in pensions and grants  are  very  welcome.
It would help if we could agree on a formula by which  pensions  and  grants
are increased at a given percentage above inflation  annually.  We  have  to
remember that old age pensions, intended to keep one  person  in  reasonable
comfort, are now stretched to care for unemployed family members,  children,
HIV orphans, and others.

In many instances, pensions and grants are the only income  for  households.
However, as has been mentioned by others, we have no safety net  for  the  7
to 64-year-olds in need  of  support.  This  remains  an  issue  of  serious
concern which needs our attention. Job creation projects  would  accommodate
only a small percentage of able-bodied  unemployed.  What  about  the  rest?
Poverty relief through labour-intensive  projects  such  as  road  building,
etc, are helpful in the short term, but what  intersectoral  poverty  relief
plan will take care of this group in the medium to long term?

The important age group of children due to attend  or  attending  school  is
without grant support. Withdrawing the grant at such an important  stage  of
their physical and intellectual development can cause great harm.  Would  it
not be possible to increase the cut-off date on a  yearly  basis  for  those
children already in the system? It seems to  be  counterproductive  to  take
them out of the system, given the difficulties  we  experienced  in  getting
them in the system in the first instance.

We have no difficulties in accepting the amounts allocated to  the  national
department; they are  reasonable.  We  are  pleased  to  have  the  National
Development Agency placed under Programme 1, even if only provisionally.  We
are anxious to know the measures to be put in place  to  ensure  that  funds
allocated to the NDA reach the target communities. In  the  report  received
by the portfolio committee hundreds of projects were  listed,  but  we  were
given little information regarding the monitoring of these projects  and  we
would ask if and when an impact assessment can be expected.

Programme 3 elicits some concern. How will the  transition  from  Socpen  to
the  new  grant  payment  system  be  facilitated  and  how  are  the  grant
recipients to be protected? We  accept  that  the  Auditor-General's  report
emphasised the need for adjustment to the system. However,  we  need  to  be
assured that the recipients will not be penalised.

Under Programme 5, NGOs are  assisted  in  developing  ``an  enabling  legal
environment and improved  governance  and  funding''  for  the  sector.  The
questions arise:  How  successful  have  these  activities  been?  How  have
projects that lack capacity been assisted and,  even  more  important,  what
has the impact of the poverty relief funds been on its beneficiaries?

As many programmes are being implemented and audited at provincial level,  I
have looked at the buget of the KwaZulu-Natal  MEC  for  Welfare  speech  of
2001-2002, where he states that the flagship programme  aimed  at  targeting
women with young children has made a difference. He also reports that  other
programmes, such as the  micro  saving  and  poverty  eradication  projects,
created 8¬†000 jobs mainly for women, have had beneficial  effects  for  some
communities.

One of the most  important  issues  awaiting  debate  is  a  report  of  the
committee of inquiry into a comprehensive social security system  for  South
Africa. Knowing the calibre of the people the hon Minister has appointed  to
this committee, we are eagerly awaiting this report which may overtake  some
of the concerns raised on behalf of the IFP.

In conclusion, may I comment on the  new  organisational  structure  of  the
department which came into effect in April 2001 to strengthen  the  capacity
in the core business function. Under the leadership of the  director-general
this appears to have been successful. I take this opportunity to  thank  the
director-general and her  team  for  the  extensive  briefings  that  we  as
members of the portfolio committee have received. Our thanks also go to  the
chairperson of the portfolio committee for the able way in  which  he  leads
this committee.

I  may  add  that  the  hon  the  Minister  of   Social   Development,   has
demonstrated, his caring  concern  in  many  ways,  and  he  has  personally
interacted with large segments of affected individuals and  communities.  To
push back the frontiers of poverty is going to be a long, hard road, but  we
have started our journey. The IFP supports Budget Vote 18. [Applause.]

Mr M T MASUTHA: Madam  Speaker  and  hon  members,  allow  me  to  join  the
millions of people  in  congratulating  the  Minister  of  Finance,  Comrade
Trevor Manuel, for the recognition he received from UCT  when  it  conferred
upon him an honorary doctorate in Commerce  last  week  on  13  March  2002.
[Applause.]

This is an acknowledgement of the decisive role  he  has  played  since  his
assumption of office in steering the South African ship  safely  across  the
many rough seas of the global and domestic economic environment.

It is a truism that the past determines  the  present  in  as  much  as  the
present  determines  the  future.  I  therefore  speak   without   fear   of
contradiction when I say that we are today finding ourselves in a big  mess,
a huge  socio-economic  backlog  occasioned  by  our  unenviable  legacy  of
apartheid.

Evidence of this surrounds us every day of our  lives.  The  squatter  camps
alongside our highways, children living on the streets, the crime and  grime
that  continue  to  haunt  our  urban  environments  are  substantially  the
consequence of many years of disenfranchisement and racial  oppression,  and
the gruesome apartheid social engineering  strategies  that  were  sustained
over many years.

This is a history not written in ink, but in blood, and it will continue  to
linger on in our memories for as long as its impact continues to define  our
society and its effect will take a considerable measure of time  and  effort
to erase.

The ANC Government has, despite the gloomy  picture  I  have  just  painted,
embarked on a massive programme of reconstruction and development  since  it
came into power in 1994. Therefore, this  2002/2003  Budget  should  not  be
seen in isolation, but as part of  a  sustained  onslaught  by  the  ANC-led
Government on poverty, deprivation and social exclusion in  pursuit  of  its
vision towards creating a society for all based  on  equality,  freedom  and
social justice.

Soon after he became the Minister of Social Development,  Dr  Zola  Skweyiya
led the process of establishing a committee of inquiry into a  comprehensive
social security system which was endorsed by  Cabinet,  and  which  was  the
outcome of decisions of the Jobs Summit.

I am confident that the outcome of our collective effort  as  the  committee
of inquiry, which comprises experts in the fields of economics,  law,  human
development and other social sciences, will provide valuable  insights  that
will assist Government in conducting a proper review of existing policy  and
legislative frameworks governing social security.

Contrary to popular  belief  the  committee  has  not  been  established  to
examine the feasibility of the basic income grant alone.  On  the  contrary,
the committee's brief is much more elaborate and encompasses the  review  of
the full range  of  social  interventions  calculated  to  address  poverty,
vulnerability and social exclusion through  social  transfers,  both  public
and private, contributory and noncontributory, be it in the form  of  social
assistance, insurance or the full range of in kind social benefits.

Poverty manifests itself in various forms and impacts on people in  numerous
ways. It therefore requires a full range of measures  calculated  to  reduce
its impact on individuals, households and communities,  many  of  which  are
currently provided by Government,  ranging  from  direct  cash  benefits  to
indirect  and  in  kind  benefits,  such   as   the   building   of   social
infrastructure for  the  provision  of  water,  health  care,  road  access,
housing, etc.

South Africa remains one  of  the  few  countries  in  the  world  that  has
resisted significant cuts on social spending and whose  social  spending  in
fact reflects a resilient stance in favour of  prioritising  the  poor.  The
social assistance programme  which  entails  some  six  grant  types  geared
towards the most  vulnerable  amongst  our  people,  namely,  children,  the
elderly, and persons with  disabilities  is  the  envy  of  many  developing
nations that simply cannot afford  such  social  interventions.  It  is,  in
fact, our largest direct poverty alleviation programme for which the  amount
of over R18 billion has been allocated in the 2002-2003 Budget.

In this regard, allow me to quote from the  section  of  the  Budget  Review
dealing with the policy priorities over the medium  term  pertinent  hereto.
On page 127, specifically focusing on addressing poverty and  vulnerability,
it is said:


  The social security grant system delivers  income  support  to  nearly  4
  million poor South Africans. This  is  the  largest  and  most  effective
  redistributive programme within Government. Over the  next  three  years,
  increases in the real value of the grants will place more  money  in  the
  hands of the poor. This year, Government will help more families and care-
  givers who look  after  young  children.  The  child  support  grant  for
  children 7 years or less will go to a further 1,2 million children by the
  end of next year.

Whilst reviewing our social security policy and legislative  frameworks,  we
must  at  the  same  time  review  the  administrative  system  designed  to
actualise and give meaning to the rights and  obligations  regarding  social
security in  our  Constitution.  Unlike  under  the  previous  dispensation,
social security, including social assistance, is no longer a privilege,  but
a right which must be honoured and protected.  We  therefore  welcome  court
rulings that have consistently affirmed this right and applaud the  Minister
of Finance for allocating a further R2 billion towards reversing the  unfair
denial  of  full  access  to  this  right  resulting   from   administrative
inefficiencies.

Transfers  alone  cannot  address  the  pervasive   challenge   of   poverty
reduction. Job  creation  and  sustainable  development,  and  investing  in
social  economic  infrastructure,  are  critical  elements   in   addressing
poverty.

It is pleasing to note the  robust  approach  adopted  by  this  budget,  as
appears on page 126 of the Budget Review specifically  dealing  with  policy
priorities, which reads as follows, and I quote:


  The key  strategic  thrust  of  the  2001  Budget  in  support  of  these
  objectives was to target  significant  resources  for  investing  in  new
  infrastructure and the maintenance and rehabilitation of existing assets.
  Appropriately   designed,   financed   and   managed,    investment    in
  infrastructure  stimulates  economic  development  and  job  creation  in
  communities, improving  quality  of  life  and  access  to  services  and
  opportunities of poor people.

A ke rume polelo ka la gore ke nnete tlala e be e  ntshitse  noga  moleteng;
eupsa bjale ke tlala yeo e lego kotsing.  [Legofsi.]  [Let  me  conclude  my
speech by acknowledging that indeed, hunger has  had  the  upper  hand,  but
that now it is hunger that is on the retreat. [Applause.]]

Mr A Z A VAN JAARSVELD:  Madam  Speaker,  recent  statistics  show  that  an
estimated 26,9 million people are living below the  absolute  poverty  line.
This means that roughly 60% of all South Africans earn less  than  R400  per
month, of which 10,4 million live in ultra-poor households. This means  they
earn less than R193 per month. A further disturbing  figure  indicates  that
about 30% of South African children aged between 0 and 17 years  are  living
in desperately poor households. It is also  estimated  by  Statistics  South
Africa that the unemployment rate is currently in the vicinity of 37%.

It is therefore abundantly clear that one of the greatest challenges of  the
post-apartheid era is the eradication of  the  legacy  of  poverty  and  the
creation of a social development system that will be able to  develop  human
capacity within communities and that will be self-reliant  within  a  caring
and enabling society. It is for this reason that the  reduction  of  poverty
should be the central focus of the Department  of  Social  Development.  The
fight against poverty can never be that of the Government alone. It  has  to
be a joint effort by those of us who really  understand  and  are  in  touch
with the desperate situation that the poorest of the poor  in  this  country
find themselves in.

Poverty destroys human dignity. We believe that it is critical to  create  a
society that will accord all our  citizens  simple  human  dignity.  In  all
facets of our national life, we need to embrace a new  and  inclusive  South
Africanism, aimed at achieving unity of  purpose  in  ridding  us  from  the
shackles that are still holding us down and preventing us  from  growing  to
our full potential as a South African nation.

In terms of the New NP's commitment to alleviating  the  burden  of  poverty
and improving the quality of life of  all  those  disadvantaged  people,  we
believe that we should be part  of  the  following  processes.  Firstly,  we
should all be committed to the  agenda  of  social  transformation  that  is
embodied in  the  principle  of  social  justice  and  the  Bill  of  Rights
contained in our Constitution. Secondly,  we  must  endeavour  to  create  a
better life for the poor, the vulnerable and  the  disadvantaged  people  of
our society. Thirdly, our task should  be  to  reduce  poverty  and  promote
social  integration.  Fourthly,  we  need  to  develop   and   monitor   the
implementation of social policies that both create an  enabling  environment
for and lead to the reduction of poverty. Fifthly,  we  should  ensure  that
the provisions of social protection  and  social  welfare  serve  all  those
people who are  in  need  of  such  services.  Sixthly,  we  should  conduct
research  that  develops  the  social  indicators  that  are  necessary  for
programme implementation and public accountability. Lastly, we believe  that
we should all be part of the Batho Pele principle of service delivery.

All the work of the department requires extensive and  ongoing  consultation
with all the sectors of our society.  The  programme  should  be  integrated
with those of other Government departments and all  spheres  of  government.
The department must therefore work in  partnership  with  NGOs,  faith-based
community organisations, the business sector,  organised  labour  and  other
role-players. Access to the department should be  based  on  solidarity  and
engender self-reliance. Social service professionals must act on  the  basis
of solidarity with all of humanity.

Amongst  the  key  objectives  the  Department  of  Social  Development  has
identified for the medium term are: Firstly, the mitigation  of  the  social
and economic impact of HIV/Aids on poor households and  children;  secondly,
the  progressive  achievement  and  realisation  of  children's  social  and
economic rights; and thirdly, to rebuild families  and  communities  through
programmes that empower young, old and disabled people as well as the  women
of the country.

In order to achieve these goals, the department  will  have  to  design  and
deliver appropriate policies and programmes  will  have  to  concentrate  on
improving the accessibility and efficiency of  the  social  security  system
whilst at the same time  building  organisational  capacity,  improving  co-
operative governance and ensuring the appropriate distribution of  resources
in the social development sector.

A particular challenge should be to work with organisations  that  have  the
competencies to reach beneficiaries. Capacity will have to  be  built  where
needed and should result in the reallocation of resources in certain areas.

In conclusion, I would like to convey the thanks of the  community  of  Port
Elizabeth, specifically  to  the  Minister  and  his  department  for  their
endeavours to improve services to pensioners and people  who  are  receiving
grants. They also thank the director-general and staff for their  endeavours
to meet with the challenges of the  department.  The  New  NP  supports  the
Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Mr D G MKONO: Madam Speaker, hon Minister,  hon  members,  the  Budget  Vote
before us should be a beacon of hope for many South  Africans  who  live  in
poverty. We doubt if it is, given the  situation  that  this  country  finds
itself in.

We live in a country with few social workers, many of whom are  not  active.
We live in a country where some surveys estimate that more than half of  our
children live in poverty. Other surveys estimate  that  half  of  our  adult
population share the same dismal fate. We are referring here  to  the  lives
of millions of South Africans, which are a catalogue of daily suffering  and
hunger.

The Department of Social Development is, in  our  opinion,  severely  under-
resourced. Countless NGOs that are specialising in welfare related  services
bear testimony to this assertion. This Government  is  simply  not  reaching
the poor and the neglected. This department is a  perennial  perpetrator  of
the crime of underspending and roll-overs. It is a crime and injustice  that
screams to the heavens. Year  after  year  this  Budget  Vote  receives  too
little from Government, and the department does not spend even  that  measly
amount. There can be no justification for this gross negligence.

The failure of this department to achieve even its own intended  targets  is
cause for great concern, never mind the fact that the department's  intended
efforts, and even if achieved, are  insufficient.  For  example,  the  child
support grant, which extends only to children until the age  of  seven.  Yet
it is exactly at this age that children should go to school,  which  implies
added expenses in their households in terms of tuition  fees,  school  wear,
stationery  and  transport  costs.  Government  chooses  to  abandon   these
children at this fragile age. What hope do these  children  have  of  proper
education that will help them to rise above poverty  and  become  productive
citizens?

The current system condemns them  to  the  ranks  of  millions  who  require
grants from Government. The same can  be  said  of  many  other  grants  and
services of the department.

We cannot condone the manner in which thousands of old age grants have  been
fumbled, delayed and cancelled in the past  few  years.  Similarly,  we  are
concerned about current systems' insensitivity towards women and widows  who
often had poor households with little or  no  Government   support.  We  are
dismayed when we receive reports of disabled people who live in poverty  and
must seek private donors for vital surgery. The  litany  of  neglects  seems
endless.

The budget Vote before us allocates too little, in our opinion,  to  address
all these serious matters. To demonstrate this assertion, we  need  only  to
place it within the context of the R15 billion that the national Budget  put
back in the pockets  of  taxpayers  or,  for  that  matter,  the  staggering
billions of rands being wasted on weapons of war. Given that Government  has
set aside additional funding for  social  development-related  purposes  and
that it has embarked on a campaign, along  with  civil  society,  to  ensure
that more people who should receive grants actually do so.

The UDM supports this Vote,  but  Government  should  realise  that  if  the
performance of this department is  not  turned  around  immediately,  it  is
creating  a  long-term  socio-economic  disaster  that  will   cost   future
generations dearly. The window of opportunity to act is fast disappearing.
Mr D C MABENA: Madam Speaker,  hon  members,  we  are  all  faced  with  and
challenged by a new enemy that knows no boundaries, feelings,  emotions  and
sympathy, and has no mercy towards the  most  vulnerable,  our  future,  the
children.

At present HIV/Aids and poverty are our main enemies. According to  research
approximately 1 500 people are infected daily. One of  the  most  disturbing
factors of this scourge is that it has  reached  pandemic  proportions,  and
that it is the economically active group which is most affected  and  is  at
risk.

How do we as parliamentarians respond in the spirit  of  Vukuzenzele?  Other
companies have embraced this initiative by putting into operation  effective
policies on HIV/Aids that ensure better management of the disease  in  their
workplace. These policies are championed  in  partnership  with  unions  and
include the training of workers.

How do we understand the role that social  development  should  play  in  an
integrated approach  to  HIV/Aids  through  the  development  implementation
support programme? Our  Government  is  committed  to  fight  and  eradicate
poverty through developing,  managing  and  co-ordinating  income-generating
projects. Fifty million rands have been  allocated  in  2002  and  2003  for
HIV/Aids, compared to R12,5 million  in  the  2001-2002  Budget.  We  should
thank the Minister for this drastic increase. Ten percent of the money  will
go towards the appointment of HIV/Aids co-ordinators and  R46  million  will
be divided across  nine  provinces  for  home-based  care.  This  will  also
strengthen availability of integrated programmes for prevention  and  coping
with the impact of the disease. There are 466 existing and identified  home-
based care  and  community-based  care  projects.  Of  these  projects,  330
receive no Government funding. However, 300 home-based care  and  community-
based projects are targeted for training and improving food security.

Kusukela  enyakeni  umbuso  wabantu  wathoma  ukuberega,   izinto   ezinengi
zatjhuguluka  neempilo  zabantu  zabangcono  khulu.  Ngokuba  lombuso  ufana
nesikhukhukazi esitlhogomela amadzinyani  wawo  woke.  Kulonyaka  uMongameli
wenarha ekulumeni yakhe uze nejima okuthiwa nguvuka uzenzele, elipha  abantu
igunya  lokuzinikezela  nokuberegisana  nombuso   ekwenzeni   iimpilo   zabo
zibengcono kunekuthomeni.

Ugadangele  khulu  ekulweni  nesifo  sentumba  ntonga,  umtlhago   nendlala.
[Ihlombe.] Nani bodla ulale phumani  engutjeni  nilise  ukuzifihla  ngomuno.
Fakani isandla kulokho enikwaziko. Jabula  mphimbo  uzogwinya  nawe  mtlhago
obukade  ubhoda  amahlalo  wethu  ubhabhile  begodu   usengozi.   [Ihlombe.]
Ngombana enyakeni ka-2001-2002 Budget umbuso  wafaka  imali  elingana  neR50
million esikhwameni se-poverty eradication.  Ku-Budget  ka-2002-2003  umbuso
ufake imali engange  R100  million  injongo  yombuso  kukuthi  enye  inxenye
yemali isize abantu ngokudla-poverty  eradication.   Enye  isize  umphakathi
kumaphrojekhti wezandla njengokuthunga, ukwenza uburotho  nokhunye  okunengi
abantu    abangaziphilisa    ngakho    ngokuzenzela-poverty     eradication.
(Translation of Ndebele paragraphs follows.)

[Since the year the Government of the people started  working,  many  things
changed and the lives of the  people  improved.  This  is  so  because  this
Government is like a hen taking care  of  all  its  chicks.  This  year  the
President of the country, in his address, came up  with  a  campaign  called
Vukuzenzele. This campaign encourages people to  offer  their  services  and
work together with the Government to improve people's lives.

The Government is determined to fight the Aids  disease.  [Applause.]  Those
who are lazy must also come out of hiding and  contribute  what  they  know.
People must be happy, because the poverty that has been part  of  our  lives
is now in trouble. [Applause.] This is because in  the  2001-02  Budget  the
Government put aside an amount of R50 million for  poverty  eradication.  In
the 2002-03 Budget the Government put aside R100 million  so  that  part  of
the amount could help people alleviate poverty. The  remaining  amount  will
help people with projects such as sewing, baking and many  other  things  on
which people can survive.]

The impact of HIV/Aids is  felt  in  poorer  communities.  Often  the  older
people, grandfathers and grandmothers, are left to  care  for  the  families
who have no income after the death of  breadwinners.  Therefore,  Government
should be very clear about  what  kind  of  support  is  available  to  such
families, and here we talk about clear information on child support  grants,
disability grants for the people who have full-blown aids  and  services  to
child-headed households. We  also  pay  tribute  to  organisations  such  as
churches or faith-based  organisations  for  their  role  in  assisting  the
communities, because Government cannot do this work alone. We  are  grateful
for the spirit of volunteerism. This year, as the ANC, we want to  see  that
volunteerism is strengthened.

Umbuso wenza koke okusemandleni ukunikela nokuthuthukisa abantu  bawo  nathi
kuqakathekile khulu ukuthi sibambisane nawo  ukuze  ijima  lika  vukuzenzele
liberege, kuvuswa ezivusako. Ukhongolo uyayisekela  ivowudu  yebhajethi  le.
[The Government has done everything it could in giving to and in  developing
its people and it is also very important for us to work  together  with  the
Government so that the Vukuzenzele campaign can work - help comes  to  those
who help themselves. The Congress supports this budget Vote.]

As the House will be in recess, my appeal to all members  is  that  we  must
not politicise the issue of HIV and  Aids.  Let  us  always  remember  that,
firstly, people come first; secondly, that we as  members  should  take  the
lead in encouraging and assisting our  communities  in  self-help  projects;
and lastly, that we embrace the  spirit  of  volunteerism  and  Vukuzenzele.
[Applause.]

Adv Z L MADASA: Madam Speaker,  I  have  been  asked  by  Mrs  Southgate  to
deliver this speech on her behalf.

Our population is facing great social challenges, especially with regard  to
HIV/Aids, child welfare and unemployment. It is estimated that this  country
has at least 22 million people living in poverty who on average  survive  on
R144 per month. The ACDP welcomes the increase in  the  pensions  and  child
support grants, yet we fail to understand why the Government  cannot  commit
itself to a basic income grant.
The  ACDP  does  not  primarily  see  the  basic  income  grant  as   merely
supplementing the income of the poor, but as an investment in the  long-term
stability of our society. The ACDP supports the  call  for  a  basic  income
grant in the form of food coupons that will allow people to buy staple  food
such as bread, milk, etc. Let us remember that the  poor  do  not  calculate
their budgetary needs according to economic  indicators,  but  according  to
what food they have on the table.

Child development is an equally  important  factor  that  needs  our  urgent
attention. The moral degeneration of our society is causing major trauma  to
our children. The increase of abuse of our  children  will  leave  a  legacy
that will impact negatively on the future  of  this  country,  unless  child
crimes such as child rape are dealt with.

The Ministry of Social  Development  has  devised  a  ten-point  plan  which
includes  rebuilding  the  family,  community  and  social  relations.   All
interested stakeholders must support this plan, as the ACDP does. The  moral
regeneration of our families and youth cannot be budgeted  for  only  within
the economic framework.

The ACDP has always stated in  the  House  that  the  family  is  a  primary
building block of a  stable  society.  Family  values  do  not  support  the
pornographic exploitation of  women  or  uncounselled  abortions  on  demand
without parents' consent. The Government must  avoid  the  contradiction  of
passing laws which undermine family values while at the  same  time  calling
moral summits. The ACDP believes that if we are serious about family  values
we will respect basic human needs, rights and responsibilities.

With respect to administrative ability, greater emphasis is needed from  the
department to assist provinces to improve on their capacity to  spend  their
budgets earmarked for HIV/Aids and social grants. We must remember that  the
ultimate objective of the Government must not be the creation of  dependency
but the development of sustainable independence.

Ms E GANDHI: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, hon members  and  comrades,  I  am
going to focus on that section of the  Budget  which  is  the  smallest,  ie
social service transformation and rights advocacy in  respect  of  children,
youth and families.

The budget for this sector has received a relatively  substantial  increase,
from R10,9 million to R14 million in the current year, and R15,5 million  in
the 2004-2005 Budget. This programme is divided into four subprogrammes.  My
focus is on two subprogrammes, as already indicated.

The budget for setting of service  standards  has  been  increased  from  R1
million last year to R3,1 million in the current year, and will increase  to
R3,5 million in  the  following  year.  The  budget  for  the  programme  on
advocacy in respect of children, youth and families shows an increase,  from
R4,2 million to nearly R5,8 million, and will be increased further  to  R6,1
million in the following year. In addition,  there  are  sums  allocated  to
provinces for this programme. So,  clearly,  these  two  programmes  are  on
track.
What does  this  mean  for  the  country?  The  cynics  can  say  that  this
Government show scant regard for the plight  of  our  children.  They  would
cite nondelivery, according to them, of antiretroviral  drugs,  the  absence
of  basic  income  grants,  the  rising  cost  of  living  and  perhaps  the
nondelivery of grants  to  some  families.  Perhaps  all  these  factors  do
contribute to the situation our children find themselves in.

However, we say pointing fingers  do  not  do  anything  much.  We  need  to
remember, firstly, that what we see today is the result  of  the  systematic
deprivation, dehumanisation, breakdown in family life and  brutalisation  of
our community and children over hundreds of years. This system  was  further
maintained by a system of social welfare services  which  encouraged  people
to accept their position, to accept their dependency  on  Government  grants
and welfare services, based on the Western model of system  maintenance  and
individualism.  We  see,  for  instance,  in  the  West  that  almost  every
individual is dependent on a psychiatrist, psychologist  or  social  worker.
This is because they are born within a system  which  creates  a  dependency
syndrome. Perhaps one needs to think how  people  in  non-Western  countries
continue to survive without  seeing  the  face  of  a  psychiatrist,  social
worker or psychologist. This does not mean we  do  not  value  the  work  of
psychiatrists, psychologists and social workers.

What we need in this country are three things. Firstly, we  need  the  total
mobilisation of all sectors of our  community  and  our  resources  to  work
towards the transformation of our society, in order to restore families  and
the family values of love, respect, humanity and dignity in  the  spirit  of
Vukuzenzele. I want to welcome here the allocation of  time  for  the  moral
regeneration and volunteerism programmes that have been budgeted for, and  I
hope that there are some funds allocated to these programmes as well.

Secondly, I want to say that there is a need for the transformation  of  the
social work profession, so that we will have social  workers  who  would  be
able to empower  individuals  and  communities  with  information  on  vital
issues, such as the various programmes of local government which  impact  on
the lives of the community, the  resources  offered  by  various  Government
departments and NGOs, how to access  these  resources,  information  on  the
viability of projects, and how to draw up business plans and  set  up  small
businesses. Social workers also need to help individuals and communities  to
become self-sufficient,  and  to  inculcate  communal  values  and  communal
interdependence.

This would undoubtedly require new vocabularies,  new  textbooks,  knowledge
about the areas of operation, lists of resources available in  these  areas,
information on the economic activities in the areas, key development  nodes,
and training new disciplines such as economics, political science,  business
management and so on. I hope that the department, in setting  standards  and
evaluating programmes, will bear these principles in mind.

The disparity in the level of remuneration of social workers in  the  public
and private sectors, and the disparity in the  remuneration  between  social
workers and other professionals with similar academic background, is  indeed
a worrying factor and does need attention.

At national level,  the  department  has  increased  its  budget  from  R5,9
million to R6,3 million this year and R7,1 million in  the  following  year.
The allocation to the NDA has also been increased from  R92,6  million  last
year to R96,7 million this year and R201,2 million in  the  following  year,
and R107 million in the budget of the year 2004-05. We urge the NDA and  the
Lotteries  Allocation  Authority  to  look  into  better   and   streamlined
subsidisation of important work that is being done in the community.

Thirdly, a comprehensive code for children and juvenile offenders will  help
in  improving  services  to  the  growing  number  of   children   requiring
protection. I look forward to seeing the Bill which the Minister has  spoken
about. I know that funds have been set aside for the setting up of  a  child
protection register, and hope that there will be funds available if the  new
comprehensive Bill  requires  the  setting  up  of  a  child  sex  offenders
register and other recommendations that may flow  from  the  legislation.  I
would like to thank  the  director-general  and  her  team  for  the  quick,
efficient and effective response in the baby Tsepang matter.

Finally, it is important to remember that, since 1994, this  Government  has
ratified several international instruments on the  rights  of  children  and
women, and has entrenched these in the Constitution  and  in  several  laws.
Yet, the incidence of child and  women  abuse  continues.  This  raises  the
question whether a rights culture means licence to do whatever one  pleases.
I believe that a rights culture can only be effective if we are prepared  to
exercise self-control, take on responsibility and become dependable.

Clearly, what  is  urgently  needed  is  a  transformation  of  our  public,
professional services and of our society. We need to have service  providers
who are caring, patient, dedicated, efficient and prepared to go beyond  the
call  of  duty.  The  community  needs   to   become   serious   about   its
responsibility  and  needs  to  be  involved  in  community  programmes   as
volunteers in the spirit of  VukuZenzele  and,  in  Mother  Teresa's  words:
``Let us find our own Culcutta in our own back yards''. [Applause.]

Mrs M A SEECO: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the UCDP, we appreciate the  fact
that this enormous Department of Social Development intends to  improve  the
quality of lives of South African society.

With regard to population and development, it will provide from the  poverty
relief allocation, which increases from R52 million to  R101  million.  This
will stand our people in good stead. Poverty is rife in large parts of  this
country, and that is  why  we  lament  that  more  funds  have  to  be  made
available.

Allocation for HIV/Aids increased significantly from R13,4  million  to  R15
million. This scourge has to be fought with all our might.  People  have  to
be educated. It is common knowledge that, invariably, the poorer people  are
always affected by diseases, and this killer disease is no exception.

The department  has  objectives  such  as  the  progressive  realisation  of
children's social and economic rights, empowering young, old,  and  disabled
people as well as women. This  department  has  six  programmes  which  make
significant progress in improving the accessibility and  efficiency  of  the
social security system.

We congratulate the Minister of the department for considering Vote  18.  We
only hope that there will be greater oversight  in  provincial  departments,
as some do not live up to expectations. They either fail to pay in  time  or
fail completely. The restructuring of the department  and  the  building  of
internal capacity will enable it  to  deliver.  Therefore,  we  support  the
Vote.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, the MF supports the aim  of  the  Department
of Social Development to contribute to improving the quality of life of  the
poor, the vulnerable and  the  marginalised  within  South  African  society
through an integrated and caring system of  social  development  grants  and
services.

The MF finds the aims and objectives of the department to  be  well-selected
and to cover the crucial circumstances that  hinder  and  sink  development.
The priorities put forward  by  the  department  such  as  improving  social
security, instituting a pragmatic approach to poverty relief, enhancing  the
response to HIV/Aids, transformation of the welfare  service  and  improving
the functioning of the department is supported. It is noted that  for  these
priorities to be met successfully, it  will  need  the  assistance  and  co-
operation of all parties.

The MF views this department as  the  people's  department  and  sees  their
working with the public as a great means to achievement. The  programmes  of
the department and challenges do not  stop  here.  The  linkage  with  other
clusters deposits the importance and need for this department to be  carried
effectively and efficiently, which is extremely pressurising.

The MF  supports  the  budget  allocated  to  this  department,  but  it  is
concerned by the reduction in the allocation for  poverty  relief.  That  is
one of the most crippling problems our society faces. It may  be  understood
that the resources are minimal and the  budget  may  be  tight,  but  a  cut
rather to administration than poverty  relief  may  be  viewed  to  be  more
viable. Unfortunately, monetary assistance is  a  key  factor,  and  the  MF
understands the pressure of allocating monies to the various sectors due  to
the varying degree of need and  desperation.  The  MF  supports  the  Social
Development Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Mrs M P COETZEE-KASPER: Madam Speaker, colleagues and Minister ...

... toe die ministeri√´le komitee oor die verwaarlosing en  mishandeling  van
bejaardes verlede jaar hul  verslag  bekend  gestel  het,  het  die  verslag
geheet: Mothers and Fathers of the Nation. Hiermee wil ek  graag  Machabeng,
Virginia, Melodie en Bronville  se  oumense  welkom  heet.  [Applous.]  Mama
Moeliti wat op die galery sit is 96 jaar. Sy het nou nog  nie  'n  huis  van
haar eie nie. Sy kry 'n pensioen en is tevrede, maar sy wag vir 'n huis.  Sy
is 96 jaar oud. Dan het ons nog drie Griekwas ook: Me Jahrs  en  Oupa  Lukas
van die Vrystaat. Dis die opregte Griekwas. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Die bevinding van die komitee het dit wel laat lyk asof ons ons  moeders  en
vaders vergeet het. Hoekom? Hulle kry nie die  respek  en  eerbied  wat  ons
hulle skuld nie. Hulle geld word van hulle  afgevat.  Hulle  word  misbruik.
Hulle word eenkant toe gestoot en hulle word selfs verkrag. Vandag  doen  ek
'n beroep op ons hele nasie, as ons die  maatskaplike  ontwikkeling  van  al
ons mense as ernstig beskou, kan ons nie bekostig om  ons  oumense  te  laat
voel hulle word weggestoot en vergeet nie. Dan gaan ons dit  nie  regkry  om
te reageer op President Mbeki se oproep dat ons opstaan en saamwerk aan  ons
toekoms nie. En waar het ons 'n beter voorbeeld nodig  van  die  bydrae  wat
ouer mense kan lewer vir ons nasie as oud-president Mandela.
As ons kyk na die deel van die Begroting wat op  ouer  mense  gemik  is,  is
daar twee sake waarop ons moet fokus. Die eerste saak is  die  geld  wat  in
die vorm van ouderdomspensioene aan ons mense betaal word. Die  tweede  saak
is die geld wat beskikbaar is vir dienste aan  ouer  mense.  Hierna  wil  ek
later terugkeer.

In 1994 was die ouderdomspensioene R390 per  maand.  Dit  word  vanjaar  van
R570 na R620 verhoog. Dit beteken  'n  verhoging  van  R50  per  maand.  Die
verhoging tree op 1 April in werking. Hierdie verhoging is uiters  belangrik
omdat ons weet dat ouderdomspensioene nie slegs die  een  ou  mens  aan  die
lewe hou nie, maar eintlik vir die hele gesin brood op die tafel sit.

Omdat  die  pensioen  vir  baie  gemeenskappe  'n  lewenslyn   is   -   hele
gemeenskappe se ekonomie hang daarvan  af  -  is  dit  noodsaaklik  dat  ons
bejaardes elke maand sonder moeite hulle pensioen moet kan trek. Ons het  te
dikwels in die onlangse verlede gehoor van  oumense  wat  met  groot  moeite
teen voordag by die betaalpunt opdaag, net om  te  hoor  dat  daar  nie  vir
hulle 'n pensioen is nie - sonder verduideliking, sonder  goeie  rede.  Daar
is twee sulke oumense wat die afgelope ses maande sukkel  om  hul  pensioene
te kry.

Oumense moet ook soms die hele  dag  in  die  oopte  wag  vir  amptenare  of
werknemers van een van die betaalkontrakteurs om met hul geld op te  daag  -
sonder skuiling, sonder kos of water, sonder toiletgeriewe. In my  provinsie
alleen het amper die helfte van alle  betaalpunte  geen  sitplekke  vir  die
pensioenarisse nie, en 'n derde van die betaalpunte het geen toilette nie.

'n Mens het begrip daarvoor dat die Regering nie alles oornag  kan  voorsien
nie, maar ons moet daadwerklik iets hieraan doen. 'n Deel van die  kontrakte
wat die provinsiale regering met kontrakteurs gesluit het, bepaal dat  hulle
moet bydra tot  die  opgradering  van  betaalpunte.  Word  hierdie  bepaling
nagekom en volg die provinsiale regering dit voldoende op? Wat doen  ons  as
dit nie gebeur nie?  Ek  vertrou  dat  die  geld  wat  aan  die  departement
toegewys is vir die  verbetering  van  pensioendienste  juis  hierdie  soort
probleme sal aanspreek.

Ons  sien  ook  daarna  uit  dat  die  amptenare  verantwoordelik  vir   die
administrasie van pensioene sal baat  by  opleiding  in  mensgerigtheid.  Ek
doen 'n beroep op die Minister: Ons  kan  nie  oneerlike,  lui  of  korrupte
amptenare bekostig nie. Ons kan dit nie meer  doen  nie;  ons  moet  optree.
[Applous.]

Die Minister het reeds verwys na die R2 miljard  wat  in  hierdie  Begroting
toegeken is vir die terugbetaling van pensioene aan diegene  wat  as  gevolg
van administratiewe tekortkomings oor die afgelope vier jaar nie  hul  volle
pensioene ontvang het nie. Ons praat hier  van  mense  wat  langer  as  drie
maande moes wag nadat hulle aansoek gedoen het voordat die  pensioenvoordele
betaal is, of mense wat van die register verwyder is as gevolg van  'n  fout
in die rekenaarstelsel.

Ons doen 'n beroep op al ons mense in die  provinsies  om  na  vore  te  kom
indien hulle onder hierdie groep val en om hul  regmatige  terugbetaling  op
te eis. Ofisi tsa di teng Virginia, e yang teng. [My  kanoor  is  beskikbaar
in Virginia, u kan daarheen gaan.]

Maar ons moet ook weet dat daar mense is wat gaan  probeer  om  oneerlik  te
wees en die oumense uit te buit of om hul geld van hulle af te neem.  Daarom
vra ons dat die departement  duidelike  boodskappe  sal  uitstuur  aan  alle
pensioenarisse oor die manier waarop die geld uitbetaal sal  word.  Ons  vra
gemeenskappe ook om waaksaam te wees en toe te sien dat die  bejaardes,  van
wie vele baie oud en swak is, nie misbruik word  net  om  hul  geld  in  die
hande te kry nie. Ons vra ook dat die banke die dienstefooie wat  hulle  van
pensioenarisse aftrek heeltemal sal afskaf sodat meer bejaardes die  veilige
opsie kan gebruik om hul pensioene direk  in  'n  bankrekening  inbetaal  te
kry. [Applous.]

Die uitwerking van HIV/Vigs op ons gemeenskap beteken dat ouer mense se  rol
in die familie en die gemeenskap vinnig  verander.  Al  hoe  meer  oumas  en
oupas moet na hul kinders en kleinkinders omsien omdat hul kinders  te  siek
geword het om te werk en na hulself om te sien. Dit plaas al hoe  meer  druk
op die  bejaardes  se  pensioene  en  kragte,  waar  hulle  vir  kinders  en
kleinkinders moet sorg.

Ons moet ook seker maak dat die bejaardes volle toegang  het  tot  inligting
oor watter staatshulp beskikbaar is  en  hoe  hulle  daarvoor  moet  aansoek
doen. Daar is veral onduidelikheid oor wanneer daar aansoek gedoen kan  word
om 'n ongeskiktheidstoelae vir iemand wat ``full-blown'' Vigs  het,  en  ons
weet dat dit juis di√© stadium is wat mense die meeste sorg nodig het.

Daarom vra ons dat die deel van die Begroting wat toegeken word vir  dienste
aan bejaardes drasties vermeerder word, sodat die baie organisasies  wat  in
die gemeenskap bestaan, en wat die las op die ouer  garde  moet  verlig,  of
wat deur bejaardes self gestig word, hul werk effektief kan doen. Ons  praat
dikwels van die  waarde  van  die  werk  wat  vrywilligers  doen,  maar  ons
ondersteun hulle nie voldoende nie. Te dikwels hoor ons  dat  geld  bewillig
is, maar dit kom net nooit by die kleiner organisasies uit nie,  of  by  di√©
wat eerlik en opreg  is  met  die  behulpsaamheid  en  bevoegdheid  van  hul
vrywillige dienste aan ons eerste burgers. Ek pleit  vandag:  Moet  dit  nie
onmoontlik maak vir klein organisasies met min  geskoolde  lede  nie.  Hulle
help ons moeders en vaders om hulp te bekom. Hulle  doen  waardevolle  werk.
Hulle verdien ons steun. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[When the ministerial committee investigating the neglect and abuse  of  the
elderly published their report last  year,  it  was  entitled:  Mothers  and
Fathers of  the  Nation.  I  would  now  like  to  welcome  the  elderly  of
Machabeng, Virginia, Melodie and Bronville. [Applause.]  Mama  Moeliti,  who
is on the gallery, is 96 years old. She still does not have a  home  of  her
own. She gets a pension and she is satisfied,  but  she  is  waiting  for  a
house. She is 96 years old. Then there  are  three  Griquas:  Ms  Jahrs  and
Grandfather  Lukas  from  the  Free  State.  These  are  the  real  Griquas.
[Interjections.]

The findings of the committee in fact made it look as if we  have  forgotten
our fathers and mothers. Why? They are not receiving the respect and  honour
that we owe them. Their money is taken from them. They are abused. They  are
shoved aside and even raped. I am making an appeal to our whole  nation,  if
we take the social development  of  all  our  people  seriously,  we  cannot
afford to make our elderly feel as if they are shoved aside  and  forgotten.
Then we shall not succeed in reacting to  President  Mbeki's  plea  that  we
arise and work together at our  future.  And  where  do  we  find  a  better
example of the contribution that older people can make in  our  nation  than
former President Mandela.

When we look at the part of the Budget that is  directed  at  older  people,
there are two matters on which we must focus. The first matter concerns  the
money that is paid to our people in  the  form  of  old  age  pensions.  The
second matter concerns the money that is available  for  services  to  older
people. I would like to come back to this later.

In 1994 the old age pensions were R390 per  month.  It  is  being  increased
from R570 to R620 this year. This means an increase of R50  per  month.  The
increase comes into  operation  on  1  April.  This  increase  is  extremely
important, because we know that old  age  pensions  do  not  only  keep  one
elderly person, but also put bread on the table for the whole family.

Because the pension is a lifeline in  many  communities  -  the  economy  of
entire communities depend on it - it is essential that  our  elderly  should
be able to draw their pensions every month  without  any  trouble.  We  have
heard too often in the recent past of  elderly  people  who  arrive  at  the
paypoint at the crack of dawn, after going to a great deal of trouble,  only
to hear that there is  no  pension  for  them  -  without  any  explanation,
without any good reason. There are two such elderly  people  who  have  been
struggling for the past six months to get their pensions.

Sometimes the elderly have to wait  out  in  the  open  the  whole  day  for
officials or employees of one of the  payment  contractors  to  arrive  with
their money - without shelter, without food  or  water,  without  sanitation
facilities. In my province alone almost half of the paypoints have no  seats
for the pensioners, and a third of the paypoints have no toilets.

One understands that the Government  cannot  provide  everything  overnight,
but we really have to do something about this. A part of the contracts  that
provincial governments concluded with contractors provided that they had  to
contribute to the upgrading of paypoints. Is this provision  being  complied
with and is provincial government adequately following up on this?  What  do
we do where this does not take place? I trust that the  money  allocated  to
the department for the improvement of pension  services  resolves  precisely
this kind of problem.

We are also looking forward to officials responsible for the  administration
of pensions gaining from undergoing training in people-skills. I  am  making
an appeal to the Minister: We  cannot  afford  dishonest,  lazy  or  corrupt
officials. We can no longer do this; we must act! [Applause.]

The Minister has already made reference to the  R2  billion  that  has  been
allocated in this Budget for paying back pensions to  those  who,  owing  to
administrative shortcomings, have not received pensions for  the  past  four
years. We are talking here about people who had  to  wait  more  than  three
months after applying before their pension benefits were paid, about  people
who were removed from the register  owing  to  a  mistake  in  the  computer
system.

We are making an appeal to all our people in the provinces to  step  forward
if they fall in this group and to claim their lawful back-pay. Ofisi tsa  ka
eli teng Virginia, e yang teng. [My offices are available in  Virginia,  you
can go there.]

But we must also know that there are people who  are  going  to  try  to  be
dishonest and exploit the elderly or take their money  from  them.  That  is
why we are asking that the department will send out clear  messages  to  all
pensioners regarding the manner in which the money  will  be  paid.  We  are
asking communities also to be vigilant and to ensure that the aged, of  whom
many are very old and weak, are not exploited simply to obtain their  money.
We are also asking banks  completely  to  abolish  service  fees  that  they
deduct from pensioners so that more pensioners will use the safe  option  of
having their pensions paid directly into their bank accounts. [Applause.]

The effect of HIV/Aids on our community means that the role of older  people
in the community is changing rapidly. An increasing number  of  grandfathers
and grandmothers  must  take  care  of  their  children  and  grandchildren,
because their children have  become  too  ill  to  work  and  take  care  of
themselves. This places increasing pressure on the pensions and strength  of
the  elderly  where  they  have  to  take  care  of   their   children   and
grandchildren.

We must also ensure that the elderly receive full access to  information  as
to what state aid is  available  and  how  to  apply  for  it.  There  is  a
particular lack of  clarity  about  when  application  can  be  made  for  a
disability grant for someone with full-blown Aids, and we know  that  it  is
specifically during this stage that people need the most care.

Therefore we are asking that the part of the Budget allocated  for  services
to  the  elderly  should  be  increased  dramatically,  so  that  the   many
organisations in the community that have to relieve the burden of the  older
generation, or that have been established by the elderly themselves, can  do
their work effectively. We often talk about the value of the  work  that  is
performed by volunteers, but we do not support them  adequately.  Too  often
we hear that money has been appropriated, but it never reaches  the  smaller
organisations, or those who are honest and sincere in  their  assistance  to
and competence of their voluntary services to our foremost citizens. I  make
the plea today: Do not make it impossible for small organisations  with  few
learned members. They help our mothers and fathers to attain help.  They  do
valuable work. They deserve our support.]

Old people should not only be seen as recipients, but  also  as  people  who
contribute to rebuilding our society and communities by getting involved  in
projects. I would appreciate it if our First Lady, Mrs Zanele  Mbeki,  could
come down and protect our elderly people. [Applause.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Madam  Speaker,  the  poor  in  our  society  lack  the
necessary organisational structures that can champion their cause.  In  most
cases they support organisations of other classes in society.

Firstly, in order for the poor to determine their  own  destiny,  they  need
resources to build organisations of their own, with  their  own  leadership,
power and decision-making processes. Funds allocated in this Budget will  go
a long way towards achieving this.  Secondly,  in  order  for  the  poor  to
control their own organisations adequately, they need  education.  To  Azapo
every little activity or resource  that  lead  to  the  enhancement  of  our
people's lives is always an important step, and we support it.

The strategic challenge facing the Department of Social  Development  is  to
address poverty and contribute towards its eradication. Azapo believes  that
in doing  so  the  department  should  promote  consultation,  dialogue  and
sharing of developmental experiences with the poor communities and the  many
NGOs that operate in this field.

The time for poverty alleviation is over. We should talk more about  poverty
eradication.  Azapo's  problem,  however,  is  that  more  often  that   not
officials in this department do not use these resources for  what  they  are
intended. Some officials do, in fact, pocket some of these  funds  that  are
needed by  the  most  desperate  poor.  This  state  of  affairs  should  be
drastically addressed. Azapo supports this Vote.

Mnu   B   M   SOLO:   Somlomo,   uNgqongqoshe   ohloniphekileyo    womNyango
wezeNhlalakahle kanye noNgqongqoshe  abakhona  lapha,  amalunga  ePhalamende
ahloniphekile nabantu abadala  abazozimazisa  lo  mcimbi,  isabelo  sezimali
somNyango  wezeNhlalakahle  esabelwe  abantulayo  yiso   esinikeza   ithemba
kwabahluphekileyo,  kwabahola  impesheni,   kwabakhubazekile   nasezinganeni
ezidinga usizo nezithembele kuHulumeni.

Kusukela   ezinkulumeni    zikaMongameli    wezwe    laseNingizimu    Afrika
nasezinkulumeni  zikaNgqongqoshe   womNyango   wezeziMali,   okwakuyinkulumo
eyayilindwe yisizwe sonkana. Nembala le nkulumo yesaBiwomali izokwazi  nokho
ukubhekana nobumpofu nendlala esibhekene nayo.

Siyazi sonke ukuthi  indlala  yande  kanjani  kuleli  laseNingizimu  Afrika.
Ngakho-ke sonke sidinga ukuthi sibambe iqhaza  ekulweni  nale  nkinga  ukuze
sonke futhi sinqobe. Kufanele singakhohlwa ukuthi iningi lezinkinga  ladalwa
yinqubomgomo yombuso wengcindezelo.

Ngithanda ukucaphuna amazwi kaMongameli lapho ethi  khona.  (Translation  of
Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr B M SOLO: Madam Speaker, hon Minister of Social  Development  and  other
Ministers who are present here, hon members and  people  who  have  come  to
attend this occasion, the budget of the Department  of  Social  Development,
about what has been given to the poor people, is the one that provides  hope
to the poor, the pensioners, the disabled and to  children  that  need  help
and who rely on Government.

It comes out in the speeches by  the  President  of  South  Africa  and  the
speeches by the Minister of Finance, speeches that are awaited by the  whole
nation. Of course, this Budget speech will be able to deal with the  poverty
and hardship that were are facing.

We all know how widespread poverty is in South  Africa.  Therefore,  we  all
need to play a role in fighting this problem so that we  will  all  win.  We
should not forget that most of the problems were created by apartheid.

I would like to quote the words of the President when he said:]


  Of decisive importance to the millions of our people and  the  future  of
  our county, as we meet here today; the central question we will  have  to
  answer, at the end of the day, is  whether  what  we  are  doing  as  the
  legislature, the executive, the judiciary, the fourth  estate  and  civil
  society, is helping to lift,  from  the  shoulders  of  our  people,  the
  intolerable burden of poverty and underdevelopment.

I believe that this budget is part of a realistic  attempt  to  answer  that
question in a meaningful and realistic way. Ours is to commit  ourselves  to
taking up the challenge by ensuring  that  the  provisions  of  the  various
programmes of this budget are implemented effectively.

As a people, we need to mobilise churches and civil society and  rally  them
behind the building of a caring society, a society that cares for the  aged,
the disabled, the children and the poor who are wretched, powerless and  who
lack the resources to fend for themselves, a society that  wants  peace  and
prosperity with values and norms that are beyond reproach,  a  society  that
is stable and at peace with itself.
Gradually we need to  be  seen  pushing  back  the  burden  of  poverty.  We
therefore have to lend a hand in the national effort to build a better  life
for all, inspired by the call of Vukuzenzele. It is based on the above  that
this Government, led by the ANC, has come up  with  specific  programmes  to
fight poverty, and we expect all South Africans, from all walks of life,  to
participate in these programmes.

Hon members might have heard that tomorrow, in Stellenbosch, the  provincial
Department of Housing is also lending a  hand  to  deal  with  one  critical
aspect, the ownership of houses. The MEC for Housing  in  the  Western  Cape
will be handing over the keys of a house to an old lady of about  106  years
of age. [Applause.] This is the first time  ever  that  this  has  happened.
This is an effort to deal realistically with poverty. We  can  imagine  that
that old woman, all these years, has been staying in  a  property  that  she
never owned.

Kungakho-ke sithi sonke kufanele sihlangane sisebenzisane ukulwa  nobumpofu,
sibone ukuthi abantu bethu bahlala ezindaweni ezifanelekile, okungezabo.

Ngiyethemba  ukuthi  lesi   saBiwomali   sizoba   yingxenye   yokuphenduleka
ngendlela   efanele   kwemithandazo   yabahluphekileyo,   inkani   nje   uma
singazimisela  futhi  sizinikele  ekusebenzeni  kanzima  ukufeza   amaphupho
esaBiwomali kuzo zonke izinqubo.

Kuyodingeka    sigqugquzele    umphakathi    wonkana    futhi    sibafundise
ngokunakekelwa  komphakathi.  Uma  singakwazi   ukuhlanganyela   nomphakathi
wonkana futhi  singabandlululi  siyakwazi  ukusiza  abakhubazekile,  abadala
kanye  nezingane  eziyizintandane  ngenxa  yenhlupheko  nokweswela   umnotho
wemvelo. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[That is why we say that we all need to join together to fight  poverty  and
to see to it that our people are living in  decent  places  that  belong  to
them.

I hope that this budget will be an appropriate answer to the prayers of  the
poor, as long as we will commit and dedicate ourselves to  working  hard  to
fulfil the dreams of the budget in all procedures.

We will need to encourage the whole community and educate them about  caring
for the public. We can  join  together  with  the  whole  community  without
discriminating against anyone. We will be able to  assist  disabled  people,
older people and children who are orphans because they do not  have  natural
wealth.]

Ngeli xesha ndithanda ukuba ndibonise banzi ukuba luthetha ntoni olu  Hlahlo
Lwabiwo-mali luphambi kwethu?  Olu  Hlahlo  Lwabiwo-mali  luzama  kangangoko
ukuncedana nabantu abadala, abakhubazekileyo, abantwana kwanabo  bangenamali
yokuba  baziphilise,  ngakumbi  abo  bahlala  kwiindawo   ezibizwa   ngokuba
kusemaphandleni, ndawo ezo  umbutho  wethu  i-ANC  uzimisele  ukuba  uguqule
iimeko zawo.

UMongameli utshilo  kwiNtetho  yakhe  ejoliswe  kwiSizwe  kulo  nyaka  ukuba
uRhulumente uza kuzama ukunciphisa inqanaba lobuhlwempu.  Ngoko  olu  Hlahlo
Lwabiwo-mali luphambi kwethu luzama ukusibonisa loo mizamo.

Siyabona ukuba imali  ithe  yanyuswa  ukubonelela  abo  bafumana  inkamnkam.
Njengoko sonke sisazi, ukunyuswa kwemali yenkamnkam akuzi  kulinda  de  kube
yinyanga kaJulayi, koko le mali  iza  kufumaneka  ukususela  ngomhla  woku-1
kuApreli. Masikhangele ukuba yabiwe njani le mali.

Abantu abafumana inkamnkam, imali yabo iya kunyuswa ngama-50 eerandi,  isuka
kuma-570   eerandi   iye    kutsho    kuma-620    eerandi.    [Kwaqhwatywa.]
Nabakhubazekileyo ngokunjalo.

Kwakolu  Hlahlo  Lwabiwo-mali  siyabona  ukuba  abo  banonophela  abantwana,
ngakumbi abakhubazekileyo abangakwazi kuzenzela nto,  nabo  imali  yabo  iya
kunyuswa  ngesixa   esifanayo.   [Kwaqhwatywa.]   Abantwana   abaziinkedama,
mhlawumbi abanye babo abanganonotshelwa ngendlela efanelekileyo, nabo  imali
abayizuzayo iya kunyuka ngama-40 eerandi, ukususela kuma-410  eerandi  ukuya
kuma-450 eerandi.

Inkamnkam  yabantwana  nayo  iza  kunyuka  ngama-20  eerandi  -  ndaba   ezo
abazithakazelele kakhulu abantwana.  Ndiyaziva  ezi  zinto  zithethwa  apha,
kodwa abantwana ebendithetha nabo  phaya  ecaweni  ngeCawe  bavuye  kakhulu;
bafuna nokuqonda ukuba ngaba ngenene lama-20  eerandi  akhona  na  abangathi
ngawo bathenge ngokubekela iimpahla abangazinxiba ebusika. [Kwaqhwatywa.]

Konke   oku   kungenxa   yeenkqubo   zombutho   i-ANC   nokuzinikela   kwayo
ekuqinisekiseni ukuba abonke  bantu  bayabonelelwa.  (Translation  of  Xhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[Now I want to explain further about what is meant by this  budget  here  in
front of us. Its primary aim is to help the old people,  the  disabled,  and
those without the money to survive, more especially the people of the  rural
areas, whose lives the ANC is keen to change.

The President has mentioned in his state of  the  nation  address  that  the
Government would try to reduce the level of poverty. Therefore, this  Budget
Vote speech is trying to make us aware of such efforts that are being  made.


We also observed that the pensioners' pension has  been  increased  to  help
them. As we already know, this increase will not be delayed until July,  but
that therefore it will start operating as from 1 April. Let us look  at  how
this budget has been distributed.

The money of those who receive a pension, as well as the disabled,  will  be
increased by R50, from R570 to R620. [Applause].

In this very same budget, we also  observe  that  the  money  of  the  care-
givers, more especially of the disabled, will be raised by the same  amount.
[Applause.] The orphan children's grant and  grants  of  those  who  do  not
receive proper care will increase by R40, from R410 to R450.

Children's grants will increase by R20; this news received  a  warm  welcome
from the children. I do hear the things that are being said here,  but  when
I was talking to some of the children at church on Sunday,  they  wanted  to
know the reality about the availability of this  R20,  so  that  they  could
laybye clothes that they could wear in winter. [Applause.]

All this is because of the efforts and concerns of the ANC  to  ensure  that
everybody is taken into consideration.]

Due to the sound economic policy of the ANC Government and  its  commitment,
we are now able to provide more in a very substantial way. It is with  pride
that I mention that these increases have been brought forward from  July  to
1 April 2002. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M L DA CAMARA: Madam Speaker, it is not  inappropriate  that  the  budget
debate on social development is the  first.  If  this  is  the  signal  that
fighting poverty is the Government's highest priority, then the DA  welcomes
it.

However, the true test of Government's commitment will be  in  its  delivery
and should be reflected in this budget. The Minister needs to  be  commended
on his efforts to improve the quality of delivery  in  his  department,  and
particularly on the improvement of the quality of grant payout points.  This
is not to say that payout points have reached a satisfactory  level  by  any
stretch of the imagination, but there are indications of  improvements  that
have been made. The DA certainly hopes that this will continue for the  sake
of South Africa's most vulnerable, and I was  happy  to  hear  the  Minister
saying that this would accelerate. I wish him well.

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Thank you.

Mr M L DA CAMARA: Madam Speaker,  when  measuring  the  hon  the  Minister's
commitment,  the  DP  was  pleased  that  the  Minister  had  announced  the
establishment of the Taylor Committee to look into  social  security  reform
in 2000. However, we, like the rest of the nation, are  hugely  disappointed
to see that the commission's report, which was due in November,  is  yet  to
be released.

While we await the outcome of the report, millions of  people  fall  through
the cracks of the social security net. We need only  to  think  of  children
above the age of seven, who do not  receive  the  child  support  grant,  as
pointed out by the hon Kalyan earlier,  or  of  the  many  unemployed  South
Africans to whom a basic income grant  would  mean  the  difference  between
going to bed hungry or going to bed full, or of those  caregivers  who  need
the foster care grant to ensure that they can look after their charges.

These and other issues desperately depend on the report  being  released  to
Parliament soon. There are many in our country who look  to  the  state  for
some sort of assistance. The very faith in our  democratic  dispensation  is
dependent on what material support  we  can  offer  them  to  relieve  their
everyday suffering. We dare not betray that faith.

We are all acutely aware that the longer it takes to  release  this  report,
there more unlikely it is that its recommendations will be included in  next
year's budget. Procrastination in this regard is  tantamount  to  prolonging
misery for millions  of  our  compatriots.  Hon  Minister,  when  can  South
Africans expect the release of the report? How much longer must the poor  be
kept in limbo? The people are dying to  know.  I  hope  that  for  once  the
Government will prove me wrong when I say the ANC Government is  failing  in
its  duty   to   alleviate   the   suffering   of   South   Africa's   poor.
[Interjections.]

The hon Ken Andrew, as far back as 2000, raised the issue of a basic  income
grant. Allow me to use this opportunity to do so again. Before the  hon  the
Minister of Finance - he is not in the  House  -  dismisses  this  issue  as
populist nonsense, let me remind him  that  he  and  his  party  ran  on  an
antipoverty  ticket,  not  on  a  ``pro-fighter  jet''  ticket.   When   the
Government of  a  poverty-stricken  nation  such  as  ours  receives  a  tax
windfall, as this one did, it is neither unrealistic nor populist to  expect
the consideration of a basic income grant. It  is  inconceivable  that  this
Government has not done that.  This  says  volumes  about  the  Government's
commitment to fighting poverty. It is time that this Government  deals  with
poverty with some urgency, in fact with the same urgency as that with  which
it dealt with  the  arms  deal,  and  not  with  the  complacency  that  has
characterised  delivery  for  seven  years.  This  will  be   the   greatest
demonstration of its commitment to fighting poverty.

The hon Gandhi says we should not point fingers, but  regrettably  there  is
something we can point to - the lack of good delivery. I wish  the  Minister
well and the DA supports his efforts, we just hope  that  the  rest  of  his
colleagues will do the same. [Applause.]

Ms N M TSHEOLE: Madam Speaker, our parents up in the gallery,  hon  members,
the Minister and ...

... bagaetsho, ke a roroma. Ke roromiswa ke boitumelo le tsholofelo  ya  tse
di tlang ka moso. Fela pele ke tsewa ke maikutlo a boitumelo, ke batla  gore
fa re bua re le mo Palamenteng, a re se  ke  ra  itira  magapu  ra  phantsha
fela. A re bueng re itse gore rona batho  ba  re  leng  mo  Tlhabololong  ya
Loago, re emetse karolo ya setshaba sa gabo rona se se leng bokoakoa -  bana
ba ba tswang mo malapeng a a tlhokang a bodiidi, bana bao ba  thuntsweng  ke
borrabo, batsofadi, batho ba ba tlhokang, ba ba sa tshwaneng le rona  ba  ka
Setswana re ba bitsang digole, fa ke fosetsa maloko a  a  tlotlegang  a  tla
intshwarela. A re bueng re itse gore mathata a bona  ga  se  a  re  ka  yang
dipolotiking ka ona. Ga re bue dipolotiki, re bua go thusa setshaba. Re  bua
go aga setshaba. A re se ke ra nne re bua fela o ka re re  kwa  setediamong.
Ke bua  jaana  ke  lebisitse  mo  go  se  se  builweng  ke  Rre  Da  Camara,
Mohumagatsana Kalyan le Rre Mokono. A re ke re tlhopheng mantswe fa  re  bua
le batho ba bo rona ba ba sokolang, re se ke ra phantsha fela re  itse  gore
re totobetsa ntho e e tutetseng. Boladu fa o bo tobetsa bo a fisa. A  re  ba
utlweleng botlhoko, re se ke ra nne o ka re ga re na maikutlo.

Ke ne ke utlweletse Mohumagatsana Kalyan fa a ne a bua a  re  ``foster  care
denied to orphans''. (Translation of Tswana paragraphs follows.)

[... countrymen, I am shaking because there is joy and hope for the  future.
But before I express my abundant joy, I would  like  to  say  that  when  we
speak in Parliament, let us not be like watermelons and  just  explode.  Let
us speak knowing that as people who are concerned with  social  development,
we are representing the weakest of  our  society,  that  is,  children  from
poverty-stricken homes and those without fathers, the elderly, the poor  and
those who are not like us, the disabled. I apologise if I was  not  supposed
to say it that way. When we speak about these issues, le  us  bear  in  mind
that their problems are not political. We are not talking politics,  but  we
want to help these people. I am saying  this  specifically  in  relation  to
what was said by Mr Da Camara, Ms Kalyan and  Mr  Mokono.  Let  us  be  very
considerate when speaking to our  poor  people  and  avoid  worsening  their
situation. The more you stir it, the more it stinks. Let us  empathise  with
these people.

I heard Ms Kalyan saying that ...]

... foster care cannot just be given to people.  There  is  a  law  that  we
inherited, which  needs  to  be  amended.  She  knows  very  well  that  the
department   is   drafting   a   comprehensive   social   assistance   Bill.
[Interjections.]

Didimala o ntheetse. Ke ne ke go reeditse,  ga  ke  a  go  atlhamela.  [Keep
quiet and listen to me. I listened to you and never interjected.]

Just keep quiet! The member knows very well that we are redrafting the  laws
that we inherited. Mr Van Jaarsveld said it very well. He said it  all  when
he said that it is a legacy and that it takes long to address a legacy.

I am going to use a number of words that we usually use here in  Parliament.
When  we   talk   we   always   say   ``restoration'',   ``rehabilitation'',
``reprioritisation'', ``regeneration'', ``reconstruction'',  ``rebuilding'',
``renew'', ``transformation''. All these mean we are rebuilding  afresh.  We
all know that rebuilding a house is not like  building  a  house.  When  one
rebuilds, one destroys. One uses some of  the  material  that  was  used  to
build that house. It is done  at  a  cost.  [Applause.]  And  one  pays  for
destroying the  old  structure.  Rebuilding  is  not  just  rebuilding,  one
destroys  as  well.  Unfortunately,  there  are  casualties;  we   are   not
rebuilding with bricks. We are rebuilding the souls, the  lives  of  people,
and there are casualities, because we have inherited a legacy. [Applause.]

Rebuilding also  looks  at  maintenance.  At  the  same  time  when  one  is
rebuilding one is maintaining. One  cannot  ignore  the  structure  that  is
being rebuilt, because in social development we deal with people. We do  not
use steel, corrugated iron or  bricks.  We  rebuild  a  country,  a  country
composed of people, people who have suffered. People should  not  play  with
the feelings of other people, because people are suffering. [Applause.]

There are other things to which I want  to  draw  members'  attention.  This
Government is trying its best to show that rebuilding  has  casualties.  The
Government has voted R2 billion to address the casualties.  Can  people  not
appreciate this? Can people not criticise in order to  help  rebuilding,  or
do they want the structure not to be rebuilt, to  stand  as  it  is  and  to
collapse? Is that what they are driving at? Why can they not appreciate  and
encourage participation in rebuilding? A legacy  that  this  Government  has
inherited is one of dependency.

Ka Setswana ra re, mokodue go tsoswa o o itekang. [In Setswana, we  say  God
helps those who help themselves.]

In my language and culture, no matter how one is, one has  to  do  something
in order to be helped. The legacy that we  have  inherited,  which  hon  Ela
Gandhi referred to, is that people  were  dependent  on  grants,  they  were
never assisted to do anything. That is why they  complain  when  grants  are
restructured. They complain.

Yes, we know there are casualties. I have said  that  already,  but  turning
the mind of a person around is not child's play. It is not  like  digging  a
hole and putting in stones and bricks  to  start  a  new  building.  We  are
dealing with the souls of people. The R2¬†billion is trying to address  this.
Let people learn to appreciate when good things and good attempts are  made.
Let people learn to appreciate what has been destroyed.

I would not like to go back to what I said last year when  we  were  passing
the budget vote on social development, when I  talked  of  a  sekorokoro  [a
very old car].  The  issue  is  that  we  are  dealing  with  a  legacy  and
everything that comes with it. One  can  see  all  the  terms  that  I  have
quoted.

Now we look at the reconstruction and restoration of families. We are  faced
with people who have no respect for themselves. These are people who do  not
even care. They abuse their own children.  What  has  caused  people  to  do
this?

We cannot make an apology for that. We cannot find an excuse  for  that.  It
is something that touches the depths of our souls, but we have to  face  it.
It is a reality that this country has to face and address. We  cannot  score
points on such issues if the souls involved are real souls. Let us think  of
what we are saying.

I am going to leave that and come to our elderly, that is my  parents.  This
country and Government love them. We respect them because  we  are  what  we
are because of them. [Applause.] They suffered for years. We have just  been
told  that  a  house  is  going  to  be  given  to  a  106-year-old.  It  is
understandable. People are meant to be in houses.  What  did  they  call  it
becoming 90 something years without owning a house? It  is  not  surprising,
but this Government is trying to make people own their own homes. To  honour
and respect the people. That is a good thing. [Applause.]

My mother who still does not have a house, it is a pity that she still  does
not have it, but she is going to have one. The Minister has heard  that  and
he is going to convey that message to the Minister of Housing.

This Government is trying to say to people they have a right to  own  homes.
One cannot lease a house for 99 years. That  is  the  system  that  we  come
from. I know that my aunt died before she could own a home, because she  had
to live for 99 years, and died at 91. She had never owned  a  home.  If  the
Government had not changed, she would still be waiting 99 years to  own  her
home. People were not meant to own any homes. These  are  things  that  this
Government is addressing and people must learn to appreciate that.

We cannot deny that there are shortcomings. Hon members have covered all  of
them with regard to delivery. The President has said that anybody  who  does
not want to serve our people must go. [Applause.] They  cannot  be  kept  in
our Government if they are not going to respect our mothers. We promise  our
mothers that those who treat them without  respect,  as  the  President  has
said, are going to leave. Those who can respect our own people are the  ones
who are going to be employed by this Government. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF  SOCIAL  DEVELOPMENT:  Siyabulela.  [We  thank  you.]  Madam
Speaker, I want to thank all the members of this House who  participated  in
this debate. I want to say it has been a long way since two years  ago  when
we could not necessarily agree on many issues.

There has been a lot of progress  that  has  been  made,  not  only  by  the
Department, but also by the portfolio committee in the way that  it  is  has
been able to exercise its oversight duties  and  assist  the  department  in
many ways, and for that we should say thanks to all the members,  especially
to the chair and all the other people who are involved in it. [Applause.]

The whole issue has not been party political, as hon members heard here.  It
has been something that all of us have taken together in order to make  sure
that the lives that we lead and the country  for  which  we  are  struggling
become something that all of us can be proud of. It is with  that  sentiment
and in that spirit that I come to answer some of  the  questions  that  have
been raised today. I might not necessarily be able to answer them  all,  but
I will try to answer the least, if the hon Deputy Speaker allows me.

The many issues that have been raised directly concerned  issues  that  have
been raised by the President,  that  is  improving  the  lives  of  the  our
people, and the poorest of the poor. Centrally to that has  been  the  lives
of the children and the disabled. We are trying to do that at the moment.

One of the issues that was raised by almost everybody is the  issue  of  the
comprehensive social security. Quite obviously, last year I said, as we  had
planned, that the  report  would  have  been  given  to  us  in  July  2001.
Unfortunately, it has not been like that. We only received it by the end  of
January 2002. We only read it about three  weeks  ago.  The  five  Ministers
then met and tried to look at it.

We made some comments and sent that report back to the cluster of directors-
general who are preparing it so that it should be given to Cabinet  as  soon
as possible and the whole process can move as fast as possible.  As  far  as
that is concerned, we will make it  available  to  each  and  everybody.  We
would welcome all the comments that members  will  make  and  I  hope  those
comments will prove to make it much better than it is at the moment.

On the issue of the budget allocation not being enough for welfare  services
in particular; there  are  not  enough  subsidies  for  NGOs  and  there  is
underexpenditure by  the  department,  I  want  to  say  that  there  is  no
underexpenditure by the department this year. In  fact,  it  has  overspent.
[Applause.] We have  made  provision  for  7,3%  increase  in  subsidies  to
national council. Welfare allocations are small, but we need to  have  norms
and standards so that we can cost the services that are  being  rendered  by
the NGOs.

Poverty funds have not been cut. The future of the poverty relief fund  will
depend on the national Treasury's evaluation and, more importantly, our  own
evaluation as a department, and the assistance that we can get from  members
whether we really, with that poverty alleviation, are reaching  the  poorest
members of our society or not. This must  be  central  to  almost  each  and
every comment that has been made. We do not just want to throw money  around
without knowing where it goes. What we want is to target  those  communities
and people who are suffering, so that we can make their  lives  much  better
than they are at the moment.

On the issue that has been raised, first I want to  thank  our  mothers  who
are up there, and I hope that we will be able to make a difference to  their
lives by means of the little  things  that  we  are  doing.  We  know  quite
clearly that what we are doing is not enough. They need more than  they  are
getting at the moment. They have sacrificed their lives for  the  betterment
of this country. Whatever they are getting is not a gift  from  God,  it  is
something that comes from their own contributions. It comes  basically  from
their taxes that they have paid through the  years.  I  think  it  is  their
right, and it is stamped in the Constitution that they must  never  beg  for
these grants. It is theirs. They should demand them! [Applause.]

Regarding the issue that has been raised on  housing,  I  will  specifically
raise this with the Minister of Housing, but more importantly, with the  MEC
and the Premier of the Free State. I know she is a very kind lady, and  once
she hears about this she will ensure that something is done.

Let me now start answering the  questions  that  were  raised  by  some  hon
members. I hope I will be able to answer at least one or two  from  each  of
them. In so far as the hon Cass Saloojee's  question  on  the  role  of  the
Independent Development Trust is concerned, I would say that the IDT is  for
disbursement of funds, moneys used for capacity-building of  the  department
and for the capacity-building of community structures. It is also  used  for
the establishment of programme systems and procedures. All of the  above  is
executed  in  partnership  with  the  Department  of   Social   Development,
specifically the  poverty  relief  funding.  The  national  department  only
participates in the identification of 10% of the total projects.  These  are
projects that overlap on provincial boundaries and  can  be  used  as  pilot
projects to establish norms and standards. The rest of the  budget  is  sent
to the provinces.

In so far as the role of the National Development Agency is concerned,  this
is primarily a  body  to  fund  development  programmes  of  community-based
organisations  and  NGOs.  The  NDA  also  supports  materials  to   support
projects.

With regard to hon Kalyan's questions on the issue of HIV/Aids, I would  say
that children who are infected and affected by HIV/Aids qualify for all  the
services that are available to other vulnerable children. However, the home-
based and community-based care programmes are currently used extensively  to
enable the primary care-givers  of  these  children  to  access  grants  and
services that they are entitled to.

In so far as the Mount Frere issue is concerned, our response  has  been  an
integrated one. The Department of Health, the Department  of  Home  Affairs,
local government and Eskom are together providing a basket  of  services  in
the short to medium term, and their long-term planned intervention  is  well
in place through the establishment of the hydroponics  project  to  increase
and sustain food security. We have been able to get the  assistance  of  the
international  donor  community,  specifically  the  United  Nations   donor
organisations such as the World Health Organisation, the UN Children's  Fund
and many others in the UN Development Programme.  They  are  going  to  work
with us and the government of the Eastern Cape to ensure that  that  project
gets the necessary assistance. I am quite sure that  the  hon  member  knows
that there are many such programmes right throughout  the  country,  and  we
can only establish where those programmes  are  if  the  hon  member,  every
parliamentarian and I work together to  target  and  point  to  where  these
projects are, so that we  can  give  the  necessary  funding  to  all  those
places.

In so far  as  Mr  Van  Jaarsveld's  question  on  the  need  to  strengthen
partnership is concerned, surely we are working  with  the  NGO  sector.  We
would not be where we are at the present moment had the churches  and  other
religious organisations not given us the necessary help. We have been  able,
through them, to reach many, many of our deserving citizens.

With regard to the need to  support  the  volunteer  sector,  we  have  been
working with the volunteers in the volunteer groups throughout  the  country
since the United Nations had declared last year the Year of  the  Volunteer.
I think we are going to continue doing so. I think I have  already  answered
the issue of additional funding for the NGOs.

The hon Mrs Mars asked how we would be able to ensure that the funds of  the
National  Development  Agency  are  targeted  to  address  the   development
objectives, as there were problems with some poverty relief projects. In  so
far as the NDA is concerned, firstly, the Minister has  required,  in  terms
of the Public  Finance  Management  Act,  as  hon  members  know,  that  the
programmes and projects planned by the NDA must be evaluated; secondly,  the
national Treasury regulations also apply to the NDA;  and  lastly,  the  NDA
will have to submit an annual report to this Parliament. Projects funded  by
the NDA are also paid in trenches, so that we should be able  to  trace  and
be accountable for everything that we give.

The hon Mrs Mars also asked how the transition from the SWOT system  to  the
new  system  would  ensure  that  the   recipients   of   grants   are   not
disadvantaged. To ensure a smooth transition through quality testing in  the
running of our prototype system we will  proceed  with  the  roll-out.  This
will then be followed up by a pilot phase.

With regard to the question by the hon Mr Mkono, I  think  I  have  answered
him. He did not know what he was asking. [Laughter.] He did  not  read  what
he was supposed to have read. As a member of Parliament,  before  one  comes
here, one must be sure of one's facts, so that we can answer questions  that
are necessary, and not spend our time on something that is unnecessary.  All
the funds for poverty relief have been used and sent  throughout,  and  they
have been given to the rightful people. As a department, we have  spent  all
our funds, and this current year  we  are  struggling  to  stay  within  our
allocated budget.

The hon Ms Rajbally should note  that  the  poverty  relief  allocation  has
actually doubled compared to last year. Last year we  got  R50  million  and
this year we are getting R100 million,  and  next  year  we  will  have  R71
million. The Government is however reviewing the entire Poverty Relief  Fund
to evaluate its impact. Hence, no further allocation has been  made  in  the
outer year of the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, that is the year  2004-
2005. The national Treasury will play a leading role in this review, and  we
hope we will know the outcomes soon. In other words, we  are  reviewing  the
poverty relief funding. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Minister, I regret your time has expired.

The MINISTER: I am sorry about that, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.
  CONSIDERATION OF INTERIM REPORT OF TASK GROUP ON SEXUAL ABUSE OF CHILDREN

Mr E SALOOJEE: Madam Speaker, hon members, the Parliamentary Task  Group  on
the Sexual Abuse of Children last week heard some  of  the  most  terrifying
evidence of the absolute devastation that sexual abuse causes in  children's
lives.

Towards the end of the hearings, we also heard from a group of children  how
they felt about abuse and the effect it has on children's lives.  These  are
children who showed enormous courage in coming to Parliament to  tell  their
stories.

I can safely say that this part of the process was the most moving  for  all
of us, and that there can  be  no  doubt  that  it  constituted  a  valuable
contribution to our proceedings. We were deeply touched  and  moved  by  the
children's bravery. So, I would like to start by  paying  tribute  to  those
children who, against the  most  challenging  odds,  came  to  tell  us,  as
lawmakers, and to plead with us to help stop this.
I would like to make it very clear to the House that  the  debate  today  is
not meant to be the final debate on the matter of sexual abuse of  children.
The task group worked against a considerable time constraint to  finish  the
hearings and to start considering the many issues that came out  during  the
proceedings.

Because of the complexity of the matter, and because we want to  do  justice
to it in the recommendations we make, the task group felt it was  unable  at
this stage, so soon after the hearings, to  provide  the  National  Assembly
with a final report on our findings.

We want to complete our report and recommendations as a  matter  of  urgency
when we return from the April recess. We also want to ensure  that  we  play
our role in the fight against sexual violence as constructively as we can.

We are, however, aware of the expectation among  very  many  South  Africans
that Parliament acts on the issue. We felt that in view of  our  celebration
of Human Rights Day on Thursday, we should start reflecting  on  the  nature
and extent of this horrific crime against our children. This crime  suggests
that we are not treating the rights of our  children  with  the  seriousness
they deserve.

After the task group was established in terms of the decision in the  office
of the Speaker,  and  to  give  effect  to  a  resolution  of  the  National
Assembly, we called for written submissions as well as  oral  presentations.
Through our efforts in the media, we managed  to  draw  on  individuals  and
organisations  from  across  the  spectrum  of  our  country,  and  we   are
encouraged by the  response  we  received.  We  received  seventy  six  well
thought-out  submissions.  We   listened   to   six   different   Government
departments and 32 individuals and organisations over three and a half  days
of hearings.

Throughout the week, the task  group  was  told  about  our  children  being
brutally raped, being raped a second time and a  third  and  too  often  not
being heard. We were told of very many instances where abuse  was  reported,
where either the child was  not  listened  to  or  the  case  was  withdrawn
somewhere in the course of the criminal justice process. We were  told  that
police statistics  of  about  20  000  instances  of  sexual  abuse  against
children which were reported  annually  constituted  only  the  tip  of  the
iceberg.

Let us be clear about this. Sexual abuse is not a sudden phenomenon, nor  is
South Africa alone in dealing with challenges that it faces in this  regard.
In fact, the report of the  International  Tribunal  for  Children's  Rights
released last year, noted that, despite the universal  ratification  of  the
Convention on the Rights of the Child in  1989,  all  indications  are  that
violence against children is on the rise.

The commercial sexual exploitation of  children  is  also  on  the  increase
worldwide. According to a report by the  United  Nations,  between  two  and
four million people are trafficked every year and many  of  them  are  girls
between the ages of four and 17 years old. As  elsewhere,  it  appears  that
trafficking in South Africa is also linked to  conditions  of  poverty  that
render children more vulnerable to this form of exploitation.

It would seem that the production and distribution of child pornography  is,
likewise, also on the increase. Children are sometimes trafficked  expressly
with this aim. There have been further suggestions that there  is  a  strong
link between the possession of child pornography and sexual abuse.

Where does the sexual abuse of children take place? In  1998,  a  report  by
the Medical Research Council suggested that school teachers perpetrate 1  in
3 instances of child rape. Although this does not differ radically from  the
case in  other  countries,  there  are  a  number  of  causes  for  concern.
Presenters noted that too often school authorities allow reported  cases  of
child abuse to go unattended. The result is that  perpetrators  are  allowed
to remain at the same school for years,  making  it  possible  for  them  to
abuse more and more children.

We are grateful for the clear commitment given at the hearings given by  the
Minister of Education to address this issue.  We  agree  with  the  Minister
that a teacher who sexually abuses learners should not be in the  classroom.
Where a learner discloses abuse, that child must feel that  they  are  being
heard and that the allegations are taken seriously.

The second largest incidence of child rape takes place in the  home.  It  is
perpetrated by someone who  is  known  to  the  child  and  is  supposed  to
trustworthy. This kind of abuse must be one of  the  forms  that  leave  the
most devastating scars on young children, both boys and girls.

Impacting on the child's ability to disclose abuse in the  home  or  in  the
community is the silence in our society  around  the  issues  of  sexuality.
This silence  also  contributes  to  the  stigma  that  both  survivors  and
families experience once abuse is reported. A number of the presenters  also
made reference to the  protection  that  we  offer  children  through  state
agencies and the manner in which our protection agencies  respond  to  child
survivors. Our  protection  and  care  services  are  sometimes  not  child-
friendly.

While the SAPS Child Protection  Unit  is  trained  in  dealing  with  child
survivors of abuse, these units are not available in each town  and  village
across the country. Survivors often speak of insensitive  handling  by  both
police, health and court officials at the different stages of  the  process.
In addition, once a child survivor enters the child  protection  system,  it
often takes very long for the court process to be finalised.

Linked to the court process, presenters raised  the  issue  of  the  message
that some of the judgments in our courts may have  sent  to  both  survivors
and perpetrators. When a magistrates says that  an  abuse  is  less  serious
when it takes place at home or when the testimony of a  child  is  distorted
in defence of a perpetrator, serious  questions  must  be  asked  about  the
extent to which there is an understanding among  officials  in  the  justice
system of the life-long harm that sexual abuse does to children.

There seems to be some consensus on the fact that while we have a number  of
very progressive laws and policies  in  place,  these  are  not  effectively
implemented. In some cases this is because of a lack  of  resources  on  the
side of the protection and law-enforcement agencies. We are  expressing  the
hope today that, when the review of aspects of the Sexual  Offences  Act  as
well as the Child Care Act  are  finalised  and  services  are  established,
those  services  will  be  well   resources   and   that   interdepartmental
responsibilities with regard to protecting children will be spelt  out  much
more clearly.

It was pointed out to us that because people are not  clear  about  who  has
the right and the responsibility to  report  abuse,  ultimately  many  cases
simply go unreported.

Before I conclude, I  want  to  make  a  sincere  and  urgent  plea  to  our
communities, particularly on the eve of Human Rights  Day,  that  we  should
all act together in protecting our children.  Children's  rights  are  human
rights. We cannot afford to let our children down.

Finally, I would like to thank all the members of the task group as well  as
those members of Parliament who took the time and the effort  to  listen  to
presentations, read submissions and to ask  incisive  questions.  I  believe
that we have functioned well as a team and we have been able to cross  party
lines on an issue that, without any doubt, is of national importance to us.

Upon our return, we will have to consider our work as members of  this  task
group in a manner that puts beyond any doubt the seriousness with which  the
final report will be prepared. [Applause.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: Madam Speaker, the appointment of a  task  team  to  analyse
the causes of child abuse and inform our  counter  strategies  appropriately
has been welcomed by  many.  A  variety  of  organisations  that  work  with
children made presentations to the task team. From all  accounts,  it  would
appear that child abuse is getting worse. Alternatively, because there is  a
safe atmosphere for reporting, more cases are being reported.

Statistics presented show that one child is raped every 24 hours. In the  18
months from January 2000, there were almost 32 000 reports  of  child  rapes
and sexual  attacks  on  children  countrywide.  Almost  every  presentation
highlighted the  point  that  South  Africa  lacks  an  integrated  and  co-
ordinated approach to child abuse.

Several  presenters  have  posed  the  question  why  the   National   Child
Protection Strategy, which was presented  to  the  Government  in  1997  and
which deals with both prevention and management, has yet to be implemented?

It is quite clear that there is no single approach to deal with child  abuse
and that a multifaceted approach  is  needed.  On  the  one  hand  a  strong
legislative framework  is  urgently  required,  one  that  has  the  child's
interest at heart and which will prevent  secondary  trauma.  On  the  other
hand, existing services and infrastructure must be  adequately  equipped  to
address child abuse. This includes medical, legal,  educational  and  social
services.

It also became eminently clear during the hearings that there is  an  urgent
need for a moral renewal of our society and a dire  need  to  uplift  women,
and more especially the girl-child, to be seen as equal  human  beings,  not
as a possession or containers for poison.

While every single South African has a huge responsibility to our  children,
I think faith-based organisations have a huge and meaningful role  to  play.
We all need to recommit ourselves to protecting children. We  need  to  work
collectively to dispel the dangerous myth that  having  sex  with  a  virgin
will cure one of HIV and Aids. I would  like  to  quote  the  words  of  our
former President, who said:


  Our success will and must be measured in the happiness and welfare of our
  children, at once the most vulnerable citizens in  any  society  and  the
  greatest of our treasures.  There  can  be  no  keener  revelation  of  a
  society's soul than the way in which it treats its children.

Today in South Africa children are the victims  in  41%  of  rapes.  We  are
failing our children and the damage to their psyches is immeasurable.

In conclusion, the four days of hearings gave cause  to  many  on  the  task
team to reach deep into their emotional reserves to  cope  with  the  trauma
and the depth which is now surfacing. I would like to say to those  members:
Let this be the driving force to eradicate all forms of sexual violence.  By
lending an ear they have started the healing. [Applause.]

Mr O S B BALOYI: Madam Speaker and hon members, the  Task  Group  on  Sexual
Abuse of Children sat through 38 presentations at the hearings and  received
for scrutiny up to 76 submissions in total. The culmination of the  hearings
was the very touching closing session where affected children testified.

The National Assembly must be applauded for the bold vision of appointing  a
task team to take on this very delicate and serious topic  of  sexual  abuse
of children. Worsening reports are being published of increase in  cases  of
sexual abuse of children at extremely young ages, very delicate ages,  never
heard before in the history of  this  country.  Then  again,  there  is  the
danger of HIV/Aids which has become a central problem when we talk  of  rape
of young children.

Today's debate, on the  eve  of  Human  Rights  Day,  marks  South  Africa's
commitment to dealing with the  growing  scourge  of  the  sexual  abuse  of
children. Let it not  be  thought  that  this  problem  is  unique  to  this
country. The problem occurs all over the world. We in South Africa  are  not
afraid to talk or report about it.  Indeed,  today's  debate  indicates  our
resolve to deal with the problem head-on.

It was a challenge as well as a great privilege to be a member of this  task
team. One was exposed to very  good  presentations  from  members  of  civil
society,  academics,  research  institutions,  people  from   rural   areas,
children's rights groups, NGOs,  CBOs  as  well  as  Government  departments
concerned. Another unique experience was the  presentation,  in  camera,  by
the children who were able to  share  their  painful  experiences  with  the
members of the task group. This, for me, was  a  watershed  experience  that
inspired me to dedicate myself to be part of the solution rather  than  keep
quiet, do nothing and be part of the problem.

We shall all be affected after we have heard the contents  of  the  document
that will be tabled.  Some  of  the  children  are  visually  impaired.  Hon
members, visually impaired individuals  were  victims.  This  was  indeed  a
moving session.

The bulk of the presentations to the task group on child  abuse  dealt  with
matters of service provision and child protection services, focusing  mainly
on the scarcity of such provision and  services.  A  large  portion  of  the
presentations dealt with problems after the event  and  looked  at  possible
remedial action after the event. Another cluster  of  presentations  focused
on primary level issues and looked at the problem areas, and then  attempted
to highlight those things that can be addressed  even  before  our  children
are sexually abused.

Hon members should allow me to give them just a glimpse of the  issues  that
were  raised  at  the  hearings.  Child  and  sexual  abuse  occurs  in  all
communities. It is generally accepted that children in poor communities  are
more at risk. In South Africa we all know that race correlates closely  with
socioeconomic status. This therefore means that the  children  who  live  in
disadvantaged high-risk neighbourhoods are particularly at risk of rape  and
other forms of child abuse.

Members will learn from the report about the  impact  poverty  has  and  how
poverty develops low self-esteem in people  and  a  low  sense  of  personal
control over  their  lives.  Poverty  can  make  care-givers  vulnerable  to
outbursts of anger at the children. This anger can result in physical  abuse
and neglect of the children. Neglected children are then  easy  targets  for
abuse, even sexual abuse.

Sexual abuse of children happens most  frequently  where  there  is  alcohol
abuse and domestic violence. Alcohol also plays an  amplifying  role  as  it
breaks down the inhibitions that would otherwise place  limitations  on  the
perpetrator's behaviour. Sexual abuse frequently takes  place  on  weekends.
Other vulnerable times are during weekdays,  after  school,  en  route  from
school or at the child's home where working  adults  return  late  from  the
workplace and young children are left alone.

The observation is that it is people  who  live  near  the  child,  who  are
acquainted with the child or the child's family, and who have time on  their
hands who pose a particular threat to children. I am looking forward to  the
debate after the document has been tabled and I trust that the  debate  will
take place not too long from now. May  that  debate  indeed  yield  for  our
country policies, laws and strategies that will ensure  a  better  life  for
all the children of South Africa,  free  of  the  threat  of  sexual  abuse.
[Applause.]

Nk P N MNANDI: Somlomo,  Ngqongqoshe  ohloniphekile,  bahlonishwa,  maqabane
nezihlobo ezikhona phezulu, angivule  inkulumo  yami  ngokuthulela  isigqoko
abantwana abakade belapha beqhamuka  kulo  lonke  elakuleli,  abazikhulumele
ngokwabo.  Nakuba  bekubuhlungu  kubona  nakuthina  ukuzwa  ngokuhlukunyezwa
kwabo, siyababonga kakhulu.

UMongameli wezwe uThabo kaMbeki ngenkathi evula le  Ndlu  kulo  nyaka  wathi
siyizwe elikwaziyo ukulwa futhi  siyizwe  elikwaziyo  ukunqoba.  NgolukaJoji
... (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Ms P N MNANDI: Madam Speaker, hon  Ministers,  hon  members,  comrades  and
relatives who are sitting in the gallery,  I  would  like  to  introduce  my
speech by saluting the children who  were  here,  from  all  parts  of  this
country, who spoke for themselves. Although it was painful for them, it  was
the same for us when we heard about their abuse and we say: Thank  you  very
much.

The President, when he opened this House this  year,  said  that  we  are  a
country that is able to fight and win ...]

... a nation that fights and wins.

Nembala  le  yabanukubezi  babantwana  bethu  sizoyilwa  njengesizwe   futhi
sizoyinqoba njengesizwe.  Ngakho-ke  namhlanje  sithi:  mayihlome  ihlasele.
[Ihlombe.]

Ekupheleni konyaka odlule iSilo  Samabandla  onke  inkosi  uZwelithini  Zulu
enkulumeni  yakhe  yesizwe  wathi  bonke  laba  bantu  abenza   leli   chilo
lokunukubeza abantwana abawona amadoda, igama  labo  ``imigodoyi''.  Ngithi,
``Bayede'' kuleyo ndawo.

Ngithanda ukuvumelana  noNgqongqoshe  wezemFundo  uma  ethi  umsuka  walokhu
kuhlukumeza usodlameni olukhona ekhaya  nasemphakathini.  Yebo,  siwushayile
umThetho wokuqeda nya ukushaywa kwabantwana ezikoleni kodwa awukho  umThetho
othi abantwana abangashaywa  emakhaya.  Kumanje  sikhuluma  nje  kunenkolelo
yokuthi izinga lokudlwengula linyukile kuleli.  Cha,  akunjalo,  okwenzekayo
yilokhu: UHulumeni  oholwa  nguKhongolose  ushaye  imithetho  eyenza  ukuthi
abantu bazi kabanzi ngamalungelo abo. Manje sebeyakwazi ukukhuluma  nokuveza
obala izinkinga zabo. Siyabonga kuKhongolose, avulekile amasango.

Mangingene kumNyango wezeMfundo.  Abantwana  bazikhulumele  ngokwabo.  Bathi
izifundo zobulili kufanele zifundiswe ezikoleni. Kuyacaca-ke  ukuthi  uhlelo
olusha lokufunda i-Curriculum 2005 iyibambe khona, ngoba ugotshwa  usemanzi.


UmNyango  wezeMfundo  uhlangene  nomNyango  wezokuPhepha  balwakhile  uhlelo
lwezikole   eziphephile.   Lolu   hlelo    lunakho    ukufundisa    mayelana
nokuhlukunyezwa   ngokocansi.    Nalo    uhlelo    lokusiza    amantombazane
ekuphunyukeni ezimeni ezibucayi selukhona. Luzosiza  ukuthi  izingane  zethu
zamantombazane  zithole  amathuba  okuphunyuka,   zingasali   sezithithibala
okwezimvu zomhlatshelo.

Isigungu sothisha i-Sace silusukumele ngokukhulu ukushesha lolu daba.  Bathe
uthisha onukubeza abantwana uzokhishwa ohlelweni  lwabafundisi  futhi  ngeke
aphinde afundise, okwakhe ukuya ezikhindini.
Nakuba lolu daba luvusa  uhlevane  nentukuthelo  esizweni  sonke,  masigweme
ukwenza  izitatimende  ezibopha  ngabhande  linye  njengokuthi  nje  othisha
bangabadlwenguli. Akusibona bonke othisha  abanukubeza  izingane  ezikoleni.
Iningi lothisha  liyawenza  umsebenzi  ngokukhulu  ukuzikhandla.  Imiphumela
kamatikuletsheni yangonyaka odlule  ingubufakazi  balokhu.  Namanje  zikhona
izingane ezinukubezwa obaba bazo kodwa akusho ukuthi wonke  umuntu  ongubaba
ungumdlwenguli. [Ihlombe.]

Laba abasebancane abenza  lo  mkhuba  kufanele  sibe  nezinhlelo  zokubasiza
ikakhulukazi ezikoleni.  Nakhona  udaba  lwabo  kufanele  lubhekwe  ngamehlo
okhozi  ukuze  basizakale.  Kufanele  sikhumbule  ukuthi   nathi   sabadlala
omasigcozi nomacashelana.

Ezikoleni   zethu   kuyanda   ukufunda    ngobuchwepheshe    bobuchafachafa,
amakhompiyutha. Izingane zingena  ziphuma  koma-internet.  Othisha  nabazali
mabasize abantwana ukuthi  bangangeni  kula  magumbi  e-internet  anemikhuba
phakathi.  Abantwana   ezikoleni   mabafundiswe   ngobugebengu   bokuthathwa
kwabantwana basetshenziswe ngokwezocansi.
Ezifundweni zabadala alube  khona  uhlelo  lokufundisa  ngokuba  umuntu  abe
ngumzali ofaneleyo. Ngikhuluma kanje  namhlanje  ngoba  kukhona  ukucekeleka
phansi kwekusasa lezingane. Bakwethu izingane zimsulwa,  azinacala  namandla
okuzilwela. Yingakho  sithi  kuyo  yonke  le  migodoyi:  nifike  ekugcineni,
nizokaka imbazo. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[As a nation we are going to fight the number  of  child  abusers  until  we
win. Therefore, today we say let us arm ourselves and attack. [Applause.]

At the end of last year, his  Majesty,  King  Zwelithini,  in  his  national
speech said that all those who commit the atrocity of abusing  children  are
not men, they are worthless dogs. I say: Bayede! [royal salute] to that.

I agree with the Minister of Education when he says that the cause  of  this
abuse is the domestic violence in our communities. Of course we have  passed
legislation regarding abolishing of the beating children at home. Today,  as
we talk, there is the belief that the level of rape has  increased  in  this
country. No, this is not true, what is really happening is  this:  The  ANC-
led Government has passed legislation that enables  people  to  be  informed
about their rights. Today they are able  to  speak  and  put  forward  their
problems. We would like to thank the ANC, the gates are now open.

Let me focus on the Department of Education. Children have spoken  on  their
own. They said that the subject of sex should be taught in  schools.  It  is
clear that the new education programme, Curriculum 2005, is doing the  right
thing, because a tree is bent while it is still young.

The Department of Education, together with  the  Department  of  Safety  and
Security, have designed a strong and safe school programme.  This  programme
deals with educating people about rape. A programme to help girls  who  have
escaped difficult circumstances has been introduced. It will help our  girls
to get a chance to escape, and not be helpless like  sheep  that  are  being
led to the slaughter.
The teachers' organisation, Sace, has taken this issue seriously. They  said
a teacher who abuses children will be kicked out of the teachers'  programme
and he will never teach again, he will have to go to jail.

Although this issue causes the hackles to rise and anger  to  erupt  in  the
whole nation, we must avoid generalising, for instance, by saying,  teachers
are rapists. Not all of teachers abuse children at school. Many teachers  do
their work diligently. The Matric results of last year are  proof  of  this.
Even today there are children who are being abused  by  their  fathers,  but
this does not mean that all fathers are rapists. [Applause.]

We  should  have  programmes  in  schools  to  help  young  people  who  are
committing these crimes. Their issue should be looked at seriously  so  that
they can get help. We must remember that even we, ourselves,  did  play  the
game of hiding from one another when we were young. In  schools,  the  level
of learning about computers is increasing. Children are  increasingly  using
the Internet. Teachers and parents must assist children not to go  to  these
sections of Internet that display bad habits. Children at schools should  be
taught about the crime of child abuse.

In the courses for older children, there should be a programme that  teaches
them about being good parents. I talk like this today because  there  is  an
attitude of looking down upon the  future  of  the  children.  Good  people,
children are innocent, they are not guilty nor do they  have  the  power  to
fight for themselves. That is why we say to  all  these  useless  dogs:  You
have now arrived at the dead end of the road, you  are  going  to  face  the
axe. [Applause.]]

Mr C M MORKEL: Mr Chairman, I was hoping Madam Speaker  would  still  be  in
the Chair, because I wanted to thank her for her role in ensuring  that  the
sexual abuse of our nation's children enjoys such a high  priority  in  this
House. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, you are making  a  noise.
Continue, hon member.

Mr C M MORKEL: Similarly, the contribution of the Chairperson  of  the  NCOP
also needs to be acknowledged.

I take this opportunity to thank all members of the task  group,  especially
chairperson Salojee, for the spirit in which we were able to  make  progress
beyond the ominous Ides of March. It was a clear indication that we can  and
must rise above  petty  party-political  bickering  so  that  we  can  forge
consensus on issues of national importance. The sexual abuse of children  is
undoubtedly such an issue.

We also wish to thank the committee section,  researchers,  the  public  and
education department of Parliament as  well  as  the  media  for  all  their
valiant efforts. Most of all, we need to thank the respondents to  the  call
for submissions in this our attempt to  make  sense  of  the  state  of  the
emergency confronting our nation's children. The outpouring of the  accounts
of sexual abuse by children was  in  itself  a  clear  indication  that  the
hearings were not just another talk shop where we often hear theories  about
faceless perpetrators and victims. The children have spoken.

The prematurely aged faces with which many sobbing children shared  some  of
their traumatic experiences reinforce the view that children must  be  given
the opportunity to  share  their  experiences  with  Parliament,  Government
departments and the judiciary in a more sensitive and specialised manner.

Far too often the leaders of our nation do not listen to our children as  if
to say: ``Gaan speel buite. Hierdie is grootmense se sake.''  [Go  and  play
outside. This is an adult matter.]  This  is  one  of  the  worst  forms  of
paternalism. We must ensure that we listen to and  represent  the  interests
of our nation's children in a more structured and sustained manner.

I am of the view that the event of the public hearings is only the start  of
the healing process. The final report can only be  completed  when  we  have
sufficiently interrogated the overwhelming content of both oral and  written
submissions in a more analytical manner  than  allowed  for  by  the  urgent
efforts ahead of the Easter recess.

The  recommendations  on  process  that  emerged  from   the   comprehensive
submissions requiring decisive action include  views  to  the  effect  that,
firstly, the final report of the task group  must  result  in  a  review  of
certain Government policies and  programmes,  and  they  suggest  that  this
could best be driven by an interministerial committee whose  political  will
must co-ordinate the urgent work of an interdepartmental  committee  on  the
sexual abuse of children. Secondly, an urgent need is identified  to  review
all  relevant  legislation,  thus  demanding  the  undivided  attention  and
resources of Parliament as well. Thirdly, the monitoring and oversight  role
of Parliament must remain focused on this  crisis  until  we  are  satisfied
that the systemic challenges that we have to  deal  with  and  the  relevant
interventions are in place, so that  our  children  can  be  children  again
without being forced into early adulthood.

In drafting the final report of the task group during the  next  sitting  of
Parliament, some of the key areas that we would need to focus on  include  a
consolidation of the sectoral research on the causes and effects  of  sexual
abuse on both victims and perpetrators; the need  for  a  comprehensive  and
action-oriented policy; programmatic and legislative review;  and  the  need
for public awareness and  participation  in  interventionist  programmes  of
action.

We would need to find constructive consensus on the  substantive  issues  of
contention  that  emerge  from  the  public  hearings.  These  include   the
assertion that many perpetrators have themselves been  victims  of  violence
and sexual abuse as children; the impact  of  censorship  policies  and  the
availability of pornographic material; the impact of certain cultural  myths
and practices, including the misconception that having  sex  with  a  virgin
could prevent or cure HIV/Aids; the practice of the virginity  testing;  the
need for a register of sexual offenders; the need for  community-based  safe
houses; the need for child-friendly  trauma  counselling;  the  testing  for
exposure to HIV/Aids  within  and  beyond  the  incubation  period  of  both
victims   and   perpetrators;   the    precautionary    administration    of
antiretroviral drugs to victims within 72 hours of  being  raped;  the  need
for a more child-friendly environment for the  proper  reporting  of  sexual
abuse; the need for appropriate record keeping and statistical  analysis  of
sexual offences against children; the need for focused and  legal  community
action; and, last but not least, the  need  for  public  awareness  and  sex
education.

In conclusion, if we fail in our task, only we can be  held  responsible  if
our children continue to become victims of sexual abuse, as a result of  any
systemic challenges that are not monitored, overseen and redressed.

Although I do not have children of my own as  yet,  I  nevertheless  make  a
pledge before this House that I will strive always to  serve  and  represent
the voiceless little people, especially our children and youth, who need  to
be heard in greater  numbers  and  more  often.  Your  child  is  my  child.
Children must be seen and not hurt.

Our challenge  now  is  to  sustain  and  expand  this  annual  activity  of
Parliament  called  the  youth  parliamentary  programme  beyond  role-play.
Otherwise, addressing our common challenges would  at  best  remain  child's
play, and at worst, would become a nightmare on Freedom Street. We  have  no
more time for thinking and talking about reworking old plans.  We  must  act
now to break the exponentially  spreading  virus  that  lurks  deep  like  a
cancer,  eating  away  at  the  soul  of  our  nation  and  spreading   from
perpetrators to victims, who themselves become perpetrators.  We  must  stop
this evil hand that rocks the cradle of our nation. They are our children  -
your child is my child.

Laat die kranse antwoord  gee  op  die  stem  van  die  beskermers  van  ons
kinders. [Let the voices of our children's  protectors  ring  out  from  the
hilltops.]
Let our voices ring out from the hilltops in the  deepest  rural  areas  and
the rooftops of densely populated  urban  areas,  that  I  am  my  brother's
keeper, and I am my sister's keeper.

Ms A VAN WYK: Mr Chairperson and hon members, at the outset I would like  to
thank the chairperson, Mr Saloojee, for the sensitive  manner  in  which  he
conducted  the  hearings.  The  diligent  and  dedicated  approach  of   the
committee secretary and the research team should also be noted  and  receive
this House's appreciation.

Sexual abuse of children is a reality that was highlighted with the rape  of
baby Tsepang and the subsequent public outrage and condemnation of that  act
of horror. The appointment of the multidisciplinary task group  demonstrates
the seriousness and urgent need that is experienced across  party  lines  to
deal with this demon in a decisive manner. The interest and  involvement  of
the Minister of Education in the work of the task group was encouraging  and
appreciated.

The public hearings  painted  a  grim  picture.  The  submissions  had  many
aspects of commonality, such as the the insensitive  and  inadequate  system
dealing with sexual abuse against  children.  They  highlighted  a  lack  of
resources, both material and  human.  Throughout  the  structures  that  are
involved in each case of sexual abuse there is poor communication  with  the
survivor and their families, inadequate or,  more often  that  not,  no  co-
ordination between the different role-players  and  inadequate  training  to
deal with survivors and their families.

It was clear from  the  public  submissions  that  every  single  Government
department which is tasked in one way or  another  in  dealing  with  sexual
abuse survivors is plagued with each of the above-mentioned problems.  There
is not one department that can stand up and state in honesty that it  cannot
do better or that it is dealing with the  problem  of  sexual  abuse  in  an
adequate manner. That would simply be dishonest.  It  would  also  serve  no
purpose in finding lasting solutions to deal with the sexual  abuse  of  our
children.
It is true that a police officer at the police station decides  that  he  or
she will not open a docket because the alleged perpetrator is  a  person  of
high esteem and he or she would not be guilty of  such  allegations.  It  is
true that in the Department of Health a sexual abuse survivor is  sent  home
and told to come back the next day because there is no doctor  available  to
examine the victim. It is true that in the Department of Social  Development
there simply are not enough places of safety or trained  social  workers  to
deal with such victims. It is true that  in  the  Department  of  Justice  a
sexual abuse survivor will be exposed to the accused  and  their  supporters
in the court. It is true that the Department of Home Affairs fails to  issue
social beneficiaries with the necessary documentation that  is  required  by
them to receive their social grants.

We heard about the role of alcohol and drug abuse in sexual abuse. The  task
group listened with horror how poverty  aggravates  the  situation  and  how
parents sell their own children with the hope of  soliciting  some  form  of
financial reward. But it was the evidence of the children  themselves  which
touched us the most. It was their testimony about their own  personal  abuse
that served as the greatest motivation to find solutions in  order  to  deal
with this in a decisive manner.

Our children are the pride of our nation. They are our hope and our  future.
They are the reason we  should  be  working  tirelessly  towards  shaping  a
better tomorrow. We cannot allow these monsters  who  steal  our  hope,  our
pride and our future to  get  away  with  it  any  longer.  We  cannot  call
ourselves a free society, yet our children live  in  fear.  We  cannot  call
ourselves leaders of this nation if we cannot protect our children.

I am talking about protecting our children not from an  outside  enemy,  but
from an enemy within, an enemy who carries the name ``father'',  ``mother'',
brother'', ``sister'', ``teacher'' or ``friend'', an  enemy  who  should  be
protecting and leading, yet who ends up perpetrating a crime.

This interim report does not  deal  with  solutions.  But  what  it  clearly
states to us is  that  we  as  a  nation  will  collectively  have  to  take
responsibility in addressing this problem of child abuse. [Applause.]

Mr M E GEORGE: Mr Chairperson, hon members of Parliament, I  would  like  to
start my  presentation  by  commending  Parliament  for  instituting  public
hearings on sexual abuse of children. I trust that this marks the  beginning
of a concerted effort involving  both  Government  and  the  NGO  sector  in
making a real difference in the lives of abused children.

As a Christian my attention has been drawn by the evil things  human  beings
are doing  to  each  other.  I  am  convinced  that  God  must  be  terribly
disappointed that humans can commit such  horrible  deeds  to  other  fellow
human beings. When God created man, he was  full  of  enthusiasm  and  love.
Members should read Genesis 1:26 which says, and I quote:


  Let us make man in our image, in our likeness, and let them rule over all
  the earth.

What human beings are doing is not only an embarrassment  to  human  beings,
but also an embarrassment  to  God.  What  men  do  to  their  wives,  their
children and the children of  their  girlfriends  is  what  we  are  hearing
about, and it is not good for  this  nation.  Looking  at  the  crime  rate,
specifically at violence against women and children, it is  clear  that  too
many of our people  have  lost  their  moral  bearings  and  that  there  is
something terribly wrong in society.

Behaviour is too often based on short-term personal gain, with little or  no
thought for the consequences for other people. In  this  context,  the  most
vulnerable members of our society - children -  fall  victim  to  those  who
wish to gratify themselves or simply to exercise power. Many people's  sense
of what is right or wrong has become perverted. One can tell  by  the  jokes
we make even in the corridors of this Parliament.

A bleak picture  emerged  from  the  hearings  through  more  than  30  oral
submissions by survivors,  nongovernmental  organisations  and  researchers.
There was a real cry for help at the hearings. They  showed  the  extent  to
which apartheid brutalised all of us. One of the key  things  apartheid  did
was to physically destroy communities and families through systems  such  as
migrant labour and the single-sex hostels at  mines.  What  struck  me  most
throughout the hearings was that there is a continuum of violence  and  that
there is a connection  between  violence  against  women  and  children  and
violence against men who are perceived to be weak.

There are indications that those who were abused are themselves three  times
more likely to commit rape or abuse other people. This fuels  a  culture  of
violence. Violence breeds violence.

Although the South African Police Service's Child Protection  Unit  has  had
some successes in combating child sexual abuse, it is  not  easy  to  police
child sexual abuse. It is difficult  to  control  and  prevent  child  abuse
simply because it happens within the privacy of the home,  bedroom,  office,
church, and so on.

According to research, children are more likely to  be  sexually  abused  by
someone they know, friends or relatives, than by a  stranger.  Children  are
confused  about  being  abused  by  someone  they  trust  to  protect  them.
Education about child sexual  abuse  starts  at  home.  If  the  home  is  a
problem, then the society has to rely on the state to assist with  educating
the public about the problem.

That is the message that we must send out,  that  we  cannot  tolerate  this
type of activity - the abuse of our children.  The  issue  of  child  sexual
abuse must  not  be  politicised  and  all  political  parties  should  work
together in combating this problem.

I want to thank all political parties for the manner in which  they  handled
the hearings. There was no attempt to bring in  politics,  except  from  our
new converts, the ACDP. As usual they tried, in vain,  because  nobody  took
them seriously, to politicise the issue.

I hope the speaker who is going to speak after me is not going to  try  that
again, because she was  the  champion  of  that  wrongdoing.  Of  course,  I
understand why they behave as they are doing. They claim to  be  Christians,
but most of the time they do  not  behave  like  Christians.  They  probably
misuse Christianity for some political expediencies.

We must counteract the commodification of  sex  and  the  dehumanisation  of
women.  Appropriate  legislation  to  prevent   child   sexual   abuse   and
legislation to support the victims should be enforced. Policy for  combating
child sexual abuse should be the responsibility of various Ministries,  such
as Welfare, Health, Culture, Education, Safety and Security and Justice.

The problem of child sexual abuse  requires  sustained  attention.  We  have
seen many processes of this nature start and then  dissipate  as  the  media
attention shifts to another topic. I am therefore hopeful that this  process
initiated by Parliament will result in a  sustainable  primary  preventative
approach to the problem of child sexual abuse,  as  part  of  a  renewal  of
strategies to protect all children from all forms of abuse.
In  the  final  analysis,  all   South   Africans   must   take   collective
responsibility to break the cycle of violence against women and children.

I want to conclude by saying that I am talking as  a  man  to  men.  Let  us
respect our children, women and those who are weaker than us. [Applause.]

Ms C DUDLEY: Jesus, I trust in you. Madam Speaker, while we indulge  in  yet
another debate today, there is a rape or attempted rape of a child every  24
seconds in our country. In the short time I have today, I  will  concentrate
on issues raised in written submissions which the task  team  chose  not  to
hear.

Government repeatedly makes appeals to churches with  regard  to  the  moral
regeneration of  our  people,  but  consistently  undermines  their  efforts
through destructive legislation, policies and lack  of  enforcement  of  the
laws. Children, being made in God's image, are unquestionably valuable.  And
yet, in South Africa the propaganda about overpopulation is  widespread  and
the value of children is  measured  by  whether  or  not  they  are  wanted.
Abortion is the ultimate child abuse and by allowing and even promoting  the
destruction of children  as  a  woman's  right,  the  protective  role  that
society should play is undermined.

A large percentage of abortions are done even after 21  weeks  and  hundreds
of these tiny babies born alive, are being thrown in buckets to  drown.  God
have mercy on us! And, if this is politics, Mr George, then so be it.

The ACDP  calls  on  Government  to  scrap  the  Choice  on  Termination  of
Pregnancy Act of 1997, and revise the Constitution to ensure that a  child's
right to life is protected by law, from conception.

Government-funded  ``LoveLife'',  and   planned   parenthood,   school   sex
education and other campaigns are lewd and obscene. Yes, children should  be
encouraged to talk openly to parents and other responsible adults about  sex
in the context of Godly values and loving marital relationships,  but  there
is no correlation between this and the smut produced by ``LoveLife''.

The ACDP pleads with Government urgently to recall  and  replace  Curriculum
2005's HIV/Aids and  life  skills  courses,  which  include  videos  on  gay
cruising and prostitution, and instruction on how a  woman  has  an  orgasm,
including how a  female  or  male  can  give  a  woman  oral  sex,  explicit
instructions on sexual  intercourse  repeated  every  year  and  much  more.
Ezekiel 16:58 states:


  You will bear the consequences  of  your  lewdness  and  your  detestable
  practices, declares the Lord.

While TV promotes and glamorises casual sex, STDs contracted as a result  of
promiscuity are not depicted. Recently, e-TV ran ``Emmanuelle'', which is  a
pornographic series of movies, in spite of widespread objections.  The  ACDP
calls on Government to give the SABC a moral mandate not to show  programmes
that promote promiscuity and give  the  Broadcasting  Complaints  Commission
the power to prevent the screening of undesirable material.
At least four submissions on pornography were made to the task team  but  no
oral presentation was accommodated. There is a  perception  that  Government
is diverting attention from the contentious issue of pornography as a  whole
by homing in on the universally condemned child  pornography  and  Internet,
which has no relevance in many communities.

In South Africa, adult pornography is legal and  defended  in  the  name  of
free speech, while children fall victim  to  those  who  become  aroused  by
adult pornography, simply because they are small and easily intimidated  and
manipulated.

In addition, the physical differences between the 18-year-olds  depicted  in
pornography and  14-to-17-year-olds  is  indiscernible.  SA  Police  Service
records show that child rape has increased by over  400%  since  pornography
was legalised in 1996. Pornography is all too often a manual for rape.

The ACDP calls on Government to make both the sale  and  the  possession  of
all pornography illegal, to give the Film and Publication  Board  the  power
to preview potentially pornographic material  to  prevent  it  from  getting
into circulation, and to close down adult pornography stores.  South  Africa
has the highest reported rape rate. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms L MABE: Mr Chairperson, I still do not  understand  why  the  people  who
claim to be Christians have a problem with  the  termination  of  pregnancy,
which was accessible to whites in this country during the  early  70s.  Now,
when it becomes available to blacks it becomes a  sin  and  a  big  problem.
[Interjections.] I do not want to engage in politics at  this  time  because
the topic we are discussing here is a highly sensitive one. So, today  I  am
not prepared for any political debate.

From the hearings we conducted last week, it is quite clear that  there  are
serious problems in the justice system, and there is no way that  we  cannot
reflect on those problems, which were raised  by  the  people  who  attended
those hearings. It was clear from  the  presentations  that  cases  are  not
properly investigated by the public prosecution. These cases, which are  not
properly investigated by the police, are  just  allowed  to  go  through  to
court prosecutors, while it is quite clear that there are not  enough  facts
to press charges against the perpetrator.

It was also made clear that the credibility of cases is compromised  by  the
fact that insufficient information is provided  by  police  officers,  while
the victims have given sufficient information, which  was  not  captured  in
the statement. There was also another problem in terms of the delays in  the
finalisation of cases. These delays psychologically affect  the  victims  so
that they cannot withstand the pressure of  the  courtrooms  and  the  legal
representatives of the perpetrators.

These delays also lead to the victims losing their memory in  terms  of  the
sequence of events. If prosecutors can ensure that the processing  of  these
cases is speeded up, that will help the victims. The  environment  in  court
also intimidates children. Imagine if a child of four or five years  of  age
has to appear in front of an adult. How  can  that  particular  child  argue
against adults? That is a highly impossible situation.

The presence of perpetrators also intimidates the children. One  finds  that
the boyfriend of the mother or the uncle is present, facing  the  child  who
has to give testimony about what has happened. This is a gross  irregularity
in terms of our legal system. These things should be avoided in future.

With regard to cross-examination, the legal representatives of  perpetrators
regard it as a victory when during cross-questioning a  young  child  cannot
argue against an adult person. What does that mean? Are  we  making  a  joke
out of our criminal justice system by not protecting these children?

The insensitivity of legal representatives also  causes  these  children  to
end up confused and experiencing serious fear when standing against  adults.
With regard to the judicial officers, it is unfortunate  that  some  of  our
magistrates and judges prejudge the victims. When they cross-examine a  girl
child, they want to know: What was she wearing?  Was  it  her  first  sexual
experience? What is that? How can one say that a child of five years of  age
had a first sexual experience? That is uncalled for.

The other thing is that they  also  concentrate  on  the  character  of  the
complainant. If the child grew up in a violent area, they maintain that  the
child invited abuse. That is wrong. A child  cannot  invite  abuse  from  an
adult. That is not possible.

Another issue which was of concern to the presenters is that  the  sentences
which are passed are too lenient. One finds that somebody who has  committed
rape is sentenced to four or five years. This does not fit  the  crime  that
was committed. Rape is a major offence in this country.

Another issue is that  there  is  a  low  conviction  rate  of  these  child
rapists. Cases are taken to court but at the end of the day people  are  not
convicted. They cannot be given jail sentence  because  of  what  they  have
done. Another thing that cropped up is that there is a high withdrawal  rate
of cases. This results from the  fact  that  victims  are  very  young.  The
perpetrators are family members who intimidate these  children.  When  there
are no visible injuries  on  the  bodies  of  these  children  there  is  no
evidence. Court rolls are full and it is claimed that judicial officers  are
stressed. Defence lawyers use delaying tactics. A  sexual  offence  register
was also one of the things that featured prominently,  but  this  will  need
debate at a later stage.

We are hoping that the Department of Justice will  ensure  that  legislation
on sexual offences will be speeded up so that these people can be  convicted
in a proper manner.

Ka bomadimabe, bana ba rona ba iphitlhela e le gore kwa bofelong, bagolo  ba
ba botsa dipotso tse ba ka se kgoneng go di emela. Potso ke gore: Fa  ngwana
a sa kgone go ikarabela mo motsading o tla ikarabela jang mo  mmueleding  yo
o tswang sekolong e bile a rutegile, fa ena a sa rutega go ya ka  molao?  Go
utlwisa botlhoko go bona bana ba diragalelwa ke dilo tse di ntseng jalo.

Kwa bofelong, ke rata gore ka ntlha ya fa bana ba sa kgone go  ipuelela,  go
tlhokega gore karolo ya dikgotlhatshekelo tse di ntseng di le teng - e  seng
gore go agiwe tse dintshwa - di dire ka dikgetse tsa bana ba  ba  tshwarwang
makgwakgwa le ba ba betelelwang gore go se ka ga nna le dikgetse tse  dintsi
tse di emetseng go sekwa. [Nako e fedile.] [Legofi.] (Translation of  Tswana
paragraphs follows.)

[Unfortunately, in the end adults pose questions that  our  children  cannot
answer. If children who are not  educated  cannot  be  answerable  to  their
parents, how can they be answerable to a trained professional lawyer? It  is
very sad to see children being subjected to these types of conditions.

In conclusion, I would like to say that  since  children  cannot  speak  for
themselves, a part of the existing courts - new courts should not  be  built
- should be used for cases of child abuse and rape to  reduce  the  build-up
of cases awaiting trial. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Mrs P W CUPIDO: Chairperson, while the Government has recently  appointed  a
multiparty task team to  stimulate  debate  and  make  recommendations  with
regards to combating sexual abuse of children in this country, we  face  yet
another rape of a girl of 11 years  old.  As  was  reported  in  yesterday's
newspapers, the girl lived alone with her father for three years.

Each member of the task team has received an invitation from the  Phaphamani
rape crisis counselling centre, inviting all members of  the  task  team  to
visit the rape capital of South Africa - Uitenhage in the Eastern Cape.

My vraag aan hierdie Regering is of hy die wil het en of hy  ernstig  is  om
beloftes van menseregte, soos dit in ons Grondwet aangeteken is, gestand  te
doen en uit te leef. Die Grondwet belowe aan kinders in hierdie  land  onder
meer die reg op basiese voeding, behuising, beskerming  en  veiligheid.  Dit
is inderdaad duidelik dat daar derduisende kinders is - veral dogtertjies  -
wat jare van vrees, onveiligheid, pyn, wanhoop,  aanranding  en  verkragting
beleef  sonder  hoop  vir  die  toekoms,  sonder  berading   of   behoorlike
hulpbronne om hierdie  kinders  'n  geleentheid  op  sielkundige  heling  en
liggaamlike herstel te gee. Hoe ernstig hierdie  Regering  gaan  optree  met
hierdie saak kan dalk gemeet word aan vorige probleme van dieselfde aard.

Wat het geword van ons openbare verhore en ondersoeke  na  die  mishandeling
van bejaardes? Televisieprogramme soos Carte Blanche en Special  Assignment,
asook  wyer  mediadekking,  het  internasionale  aandag  op  ons   bejaardes
gevestig. Watter  korrektiewe  stappe  het  intussen  die  omstandighede  en
veiligheid van bejaardes  verbeter?  Het  die  publiek  ooit  weer  van  die
Regering gehoor? In hoe 'n mate gee die  President  om  vir  sy  kinders  se
veiligheid en hul welstand? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[My question to this Government is whether they have the  will  and  whether
are they are serious about fulfilling  and  living  out  their  promises  of
human rights as  stated  in  the  Constitution.  The  Constitution  promises
children in this country, amongst others,  the  right  to  basic  nutrition,
housing, protection and safety. It is indeed clear that there are  thousands
of children - especially girls - who experience years of  fear,  insecurity,
pain, despair, assault and  rape,  without  hope  for  the  future,  without
counselling or proper resources to give these  children  a  chance  to  heal
psychologically and physically. How serious the Government is going to  deal
with this issue could perhaps be measured against similar  problems  in  the
past.

What happened to our public hearings and investigations into  the  abuse  of
the  elderly?   Television  programmes  like  Carte  Blanche   and   Special
Assignment,  as  well  as  wider  media  coverage,   trained   international
attention on our elderly. What rectifying steps have changed the  conditions
and safety of the aged in the meantime? Did the public ever again hear  from
the Government? How much does the President care for his  children's  safety
and welfare?]

The President spoke in this House on 21 June 2001,  just  days  after  Youth
Day, 16 June. He said, and I quote:


  We celebrated the fact that our people can march down our streets without
  the fear of being shot and killed, regardless of the cause they  seek  to
  advance.

I want to say to the President that I  also  pay  tribute  to  thousands  of
children who sacrificed their lives for such  a  good  cause.  But  now  our
children march down our streets with fear of being raped and abused.  A  new
darkness has dawned in this country. The question is: Is it safe to be  born
in South Africa?

On 21 June last year - or in a second speech the  President  made,  did  not
refer to these children, whom I represent today. It is as if he  is  unaware
of these brutal rapes and  abuses,  as  if  he  never  reads  newspapers  or
watches the news. [Interjections.] Last week we listened to presenters,  one
after the other, as well as young children, some of them  victims.  I  trust
that this Government will in this case really  take  considerable  steps  to
give hope of a safer environment.

In conclusion, the DP reaffirms our sympathy to each and  every  child  rape
victim and every mother who bears the pain with her  child.  The  Government
must take  note  of  the  seriousness  with  which  every  organisation  and
individual participated in the hearings. The Government will  also  have  to
produce new  legislation  which  will  embody  some  progressive  reform  to
existing laws relating to  sexual  offences.  We  will  concentrate  on  our
recommendations from the DP and from the DA side in the final debate in  the
second term of this year. [Applause.]

Ms H I BOGOPANE: Chairperson, allow me to take this opportunity to  dedicate
my speech today to all the children who have been sexually  abused  in  this
country. I would refrain from calling them victims because I believe that  a
day after the rape or abuse has taken place, a person is no longer a  victim
but a survivor.

I would like to dedicate this speech to take this opportunity of sharing  my
own story as a way of saying to the children of South Africa,  they  have  a
Government that listens. I would take the opportunity not to talk to  issues
around policy  because  when  the  Government  signed  the  CRC  it  made  a
commitment to children and said that the first call will  be  for  children.
Yes, we all agree, there have been problems, but there has also been  a  lot
of progress since 1994.

The  first  thing  that  I  would  address  myself  to  is  to  declare   my
disappointment firstly to the call that the termination of pregnancy  should
be abolished.

I take this stand today as a survivor  of  sexual  abuse  myself,  and  that
abuse left me with a  child  I  never  wanted  to  have.  At  that  time  if
termination  of  pregnancy  was  there,  I  would  have  taken  the  option.
Unfortunately, I am today a mother of a child who I never planned  to  have,
and at that particular time, those many years  ago,  I  was  not  given  the
option.

What makes it even more heartbreaking is  for  another  woman  who  believes
that even if she gets a child from being raped, she is forced to  live  with
that child. I am not  sure  if  I  agree  with  that.  What  makes  it  more
difficult is that as they call  for  the  termination  of  pregnancy  to  be
abolished they forget one thing, that one will become a victim for the  rest
of one's life.

The Termination of Pregnancy Act gives women an opportunity to be  survivors
because as I speak today, I have questions that  I  need  to  ask.  The  CRC
says, the child has rights  which  go  with  responsibilities.  My  daughter
needs her father, who happens to be a rapist who raped me.  I  am  subjected
to answering questions that I never wanted to answer,  and  I  am  not  sure
because that literally says that I would have to  co-operate  with  somebody
who has given me a child without my permission.

I am not sure what that means, but I will leave it to the  House  as  we  go
through the debate to make the decision. Maybe at that  time  when  we  deal
with the recommendations we can look at it. Much as I respect the  right  to
survival, I also respect the right to having a choice as a young woman.

Article 4 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child clearly  states  that
the implementation  of  the  rights  of  children,  which  is  a  Government
responsibility, must be made a reality. As we implement these rights  today,
I want to highlight that the children have highlighted their pain. A lot  of
them are abused by their own fathers who are tasked with the  responsibility
of protecting  them,  and  their  own  teachers  who  are  tasked  with  the
responsibility of teaching them.

I share the same story with one of the children who made a presentation.  As
a young blind girl she was raped by her own father, who is there to  protect
her. Every time she gets raped, he does not speak, so she is unable to  even
know who raped her.

My  only  call  and  request  is  that  the  Department   of   Justice   and
Constitutional Development needs to acknowledge  and  take  into  cognisance
the special needs of what  happens  when  a  blind  person  is  raped  by  a
perpetrator who would not even talk so as not to leave any evidence  behind,
because this would therefore say that he must  go  on  an  identity  parade.
This means that such victims would not have justice, because they  have  not
seen their perpetrators.

The second thing that was highlighted is that the Department of Justice  and
Constitutional Development must also  acknowledge  that  as  disabled  young
women with different disabilities, we  have  different  special  needs,  and
that the department must move smoothly to take into cognisance  those  needs
as the disabled also have the right to have their say and to  share  in  the
same democracy.

The issues around child abuse are not new. I would agree with my  colleagues
when they say that child abuse is not  on  the  increase.  What  is  on  the
increase is the number of victims who are so  young,  because  the  youngest
sexually abused survivor in South Africa was two weeks  old.  That  says  we
have a  problem.  I  think  when  the  Government  established  the  NPA  it
acknowledged that we had a  problem  and  that  we  required  an  integrated
approach to deal with it.

What needs  to  happen  is  what  we  will  discuss  when  we  go  into  the
recommendation as highlighted, but what I want to leave the House  to  think
about are the following. As we address child abuse we also need to  bear  in
mind that we will also be dealing with the issue of  teenage  pregnancy.  It
is on the increase for one reason, the  majority  of  young  women  who  are
pregnant have been sexually abused. A lot of them are  able  to  have  their
lives  back,  because  they  are  given  the  choice  of  terminating  those
pregnancies.

Therefore, it means that they would never ever have to see or have  anything
to do with their perpetrators again, unlike us who are  today  subjected  on
an ongoing basis. One cannot close that chapter, because one  is  forced  to
share the responsibility of raising that  child  with  somebody  one  wishes
never to see again in one's life.

It would also deal with issues of HIV/Aids, because  as  one  minimises  the
whole issue around sexual abuse and acknowledges the problems, one  develops
the different mechanisms that would address that particular aspect  and  one
makes recommendations. By the way, a lot of them  have  already  been  dealt
with. We will take into cognisance the differences between  a  rural  child,
disabled child, cultural aspects that are also at times very  oppressive  to
some of the issues, not forgetting the religious aspects. [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the crisis of child rape and abuse  is  not  a
new issue faced by society. It is, as reported by Dr Michelle Youngleson,  a
cycle which is difficult to break.
There is a history of child abuse that takes many forms and is a  course  of
many reasons. The MF is distressed by this dilemma and  is  glad  that  this
earnest initiative has been taken, noting the seriousness of  the  situation
and the determination to put a stop to it.

The MF supports the task group on sexual abuse of children and applauds  its
achievements and dedication this far. It also recognises the efforts  of  so
many parties that contributed to this programme  and  found  the  submission
made not only as contributory to tackling the problem, but also as  evidence
that South Africa does host a good moral fibre of persons and  parties  that
are genuinely concerned.

The many submissions made personally and by the NGOs, such as those by  Rape
Crisis, Prudence Msibi, Joshua  Moskei  and  so  many  others,  represent  a
breakthrough that gives the victims a voice to put an end to child abuse.

Our society needs to be educated about the many forms  of  child  abuse  and
the repercussions, causing a cycle of abuse from generation  to  generation.
The MF applauds and  supports  the  task  team  and  is  happy  to  see  the
involvement of so many departments such as Education, Safety  and  Security,
and so forth, in joining a commitment to overcome the cycle of child  abuse.
At times we do not realise that the many forms child abuse may take  can  be
emotional, verbal, and through neglect. There are so many,  and  these  have
major effects on how people socialise.

The MF supports the task team and the end  to  all  forms  of  child  abuse.
Children need to be loved, not abused. To the abusers, in God's  name,  stop
this sinful act. [Applause.]

Ms S K MNUMZANA: Modulasetulo, ha ke qale ka ho leboha bohle  kilng  ba  nka
karolo, haholo bana ba kileng ba fihla kahare ho  Palamente  ya  Afrikaborwa
ka sebete mme ba beha dintlha tsa bona; ba tshetleha mathata ao ba  fetileng
ho ona.Letsatsi la kajeno ho na ke  letsatsi  le  bohloko,  ke  letsatsi  le
mahlonoko; ka boiphihlelo boo nkileng ka ba le bona, ha re  ne  dutse  jwalo
ka komiti mme re mametse mafapha a mmuso, mekgatlo ka ho fapafapana mme,  re
mametse le bana ba fihlileng ba hlalosa boiphihlelo, boima le bthata boo  ba
fetileng ho bona jwalo ka diphofu.

Ke rata ho hlalosa ha nyenyane seo re se  utlwileng  jwalo  ka  barumuwa  ba
mmuso, ho batlisisa  le  ho  batla  mekgwa  eo  tlhekefetso  ya  bana  e  ka
fediswang ka teng, eleng e tlang ka mokgwa wa thobalano. Tlhekefetso  ena  e
ama bana ka tsela tse ngata, e ba ama mmeleng, dikelellong, mme le  bokamoso
ba bona bo ameha ka tsela e sa nepahalang.  Ngwana  eo  e  bileng  phofu  ya
tlhekefetso o phela ka leqeba leo jwalo ka motho ya nang le lefu la  lepera.
Ha nke ke re qaqa ka tse ding tseo bana bana ba iphuneng bashebane le  tsona
ka lebaka la tlhekefetso.

Diphofu tsena di tsamaya nako  e  telele  ha  ba  ilo  fumantshwa  thuso  ya
bophelo bo botle kapa ba ilo fumana dingaka. Le ha ba se fihlile teng,  mela
eo ba e emang ke e metelele haholo hobane ba hore ba eme  moleng,  ho  emela
hore nako ya bona e fihle. Ba bonwa ke batho ba hlokang boiphihlelo  mme  ba
hloka thupello e batsi ya hore ba be le kutlwelo bohloko ho bona, ba  be  le
mamello mmme ba nahanele diphofu tsena. Mekgwa  ya  ho  fumana  dintlha  tsa
ketsahalo le yona ke fokolang ka hare ho dipetlele, ka hare ho deishene  tsa
mapolesa mme qetello o fumane hore bopaki bo leng teng bo  a  fokola  ha  bo
fihla kgotla. Ho se rupellwe ha batho bohle ba amehang bakeng  sa  ho  thusa
diphofu tsena jwalo ka  dingaka,  baoki,  sepolesa,  baahlodi  le  bohle  ba
amehang, e eba qaka ho bana bana.

Ho fokola ha ditshebeletso mafapheng a mang a tsa bophelo bo botle  ha  holo
jwang batho ba iphumang ele  ba  kojwana  di  mahetleng  mme  ele  batho  ba
mahaeng le teng entse ele bothata ho bona hobane ha ba  fumane  dintho  tseo
ba tlamehang ho di fumana tse amanang le tsa bophelo bo botle.  Setjhaba  le
sona se bapala karolo hobane tsela eo ba  kgesang  diphofu  tsena  ka  yona,
ehloka ho nehelana ka bopaki hore bana bana batle ba tsebe ho fumana  thuso.
Motho ha a lokela ho fna ka bopki kgotla o tshaba mahlo a batho, otshaba  ho
hlowa ke batho bao a dulang le bona. Ho hlokeha ha dibaka  tsa  tshireletso,
ha ho nkuwa bopaki ke bong ba mathata. H di district  surgeons,  disebediswa
tsa tshohanyetso le tshehetso e phethahetseng  e  lokeang  ho  fuwa  diphofu
tsena, ke qaka ka hare ho setjhaba.

Ho na le ntlha e re tlamang, eo re tlamehang ho e hlokomela ya  tumelo  e  e
reng ho robala le ngwana e monyenyane ho  phekola  lefu  kwatsi  ya  bosolla
hlapi. Ke tlhekefetso e feteletseng hobane hase dingaka tsa setso tse  tlang
ka taba ena, empa ele lequlwananyana la batho ba ratang ho kgelosa  setjhaba
mme re ile ra ba le monyetla wa  hore  re  ke  re  kopane  le  marena  eleng
Amakhose mme bona ha ba re fa bopaki ba buile mme  ba  phatlaltsaa  hore  ba
tshetsa mmuso hoo ba bileng ba kopile lefapha la bophelo bo  botle  hore  ba
ke ba kopane. (Translation of Sotho speech follows.)

[Ms S K MNUMZANA: Hon chairperson, let me begin by saying thank you  to  all
of those who have participated, especially children who bravely entered  the
South African Parliament and stated their case,  the  children  who  bravely
tabled their difficult experiences. To me, this day is a very  heartbreaking
day. It is a very crucial  day,  given  what  I  experienced  when  we  were
sitting as a  committee,  listening  to  Government  departments,  different
organisations and, of course,  children  who  came  to  describe  their  own
experiences,  difficulties  and  hardships  which  they  have  undergone  as
victims.

I would like to explain a little bit about what we as  Government  delegates
have heard in investigating and coming up with  a  mechanism  through  which
sexual child abuse can be brought to an end. This abuse affects children  in
many ways. It affects them physically  and  mentally  and  their  future  is
negatively affected. A child who has been a victim of abuse lives life  like
a leper. Let me touch on a few factors with which these children have  found
themselves faced, as a result of abuse.

These victims walk long distances whenever they visit health service  places
or whenever they visit medical doctors. Even on arrival there, they have  to
wait in very long queues because they have to  wait  their  turn.  They  are
attended to by inexperienced people who need extensive training with  regard
to being sympathetic towards and having patience  with  these  victims.  The
system of finding factors relating to the incident is also very poor in  the
hospitals and police stations and as a  result  the  available  evidence  is
always very poor in court. Lack of training for those  who  represent  these
victims, ie medical doctors, nurses, the police, judges and  all  those  who
are accountable, becomes a problem to these children.

The lack of services in certain  health  departments,  especially  for  poor
people, is still a problem because they  don't  get  whatever  they  deserve
regarding their health. The community also contributes to this  through  the
manner in which it discriminates against these victims. One finds  a  person
shying away from giving evidence whenever that is due to be done.  A  person
becomes afraid of being hated by other people within the community.  One  of
these problems is that of a lack of secure  places  where  evidence  can  be
given or taken. The scarcity of district surgeons,  emergency  services  and
the proper service due to these victims is a big problem within society.
There is a binding factor  which  we  must  take  into  consideration.  This
relates to the myth that having sex with a small child can cure  Aids.  That
is pure abuse, because this  idea  was  not  brought  about  by  traditional
healers, but by a bunch of people whose intention is  to  confuse  and  send
people astray. We had an opportunity to  hold  a  meeting  with  traditional
leaders, ie Amakhosi, and they provided us with their  evidence.  They  have
spoken and announced that they support the Government, to  the  extent  that
they have even asked the Department of Health to hold a meeting with them.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Agb Voorsitter, kan  daar  'n  groter  aanklag  wees  teen  'n
gemeenskap as die feit dat ons vandag in die Parlement  'n  debat  moet  hou
oor die seksuele misbruik van kinders -  die  kleinste,  die  mees  weerlose
onder  ons,  wat  uitgebuit  word,  verkrag  word,  gestroop  word  van  hul
kinderlike onskuld, gevangenes gemaak word van  ervarings  wat  die  diepste
wese van hul menswees aantas? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Hon Chairperson, can any indictment of a community  be  bigger
than the fact that today, in Parliament, we have to debate the sexual  abuse
of children - the smallest, the most  vulnerable  among  us  who  are  being
exploited, raped and stripped of their  childlike  innocence,  and  who  are
being rendered prisoners of experiences that  affect  the  deepest  core  of
their humanity?]

South Africa has, as a country, adopted  one  plan  and  charter  after  the
other: The 1990  Summit  for  Children's  Goals  for  Survival,  Protection,
Development and Participation; the  UN  Convention  on  the  Rights  of  the
Child; the First Call for Children; a National Plan of Action for  Children;
the Bill of Rights in our  Constitution  and  the  African  Charter  on  the
Rights and Welfare of the Child. Still children  are  abused  and  raped  in
South Africa at an alarming rate. That is true for all communities.

Ons kan baie planne maak, en dis reg. Ons kan nasionale aksies  loods  -  en
dit hoort so - so lank ons net by die wortel van die kwaad uitkom. Ons  moet
eenvoudig  die  morele  standaarde  van  Suid-Afrika   se   mense   verhoog.
Kinderverkragting illustreer die laagste vorm denkbaar van  morele  menslike
bestaan.

Die Regering kan fasiliteer en ko√∂rdineer. Die  Regering  moet  toesien  dat
oortreders gestraf word. Maar die belangrikste saak is  dat  die  burgerlike
samelewing versterk moet word. En die kern  daarvan  is  die  gesin  en  die
kerk.  Faktore  wat  gesonde  gesinslewe  belemmer,   moet   net   eenvoudig
aangespreek word - armoede, werkloosheid, obskure sosiale hole,  misdaad  en
kultuur van geweld.  Gesinswaardes  moet  verstewig  word.  (Translation  of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[We can make many plans,  and  this  is  correct.  We  can  launch  national
campaigns - and so it should be - as long as we just get to the root of  the
evil. We simply have to raise the moral standards of  the  people  of  South
Africa. Child rape illustrates the lowest imaginable  form  of  moral  human
existence.

The Government can facilitate and co-ordinate. The Government  must  see  to
it that offenders are punished. But the most important issue is  beefing  up
civil society. At its core are  the  family  and  the  church.  Any  factors
impeding  a  healthy  family  life  must  simply  be  addressed  -  poverty,
unemployment, obscure social  dens,  crime  and  the  culture  of  violence.
Family values must be strengthened.]

The church is the most important role-player in the upliftment of the  moral
fibre of a country. The church must  never  be  seen  as  an  opponent,  but
rather as a vital companion  in  the  mammoth  task  of  creating  a  better
country for all our children.

The AEB will always be a devoted companion in the  struggle  for  the  moral
upliftment of every sphere of human life in South Africa. That is  the  only
answer, also to the question of child abuse.

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Chairperson, rape, child abuse and family violence  are
frequently under-reported, partly due to the lack of power by those who  are
experiencing the abuse.

Children, as the most vulnerable and powerless members of  society,  are  in
some instances exposed to conditions which are hazardous to  mental  health.
Particularly at risk are homeless  children,  children  living  in  informal
settlements and children whose mothers and fathers have been dehumanised  by
apartheid. Psychologists who care to  examine  South  African  society  have
confirmed the long-held view of Azapo  that  the  sociocultural  assault  on
bodies of black people is one of  the  vicious  tragedies  that  befell  our
people during the apartheid regime.

One of the contributing factors to child  abuse  in  black  communities,  is
that the apartheid system violated the integrity of  black  people's  bodies
to such an extent that their existential relationship with  the  environment
has been distorted. This resulted in negative sociocultural conditions,  and
created negative internalised individual and collective body  images,  which
reveal themselves in mental disturbance or distorted lifestyles.

When children grow up with drug  and  alcohol  abuse  where  those  who  are
supposed to  guide  them  in  life  have  distorted  images  of  themselves,
violence and abuse occur. Azapo believes that there are  no  simple  answers
and measures to this problem. To reconstruct the lives of  people  who  were
damaged by apartheid is not a simple matter.

Nkk L R  MBUYAZI:  Mphathisihlalo  neNdlu  ehloniphekile,  ngifisa  ukubonga
ukuphatha  kukamnumzane  uSaloojee  obewusihlalo   waleli   komiti   ophathe
ngendlela enobunono nangokucophelela lo msebenzi abewenza.

Kwezinye  zezikhalazo   ezivelileyo   bekunezikhalazo   ezivela   ezindaweni
zasemakhaya. Bakhalaze ngokuthi amakilinikhi  akude,  mhlawumbe  nezingcingo
kuyenzeka zingabi seduze futhi neziteshi  zamaphoyisa  zibe  kude.  Kuvelile
ukuthi  bancane  odokotela  abanolwazi  olunzulu  lokusebenza  lo   msebenzi
ikakhulu  ngoba  ingane  esuke  isidlwenguliwe  kwesinye   isikhathi   isuke
isisesimeni sokungakwazi nokuzizwa ukuthi isiya ngaphandle nokuthi  kufanele
yenze njani. Kusuke sekuhlangene zonke izicubu zayo.

Kufanele ngalesi sikhathi kube khona udokotela oqeqeshwe  ngokwanele  ukuthi
akwazi ukwenza lo msebenzi. Kuvelile ukuthi isibhedlela i-Red  Cross  yisona
esisonolwazi olunzulu lokwenza  lo  msebenzi.  Bayahlupheka  emakhaya  ngoba
abanabo abantu abaqeqeshwe ngokugcwele ukuthi benze  lo  msebenzi.  Abakwazi
nokuwabika kahle amacala aqondene nokudlwengulwa kwezingane.

Kuvelile ukuthi kuba khona amasiko  enziwayo  njengokuthi  kugezwe  amagceke
kukhishwe nenhlawulo. Kuye kuthi  uma  ingane  isidlwenguliwe  bese  abazali
bayo bebona ukuthi kungcono ukuthi kugezwe amagceke noma kuhlawulwe. Ngakho-
ke sithi lowo mkhuba mawuphele lapho izingane  zizodlwengulwa  bese  kuthiwa
kungcono kugezwe amagceke noma kukhokhwe inhlawulo bese  kuthi  lowo  owenze
lokho agcine engabanjwanga noma icala ligcine liphelile.

Okunye okuvelile ukuthi sekuphele ubuntu lapho ingane ibihlala kwagogo  noma
kwamakhelwane ayibheke ukuze zingahlali nje  zodwa  ngoba  okunye  okuvelayo
ukuthi izingane zihlala zodwa zingabhekwe muntu.

Okunye okube kubi kakhulu  ukuthi  kube  khona  abaqophi  bezithombe  abathi
bazothatha udaba oluphathelene nodaba  lwengane  uTshepang  benze  isithombe
ngalo,  siyovezwa  emazweni  aphesheya  ikakhulukazi   koBrithani.   Ikomiti
likubone alangakuthakasela lokhu. Bathi igama lalesi sithombe kuzoba  i-Dark
Heart okuyisithombe okubonakala ukuthi kusasa kuyothi le  ngane  uma  ikhula
izibone, ibone kuqoshwe ngayo isithombe sokuthi yake  yadlwengulwa  ngelinye
ilanga nabanye besibuka. Akuyona into  ezoba  yinhle  le.  Ngakho-ke  sithi,
phansi ngabaqophi balesi sithombe! Sithi, phansi!

Ziyothini lezi  zingane  kusasa  uma  sezibona  esithombeni  ukuthi  zigcina
sezenziwe kanje. Ngifisa futhi  ukuveza  ukuthi  kube  khona  lezi  zingane,
abafowethu   abakhulume   ngaphambi   kwami   bakushilo   ukuthi    izingane
ezazidlwenguliwe  zazidlwengulwe  zikanyekanye  ziningi.   Kuvelile   ukuthi
bezizisholo ngokwazo ukuthi kwenzeka kanjani. Lokhu kwenzeka ngenxa  yokuthi
zacela ukugibela emotweni thize ezayitholayo  ayabe  isazisa  lapho  ezaziya
khona. Bazivalela endlini ethile zahlala kuleyo ndlu  belokhu  bezidlwengula
izinsuku zilandelana. Kwakuyinto  ebuhlungu  kakhulu  lena  eyazwakala  kule
nto. (Translation of Zulu speech follows.)

[Mrs L R MBUYAZI: Chairperson and honourable House, I would  like  to  thank
Mr Saloojee, the former chairperson of this  committee,  for  the  neat  and
careful way in which he performed his work.

Among the complaints that were put forward, were complaints from  the  rural
areas. People complained that clinics are far from them,  and  sometimes  it
happens that telephones are not  close  to  them,  as  well  as  the  police
stations. It became clear that there are very  few  doctors  who  have  deep
knowledge about doing this job, especially because sometimes one finds  that
a child who has been raped is in a state, cannot feel that she needs  to  go
to the toilet and does not know what she should do. At these times  all  her
muscles are contracted.

At times like these there should be a doctor who is well trained to do  this
job. It became clear that the Red Cross Hospital is the only one that has  a
good knowledge of this job. In the rural areas they fail,  because  they  do
not have people who are fully trained to do this  job.  They  fail  even  to
report properly the cases regarding the rape of children.

It also became clear that some traditions are being followed, like  cleaning
the homestead and paying some penalties. When a child has  been  raped,  the
parents feel that they should clean the homestead or  a  penalty  should  be
paid. Therefore, we say, that the habit should stop where a child was  raped
and the homestead was  cleaned,  followed  by  the  payment  of  a  penalty,
because the rapist will go free and his case will end just there.

Another thing that was discovered was that  humanity  is  no  longer  to  be
found among people, because in the past a child was left with  a  granny  or
an uncle to look after her so that she would not be left alone. Now  it  has
been discovered that children are left alone.

Another very bad thing that was  discovered  was  that  photographers  would
take a child-related issue, like that of Tsepang,  and  take  a  photo,  and
then that photo would be published  overseas,  especially  in  Britain.  The
committee saw this and it was not happy with it. They said the name of  this
photo should be Dark Heart, seeing that it is a photo that this  child  will
see when she has grown up. She will see her photo, one that was taken  after
she was raped, and others will see  it  too.  This  is  not  a  good  thing.
Therefore, we say: Down with the people who took this photo, down!  We  say:
Down!

What will these children say in future when they  see  that  they  ended  up
being shown to everyone like that. I would like to tell you that there  were
children, mentioned by former speakers, who were said to have been raped  as
a group. It became clear, when they told the story themselves,  as  to  what
happened. This happened because they asked for a  lift  in  a  certain  car,
which did not take them where they wanted to go. They  locked  the  children
in a certain house, where they raped them repeatedly on a  daily  basis.  It
was a painful thing that emerged from this story.]

Mnr D V BLOEM: Voorsitter, ek wil 'n versoek rig aan die Huis dat almal  vir
'n oomblik stilbly en dink aan die gehuil en die gekreun van  'n  tweejarige
baba wat verkrag word. Ek wil h√™ dat mense in die Huis vir 'n  oomblik  moet
stilbly en dink aan 'n blinde dogter wat verkrag word. Ek wil h√™ mense  moet
vir 'n oomblik stilbly en dink aan 'n gestremde wat haarself  nie  kan  help
nie, terwyl sy verkrag word. Ek wil h√™ dat mense vir 'n oomblik  stilbly  en
dink aan 'n skooldogter wat skool toe gaan om te  gaan  leer  en  deur  haar
onderwyser verkrag word.

Dit was die boodskap wat ons Donderdag van klein kindertjies gekry het.  Die
boodskap was duidelik aan ons. Ek is gevra om hierdie boodskap aan die  Huis
oor  te  dra:  Geen  verkragter  moet  borg  of  parool  kry  nie.   Hierdie
verkragters moet in gevangenisse verwyder word van  die  gewone  gevangenes.
Hulle moet in gevangenisse gesit word soos C-Max in Pretoria. Hierdie  mense
moet voel dat wat hulle aan ons kinders doen, ons  nie  gaan  goedkeur  nie.
Ons moet sorg dat die boodskap baie duidelik uitkom. Ons  in  die  Parlement
is ernstig en ons wil 'n toekoms bou.

As ons hulle toelaat om ons kinders te verkrag, gaan ons nie mense soos  die
Speaker h√™ wat hier kan kom praat nie. Ons gaan nie 'n toekoms h√™  van  lede
wat hier sit nie.  Watter  toekoms  het  ons,  as  ons  hierdie  mense  gaan
toelaat?

Ek wil in hierdie laaste paar minute wat ek het, my tot  ons  mans  hier  in
die Parlement rig. Ons mans kom nie baie duidelik en openlik uit om  hierdie
euwel teen te staan nie. Ons mans kom nie sterk genoeg na  vore  om  hierdie
mans te wys wat klein kindertjies verkrag dat ons as wetmakers  nie  tevrede
is nie. [Applous.] As daar 'n hofsaak is soos di√© van Tsepang  in  Upington,
sien ons net vroue met plakkate staan. Ons sien  nie  mans  in  die  optogte
nie. Ek wil 'n uitdaging aan mans van alle kante rig, as daar 'n hofsaak  is
van 'n verkragter, dat ons sal gaan en wys ons is nie tevrede  hiermee  nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, I would like to address a request to  the  House
that everyone remain silent and think of the crying and moaning  of  a  two-
year-old baby being raped. I want people in this House to  be  quiet  for  a
minute and think about a blind girl being raped. I want people to  be  quiet
for a moment and think about a disabled  person  who  cannot  help  herself,
while she is being raped. I want people to be quiet for a moment  and  think
about a schoolgirl who goes to school to learn and is raped by her teacher.

This was the message we got on Thursday from  small  children.  The  message
was clear to us. I was asked to convey this message to the House: No  rapist
should receive bail or parole. These rapists  must  be  separated  from  the
regular prisoners in prisons. They should be put in prisons  like  C-Max  in
Pretoria. These people must feel that we are not going to condone what  they
do to our children. We must see  to  it  that  the  message  is  heard  very
clearly. We in Parliament are serious and we want to build a future.

If we allow them to rape our children, we will  not  have  people  like  the
Speaker who can come and speak here. We are not going to have  a  future  of
members who can sit here. What future do we have if we allow these people?

In these last few minutes which I have I would like  to  address  myself  to
our men here at Parliament. We men are not coming  out  clearly  and  openly
against this evil. We men are not coming out strongly enough to  show  these
men who rape  small  children  that  we  as  lawmakers  are  not  satisfied.
[Applause.] When there is a court case like the  one  involving  Tsepang  in
Upington, we only see women  with  placards.  We  do  not  see  men  in  the
demonstrations. I want to address a challenge to men from  all  sides,  that
if there is a court case involving a rapist, we should go and show  that  we
are not satisfied with this.]

Ms J A SEMPLE: Mr Chairperson, on a point of order: Is Mr Bloem prepared  to
take a question.

Mr D V BLOEM: Yes, okay.

Ms J A SEMPLE: Can Mr Bloem  perhaps  tell  us  why  there  are  no  Cabinet
Ministers here in the House today to hear his speech?

Mnr D V BLOEM: Mnr die Voorsitter,  die  Kabinetslede  is  reeds  besig  met
hierdie soort ding. Die ANC is baie ernstig om hierdie probleem op  te  los.
[Applous.] Die ANC neem hierdie probleem baie ernstig  op,  daarom  is  daar
vandag hierdie debat. Ons wil 'n baie duidelike boodskap  uitstuur  aan  die
verkragters:  Ons  verklaar  oorlog  teen  verkragters.  Dit  moet  'n  baie
duidelike boodskap wees. Ons gaan nie toelaat dat daar so  met  ons  kinders
gemaak word en ons mammas en oumas verkrag word  nie.  Daar  gaan  nie  plek
wees vir hulle nie.

Waarom s√™ ek dat hierdie mense verwyder moet word uit die  gevangenisse?  In
die tronk verkrag hulle  ook.  Hulle  vat  die  kleingeboude  mannetjies  en
verkrag hulle in die  tronk.  Ons  gaan  hulle  verwyder.  Ek  wil  'n  baie
duidelike boodskap aan die Minister  van  Korrektiewe  Dienste  stuur:  Geen
verkragter moet vir borg oorweeg word nie. ``Bail'' is uit.  Ons  kan  ander
mense oorweeg vir borgtog, maar nie vir hulle nie.

'n Duidelike boodskap moet aan  die  polisie,  landdroste  en  regters  daar
buite uitgestuur word: Dit is ons kinders  wat  verkrag  word!  Die  polisie
moet ten sterkste borg vir 'n verkragter  teenstaan.  Landdroste  moet  borg
weier en nie eens kyk na die verkragters nie. Ons het nie tyd op die  hofrol
vir verkragters nie. Ons is moeg vir  hierdie  verkragters.  [Applous.]  Ons
wil hulle nie weer in die gemeenskap h√™ nie.

Dit is pynlik wanneer 'n groot man op 'n klein kindjie  van  twee  jaar  l√™.
Die hele nag lank is daai kind hulpeloos. Die kind  weet  nie.  Daardie  lid
luister nie, want hy verstaan nie die pyn en  die  leed  wat  hierdie  mense
ervaar nie. Hy moes daar gewees het toe blinde  kinders  ges√™  het:  ``Mense
van die Parlement,  help  ons  asseblief.  Ons  word  verkrag.''  [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr D V BLOEM: Mr Chairperson, the members of the Cabinet are  already  busy
with this sort of  thing.  The  ANC  is  very  serious  about  solving  this
problem. [Applause.] The ANC takes this problem  very  seriously,  which  is
why we are having this debate today. We want to send a  very  clear  message
to the rapists: We declare war against rapists. This must be  a  very  clear
message. We are not going to allow our children to be treated this  way  and
our mothers and grandmothers to be raped. There will be no place for them.

Why do I say that these people must be removed from the prisons? In  prisons
they also rape. They take the slightly built men and rape  them  in  prison.
We are going to remove them. I want to send a  very  clear  message  to  the
Minister of Correctional Services: No rapists must be considered  for  bail.
Bail is out. We can consider other people  with  regard  to  bail,  but  not
them.

A clear message must be sent to  the  police,  magistrates  and  judges  out
there: It is our children who are being raped! The police must  oppose  bail
for a rapist most strongly. Magistrates must refuse bail and not  even  look
at the rapists. We do not have time on the court roll for  rapists.  We  are
tired of these rapists.  [Applause.]  We  do  not  want  them  back  in  the
community.

It is painful when a large man lies on a small  child  of  two  years.  That
child is helpless for the whole night. The child does not know. That  member
is not listening, because he does not understand the pain and the  suffering
that these people experience. He should have been there when blind  children
said: ``People  of  Parliament,  please  help  us.  We  are  being  raped.''
[Applause.]]

Debate concluded.

Report adopted.

The House adjourned at 18:44.
                                 __________
                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bill was introduced by the Minister of Finance  in
         the National Assembly on 19 March 2002 and referred  to  the  Joint
         Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of  Joint  Rule
         160:


         (i)     Financial  Services  Ombud  Schemes  Bill  [B  13  -  2002]
              (National Assembly - sec 75) [Bill and  prior  notice  of  its
              introduction published in Government Gazette No  23122  of  19
              March 2002.]


         The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on  Finance
         of the National Assembly.
         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the  classification  of
         the Bill may be submitted to  the  Joint  Tagging  Mechanism  (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers have been tabled  and  are  now  referred  to  the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee  on
         Arts, Culture, Science and Technology and to the  Select  Committee
         on Education and Recreation:


         (a)     Annual Report  of  the  South  African  Geographical  Names
              Council for 2000-2001 [RP 28-2002].


         (b)     Annual Report of the National Museum for 2000-2002.


         (c)     Strategic Plan for Arts, Culture,  Science  and  Technology
              for 2002-2005.


     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee  on
         Justice  and  Constitutional  Development  for  consideration   and
         report. The reports are also referred to the  Select  Committee  on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:


         (a)      The  report  regarding  the  suspension  from  office   of
              Magistrate R M Nongema, tabled in terms of section 13(3)(c) of
              the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


         (b)     European Convention on  Extradition,  tabled  in  terms  of
              section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (c)      Additional  Protocol  to  the   European   Convention   on
              Extradition,  tabled  in  terms  of  section  231(2)  of   the
              Constitution, 1996.


         (d)     Second Additional  Protocol  to  the  European  Convention,
              tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (e)     Explanatory Memorandum to the European Convention  and  the
              Protocols.


         (f)     SADC  Protocol  Against  Corruption,  tabled  in  terms  of
              section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (g)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Protocol.

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     (1)    Mr L V Ngculu has been elected as chairperson of  the  Portfolio
         Committee on Health with effect from 19 March 2002.
     (2)    Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly:


         Bills, subject to proposed amendments, passed by  National  Council
         of Provinces on 19 March 2002 and transmitted for consideration  of
         Council's proposed amendments:


         (i)     Copyright Amendment Bill [B 73B - 2001] (National  Assembly
                 - sec 75)  (for  proposed  amendments,  see  Announcements,
                 Tablings and Committee Reports, p 238).


         (ii)    Performers'  Protection  Amendment  Bill  [B  74B  -  2001]
                 (National Assembly - sec 75) (for proposed amendments,  see
                 Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, p 238).


         The Bills have been referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on  Trade
         and  Industry  of  the  National  Assembly  for  a  report  on  the
         amendments proposed by the Council.


     (3)    Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly:


         Bill, as amended, passed by National Council  of  Provinces  on  19
         March  2002  and  transmitted  for   consideration   of   Council's
         amendments:


         (i)     Division of Revenue Bill [B 5D - 2002]  (National  Assembly
              - sec 76).


         The amended Bill has been referred to the  Portfolio  Committee  on
         Finance  for  a  report  and  recommendations  on   the   Council's
         amendments.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     Documents in terms of section 9(1) of the Promotion of  National  Unity
     and Reconciliation Act, 1995, regarding  the  Remuneration,  Allowances
     and  other  employment  Benefits  of  the  Staff  of  the   Truth   and
     Reconciliation Commission.

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     Report of the South African Parliamentary  Observer  Mission  (Zimbabwe
     Presidential Elections: 9 - 11 March 2002).


