---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 28 February 2002'
layout: debate
year: 2002
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2002/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2002-02-28
---

THURSDAY, 28 FEBRUARY 2002
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:01.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Mnr A E VAN NIEKERK: Mnr die Voorsitter, hiermee gee ek kennis dat ek by
die volgende sitting van die Raad sal voorstel:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) dr Willa Boezak gelukwens met sy aanstelling deur die opperhoof van
       die Khoi-khoi stamhoofde van Suid-Afrika, biskop Daniël James
       Kanyiles, as die woordvoerder van die Khoisan-taal in die Wes-Kaap;


  (2) kennis neem dat mnr A E Van Niekerk, as die taalombudsman van die
       Nuwe NP, graag aan die versoek van die opperhoof om samewerking
       voldoen en bevestig dat die goeie verhouding wat reeds bestaan,
       uitgebou sal word en dat taal as 'n brugbouer en bewys van respek vir
       dit wat ons van ons voorvaders ontvang het, gebruik sal word.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the Council -


  (1) congratulates Dr Willa Boezak on his appointment by the Paramount
       Chief of the Khoi Khoi Tribal Chiefs of South Africa, Bishop Daniël
       James Kanyiles, as spokesperson of the Khoisan language in the
       Western Cape; and


  (2) notes that Mr A E van Niekerk, as language ombudsman of the New NP,
       takes pleasure in complying with the chief's request for co-operation
       and confirms that the good relationship which already exists will be
       developed and that language will be used as a builder of bridges and
       proof of respect for that which we have received from our
       forefathers.]

                          INTER-CONGOLESE DIALOGUE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) lauds the efforts of our Government and those of the rest of the
       Southern African Development Community countries upon their success
       with the establishment of the Inter-Congolese Dialogue that started
       at Sun City on Monday, 25 February 2002;


  (2) notes that mediators are ensuring that the dialogue broadly
       represents the full spectrum of stakeholders, comprising political
       parties, civil society formations and rebel groups;


  (3) further notes that this is a tentative, yet positive step towards the
       attainment of a lasting and just peace in the Democratic Republic of
       Congo and particularly the Great Lakes Region; and


  (4) believes that these efforts represent a tremendous boost for the
       success of the New Partnership for Africa's Development (Nepad) and
       would go a long way towards restoring the faith of the peoples of the
       SADC region in our ability to solve our problems through dialogue and
       negotiation.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                    NEW CAST-IRON PLANT IN PORT ELIZABETH

                             (Draft Resolution)

Me E C GOUWS: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:


  Dat die Raad kennis neem van die feit dat -


  (1) Port Elizabeth se motorbedryf binnekort 'n hupstoot van etlike
       miljoene rand gaan kry;


  (2) die Bel-Essex Korporasie van Port Elizabeth, in samewerking met die
       Italiaanse maatskappy Almec, R109 miljoen in 'n nuwe gietysteraanleg
       in die Baai gaan belê;
  (3) dit 'n baie welkom finansiële inspuiting vir die motorbedryf in
       besonder en die streek as geheel is;


  (4) talle nuwe werksgeleenthede, veral in die Nelson Mandela Metropool,
       geskep gaan word; en


  (5) die mense in die Oos-Kaap verheug is oor die positiewe beleggers vir
       dié arm provinsie.
(Translation of Afrikaans motion without notice follows.)

[Ms E C Gouws: Chairperson, I move with out notice:


  That the Council notes that -


  (1) the motor industry in Port Elizabeth will soon get a boost of several
       millions of rands;


  (2) the Bel-Essex Corporation of Port Elizabeth, in collaboration with
       the Italian company Almec, is going to invest R109 million in a new
       cast-iron plant in Port Elizabeth;


  (3) this is a very welcome financial injection for the motor industry in
       particular and for the region as a whole;


  (4) many new job opportunities will be created, especially in the Nelson
       Mandela Metropole; and


  (5) the people of the Eastern Cape are delighted about the positive
       investors in respect of this poor province.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

       INTRODUCTION OF TELEPHONE INTERPRETING SERVICE FOR SOUTH AFRICA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) congratulates the Department of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology
       on the pilot project TISSA (Telephone Interpreting Service for South
       Africa);


  (2) notes that this trial will be targeted at 60 sites throughout South
       Africa, will run from March to December 2002 and will be managed by
       the Unit for Language Facilitation and Empowerment of the University
       of the Free State;


  (3) further notes the positive role PanSALB plays in this regard;


  (4) believes that the lack of clear communication in high-risk situations
       in hospitals and police stations can be resolved by the use of this
       interpreting service over the phone, where the interpreter need not
       be with the communicator or receiver in person; and


  (5) notes that this is a first in Africa and a step in the direction of
       becoming really multilingual in practice.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

    PROVISION OF FURNITURE AND BEDDING FOR MENTALLY DISABLED CHILDREN IN
                        POLOKWANE IN LIMPOPO PROVINCE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M I MAKOELA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that for many years the children at the Tsoga O Itirele school
       for the mentally disabled in GaMphahlele near Polokwane in the
       Limpopo province used to sleep on the floor;


  (2) further notes that since Tuesday these children no longer have to
       sleep on bare concrete floors after receiving more than 100 beds,
       blankets, pillows, chairs and tables from the Minister of Public
       Works, the hon Ms Stella Sigcau;


  (3) commends the Minister of Public Works for lighting up the hearts of
       these mentally handicapped children; and


  (4) welcomes her intervention as proof of our Government's commitment to
       roll back the frontiers of poverty.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                    CONTINUED POVERTY IN THE EASTERN CAPE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms P C P MAJODINA: Chairperson, I move without notice:
  That the Council -


  (1) notes that on the eve of Human Rights month it is still painful to
       realise that in the Eastern Cape thousands of our people still live
       below poverty lines and that children go to school and to bed without
       anything in their stomachs; and


  (2) call on all South African citizens to extend their kind hands to
       assist the have-nots as part of working together in the concept of
       ubuntu and Letsima.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                BASIC CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT AMENDMENT BILL
                       LABOUR RELATIONS AMENDMENT BILL

               (Consideration of Bills and of Reports thereon)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! I take this
opportunity to welcome the hon the Minister of Labour and call upon him to
address the House.

UMPHATHISWA WEZABASEBENZI: Mhlali-ngaphambili neentsiba zakho, mandibulise
kumaqabane, kwizihlobo, kwizidwesha nezimamhlaba. Namhlanje sihlangene kule
Ndlu ukuza kuxoxa nga le Mithetho isaYilwayo mibini ndiza kuyithi thaca
phambi kwamalungu - the Labour Relations Act and the Basic Conditions of
Employment Act. (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Chairperson, hon members, comrades, ladies and
gentlemen, today we have come to this House to debate the two Bills that I
am going to table, namely the Labour Relations Amendment Bill and the Basic
Conditions of Employment Amendment Bill.]

Let me point out that there is a connection between these Bills and the
department's mandate for this year, the year of implementation, enforcement
and service delivery. These amending Bills are going to provide my
department with new and improved tools to ensure that it can fulfil its
mandate and serve stakeholders with enhanced efficiency and improved
effectiveness.

One of the key objectives of these amending Bills is to improve the
application of these two laws. When these amending Bills come into
operation, I am hoping to see improved enforcement of conditions of
employment, both by the Department of Labour and bargaining councils where
they exist; improved dispute resolution at the CCMA through the
introduction of a number of measures, including a one-stop conciliation and
arbitration process; improved registration and oversight of trade unions
and employer organisations; a reduction in the abuse of workers by bogus
labour organisations; and improved management of retrenchment disputes and
the transfer of contracts of employment when a business changes hands.

One of the most innovative amendments that has been introduced relates to
the regulation of retrenchments. This is a very difficult area. It is very
sensitive and emotive. It is a tribute to the commitment of organised
labour and organised business to social partnership that we have new
provisions on which almost full consensus was reached.

The new provisions provide for a meaningful process of consensus-seeking
before workers are retrenched. In the event that this process does not
succeed, workers will have the right either to embark on a protected strike
or pursue litigation via the Labour Court. However, the option to strike
would be preceded by a further process of conciliation to establish the
space for a settlement.

These new provisions have been particularly welcomed by organised labour.
They should also be welcomed by organised business since they will provide
more certainty, particularly since the provisions also set out time-frames
aimed at preventing protracted retrenchment discussions. And, if employers
and trade unions participate in good faith in the consultation process,
problems should be solved without workers having to resort to striking.
What we have proposed with regard to the so-called ``retrenchment clause''
is in line with international jurisprudence. There is a survey that was
done by a group of South African business leaders and the leadership of the
organised labour movement on a fact-finding mission at the ILO, because
what we decided to do was to take leaders of business and trade unions and
also the top brass of the Department of Labour into the ILO for the whole
week to discuss only section 189, which deals with retrenchment, and look
at the entire world of jurisprudence on this issue. Hence the current
section 189 in the amendments.

This package of amendments will go a long way towards assisting the
department and the social partners with the management of labour relations
in our country. These Bills send important signals, even to potential
investors, that we have, indeed, risen to the challenge to deal with
unintended consequences of our labour laws to contribute towards ensuring
that hassle factors in respect of investment are addressed.

To organised business and labour, it is a signal that Government is
committed and responsive to the changing nature of the labour market and is
prepared to negotiate changes with them. As part of the process of
producing these amendments, business and labour got together in the
Millennium Labour Council and debated a number of proposals that were later
used as a framework for negotiations at Nedlac. This was a very useful
exercise which, of course, will ensure that these amendments have a high
level of legitimacy and credibility within the business and labour
constituencies. Only the feeble-minded would fail to realise that we have
done our best to ensure that these amendments provide something to everyone
while maintaining the elusive balance between labour market efficiency and
decent labour standards.

We would also like to say to economic analysts, who blamed labour market
regulation - because they had nothing to say for the poor performance of
the economy in relation to employment, that we have been responsive to
their feedback. We should not accept everything that we read in the papers,
that is said by these labour analysts, because, up to today, we have not
agreed on why our currency is bashed left, right and centre. It is
precisely because they cannot agree on anything. My director-general knows
that I am allergic to economists and lawyers, because we will never get the
same opinion, even if we put 20 of them in front of us!

One of the objectives of the amendments is to ensure that our labour laws
are more responsive to Government's imperative to create jobs. We have
attempted to achieve this through some of the amendments such as those in
respect of basic conditions of employment and the role of bargaining
councils in relation to small businesses. However, I am also of the view
that blaming the lack of jobs on labour market regulation is very spurious.
The lack of employment opportunities is a multifaceted problem, of which
investor confidence is key, and the labour market dispensation is only one
factor among many that investors consider when they decide to invest in our
country. So to the extent that a negative perception exists about our
labour laws, we have tried to address this. Even in the 15-point programme
of the department, I indicate that we shall continue to review our labour
laws, because there is absolutely nothing wrong in looking at areas that
are posing some difficulties.

To workers who are sometimes called vulnerable or atypical - those who are
not in formal employment relationships - it says that we are trying to make
our laws appropriate and relevant to all situations. Of course, I disagree
with Malamulele, who was saying that I must have a certificate for all
people who are not working in this country and that they are exempting
themselves from labour laws and that I must sign it, because by doing that,
I will be saying to the people of this country that their Constitution is
useless. The Constitution guarantees the rights of workers. Worker rights
are human rights. I cannot sign a document that says workers in this
country have no rights. It cannot be me, or this Government - in particular
the ANC-led Government. We cannot do it.

To the institutions that we have set up through our laws such as the CCMA
and bargaining councils, it says that we want our laws to assist them in
their day-to-day operations. I believe that these amendments will make it
easier for the CCMA and bargaining councils to carry out their business
more effectively and efficiently. In fact, we have found that this area is
the one that has been highly criticised, throughout our consultations, by
both workers and employers. It is taking time to settle cases. And, as soon
as we pass these Bills here and the President consents to them, we will be
able to have even shorter processes for the CCMA.

Today, we are witnessing the culmination of a long process, a process that
has involved consultations, negotiations, public hearings, and lots of
legal drafting. It has taken us from July 2000 to bring these Bills to this
House precisely because, in the Department of Labour, we believe in
consultations, negotiations, public hearings and lots of legal drafting to
the extent that, I believe, hon members do not doubt the goodness of this
law. If hon members look properly at the law, they will realise how tight
it is. This process has confirmed for us, as South Africans, the value of
social dialogue - that inputs from workers and employers, and negotiations
between organised labour and business can only lead to value-added and
legitimate outcomes.

Therefore, it was not without reason that, when these amendments were
tabled in the National Assembly in November last year, the debate was not
characterised by conventional implausible platitudinous rhetoric, which is
generally displayed by opposition parties during debates of this nature.
Indeed, these Bills were supported on their merit by Mr Middleton on behalf
of the IFP, Mr Blaas on behalf of the New NP, Mr Mfundisi on behalf of the
UCDP, Miss Rajbally on behalf of the MF, Mr Madasa on behalf of the ACDP,
and even Mr Clelland-Stokes on behalf of the DA. All of them demonstrated
an appreciation of our challenge to maintain a balance between labour
market efficiency and protection of the constitutionally guaranteed rights
of workers to organise, bargain collectively and be treated decently. It
was the first time that laws coming from the Department of Labour were
unanimously agreed upon in the National Assembly.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Can you take your
seat, please, hon Minister.

The MINISTER: [Inaudible.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON (Mr M L Mushwana): Yes, what is your point of order?

Mr C ACKERMANN: Chairperson, the Minister is referring to a party called
the DA. I want your ruling on who the members of this party are and whether
it was elected to this Parliament, because we do not know of any such
party.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Mr Ackermann, I heard
the Minister quoting what happened in the NA. Maybe this party is there in
the National Assembly, but in terms of the National Council of Provinces my
ruling would be that we do not have the DA. However, the Minister was
correctly quoting what transpired in the National Assembly.

The MINISTER: Chairperson, the hon member can also go and look at the
Hansard, but I understand the comrade's problem. [Laughter.] No point of
order? I thought the hon member would jump up and indicate his intention to
raise a point of order.

In conclusion, I would like to thank all those who made this process
possible: the negotiators from organised business and organised labour, the
Nedlac secretariat, the legal drafters, the labour portfolio committee, the
Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises, and last but by no means
least, the overworked and dedicated officials of my department, competently
led by my esteemed director-general, Adv Rams Ramashia. Ke leboga ena. [I
thank him.]

I trust that the support I received from social partners in crafting these
Bills will be matched by even unparalleled enthusiasm in their
implementation.

Rea leboga. Ha khensa. Siyabonga. Nangamso. Baie dankie. I thank everyone.
[Applause.]
Mr S L E FENYANE: Mr Chairperson, I thank you for calling me honourable.
Let me start by indicating to the House that the passing of the Labour
Relations Act in 1995 heralded a new exciting era in our labour market. We
achieved democracy in 1994 and we could hardly bring ourselves to believe
that everything would just go on as usual. We had to amend our laws to move
in cadence with the democratic dispensation.

The passing of the Labour Relations Act in 1995 was given a tumultuous
welcome by organised labour, political organisations inside and outside of
the country and business in general. Its underlying theme was to
democratise and stabilise the labour market in South Africa.

The Labour Relations Act of 1995 attempted to ameliorate relations between
organised labour and business. These relations had been adversarial and our
Government could not bear to allow such a state of affairs to continue. It
would have been difficult for our Government to market our country and to
solicit foreign direct investment if the labour market had remained
obdurately archaic. It had to change.

For the first time in the history of this beloved country, we had co-
determination introduced into the labour market. For the first time workers
and management were expected to acknowledge that their destinies converged;
that their goals were common; and, that their strategies, hopes and fears,
indeed, formed a confluence that was mutually beneficial. This could only
happen in the workplace forums created by the Labour Relations Act of 1995.

The Labour Relations Act of 1995 gave employers a right to hire and fire.
However, that right was not absolute. What I find very exciting about
democracy is that individuals, both severally and collectively, are given
all manner of rights. However, alongside each right there is an obligation
that guarantees the existence of a system of checks and balances.
Obligations complement rights. In any democracy in the world the one cannot
exist to the full extent in the absence of the other.
In as much as a manager can hire and fire, he or she is obliged to satisfy
the requirements of procedural and substantive justice, which are
guaranteed by the Labour Relations Act of 1995. In the event that an
employee is to be dismissed summarily, the onus is on the employer to prove
either to the CCMA or the Labour Court that, as manager, he or she has been
consistent throughout in meting out such a heinous eventuality.

The employer's credibility is also important and central to the fired
employee's fate when the case is brought before the CCMA or the Labour
Court. In cases where the employer is not credible or consistent, the
employee stands a chance of being reinstated, with costs to the employer.

The Labour Relations Act also promoted and facilitated collective
bargaining. It pronounced on the existence of the right to strike. However,
alongside the right to strike there is recourse for employers. This was
promulgated to move in consonance with the letter of the Constitution.

The Labour Relations Act of 1995 also enjoins us to observe international
legal obligations and to let our legal objectives dovetail with the
International Labour Organisation's objectives and protocols.

The Basic Conditions of Employment Act of 1997 solidified and crystallised
the imperatives of the Labour Relations Act of 1995. It did this by
introducing regulations on working hours and by streamlining hours of work,
overtime, breaks and work on Sundays and on public holidays. It provided
comprehensive regulations on leave of absence and remuneration. It
regulated the prohibition of child labour and forced labour. It gave the
Minister of Labour powers to make sectoral determinations that may vary
from some aspects of the basic conditions of employment.

When all was said and done, and when everyone thought that the promulgation
of labour laws was all over, bar the shouting, an insidious cry surfaced in
the print media to the effect that our labour laws were hindering economic
growth; that they were impeding foreign direct investment, and, lastly,
that they rendered the labour market very inflexible and unattractive.

The Department of Labour, under the stewardship of the affable Minister
Mdladlana, who sometimes offers his services as lay preacher, could not
just relax and dismiss the media complaints as mere hogwash. The department
rolled up its sleeves, went to work and emerged with the amendments in
front of us today. The introduction of these amendments was preceded by
rigorous and laborious consultations with labour, business and community
organisations.

The amendments to both Bills, that is the Labour Relations Act and the
Basic Conditions of Employment Act, constitute an attempt by the department
to make the labour market more flexible on the one hand, and to give
employees due protection, on the other. The department has tried its utmost
to find a sensitive balance between the demands of business and those of
labour. The amendments, indeed, solidify the Labour Relations Act of 1995
and the Basic Conditions of Employment Act of 1997.

Comprehensive amendments were made to sections 186 and 188 of the Labour
Relations Act of 1995. The department went out of its way to deal
effectively with the existence of unintended consequences punctuating the
Labour Relations Act text in sections such as 186, 188 and 189, which had
received sustained hammering from both labour and business. This was an
observation which was very ironic indeed. Section 197, as well as sections
10 and section 75 of the Basic Conditions of Employment Act, were also
restructured.

Section 189 of the 1995 Labour Relations Act was operated upon with
clinical precision by the department. The department went out of its way to
define and describe at length the meaning of dismissal and unfair labour
practice. It created a facility in which an employer can, with the consent
of the employee, reach an amicable agreement for the two to seek
predismissal arbitration when the employee is to be dismissed for one
reason or another. In the face of looming retrenchments as a result of
acquisitions, mergers or insolvencies, workers will not be left in the
lurch.

The amendments to section 197 of the 1995 Labour Relations Act, together
with the insertion of 197(1), 197A and 197B, outline packages of measures
whose intentions are to protect workers and even their employers in order
to make informed decisions and to confirm the stability of the labour
market. In the two Bills in front of us there are presumptions that are
rebuttable anyway, indicating who is indeed an employee. These presumptions
constitute a singular, epoch-making intervention in the history of labour
relations in the country, because once a person is said to be an employee,
his or her employer should know that the former is then entitled to access
all benefits and rights guaranteed by these two pieces of legislation, and
to many of the other pieces of legislation that the state has ever passed.

I make haste to indicate that even members should be told, without
equivocation, that once a person works for one, and that person is called
an employee, then one is in trouble, because that person is entitled to
access all benefits that go to any other employee in this country. That
person could be the person who washes one's car sometimes or a domestic,
but once that person gains the name ``employee'', then one is in trouble.
It is hoped that the passing of these Bills will put to rest the complaint
that the labour market is inflexible in the country.

It is also hoped that organised labour will embrace the spirit of this new
amendment, whose intention is to protect employee rights and those of
employers. The contribution by both employees and employers to our
country's economy is acknowledged by the department, hence the drafting of
these two Bills.

I would like to urge members to support the two Bills, presented with
proposed amendments to the House, because the ultimate purpose of these
Bills is to create a labour regime that has decent labour standards and
labour market efficiency. This is indeed exceptionally beautiful, and we
all know that a thing of beauty is a joy forever. I hope this will urge
members to support this Bill. [Applause.]

Mr L G LEVER: Chairperson, I am reading this speech today on behalf of
Sandra Botha. Despite common agreement around the positive aspects of the
Budget, a common concern remains that the unemployment rate in this country
is growing steadily, but job creation is not growing in the Minister's
fruitful garden.

Even if the SA Revenue Service were more effective in collaring tax evaders
and millions extra entered the Treasury's coffers, millions of individuals
could, nevertheless, not be taxed, simply because they do not have an
income at all. They do not have jobs. Without jobs people cannot have
dignity. Without dignity, the Constitution is an empty promise, even a
cruel joke.

Nevertheless, there is much to commend in this legislation. Even though the
formation of the Millennium Labour Council in July 2000 consolidated a
joint recognition of the crisis of poverty, inequality and unemployment
facing the country, the sophistication of our labour legislation has often
been slated as a major contributor to the dearth of employment
opportunities in this country. At this point I must interject that I agree
with the hon the Minister. Even though this is only one of the factors
affecting employment, it is without doubt an important factor.

While most people are in agreement with the basic philosophy which
underlies this legislation, the impact has been perversely to limit new job
opportunities while entrenching the rights of the shrinking number of
employed. Even if this can still be circumvented to some extent in
businesses dependent on the upper end of the labour market, new entrants
and those who have little training or skills are simply not finding work.

Where I live people are desperate for work. Young, able-bodied men and
women have been jobless for years, and they are going to remain thus. They
wake up in the morning without prospects and without hope. They are
probably never going to have a job. The schooling which they received at
great expense and sacrifice will come to nought. I am going into this at
great length, because it is my daily personal experience. I do not have to
be told that there are aspects of our labour laws which promote
unemployment. They are there for anyone to see who has ever been an
employer - even in the way the hon chairperson of the select committee
dealt with this. The implication of his speech was: Beware. Once one gains
the title of employee, one is in trouble as the employer. That says a lot,
with respect, hon Minister.

The changes to the existing legislation wrought by these amendments are the
result of long negotiations, and seem to uphold important gains made for
labour. We are delighted with this achievement. The DP, on behalf of the
Democratic Alliance - I would like to say to Mr Ackermann who, I think, has
left now - supports any measure which will make it easier to employ people.

The new legislative framework which now governs our labour market still
offers substantial stability to the employed. But, nevertheless, we would
welcome more substantial change along the lines introduced here: a wider
definition of independent contractors, of which there are many genuine
cases now being adversely affected by the amended legislation, along with
our general drive for less regulation and more flexibility. While all of us
complain about the amount of tax we have to pay, our legislation should be
aimed at making taxpayers of all of us.

The DP, on behalf of the Democratic Alliance, supports these amendments,
because they show a growing consensus on the need to create an employment-
friendly environment for both small and large employers and for both the
employed and the unemployed. [Applause.]

Ms B N DLULANE: Chairperson, Mphathiswa obekekileyo, Dlamini, hon members,
ladies and gentlemen, Kungelishwa ukuba ndisukume emva kogxa wam, ethetha
ngokuba akaboni nkqubela inokuzisa imisebenzi. Kambe ke ngelishwa ndithi
mna ... [it is unfortunate that I have to stand and speak after my
colleague who says that he sees no progress that could create job
opportunities. Unfortunately, I would like to say that ...] one of the
features key to the prosperity of any democracy, in particular our young
democracy, is the need to build an economy that, amongst others things,
provides and creates jobs; an economy that secures jobs; an economy that
provides certainty on employers' rights and obligations; an economy that
facilitates and encourages job retention and constructive alternatives to
dismissal; an economy that promotes fair labour practices to protect
workers' rights; an economy that is committed to the efficiency of the
labour market and, thus, an economy that is investor-friendly in order to
create a platform for more job creation.

Today I am standing here to say that these Bills are just about that, these
amendments. That is why I was saying ... ndinengxaki ngokuba ndisukume emva
komntu ongayiboniyo loo nto. [I have a problem with speaking after a person
who says he cannot see any form of progress.]

This is a message to our people, the workers in particular, that the ANC-
led Government is responsible for changing the nature of the labour market
and for addressing the concerns and problems of all our stakeholders, that
is organised labour, business, unorganised labour, investors and small
business. Therefore it is a great honour for me to say on behalf of my
committee that we support these amendments. It is also with great gratitude
and enthusiasm that I state that this amendment has enjoyed substantial
support from most stakeholders, particularly organised labour and business.

We come from a past where labour rights were nothing but protection for a
minority, but today we are speaking a different language. The Government of
the people is committed to fair labour practices and to protecting the
rights of our workers - the rights our people fought and died for. The
fundamental change introduced by the Labour Relations Amendment Bill, which
will affect acquisitions of businesses as going concerns, is the automatic
transfer of contracts of employment of the employees of the businesses
being acquired.

This simply means that the new employer will automatically take the place
of the old employer in respect of all contracts of employment in existence
before the date of transfer. This entails that this transfer will not
interrupt employees continuity of employment. This is very important as we
have witnessed in the past that when a company was transferred to a new
owner or when it went insolvent, the rights of the employees were not
protected, such that they were the last to be considered, to a point that
most of our people found themselves without jobs when they still had to,
firstly, pay their accounts; secondly, take their children to school; and,
thirdly, support their families. Some of them did not even get packages or
the benefits that were due to them.

Yiyo loo nto ke sisithi, ngokunxulumene nokuzika kwenkampani, uMthetho
obizwa ngokuba yiLabour Relations Act uyavumelena noMthetho obizwa ngokuba
yiBasic Conditions of Employment Act omalunga neemeko zengqesho
ezingundoqo, ngezindululo eziya kuthi zisuse umxakatho emagxeni abasebenzi
abajongene nengxaki yokuzika kwenkampani.

Ezi zindululo zihamba ngolu hlobo: Okokuqala, abaqeshi mabazise kwakamsinya
ngokuba inkampani ijongene nokuzika, ngaxeshanye, iingxelo zithunyelwe
kwiimanyano zabasebenzi. Abasebenzi mababekwe phambili njengabantu
abatyalwa imali, abaxatyiswe ngcono, ukwenzela ukuba bakwazi ukufumana
intlawulo epheleleyo kwiinkampani ezikileyo. Kwakhona, intlawulo ekhutshwa
ngabasebenzi nabaqeshi kwingxowamali yomhlala-phantsi kufuneka ijongwe
ngeliso elibukhali ukwenzela ukuba abasebenzi bakwazi ... (Translation of
Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[That is why, with regard to the liquidation of a company, we say that the
Labour Relations Act and the Basic Conditions of Employment Act are in
agreement about the proposals that will remove the burden from workers that
are faced with the problem of a company that is being liquidated.
These proposals are as follows: Firstly, the employers must announce as
soon as possible that the company is facing liquidation, and have reports
sent to workers' unions at the same time. The workers should be considered
as the most valuable asset and be considered first as being creditors so
that they could get their packages or benefits that are due to them by the
liquidated company. Furthermore, the workers' and employers' contribution
to the pension fund should be monitored to enable workers to ... ]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Nushwana): Order! hon member,
can you take your seat. Please take your seat.

Mnr A E VAN NIEKERK: Voorsitter, op 'n punt van orde: Hoewel ons waardering
het vir die verskillende tale waarin die kollega praat, is dit onmoontlik
om dit met die swak kwaliteit tolkdiens wat daar is, te volg. Die tolkdiens
is óf afwesig, óf dit is absoluut power. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, on a point of order: Although we
appreciate the various languages the colleague is speaking, it is
impossible to follow them by means of the poor quality of the interpreting
service that exists. The interpreting service is either absent, or it is
absolutely poor.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! I am informed
that there is no interpretation service. Can somebody see to it that there
is interpretation? But, continue hon member, we will learn along the way.

Nksz B N DLULANG: Mhlalingaphambili, ngelishwa kubhaliwe kolu luhlu ukuba
ndiya kuthetha ulwimi lwasekhaya, isiNtu, isiXhosa. Kungelishwa ke ukuba
kungabikho mntu uyiguqulayo intetho yam.

Bendisaxelela le Ndlu ngezindululo ekuvunyelwene ngazo malunga namanyathelo
ekufuneka alandelwe xa sukuba inkampani izika. Bendikumhlathi wesithathu.

Intlawulo ekhutshwa ngabasebenzi nabaqeshi, isiya kwiNgxowa-mali
yoMhlalaphantsi, kufuneka ijongwe ngeliso elibukhali ukwenzela ukuba
abasebenzi bakwazi ukuyifumana, ingaziki nenkampani. Njengoko abasebenzi
bebekeka kwimeko emaxongo kwiimeko ezinje, isindululo sithi kufuneka
zincitshiswe ezo zinto. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

Ms B N DLULANG: Chairperson, it is written on this report that I shall be
speaking my mother tongue, my native language, isiXhosa. It is unfortunate
that there is nobody to interpret my speech.]

[[I was still informing this House about the proposals that have been
agreed upon concerning the steps that need to be followed when a company is
liquidated. I was on the third paragraph.

The workers' and employers' contributions to the Pension Fund must be
closely monitored to ensure that it is available to workers and not lost
when the company is in liquidation. As workers are placed in a precarious
situation under such conditions, the proposal is that such incidents should
be reduced.]

This amendment clarifies that workers' contributions to the benefit funds
should not form part of the liquidated business estate, and these
contributions should be held in trust, separate from the business' current
account and upon liquidation paid over to the respective funds.

It is a fact that in the past some of these funds became part of the
insolvent estate, so that the employees did not receive their dues.
Therefore, these amendments clarify the obligations of the new and old
employers in respect of collective agreements, pensions, provident fund
contributions, outstanding claims and circumstances under which severance
pay can be claimed.

One of the favourable aspects of this Bill is the element of presumption.
It requires the employer to rebut the evidence by an employee by proving
that the person is not working for him. This rebuttable presumption,
regardless of the form of the contract, presumes the person to be an
employee if any of the following factors are present: firstly, the manner
in which the person works is subject to the control or direction of another
person; secondly, the person's hours of work are subject to the control or
direction of another person; and thirdly, in the case of a person who works
for an organisation, he or she is a member of that organisation.

This section on rebuttable presumption is crucial as it attempts to address
the practice of converting contracts of employment into contracts of
service without altering the employment relationship, thus converting
genuine employees into independent contractors. As a result of these
proposed amendments, workers in such situations will receive effective
protection of the labour law, including the right to lodge a dispute in the
event of an unfair dismissal or unfair discrimination and the violation of
the basic conditions of employment.

[Ibifudula ingekho ke loo nto, kodwa ngoku ikhona ngenxa yesi sininzi
asikhokeleyo kule Komiti umhlekazi, uMphathiswa ohloniphekileyo.] [That
used not to be the case, but it is now, because of the majority of this
committee that the hon Minister of Labour leads.]

To conclude, I would like to mention that this has been a challenging
process and definitely not an easy one. Therefore, I would like to thank
Nedlac, and the department in particular, for the role they have played,
and the various stakeholders who have been willing and keen participants in
an effort to build our nation as a union for a better life for all.

Siyayamkela siyixhasa yonke le mipoposho iziswe kuthi siyiKomiti
kwanombutho. [Kwaqhwatywa.] [We accept as well as support all these
proposals brought to us as the committee and as the organisation.]
[Applause.]]

Mr M J BHENGU: Chairperson, since 1994, there has been intense debate
within and without Government corridors about how to reform the labour
programmes inherited from the apartheid government. The result has been an
unprecedented process of negotiations and consultations relating to all the
spheres of industrial relations. This resulted in the proclamation of the
Labour Relations Act of 1995, the Basic Conditions of Employment Act of
1997, the Employment Act of 1997, the Employment Equity Act of 1998 and the
Skills Development Act of 1999.

Therefore, the Labour Relations Act not only ushered South Africa into an
era of industrial relations that was unfamiliar, but also had a profound
impact on the workplace and employment relations. As the democracy
developed, it became necessary to amend the Labour Relations Act to
accommodate the changing industrial relations environment.

Since 1994, this Government has sought to address the exploitation of
vulnerable workers, the phenomenon of the working poor and inequality and
discrimination against all workers along racial and gender lines. Therefore
the amendments before this House are an endeavour to look at, firstly, the
workers' basic rights; secondly, the protection of collective bargaining,
thirdly, human resources development, and fourthly, the wage and
occupational structures.

Furthermore, what is important is that these amendments will encourage
employers to open new businesses or continue to expand existing businesses.
The amendment will significantly enhance the effective management of
disputes and lead to greater stability in the labour market and improved
services to those who need them most.

It is my pleasure to say that the IFP does have some concerns in a few
focus areas within those amendments. One of those concerns is the area of
sympathy strikers, particularly in respect of retrenchments. We all know
that retrenchment is a highly emotive issue. It is the IFP's opinion that
sympathy strikers by and large have a tendency of punishing the innocent
institutions more than the culprits who are indeed the cause of the very
strike.
However, the IFP supports the package presented in these two Bills. We
believe that these amendments will lay to rest the period of conflict that
has thus far existed, and that we will see a new, shared commitment by both
the labour and business components in taking these amendments forward.
[Applause.]

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Chairperson, Zizi ohloniphekileyo, maqabane kunye namanye
amalungu, [hon President, comrades and hon members ...] today we are here
to testify that the people are governing. The people have spoken. The
Government of the people is indeed listening to and doing something about
the concerns of our people, the workers and their rights.

We have come a long way as the people of this country. In the not so
distant past our people were denied their rights as workers. They were
abused and exploited. The rest is no secret. Fortunately, that is a thing
of the past, and never, never again will our people's rights to fair labour
practices be compromised.
This is a great honour for me and an incredible feeling to stand up before
this House to deliver such a meaningful message, one that will improve the
working conditions of our people and labour practices in our democracy.

I stand here to boldly say that we support the amendments. We support the
protection of our workers. Our people have fought for their democracy.
Indeed, the people are governing. Within the few years that the ANC has
been in power, our people are able to comment on and influence the laws
that affect their daily lives.

The ANC's slogan of ``a better life for all'' is not just a slogan, but a
conviction and a commitment to our people that we will, indeed, have a
better life for all. We are excited about the support and acceptance of
these amendments by the broader South African community, business and our
trade unions, particularly the giant trade union federation, Cosatu. This
shows our commitment as a nation to a better democratic and prosperous
South Africa. They portray high levels of credibility and legitimacy.

Ndithi umanyano ngamandla! [I say unity is strength!] Together and united
as a nation we will overcome the obstacles and challenges before us. In the
present climate of high unemployment and large numbers of retrenchments,
the amendment of these Bills seek to provide maximum certainty of
employees' rights and obligations. The amending Bills also seek to promote
labour stability, facilitate and encourage job retention and constructive
alternatives to dismissal.

Nanjengoko ezinye izinto sele zithethiwe, akubalulekanga ukuba siziphinda-
phinde. Esi sivumelwano senziwe neemanyano zabasebenzi asisayi kusingelwa
phantsi ngabaqeshi, yaye abasebenzi baya kubandakanyeka ezingxoxweni
ngokuthi bamelwe ziinkokeli zabo.

Esona sihlomelo sibalulekileyo sesi sithi: ``Phambi kokuba ubani aqale
ngokugxotha, kufuneka enze iinzame zokungagxothi. ``Okwesibini, umqeshi
akanawo amandla okugqiba yedwa ukuba uyagxotha. Ukuba iimeko zithi umqeshi
makagxothe, makazame ukuba ingabi linani elikhulu aligxothayo, ukuze
lingandi inani labantu abaswele imisebenzi.

Kwakhona, abo bachongelwe ukuphelelwa ngumsebenzi kufuneka bewazile
amalungelo abo kwanentlawulo elunge kubo phambi kokuba baphume emsebenzini,
kungathiwa baya kuhlawulwa xa sele besidla umhla-phantsi babe bengazi
nokuba yimalini na abamele kukuyifumana. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[As other points have already been dealt with, it is not necessary to
repeat them. The decision that has been entered into with workers' unions
will not be undermined by employers, and workers will be involved in
discussions through their representatives.

The most important amending clause is the one that says, firstly: ``Before
firing employees, employers have to try other remedial measures.''
Secondly, an employer does not have the right to unilaterally fire
employees. If conditions are such that an employer has to reduce employee
numbers, it must not be big numbers so as not to swell the numbers of the
unemployed. Furthermore, those who have been earmarked for retrenchment
have to know about their rights and benefits due to them, in terms of the
amount payable, before they leave the place of employment, and not be told
that they they will be paid only after they have left work.]

Most importantly, these amendments seek to improve the procedures in the
event of dismissal. This includes providing probation and introducing a
fairer system of compensation in the event of unfair dismissal. In
addition, these Bills seek to improve the functioning of the bargaining
councils, increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of the CCMA,
particularly in relation to their ability to serve small businesses and the
vulnerable workers, and bring stability to the Labour Court.

Once these amendments are put into practice organised labour will be able
to elect whether they want to go on strike or contest the substantive
fairness of a retrenchment through a Labour Court when the conciliation
process fails.

In conclusion, as next month has been identified as Human Rights month, the
workers of this country have cause to celebrate as workers' rights are
human rights. The two cannot be divorced. Lastly, as we will also be
celebrating International Women's Day next week, we will be celebrating our
rights as women and our rights as workers, as these are also human rights.
We will be remembering all those women who died fighting for our rights,
both as women and as workers. [Applause.]

Dr P J C NEL: Voorsitter, agb Minister, kollegas, dit is vandag vir my 'n
voorreg om aan die bespreking van hierdie twee wetsontwerpe deel te neem,
alhoewel wat gesê kan word, omtrent alles reeds gesê is.

Hierdie twee wetsontwerpe kan moeilik afsonderlik gehanteer word, want
albei poog om die belange van die werknemer sowel as die werkgewer te
beskerm en te bevorder. Die wysigings van die twee wetsontwerpe poog, myns
insiens, om die klimaat vir 'n beter werkverhouding tussen die werkgewer en
werknemer te skep. Of die wysigings ten volle daarin sal slaag, bly 'n ope
vraag.

In dié verband haal ek graag 'n spreuk aan uit die spreuke van C J
Langenhoven:


  Dit is net so moeilik om maklikheid in die wêreld te kry as wat dit
  maklik is om moeilikheid te kry.

Indien die wysiging wel gedeeltelik daarin kan slaag om arbeidsvrede en
arbeidsvreugde te bewerkstellig, is die poging die moeite werd. Die beeld
wat goeie arbeidsverhoudinge in veral ontwikkelende lande uitstraal na die
buiteland is van kardinale belang vir die bevordering van buitelandse
welwillendheid en investering. Goeie werkverhoudinge bevorder ook die
moraal van werknemers en dus ook produktiwiteit in die arbeidsmark, wat lei
tot ekonomiese groei en die skep van meer werkgeleenthede.

Daar moet egter by die skryf van arbeidswetgewing 'n fyn balans gehandhaaf
word, anders mag net die teenoorgestelde van wat beoog word deur wetgewing
bereik word. In dié verband haal ek graag aan uit 'n voorlegging wat die
Vryemarkstigting aan die portefeuljekomitee gemaak het:


  The professed philosophy of protagonists of labour regulation includes
  the laudable values of sound labour relations, economic growth and fair
  labour practices. The laws that deal with dismissal are therefore
  ostensibly designed also to provide a measure of security of employment
  for employees. The irony is, however, that they sometimes achieve the
  opposite effect in practice and that the more obstacles the law places in
  the way of employers who want to dismiss workers, the greater the
  disincentive it creates for employers to employ workers.

Volgens die CCMA ontstaan ongeveer 80% van alle arbeidsdispute tans as
gevolg van ontslag van werknemers. Die grootste aantal die afdankings
ontstaan as gevolg van wangedrag en onvermydelike besnoeiingsaksies. Die
amendemente maak daarvoor voorsiening dat werkers nou mag staak as hulle
ontslaan word vir hierdie genoemde redes. Die wysiging maak ook daarvoor
voorsiening dat die werker 'n keuse kan uitoefen om te staak of om enige
dispuut in die hof te beveg.

Verder geld ook dieselfde formaliteite en stappe wat gedoen word voordat
oorgegaan kan word tot stakings en uitsluitings as wat tans die geval is
vir enige staking. Al die moontlike wetlike implikasies kan moontlik
veroorsaak dat die koste verhoog, en dat die tyd wat dit neem om sake op te
los, verleng word. Dit alles kan aanleiding gee daartoe dat werkgewers
minder mense gaan aanstel.

Klousule 56 van die Wysigingswetsontwerp op Arbeidsverhoudinge beskerm die
uitbuiting van 'n werknemer wat deur 'n werkgewer vir 'n proeftyd aangestel
word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr P J C NEL: Chairperson, hon Minister, colleagues, it is a privileged
for me to participate in this discussion today of these two Bills, although
what could be said has just about already been said.

These two Bills could hardly be dealt with separately, because both aim to
promote and protect the interests of the employee as well as the employer.
In my opinion the amendments of the two Bills aim to create a climate for a
better working relationship between employer and employee. Whether the
amendments will succeed fully in this remains an open question.

In this regard I would like to quote a verse from the proverbs of C J
Langenhoven:


  Dit is net so moeilik om maklikheid in die wêreld te kry as wat dit
  maklik is om moeilikheid te kry.

If the amendment could partly succeed in accomplishing industrial peace and
job satisfaction the attempt would be worthwhile. The image which conveys
sound labour relations of the developing countries, especially to countries
abroad, is of cardinal importance for the promotion of foreign goodwill and
investment. Good working relations also promotes the morale of employees
and therefore also productivity in the labour market, which leads to
economic growth and the creation of more job opportunities.

However, with the writing of labour legislation a fine balance should be
maintained, because we might just achieve the opposite of what is envisaged
by the legislation. In this regard I would like to quote from a submission
by the Free Market Foundation to the portfolio committee:


  The professed philosophy of protagonists of labour regulations includes
  the laudable values of sound labour relations, economic growth and fair
  labour practices. The laws that deal with dismissal are therefore
  ostensibly designed also to provide a measure of security of employment
  for employees. The irony is, however, that they sometimes achieve the
  opposite effect in practice and that the more obstacles the law places in
  the way of employers who want to dismiss workers, the greater the
  disincentive it creates for employers to employ workers.

According to the CCMA, approximately 80% of all labour disputes presently
develop as a result of the dismissal of employees. The largest number of
dismissals develop as a result of misconduct and unavoidable retrenchments.
The amendments make provision for workers to strike if they are dismissed
for these aforementioned reasons. The amendment also makes provision for
the workers' right to exercise a choice either to strike or to fight any
dispute in the court.

Furthermore, the same formalities and steps, which are taken before
proceeding to strike action and lock-outs are still applicable, as is
presently the case for any strike. All the possible legal implications
could possibly cause a cost increase and extend the time it takes to
resolve matters. All of this could cause employers to appoint fewer people.

Clause 56 of the Labour Relations Amendment Bill protects the exploitation
of an employee who has been appointed by an employer for a period of
probation.]

Clause 56 states clearly that:


  (c) Probation should not be used for purposes not contemplated by this
  Code to deprive employees of the status of permanent employment. For
  example, a practice of dismissing employees who complete their probation
  periods and replacing them with newly-hired employees, is not consistent
  with the purpose of probation and constitutes an unfair labour practice.

Aangesien hierdie soort optrede algemene praktyk is, is dit goed dat
genoemde wysiging hierdie probleem aanspreek. Die feit dat die wetsontwerp
ook nou die posisie van werkers uitspel van maatskappye of instansies wat
besig is om finansieel onder te gaan, is noodsaaklik en 'n stap in die
regte rigting.

Soos ek aan die begin gesê het, dit bly 'n ope vraag of die twee
wetsontwerpe sal slaag in hul doel, en of die teenoorgestelde bereik gaan
word in sommige gevalle. Na my mening hang dit grootliks van die optrede
van alle werkgewers en werknemers af, en ook die verantwoordelike optrede
van vakbonde, of daar in die toekoms meer arbeidsvreugde en arbeidsvrede
gaan wees. As dit gebeur, kan dit alleen maar net tot die voordeel van
almal wees.

Die Nuwe NP steun albei wetsontwerpe. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Since this kind of conduct is common practice it is good that the
aforementioned amendments are addressing this problem. The fact that the
Bill also spells out the position of workers of companies or institutions
who are going under financially, is necessary and a step in the right
direction.

As I have said at the beginning, it remains an open question whether these
two Bills will succeed in their aim, and whether the opposite will be
achieved in some instances. In my opinion it depends largely on the action
of all employers and employees, and also the responsible action of trade
unions, whether in future we will have more industrial peace and greater
job satisfaction. If this happens it could only be to the advantage of us
all.

The New NP supports both Bills. [Applause.]]

Nksn M P THEMBA: Sekela laSihlalo, Ndvuna lehloniphekile, malunga
lahloniphekile, manene nemanenekati, lamuhla siphetsene neMitsetfotivivinyo
lebaluleke kakhulu. Lena ngiMitsetfotivivinyo letawucondza ngco ekwenteni
umehluko lomkhulu nalobalulekile etimphilweni tebantfu bakitsi,
nasetimphilweni tebasebenti bakitsi.

LeMitsetfotivivinyo ikhombisa kutibophelela kwaHulumende ekutseni
ahlangabetane netidzingo kanye netikhalo tebasebenti bakitsi. Ngubona
bantfu labalwa iminyaka ngeminyaka balwela inkhululeko yalelive nekutsi
basebenti babe nemalungelo ekuphatseka kahle emisebentini yabo.
(Translation of Siswati paragraphs follows.)

[Ms M P THEMBA: Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, ladies and
gentlemen, today we are addressing very important Bills. These are Bills
that will have a very direct, positive and important impact on the lives of
our people and the lives of our workers.

The Bills reflect the commitment of our Government to the needs and
concerns of our workers who for decades fought for the liberation of this
country, and that the workers could have the right to fair labour
practice.]

The negotiations on these amendments have been completed with a significant
contribution by organised labour and business by working together with
Government. The fact that substantive agreement was reached demonstrates
the value of the social partnership between these stakeholders. It further
demonstrates the commitment of South Africans working side by side as a
unit and rainbow nation for the betterment of our economy. It reflects the
ANC's commitment to transparency and for the people to be able to be part
of the legislation process so that their views and comments can be heard to
influence the whole legislative process.

The importance of the role and functioning of bargaining councils in our
country cannot be stressed enough. They are the crucial part of the
collective bargaining arrangement. Therefore there has been a need to
strengthen their functioning so that they serve employer and employee
parties better through improving their efficiency, the information required
on their service in relation to small business, regulatory oversight and
expansion of the scope of their functions to include the provision of
services to industries and their coverage of the informal sector.

The amendment with regard to the role and functioning of bargaining council
is imperative. To limit the abuse of the CCMA, often by relatively few
individuals and organisations who delay proceedings and mislead workers and
employers, the Minister has been given the power to make regulations, after
consulting Nedlac and the CCMA to determine matters such as the
representation of parties and the charging of fees by the CCMA.

To be more sensitive to the imperatives of job creation, small business
development and the application of the Act in respect of enforcement, these
amendments will enable the Minister, through ministerial or sectoral
determination, to increase the ordinary hours of work above 45, if the
resultant working time arrangements are more favourable, either where there
is a collective agreement or where this is necessitated by the operational
circumstances of the sector or in respect of the agricultural or private
security sector.

The amendment of the Labour Relations Act seeks to give bargaining councils
the capacity to improve on their enforcement procedures and provide a
substantive statutory basis for arbitrations. This means, for example, that
arbitrators have considerably more powers, even to the extent that they may
now impose fines. But, more importantly, arbitrators' decisions in case of
unfair dismissal and unfair labour practices, according to clause 47 of the
Bill, will be considered final and binding, subject only to review by the
Labour Court. These arbitration decisions can also be terminated before
referral to the Labour Court, but only with the written consent of both
parties.

The CCMA is also elevated from the perceived status of being a mere paper
tiger. According to both the Basic Conditions of Employment Amendment Bill
and the Labour Relations Amendment Bill, the CCMA's powers have increased
so that CCMA awards have the same status as orders of a civil court. This
means, for example, that if the outcome of a case results in an award of
payment to the offended party, that party will now be able to issue a
warrant of execution through the deputy sheriff to ensure that the award is
enforced without contributing to any further hardship to the offended
party.

Indeed, these amendments show the level of the commitment of Government to
making our country attractive to investors so that more jobs can be created
for our people, to enable them to afford decent standards of living. They
will then be able to support their families and educate their children, so
that those children one day become responsible leaders and entrepreneurs
creating more jobs, and so that their children will not be forced, because
of poverty, unemployment and poor schooling, to be exploited as child
labourers.

Child labour is one area that raises a point of concern in our country. It
is an area in which we need to work as a nation to combat and discourage
the problem. It is not about ``ngumntfwanami'' [it is my child]. It is a
problem that affects our children as a nation and ``njengabomake futsi''
[mothers too]. It is a problem that will destroy the future of our country,
our children, and thus make what we are trying to amend today for the
betterment of our country a nonissue, and a thing of the past. Let us not
make excuses for child labour, for it cannot be justified.
Ekugcineni, ngicela kutsi, njengobe sonkhe sitawuhamba siye emakhaya,
kumaprovinsi etfu, kuloLusuku lolutaba khona lwaboMake sihlanganise
tinhloko siyekwenta umsebenti wekusekela bomake kuto tonkhe tinkinga
labanato. [Tandla.] (Translation of Siswati paragraph follows.)

[In conclusion, I plead with all of us, as we are going back to our
constituencies and provinces, to get together on the approaching Women's
Day, to meet and support the women with regard to any problems they might
have. [Applause.]]

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Chairperson, I must indicate that I am very happy.
Hon members have made my day. Firstly, the hon members have read the two
Bills. The level of understanding has impressed me to an extent that, as a
teacher and former principal, I give hon members 10 out of 10 for
understanding the Bill. [Interjections.] [Applause.] It is very important.

I have noted most of their comments, because they are valuable comments.
Because we are together in Government, and this is our legislation, all of
us have to make sure that we understand the dynamics of the labour market.

I would also like to thank those hon members who have used our vernacular
for doing so.

Ndingomnye wabafundi besiXhosa. Andiyithandi le nto yenzekayo yokunyhashwa
kweelwimi zethu ePalamente. Ukuba siyayivumela, siya kufana nabantu
abalwela ilize. Ngoko ke masingayivumeli. Umntu makathi xa ethetha kule
Ndlu, athabathe nokuba yimizuzwana embalwa esebenzisa ulwimi lwakhe, kuba
ngokwenjenjalo wenza igalelo ekuvulweni kwamathuba emisebenzi, ngoba kukho
umntu oza kuhlala phaya, atolike, alale etyile. Xa amalungu ahloniphekileyo
engazithethi iilwimi zawo, aba bantu baphetheyo, bequka
noMhlalingaphambili, lo abasayi kuyenza into esiyifunayo, de sizisebenzise
iilwimi zethu.

Mna ke ndayeka ukunika le nto kuthiwa sisaziso. Andinasaziso ndisinikayo
mna kuba kwamhla ndazalwa akuzange kubethwe zintsimbi. Andingazange
ndizalelwe esibhedlele, ndingazange ndidle nembe. Ngoko ke andingekhe ndize
kudliswa inembe epalamente ngoku sendimdala, ndilixhego. [Kwahlekwa.]
Andinakuyivumela loo nto.

Kwakungekuhle mhla ndayipapasha le Mithetho isaYilwayo. Kwakubonakala ukuba
kuza kuqhawuka unobathana. Kambe ngenxa yothetha-thethwano nangenxa
yengxoxo, sonke ngoku, abasebenzi kunye nabaqeshi, izifuba zihuba-huba
yimigcobo nemivuyo ngenxa yempumelelo yethu ekuhliseni imisindo
neengcwangu. Kwaye yonke loo nto yenziwe kukuba sivumile ukuba kubekho
uthetha-thethwano, sixoxe ngayo le Mithetho isaYilwayo. (Translation of
Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[I am one of the scholars of isiXhosa. I do not like the tendency of
suppressing other languages that often occurs here in Parliament. If we
allow it, we will be defeating the purpose for which we struggled in this
country. We should not allow it to happen. When one addresses this House,
she or he must use her or his mother tongue, even if for a few moments,
because by so doing one would be contributing towards job creation, as
somebody would be sitting there to interpret, and would thereby be able to
put food on her or his table. If the hon members do not speak their
languages, the people who are in control, including the Chairperson, will
never do what we want until we use our mother tongues.

I stopped giving a notice when I am going to speak my mother tongue,
because even when I was born no bells were rung. I was not born at a
hospital nor was I fed gruel. Therefore, I cannot be fed gruel at
Parliament when I am this old, an old man. [Laughter.] I cannot allow that.

It was not pleasant when I introduced these Bills. The process did not go
down well. However, through negotiation, all of us, the employees as well
as employers, feel relieved and are very happy for our success in calming
people's anger and frustration. All of that became successful because we
allowed a period of negotiation about these Bills.]

The hon member Lever has raised a very fundamental point, but unfortunately
it is clear to me that he merely read his speech. I understand that, hon
member. Some of the issues he has raised are probably issues he has raised
because he had been asked to do so. I know when one is a junior member in
any party one just has to take instructions and come up and read.
[Laughter.] I understand that, but one of the issues that he has raised
relates to ... [Interjections.] Well, I am a member of the national
disciplinary committee of the ANC, so I understand we give instructions
sometimes. [Interjections.] Yes, we were quite difficult.

But the hon member has raised a fundamental issue in relation to job
creation. One of the reasons that we have taken this step, and even managed
to persuade and convince unions in this regard, is precisely that we are
concerned about this matter. However, in our own discussions with investors
it is clear that one of the fundamental issues that we have to address in
this country is the lack of skill, and unfortunately our people lack
education.

Hon members must understand that the system of apartheid was in force for
some time. The majority of the people who lack skills happen to be African
women in the rural areas. There is a big chunk of them, the youth, from 15
years to 30 years old. We are producing a lot of matriculants, about 300
000 of them per annum, and they end up nowhere. Only about 11% of them
manage to go to university. The rest loiter about the streets.

So the hon member raised a fundamental point. That is precisely why we have
the Skills Development Act and the Skills Development Levies Act, so that
we can insist that companies must train people. Now we have also introduced
learnerships so that most of these matriculants who are loitering about our
streets are taken on board in the various workplaces. That is why I am very
angry with those employers who are only paying and not claiming the levy to
train our people. Whether people like it or not, we are going to force
companies to train people. This is one of the things that we are going to
do this year. So watch this space! This is the year 2002.

I may start by inspecting this Parliament, because I have noticed that some
of the fire extinguishers here have long expired. What will happen if there
is a fire in here? I respect hon members. They also have rights, even if
they are not covered by the Labour Relations Act and the Basic Conditions
of Employment Act. [Laughter.]

However, let me thank hon members. I would like to thank the hon Fenyane. I
know to be a chairperson is a very difficult position, but I would like to
thank him for his support, and also counselling, because sometimes I come
to him frustrated and I insult him and ask him when this or that will be
happening, but his approach and his response is as if he is really a
priest. So I am sure that very soon we are going to have another umfundisi,
or priest.

I thank all hon members, and I am very serious, for supporting us, because
this is history. Let me conclude by just saying that before a deal was
clinched on labour law amendments, I stunned journalists when I announced
very excitedly, typical of me sometimes, that a miracle was about to
happen. Most of them laughed when I said that. What did hon members see
today? They saw another miracle, because all the political parties support
the labour law amendments. This is a miracle. I hope the journalists are
listening, wherever they are.

Here comes another miracle. I said there would be a miracle. It is a
miracle that trade unions, together with employers, agreed, albeit not
accepting everything, but there is a little bit for each and every person,
including hon members here. Each one said: ``I support, but ...'' But there
is something for everyone to take home in these labour law amendments.
[Laughter.]

I think we must all say hallelujah to ourselves. [Applause.] The reason why
journalists were flabbergasted was that they knew that labour market
policies were contested terrain. They were also aware of threats exchanged
between organised business and labour. Many people thought that we were
mad, and that the department was caught between a rock and a hard place.
Next time, when this lay preacher warns about miracles, hon members must
please listen, because I also get my strength from somewhere. So they must
please listen when I say there is going to be a miracle.

I hope that sceptics and all those who sometimes have the tendency of not
being convinced, and who have all these arguments about the inflexibility
of our labour market, will go out there now and say that the major problem
in our own economy is a shortage of skills in this country and that all of
us together must move along to make sure that there are skills. We have a
human resource development strategy in the country, and all of us must
encourage different employers to accept that indeed we have this strategy.

We trust that today heralds a momentous epoch in our history when we, once
and for all, bury some of these arguments about the inflexibility of our
labour market.

Let us now exhaust our collective energies in embarking on a skills
revolution, as I have indicated. Of course, it is a very ambitious
programme, but I have said there is no revolution that is not ambitious. If
all of us are revolutionaries, we must be ambitious. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Basic Conditions of Employment Amendment Bill, subject to proposed
amendments, agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Labour Relations Amendment Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to
in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! I take this
opportunity to thank the hon the Minister for engaging this House in a
lively debate.

  RETIREMENT FROM PARLIAMENTARY SERVICE OF MR C J P LUCAS, GENERAL MANAGER,
                    AND ADV A M MEYER, CHIEF LAW ADVISER

                                 (Statement)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! We are now
going to bid farewell to two of our most senior parliamentary officials. I
do believe they are present here - I see the Secretary has joined us.

I will therefore allow political parties an opportunity to make farewell
speeches in honour of Mr C J P Lucas, the General Manager of Parliament,
who has been with this Parliament for many years and is now going on
retirement. The Chief Law Adviser of Parliament, Adv A M Meyer, is also
going on retirement. I take it they are present in the House.

What is important is what we will say. I accordingly call upon the Acting
Chief Whip of the National Council of Provinces to be the first member to
pass a vote of thanks to these two stalwarts.

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, Mr Lucas started his service to Parliament on
13 January 1969 as a junior committee clerk. He then later became a
translator and after that a senior translator. He was also, at one stage, a
Senior Undersecretary to this Parliament for a considerable period of time.
He is now retiring as the General Manager of Parliament. He has held this
position since 1994.

I think the words ``general manager'' say a lot about Mr Lucas, because one
could ask him anything about what was going on in Parliament and he would
give one advice and information.

Mr Lucas, in your absence, we from the ANC are going to miss you. We wish
you a good retirement. May God bless you. I hope you will have enough time
to spend with your family.

Adv Anton Meyer, who has also served this Parliament for a number of years,
has been involved in quite a number of activities during his lifetime. In
1993 he was involved in the multiparty negotiations at Kempton Park. He
assisted with the drafting of transitional legislation, in particular with
the Transitional Executive Council Act, and with aspects of the interim
Constitution.

Adv Meyer's duties have also included, at times, giving some legal advice
to presiding officers, to committees and to the Secretary to Parliament. In
addition, he has played a key role in the preparation of the Constitution
of the SADC Parliamentary Forum. I am only highlighting a few activities.
The list is very long.

To you, Mr Meyer, and to your wife and family, we wish you a happy
retirement and may God bless you for many more years to come. [Applause.]

Mr P A MATTHEE: Chairperson, it is a privilege to say a few words about two
great leaders of this Parliament. Both Chris Lucas and Anton Meyer have,
over many years, made an enormous contribution to the effective functioning
of Parliament. They have played a major role in the establishment of our
new, present, fully democratic Parliament and, therefore, our whole
democratic dispensation, which today stands out as an example not only on
our continent but in the whole world.

Alhoewel ons hulle vandag groet, sal die diep spore wat hulle getrap het
met soveel toewyding en bekwaamheid, vir baie lank steeds hier wees om as
'n rigsnoer te dien vir almal van ons en diegene wat hulle sal opvolg.
[Although we bid them farewell today, the mark they have made with so much
dedication and ability will still be here for a very long time to serve as
an example to all of us and to those who will be following in their
footsteps.]

Mr Lucas has 33 years of service to Parliament. Many of us, including me,
were still at school when he started working here. As we all know, Mr Lucas
is an expert on the functioning of a parliamentary democracy and has, at
all times, but especially also after 1994, used his knowledge and expertise
with passion to make a success of the new Parliament and all its functions.

Baie dankie vir die vriendelike wyse waarop hy altyd bereid was om sy
kennis met ons almal te deel en ons almal so bekwaam van raad bedien het.
[We want to thank him sincerely for the friendly way in which he was always
prepared to share his knowledge with all of us and the way in which he
advised us all so competently.]

Anton Meyer has been in the Public Service for even longer - for 40 years.
He has served as a public prosecutor, a magistrate, a lecturer at the
Justice College, a state legal adviser and, since 1994, as the Chief Law
Adviser of Parliament. During 1975 I had the privilege of being one of his
students on a public prosecutor's course at the Justice College in
Pretoria.

Adv Meyer also served as a legal adviser during the transition of the then
South West Africa to Namibia and also during those elections. He also
played a major role during the negotiations for our new Constitution. He
also served as Deputy Chief State Law Adviser.

Hy is 'n kenner van die opstel van wetgewing, en het daarom ook 'n groot
rol gespeel in die opstel van die finale Grondwet en die opstel van die
Reëls van die Parlement.

Ons sal hom onthou as 'n uiters bekwame regsgeleerde wat altyd op 'n
vriendelike en baie bekwame wyse beskikbaar en toeganklik was. Hy was 'n
persoon op wie se regsvaardighede en regskennis 'n mens kon reken. As Anton
Meyer vir 'n mens regsadvies gegee het, dan het jy geweet jy kan daarop
reken. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[He is an expert in the drafting of legislation, and for this reason he
also played a major role in the drafting of the final Constitution and the
drafting of the Rules of Parliament.

We shall remember him as an extremely competent lawyer who was always
available and approachable in a friendly and very competent way. He was
someone on whose legal abilities and legal knowledge one could rely. When
Anton Meyer gave one legal advice, one knew one could rely on it.]

We greet both these, as I have said, leaders. They were not leaders in the
political sense who made big speeches, but they played a major role in
bringing our new dispensation and democracy to where they are today. We
salute them and wish them and their families everything of the best. And we
are sure that they will still play a major role in the future of our
country. We hope that their expertise and knowledge will still be
accessible to all of us. [Applause.]

Mr L G LEVER: Chairperson, we bid farewell to and thank two very senior
servants of Parliament and the people. I have not had personal dealings
with Mr Lucas, but I am assured by all those people I spoke to who have had
personal dealings with him that he deserves our appreciation. I have
recently come to appreciate Mr Meyer's abilities and skills since serving
on the Committee on the Powers and Privileges of Parliament.

I believe both men have served this Parliament and the people of the
country in an exemplary fashion, and we in the DP, together with every
member in this House, wish both of these gentlemen every blessing for the
future. [Applause.]

Mr M J BHENGU: Chairperson, there is a saying that goes: ``We meet to part
and part to meet.'' I would imagine that it is time for us to part with
these honourable gentlemen.

I have been the Deputy Chief Whip of the IFP for the last term, and I
remember that I interacted a lot with the two gentlemen. I know that they
have a wealth of experience. What was striking was that they were prepared
to share their experience with whoever came to them. They were prepared to
listen and help. Indeed, as the previous speakers put it so eloquently,
they actually helped a lot in nurturing our new democracy.

As the IFP, we say that we are very grateful for what they have contributed
in the development of our new Parliament and that they shared their
experience and knowledge with us. Therefore, we wish them all the best
wherever they. Nihambe kahle! [Go well.] Niphumule kahle futhe! [Rest
well.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Hon members,
we will just have a few words from the presiding officers in the NCOP.

As presiding officers, we say that Mr Lucas will be missed by Parliament
for reasons that are too many to count. Those that stand out clearly are
the following: Mr Lucas has such an immense appetite and capacity for
coffee, if you did not know ... [Laughter] ... everyone is wondering which
coffee shop is going to be so fortunate as to be patronised by the retired
Mr Lucas as its customer.

He has such an amazing capacity for deep and clear reflection on matters of
strategic importance. We recall that, during many of our meetings when we
were asking Mr Lucas very difficult and probing questions, he would sit
back in reflection and listen carefully and quietly to all queries and he
would later on come forward with such a thoughtful answer which clarified
some of the many difficult questions.

As you will remember, when we first came to this Parliament, we were all
new. We did not know what was in this big institution, but Mr Lucas was one
of those hardworking officials who assisted us in going through our work in
Parliament. Mr Lucas has the ability to distinguish central issues from
general items and to support processes by identifying and dealing with
important policy issues. Not only did he deal with important policy issues,
but he also assisted us in the formulation of new policies to replace those
apartheid policies which were then the order of this Parliament. He was
such a hard, astute and committed worker with a real commitment to South
Africa's democratic Parliament.

It is a pity that we had to miss him at such an early stage. As you will
remember, Mr Lucas actually resigned a year or two ago. And, when
Parliament realised the role that he was playing here, it requested him to
defer his retirement. Mr Lucas was kind enough to agree and spent yet
another period of time assisting the Secretary in transforming this
democratic institution. He will definitely be sorely missed, and I hope he
will not disappear because we will always approach him for more advice.

Just as we came to Parliament in 1994, when we actually did not know what
we were going to do in this Parliament, the state law adviser who was at
this Parliament then left us, hardly three months after the 1994 elections.
Mr Meyer came at that particular time to assist and guide us. The Acting
Chief Whip has already indicated that Mr Meyer was involved in Kempton Park
during the constitutional negotiations which brought about democracy in
South Africa, which was indeed a realisation of a dream long cherished by
those selfless combatants and compatriots who put their country and the
people before their lives. He was there in Kempton Park to make this dream
a reality.

When Mr Meyer further finally joined Parliament as its Chief Law Adviser,
we were all new in this Parliament. It was indeed an interesting scenario,
because we had people from Robben Island, from the UDF, from exile, from
the apartheid era and from the homelands mixed together in this institution
and we did not know how to move forward. We actually did not know the
daunting task which lay ahead of us.

When we came to this new institution, where all the apartheid laws were
enforced, and we had to enact new legislation to replace all the  apartheid
laws, Mr Meyer was there to lend us a hand. Hardly any legislation went
through this Parliament without passing under the stern eye of Mr Meyer. He
scrutinised a lot of legislation.

Hon members will remember that during 1994 and 1995 in particular, a big
volume of legislation was promulgated, which was intended to repeal the
apartheid laws. I am still asking myself how Mr Meyer managed to cope with
that.

Mr Meyer has been a tower of support to both Presiding Officers, committees
and the administration of Parliament. Although he had received a copy of
his job description, we are not so sure that he ever found time to study
his job description or his job profile, as we call it today.

Mr Meyer's advice was also instrumental in the formation of SADC. His
demeanour made the people he was advising in the SADC very comfortable, so
that they trusted his advice and relied on his opinion despite the fact
that they came from the various Southern African developing countries. We
just hope that these are not the very same people who are poaching him away
from Parliament.

We also recognise the willingness on the part of Mr Meyer to help us and
lead us on many occasions. He advised us in regard to law and
administration, and we are glad to have had such a man. His opinion and
advice have undoubtedly contributed considerably towards shaping Parliament
and the parliamentary law of South Africa. It is a real pity that those who
work hard enough and make a difference are destined to take their rest. But
I must say to Mr Meyer that we are not sure that he is retiring, because he
does not look tired. What I suggest we do is to give him a 24-hour
cellphone so that we can reach him for 24 hours a day.

Finally, allow me to say to Mr Meyer, and perhaps to Mr Lucas, that when
South Africa was approaching election time in 1994, some pessimists and
some counter-revolutionaries pressed the panic button that after the
election South Africa was going to be violence-ridden. Some began to
stockpile food or emigrated, and others resigned from the Public Service,
even after the elections. We appreciate the fact that Mr Meyer and Mr Lucas
did not resign. They stayed on and helped us to fortify and concretise this
democracy. We will remember their good work with pride, and remember them
as patriots. And I say: Go well! Mooiloop! Hambani kahle! Hambani kakuhle!
Tsamayang gabotse! Tsela tshweu! Kha va chimbile swa vudi! Fambani kahle!
Hambani kahle, ngesiNdebele.

In all, we all wish them well, and a good rest. With those few words, I
conclude the business of this House. [Applause.]

The Council adjourned at 15:45.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                         WEDNESDAY, 27 FEBRUARY 2002

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the Office
     of the Public Protector for 1999-2000 [RP 09-2002].

                         THURSDAY, 28 FEBRUARY 2002

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bill was introduced by the Minister of Transport
         in the National Assembly on 28 February 2002 and referred to the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
         Rule 160:


         (i)     National Railway Safety Regulator Bill [B 7 - 2002]
              (National Assembly - sec 76) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
              prior notice of its introduction published in Government
              Gazette No 23100 of 6 February 2002.]


         The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Transport
         of the National Assembly.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     (1)    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces:


          Bill, as amended, passed by National Assembly on 28 February 2002
          and transmitted for consideration of Assembly's amendments:
         (i)     Animal Health Bill [B 64D - 2001] (National Council of
              Provinces - sec 76).


         The amended Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Land
         and Environmental Affairs for a report and recommendations on the
         Assembly's amendments.


     (2)    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces:


         Bill passed by National Assembly on 28 February 2002 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (i)     Division of Revenue Bill [B 5B - 2002] (National Assembly
              - sec 76).


         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Finance of
         the National Council of Provinces.


