---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 07 May 2002'
layout: debate
year: 2002
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2002/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2002-05-07
---

TUESDAY, 7 MAY 2002
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:06.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                            DISCOMFORT OF MEMBERS

                               (Announcement)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, you will have to be prepared for
a certain amount of discomfort. We are squatting here in the Old Assembly
Chamber and we are going to have to tolerate the business that is going on
out there in the lobby and the noise that may intrude on our own
deliberations. As squatters, we do not have much of a say as to what
happens and how we respond to it.

                                 NEW MEMBER

                               (Announcement)

The Chairperson announced that the vacancy in the delegation of the Western
Cape had been filled by the appointment of Mr F Adams with effect from 15
March 2002.

The member made and subscribed the oath in the office of the Chairperson.

                           STATEMENT OF CONDOLENCE

                          (The late Mr S V Tshwete)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Madam Chair, hon members and comrades, the
NCOP salutes the late Minister of Safety and Security, Steve Vukile
Tshwete, who passed away an hour before Freedom Day 2002 in Military
Hospital in Pretoria. Comrade Tshwete was born in the village of Peelton on
12 November 1938. He spent his childhood in Peelton and later in King
William's Town and East London. The growth of his political awareness
coincided with the 1950s Treason Trial.

He was still at school when he joined the ANC and was elected national
secretary of the South African Students Organisation, at the same time that
our President Mbeki was its chairperson. Undeterred by the banning of the
organisation, Comrade Steve went underground and joined uMkhonto weSizwe
and also became secretary of the regional command of MK. He was captured in
1963 and in the following year was sentenced to 15 years for sabotage.

He turned to the political organisation in the Eastern Cape following his
release in 1978, becoming the president of the UDF in the Border region in
1983. He was declared a prohibited immigrant in South Africa and banished
and restricted to the Ciskei. He had been repeatedly detained by the Ciskei
government. He left the country and returned to the country permanently on
the instructions of the national executive committee of the ANC.

In May 1990 he assumed work for the ANC as its national organiser. He
headed the ANC sports desk and later became the Minister of Sport and
Recreation. He performed a pivotal role as Minister of sport with a passion
that moved the nation and which made sport our common playground as South
Africans and a powerful tool of national reconciliation and nation-
building. When our teams won, Comrade Steve rejoiced with them. When they
lost, he cried with them and became part of the teams and went with them
through their trials and tribulations.

In 1999 Comrade Tshwete was appointed Minister of Safety and Security. He
dedicated himself to tackling crime and lawlessness and building safer
communities for our people. He made his presence felt. He was able to win
the support of our police, motivate them and identify with them and
understood the challenges they faced in their day-to-day work.
Comrade Tshwete was not desk-bound. He was a leader who was always in the
hot spots, providing support to police officials on the beat and assuring
people and victims of crime that he was there, committed to eradicating
crime in society.

Despite a schedule in which he had to dedicate many many hours to the
nation, Comrade Steve was also a dedicated father and a loyal husband. This
Council therefore conveys its sincere condolences to his spouse, to his
children and to the family of Comrade Tshwete. [Applause.]

Mnr J L THERON: Agb Voorsitter, ek wil hierdie mosie graag spesifiek in
Afrikaans doen as 'n erkenning aan die veelsydigheid van Minister Steve
Tshwete. Soos baie van u seker weet, kon hy onder meer baie vlot Afrikaans
praat en dit wys onder andere op sy veelsydigheid. Ander aspekte wat ek kan
uitwys wat betref sy veelsydigheid, sluit in: Hy was 'n baie goeie
sportman. Atletiek, sokker en rugby tel onder die sportsoorte wat hy
beoefen het. Hy was 'n goeie rugbyspeler en het selfs rugby op die eiland
georganiseer, waarin hy homself goed uitgeleef het.

Hy was 'n goeie organiseerder; van sy jeugjare af was hy betrokke in
verskeie hoedanighede in die organisering van die jeug. Hy was 'n goeie
dispuut- en konflikhanteerder - vandaar die bynaam ``Mr Fix It'' - wat
boekdele spreek. Dit is ook bekend dat die ANC vir hom baie effektief in
dié verband operasioneel aangewend het. Hy was 'n goeie gesinsman. Hy was
'n goeie leier. Hy was 'n goeie Minister. Hy was Minister van Sport en hy
was Minister van Veiligheid en Sekuriteit.

Ek kan nie die geleentheid laat verbygaan sonder om hierdie een aspek van
hom duidelik uit te lig nie. Die groot Afrikaanse digter Jan F E Celliers
het in sy gedig ``Trou'' gesê: ``Ek hou van 'n man wat sy man kan staan.''
En: ``Ek hou van 'n arm wat 'n slag kan slaan.'' Minister Tshwete was by
uitstek iemand wat sy man kon staan. Daarvoor eer ons hom en daarin was hy
vir almal van ons 'n voorbeeld. Ons het vandag in Suid-Afrika meer mense
nodig wat hul man kan staan en hier kan ons sy voorbeeld navolg, as ons van
Suid-Afrika 'n vooruitstrewende land wil maak. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr J L THERON: Hon Chairperson, I would like to move this motion
specifically in Afrikaans as a recognition of the versatility of Minister
Steve Tshwete. As many of you probably know, he could speak Afrikaans
fluently, among others, and this indicates, among other things, his
versatility. Other aspects I could highlight regarding his versatility
include the following: He was a very good sportsman. Athletics, soccer and
rugby are among the sports which he played. He was a good rugby player and
even organised rugby on the island, which he did to the full.

He was a good organiser; from the time of his youth he was involved in
various capacities in organising the youth. He was good at dealing with
conflict and disputes - from which he got the nickname ``Mr Fix It'' -
which speaks volumes. It is also known that operationally the ANC utilised
him very effectively in this regard. He was a good family man. He was a
good leader. He was a good Minister. He was the Minister of Sport and he
was the Minister of Safety and Security. I cannot allow the opportunity to
pass to clearly highlight this one aspect of him. The important Afrikaans
poet Jan F E Celliers said in his poem ``Trou'': ``Ek hou van 'n man wat sy
man kan staan.'' And: ``Ek hou van 'n arm wat 'n slag kan slaan.'' Minister
Tshwete was notably someone who could stand his ground. We honour him for
that and he was an example to all of us. Today we need more people in South
Africa who can stand their ground and here we can follow his example, if we
want to make South Africa a progressive country. [Applause.]]

Mr P A MATTHEE: Chairperson, in the words of President Mbeki: ``A great
patriot, a fearless freedom fighter, a selfless servant of the people and a
committed nation-builder has fallen.''

I repeat these words of our President today because they succinctly
encapsulate the greatness of our late colleague Minister Steve Tshwete. I
had the privilege of getting to know Steve Tshwete much better than before
during the past few months, which were also the last few months of his
life, especially during the talks between the ANC and the New NP. Although
I thought I knew him reasonably well before, it was only during these past
few months that I really got to understand the depth of his love for our
country and our nation.

I got to know the depth of his warm and sincere personality, the depth of
his passion for reconciliation and nation-building between all our people
and the depth of his commitment to make South Africa work and to create a
better life for all in South Africa.

I will never forget the openness, the passion and the sincerity with which
he spoke when he addressed our federal council and also at the press
conference thereafter. He also gave me - and I believe many South Africans
- new hope that we would be able to succeed in drastically bringing down
the unacceptable crime levels in our country. Under his leadership it was
possible to stabilise the levels of crime more than a year before it was
thought possible to do so.

He really deserved the nickname ``Mr Fix It'', not only because he could
really get things done, but also because he had the ability to inspire
people around him, and to make them enthusiastic about achieving solutions
to what may have seemed insurmountable problems. We will sorely miss him in
this Council and, at a personal level, many of us will also miss him as a
trusted friend.

We can honour his memory by doing our utmost to continue the service he so
selflessly rendered to South Africa and all its people, and to continue
with the nation-building that he was so passionate about and so committed
to.

Our deepest sympathy goes to his wife, Pamela, and his four children. They
can forever be proud of him.

Hamba kahle, ntanga. [Go well, brother.]

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson and hon members, like all other members who
have spoken before me, and on behalf of my party, the IFP, I stand up with
a very broken heart to express our deepest sympathy to the family, friends,
comrades and all who came into contact with the late hon member and
Minister of Safety and Security, Mr Steve Tshwete.

He was a great leader and one of the great sons Africa has produced. We in
the IFP salute him for what he was. He demonstrated a warm attitude to
people around him and maintained impartiality. He was a leader to all, and
a leader for all. He was dedicated to his work and therefore was loved for
his commitment to whatever work he was doing. The nickname ``Mr Fix It''
says it all.

He will definitely be missed, not only by his family and his comrades and
friends, but also by all peace-loving, good citizens of the country who are
committed to transformation and development within the African continent as
a whole. His sudden death has shocked the country. I hope that his unique
style of debate when defending what he believed in will be acquired or has
already been adopted by some of the young members of this House. He has
fought a good fight. May his soul now rest in peace.

Sithi thina beNkatha Freedom Party: Dudu kini nonke zihlobo nomndeni
akwehlanga lungehlanga. INkosi ibisiphile yena, iNkosi isithathile.  [We in
the Inkatha Freedom Party say: The family and relatives must be consoled.
What has happened could not be prevented. God gave him to us, God has taken
him.]

Mr R M NYAKANE: Chairperson, hon members, on 26 April this year the skies
clouded over, something which was symbolic of the drawing to a close of a
great man's time here on earth. This man who was loved in the hills and
admired in the cities was also able to milk cows. He often eclipsed men of
greatness. May his ancestors shine their light on him, and may he continue
to live in the hearts of those whom he served by making their lives richer.

His departure from this world is truly a loss. But let us not allow that to
make us fail in our duty. Let us take lessons from his legacy and pass them
on to our children. Let us feed our children truth and respect, two moral
qualities personified by a great leader, Steve Tshwete. His deeds have
spoken to all South Africans.

Etlela hi ku rhula nhenha ya tinhenha. [Rest in peace, hero of heroes.]

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, our prayers and deepest condolences go out to
the Tshwete family at this sad time, which has not been made any easier by
his having been so much in the public eye at the time of his death. His
gruff exterior and his tough talk was clearly what was needed by a
demoralised Police Service at the time of his appointment as Minister, and
he certainly did not disappoint the country.

However, I suspect that that gruff exterior hid and shielded a softer side.
I experienced it myself, and I value the memory thereof. He was a popular
Minister, and he will be missed.

It is quite interesting that when someone dies, immediately particular
attributes of that person come to the fore. Very often it is just like when
one looks at a baby and one is able to tell that it looks like its father.
If someone dies and everybody starts talking about them, particular
attributes come to the fore.

It is interesting to see what attributes were immediately given to Tshwete.
People spoke of his loyalty, and words such as ``reconciliation'' and
``reconciler'' were on everybody's lips. It is strange because people might
have used other terms to describe his military background, but they did
not. It was the reconciliatory aspect of his personality which was on
everyone's lips. We in the ACDP respect and honour that, and there can be
no greater attribute any South African can have at this time. We support
the motion.

 Mr J O TLHAGALE: Chairperson and hon members of this House, although my
acquaintance with the late Safety and Security Minister was of short
duration, I nonetheless knew him as a forthright and no-nonsense person.

At our management meeting on 29 April this year, after observing a moment
of silence in his honour, the leader of the UCDP, Kgosi Mangope, said that
he regarded the late Steve Tshwete as the right man who was equal to the
task for which he had been appointed, and had looked to him as somebody who
would solve the problem of crime in our country.

An important lesson that must not pass unnoticed is that whilst we oppose
each other even to the extent of indulging in unparliamentary and
acrimonious accusations against each in the Houses of Parliament, we
nevertheless love each other.

May his survivors, relatives and our colleagues in the ANC know that we in
the UCDP share their grief. May his soul rest in peace. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I thank hon members for those
statements of condolence and add, from the Chair, a further statement.
I was deeply distressed to hear of Minister Tshwete's passing last weekend,
and more distressed at having to travel abroad a day after learning of this
painful loss. I would therefore like to express my own deepest sympathy and
condolences to his wife and children on their tragic loss. South Africa is
all the poorer for losing a patriot with the charisma to inspire and the
energy to implement.

Minister Tshwete's enthusiasm for life, his rough-and-tough approach to
politics and personal warmth touched all who knew him. His bravery in the
struggle against apartheid is legendary. South Africa is the poorer for
losing a patriot of his courage and conviction. Comrade Tshwete was an
outstanding comrade, a gallant freedom fighter and a true leader in all
spheres. He was, as many have said, larger than life. He will be missed by
all of us.

As we remember his contribution as Minister of Safety of Security, let us
not forget the enthusiasm and talent he brought to his stewardship of our
return to international sport, nor his successful work with all the parties
in Parliament as Leader of Government Business. Happily, we are fully
honest when we say that he played each of these national roles with honour
and efficiency. His death is a loss to the nation, and his memory will live
on for generations. Hamba kahle, Comrade Steve! [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I shall move at the next
sitting of the Council:


  That the Council, noting -


  (1) the rapidly deteriorating situation in the Middle East, occasioned by
       Israeli state aggression against the state and people of Palestine,
       including the killing and maiming of civilians;


  (2) the occupation of Palestinian land and territory by the Israeli
       government;


  (3) the violation by the Israeli government of UN Human Rights treaties
       and the Geneva Convention and protocols on the treatment of civilians
       and prisoners of war;


  (4) the efforts of the Arab States, the United Nations, the UN Security
       Council and several other governments, including the Government of
       South Africa, to find a lasting peaceful solution in the Middle East;


  (5) the refusal of the Israeli government to permit UN observers to
       investigate the events in Jenin; and


  (6) the progress in regard to resolving an impasse in the Church of
       Nativity in Bethlehem,


  therefore requests that a debate with the title ``Palestine: a struggle
  for self-determination, freedom, human dignity and peace'' be held on 9
  May 2002.

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, at the next sitting of this House I shall
move:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with serious concern -


       (a)  the rising rate of unemployment and poverty;


       (b)  that millions of people live in destitution; and


       (c)  that sound economic policies do not always translate into higher
           standards of living; and


  (2) therefore calls on all sectors of government to commit more resources
       to the development of the small business sector because this sector
       has a huge percentage of women involved in survivalist business
       activities.

Mnr A E VAN NIEKERK: Voorsitter, by die volgende sitting van die Raad gaan
ek voorstel:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) kennis neem dat daar mediavraagstukke in Suid-Afrika is wat onopgelos
       is soos die motivering vir 'n presidensiële perskorps in 'n land waar
       mediavryheid grondwetlik verskans word en die persepsie dat dié korps
       nie ernstig deur die buitelandse media ervaar word nie;


  (2) voorts kennis neem dat die tweede internasionale konferensie oor die
       parlemente en die media onlangs deur die Statebond en die Wêreldbank
       in Suid-Afrika gehou is ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Mr Van Niekerk, could you wait? I
understand that we have a problem with the sound. Could we ensure that the
interpreters are able to hear what is being said on the floor of the House?
They are unable to interpret owing to the sound not carrying.

Mr Van Niekerk, I am afraid that I have to do something that I do not
normally do and give you more time so that you can present your notice of
motion from the beginning again owing to the fact that it was not heard.

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Thank you, Chairperson. That means that I do not have
to rush, as I was doing. [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: You do have to rush! [Laughter.]

Mnr A E VAN NIEKERK: Voorsitter, by die volgende sitting van die Raad gaan
ek voorstel:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) kennis neem dat daar mediavraagstukke in Suid-Afrika is wat onopgelos
       is soos die motivering vir 'n presidensiële perskorps in 'n land waar
       mediavryheid grondwetlik verskans word en die persepsie dat dié korps
       nie ernstig deur die buitelandse media ervaar word nie;


  (2) voorts kennis neem dat die tweede internasionale konferensie oor
       parlemente en die media onlangs deur die Statebond en die Wêreldbank
       in Suid-Afrika gehou is;


  (3) van mening is dat dit hoog tyd is dat die SA Parlement en die SA
       media in hierdie Parlement die gesprek verder voer en dat hierdie
       twee rolspelers nou eienaarskap moet neem om daardeur doeltreffende
       verhoudinge hier te kan bou en so die aansien van die Parlement as 'n
       demokratiese instelling te kan verhoog; en


  (4) laastens kennis neem dat die Internasionale Media-Vryheidsdag op 3
       Mei gevier word en dat lande in Afrika onder die nuwe Afrika-unie 'n
       geleentheid het om 'n manifes saam te stel wat internasionale
       agterdog oor die vry media as instelling op die vasteland kan
       besweer.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, I give notice that I shall move at the
next sitting of the Council:


  That the Council -


  (1) takes note that there are media questions in South Africa which
       remain unresolved such as the motivation for a Presidential press
       corps in a country where freedom of the press is entrenched in the
       Constitution and the perception that this corps is regarded as a joke
       by the foreign media;


  (2) furthermore notes that the second international conference on
       parliaments and the media was recently hosted in South Africa by the
       Commonwealth and the World Bank;


  (3) is of the opinion that it is high time that the SA Parliament and the
       SA media should take the debate further in this Parliament and that
       these two roleplayers should now take ownership to thereby build
       efficient relationships here in order to enhance the esteem of
       Parliament as a democratic institution; and


  (4) lastly takes note that International Media Freedom Day was celebrated
       on 3 May and the countries in Africa under the new  African Union has
       an opportunity to compile a manifest which could allay international
       suspicion about a free media as institution on the continent.]

           CONGRATULATIONS TO NEW DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms L JACOBUS: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) congratulates Ms Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula on her appointment as Deputy
       Minister of Home Affairs;


  (2) notes that she has over difficult periods in the history of our
       country distinguished herself as a woman committed to the ideals of
       our nation;


  (3) further notes that her qualities, abilities and diligence are widely
       respected; and


  (4) believes that she will be the perfect catalyst for transformation,
       not only in the Department of Home Affairs, but also in the country
       as a whole.

I have just come from the swearing in ceremony of the Deputy Minister and I
could not help noticing that she has very small feet. I am more than
confident, however, that she will be able to fill the boots of her
predecessor and comfortably walk the walk.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                        TRIBUTE TO MARK SHUTTLEWORTH

                             (Draft Resolution)

Dr E A CONROY: Voorsitter, ek stel graag sonder kennisgewing voor:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) hulde bring aan ons ruimtereisiger, Mark Shuttleworth;


  (2) hom gelukwens met sy besondere prestasie om die eerste Afrikaan en
       Suid-Afrikaner in die buitenste ruim te word; en


  (3) hom bedank vir die wyse waarop hy die naam van Suid-Afrka en ons
       trotse vlag tot nuwe hoogtes gevoer en 'n navolgingswaardige rolmodel
       vir die Suid-Afrikaanse jeug geskep het.
(Translation of Afrikaans motion without notice follows.)

[Dr E A CONROY: Chairperson, I take pleasure in moving without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) pays tribute to our cosmonaut Mark Shuttleworth;


  (2) congratulates him on his exceptional achievement of being the first
       African and South African in outer space; and


  (3) thanks him for the manner in which he took the name of South Africa
       and our proud flag to new heights and created a role model worth
       emulating for the South African youth.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

           CONGRATULATIONS TO NEW MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr T S SETONA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with gratification the appointment of Comrade Charles Nqakula
       as the new Minister of Safety and Security;


  (2) believes his appointment is an acknowledgement of the positive and
       constructive role he has played in the transformation and nation-
       building process in the new South Africa;


  (3) further believes that his appointment is a fitting tribute to the
       enormous contribution he has made in the struggle for liberation and
       the commitment and hard work he has shown towards the people of South
       Africa; and


  (4) joins in this celebration by congratulating the honourable Minister
       of Safety and Security on his appointment.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                   NEGATIVE REPORTS ON HOSPITAL CONDITIONS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Dr P J C NEL: Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) kennis neem dat -


       (a)  negatiewe berigte oor die haglike toestande wat tans in die
           hospitale in die Oos-Kaap heers, onlangs in nuusblaaie en ander
           media gerapporteer is;


       (b)  dié negatiewe berigte 'n persepsie skep dat dit die geval is in
           alle hospitale in alle provinsies, maar dit is verseker nie waar
           van die hospitale in die Vrystaat nie; en


       (c)  die oorsaak vir die agteruitgang na bewering toegeskryf kan word
           aan 'n tekort aan fondse, wat reeds aan die begin van die nuwe
           boekjaar ondervind word;


  (2) die agbare Minister van Gesondheid versoek om ondersoek in te stel na
       dié bewerings; en


  (3) indien dit wel die geval is dringend vra dat die aangeleentheid
       onmiddellik beredder word.
(Translation of Afrikaans motion without notice follows.)

Dr P J C NEL: Chairperson, I move without notice:
  That the Council -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  negative reports about the desperate conditions that currently
           prevail in the hospitals in the Eastern Cape have recently been
           reported in newspapers and other media;


       (b)  these negative reports create the perception that this is the
           case in all hospitals in all provinces, but that this is
           certainly not true of the hospitals in the Free State; and


       (c)  the cause for the deterioration can allegedly be ascribed to a
           shortage of funds, experienced as early as at the beginning of
           the new financial year;


  (2) requests the honourable Minister of Health to investigate these
       allegations; and


  (3) if this is indeed the case, urges that the matter be addressed
       immediately.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                          INTERNATIONAL NURSES' DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms E C GOUWS: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the ICN proclaimed 12 May (this coming Sunday) as International
           Nurses' Day;


       (b)  this day, the anniversary of Florence Nightingale's birth, is
           celebrated around the world every year; and


       (c)  International Nurses' Day provides an excellent opportunity to
           inform and remind the public about the extent and importance of
           nurses' work; and


  (2) suggests that we not only remember our mothers on this Mother's Day,
       but spare a thought for our nurses and let us send a rose to a nurse
       on 12 May.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: The motion is agreed to, but I wonder where
hon members are going to find roses.

                           DEATH OF KGOSHI MASHILE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M I MAKOELA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -
  (1) notes, with sadness, the passing away of Kgoshi Mashile, a former
       Senator and a former member of the National Council of Provinces
       representing the Northern Province until 1999;


  (2) conveys its condolences to the family of Kgoshi Mashile; and


  (3) pledges its spiritual and moral support during their time of grief.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                 RECENT PERFORMANCE OF NATIONAL SPORTS TEAMS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr N M RAJU: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that the three major codes of sport in South Africa, ie
       cricket, soccer and rugby, seem to find themselves in the doldrums of
       poor performances;


  (2) calls upon all South Africans not to indulge in an orgy of finger-
       pointing at various scapegoats, but rather to unite behind our
       national sides and to give space to the respective administrators to
       restore order and a sense of discipline and commitment; and


  (3) believes that sooner rather than later "alles sal regkom" and that
       all South Africans will be proud once again of our national teams'
       performances in the international limelight.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                        BEREAVEMENTS OF NCOP MEMBERS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) takes note of the grief experienced by the following colleagues,
       their families and friends:


       (a)  colleague Vilakazi grieves the death of her sister; and


       (b)  colleague Taabe grieves the death of his mother; and


  (2) further notes that when Mr A E van Niekerk's father passed away years
       ago a friend comforted him with the following words:


          Remember all the good and outstanding characteristics your beloved
          one was loved for, for now after his death it is your
          responsibility to make those characteristics live through you.
          That is the price you have to pay for the privilege you had, to
          know the beloved who passed on. We wish you the grace of God to be
          healed soon.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                   POLICY FOR ALLOCATION OF FISHING RIGHTS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs A M VERSFELD: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that the DA is calling on Minister Valli Moosa and the
       Department of Marine and Coastal Management to produce the set of
       policy guidelines that was supposed to appear with the application
       forms for fishing rights;


  (2) calls on that department to go out to visit fishing communities to
       explain to them -


       (a)  how the above criteria were applied; and


       (b)  why some people who are not bona fide fishermen got allocations
           while most of the subsistence fishermen once again got nothing;


  (3) further notes that the DA is challenging the Minister and Marine and
       Coastal Management for a public debate on the issue of rights
       allocation and their so-called policy guidelines; and


  (4) also notes that the DA is noting with concern that a PDI group that
       applied for a fishing right were denied access because one member
       ``was convicted of fishing without a permit'' and that the DA is
       hoping that the Minister and his department will apply the same
       criteria once they revisit the application of Hout Bay Fishing and
       not give them special privileges because they could afford to pay a
       fine of R40 million - what is good for the goose is good for the
       gander!

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Is there any objection to the motion? There is
an objection. The motion will therefore become notice of a motion.

I think it is important that hon members move matters on behalf of parties
represented in the House.

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, I am grateful for the sympathy expressed,
but I wonder if the House would allow me to correct Mr Van Niekerk's
motion. It is not my sister who passed away, but my first daughter.

         CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA AMENDMENT BILL

                    (Debate in terms of section 74(5)(c))

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, the
draft legislation forming the subject of our debate this afternoon is one
of a package of four pieces of legislation, four Bills with one common
denominator. They all deal with the creation of laws providing for and
governing the procedures relating to the crossing of the floor by elected
representatives, or to frame it in a more legal tongue, the legislation
deals with changes of party membership, mergers between parties and
subdivision of parties within the context of national, provincial and local
government legislatures.

The first of these Bills is the Loss or Retention of Membership of National
and Provincial Legislatures Bill, which deals with the issue of crossing
the floor in the National Assembly and the provincial legislatures. This
Bill finds its origin in the Constitution itself, which provides that an
Act of Parliament may, within a reasonable period after the Constitution
took effect, be passed in accordance with section 76(1) to provide for the
manner in which it will be possible for a member of a legislature who
ceases to be a member of the party which nominated him or her to retain
membership of that legislature. The same Act may also provide for any
existing party to merge with another party or to subdivide into more than
one party. On 13 November 2001 the National Assembly gave permission to the
Assembly's Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development to
proceed with the consideration of this Bill.

The second Bill is the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa
Amendment Bill, which is the subject of our debate this afternoon. The
purpose of this Bill is to address the crossing issue at local government
level, and I will return shortly to the provisions of this Bill.

Thirdly, the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Second Amendment
Bill creates a mechanism for adjusting the composition of a province's
delegation to the National Council of Provinces in the event of a
significant change in the composition of a provincial legislature. I need
not say more in regard to this Bill, save to remark that it affects the
Council and it must, accordingly, also be passed by this Council.

The final member of this quartet of Bills is the Bill amending the Local
Government Municipal Structures Act of 1998 in order to harmonise its
provisions relating to loss of council membership with the provisions of
the first Constitution Amendment Bill, the subject of today's debate. As I
have mentioned, the first Constitution Amendment Bill aims to regulate
changes of party membership and mergers or subdivision of parties at the
level of local government.

The provisions of the Bill are largely modelled on the principles contained
in the Bill dealing with membership. Provision is made for the following:
Changes of party membership will only be allowed after the expiry of a
period of 12 months after the date of the previous election of all
municipal councils. Similarly, such changes will not be allowed during the
12 months preceding the date of the next election of all municipal
councils. A further requirement is added, namely, that a change of party
membership will only be allowed if the members wishing to leave a party
represent not less than 10% of the seats held by the party concerned.
Similarly, mergers between or subdivisions of political parties will only
be allowed after the expiry of 12 months after the date of the previous
election of all municipal councils and will not be allowed during the 12
months preceding the date of the next election of all municipal councils.
In respect of subdivisions, a further requirement is also added, that the
members leaving the original party must represent not less than 10% of the
seats held by the party concerned.

All of the above steps may only take place during limited periods, as
determined by the Bill. In the year 2002 such periods will be during the
first 15 days following the commencement of section 158A and again from the
first to the 15th day of September. In the years thereafter, such periods
will last from the first to the 15th day of February and from the first to
the 15th day of September of each year.

The Bill also introduces a new principle in that provision is made that
during the period allowed for the above changes of membership, mergers or
sudivisions of parties, no party represented in a municipal council may
suspend or terminate the party membership of a councillor representing that
party. A party is further prevented from performing any act whatsoever
which may cause such a councillor to be disqualified from holding office as
a councillor or change such councillor's position on a party list relating
to the said municipal council. During the window period allowed for
crossing, mergers or subdivisions, a councillor is allowed to change party
membership only once and a party may merge or subdivide only once.

It stands to reason that the proposed amendments are evoking considerable
interest both from within and outside Parliament. Both Constitution-
amending Bills were published in the Gazette for public comment and I have
also invited comments from various provincial legislatures. It is already
apparent, from the comments received, that there are certain areas of the
proposed legislation that will require some refinement and I believe that
those matters will shortly be dealt with comprehensively by the relevant
committees of Parliament.

I do not wish to pre-empt the possible changes, save to remark that the
provisions of the membership Bill will obviously have to be brought into
line with those of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa
Amendment Bill because we want to ensure that the principles governing
changes of party membership and mergers or subdivision of parties will be
the same at national, provincial and local government levels. For example,
we have already moved away from the concept proposed in the membership Bill
that the President must, by means of a proclamation, determine the periods
during which such changes will be allowed to take place.

I am confident that the views that are expressed by all participants in
this debate will provide useful in assisting towards the consideration of
this legislation. [Applause.]
Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, I am not going to repeat what the Minister
said, but I will emphasise what he said.

Once more, as we promised, Parliament is coming up with this piece of
legislation to add yet another pillar to support our democracy. This seeks,
for the first time in our democracy, to regulate changes of party
membership, mergers and subdivision of parties at the level of local
government.

As members are aware, this constitutional requirement is contained in item
23A of Schedule 2 to the interim Constitution, that is Act 200 of 1993.
This provision dictates that an Act of Parliament may, within a reasonable
period after the new Constitution took effect, be passed in accordance with
section 76(1) of the 1996 Constitution to amend that particular item which
would make it possible for members of the legislature to change their party
membership without losing their seats.

These items, 23 and 23A, refer to the Loss or Retention of Membership of
National and Provincial Legislatures Bill, which modelled and necessitated
the creation of this piece of legislation which is before us. At present,
our Constitution does not provide for similar changes of party membership
and mergers between or subdivisions of parties in the context of local
government. It provides for changes of party membership in that it only
allows a member to change membership after the expiry of 12 months after
the date of previous elections of all municipal councils.

By this provision, we are not giving people a blank cheque. These changes
will not be allowed during the 12 months preceding the date of the next
election of all municipal councils. Furthermore, the said changes will only
be allowed if the members wishing to leave a party represent not less than
10% of the seats held by the party concerned. The same requirement will be
applied when parties want to merge or sudivide.

To make sure that there is no disruption in Government work or the
political arena, that is, the movement by members from one party to the
other or the merging or subdivision of parties, there is a limited period
for that to happen. This year, for example, the movement or merger can only
take place during the first 15 days following the commencement of section
158A and again from the first to the 15th day of September. In the years
thereafter, such periods will last from 1 February to 15 February and from
1 September to 15 September of each year. I hope that I have simplified
this as far as I could.

There are members, that is MPLs and councillors, who have become slaves in
their own parties. Even if that particular party has become more and more
irrelevant in our political arena, members are stuck with it. Even if
leaders of those parties are dictators, members are stuck with those
leaders. By this legislation, we are freeing members to exercise their
rights and leave those irrelevant parties to join vibrant and relevant
parties like the ANC. [Laughter.] [Applause.]
This Bill is introducing this new principle which is not contained in the
membership Bill in that it provides that during the period allowed for the
above changes of membership, mergers or subdivisions of parties, no party
represented in a municipal council may suspend or terminate the party
membership of a councillor representing that party, as the Minister said,
or perform any act whatsoever which may cause such a councillor to be
disqualified from holding office as a councillor or change such
councillor's position on a party list relating to the said municipal
council.

To avoid people moving from party A, B and C within a short space of time,
the Bill provides that during these 15-day window periods a councillor is
allowed to change party membership only once, and at the same time a party
may merge or subdivide only once, as the Minister rightly said. So no
councillor will, like a frog, jump from one party to another at random.

For those who might have forgotten, this debate started more than 10 years
ago during Codesa in Kempton Park. As one of those who were involved in
those negotiations, I would like to say that parties like the DP were very
vocal in urging parties to agree that we should have these provisions in
our Constitution. I hope that they have not changed their position.

I would like to conclude by making the following announcement: From the
13th to the 15th of this month the select committee and the portfolio
committee will be conducting public hearings here in Parliament about the
same BillS. I want to urge all stakeholders to come and participate in
these hearings. They can do that by sending in written submissions or by
coming here and making oral submissions. As Parliament we have done our
part. It is up to stakeholders to do the same. A goal is a dream with a
deadline. Love your country enough to talk about these Bills. [Applause.]

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, my party has debated and anguished over this
legislation. We have consulted widely. It is our considered opinion that
this legislation is wrong-minded and that it is, at best, premature.

The whole question of on what basis members should be elected is currently
under review, perhaps to get closer to the German electoral model on which
our Constitution is largely based, where something like 50% of the seats in
Parliament and in the other legislature, the provincial parliament, might
be constituted on a constituency basis. I believe Dr Van Zyl Slabbert and
Idasa are looking at this on behalf of the Government.

Why then should we now come with a short-term interim measure which gives
entirely the wrong impression? Why, in our view, the indecent haste? The
next election is around the corner. In a very short time we will be
preparing for it. It is only two years away. We therefore believe that the
measure is unnecessary and undesirable at this time. We do not believe,
also, that it is desired by the majority of councillors, certainly not
those that we have consulted in the Cape province.

We believe that what is proposed is tantamount to gerrymandering of the
Constitution to serve the short-term desires of a particular political
party. We do not think, whatever the merits may be, that that is the right
way to go about working with the Constitution. We believe that if and when
the parliaments of our country are fully or partly constituted on a
constituency basis - let me say that I think that was agreed between the
major parties at Codesa in that this was the ideal way for us to constitute
our Parliament - were we to move in that direction, which we partially have
done with the local government, with directly elected ward members whose
names appear on the ballot paper, that a new situation will arise, a new
situation in which crossing of the floor would, in fact, be conventional
and correct and in line with the conventions in most of the great
democracies. But, in our view, we are not there yet.

Our system is currently a list system of proportional representation. We
believe that what is proposed in this Bill runs the risk of skewing the
principle of proportionality, as set out in the Constitution. We agree with
the judges' comments with regard to the certification of the Constitution
of the RSA 1996(4) SA 744 on page 831, on which they make the following
comments. They say, on page 185:


  It is the party that faces the voters during the succeeding election and
  has to justify its acts in the previous legislative period.

On page 186 they say:


  Under a list system of proportional representation, it is parties that
  the electorate vote for and parties which must be accountable to the
  electorate. A party which abandons its manifesto in a way not accepted by
  the electorate would probably lose at the next election.

What is the most telling is what they say on page 187:


  It also prevents parties in power from enticing members of small parties
  to defect from the party upon whose lists they were elected to joining
  the governing party. If this were permitted it could enable the governing
  party to obtain a special majority which it might not otherwise be able
  to muster, and which is not a reflection of the views of the electorate.

This is according to the judges of our Constitutional Court. Is this not
precisely what has happened in the Western Cape parliament? A party elected
on the basis of keeping the ANC out, whatever the merits of that may have
been, has ushered in the ANC little more than a year after the election of
that party. [Interjections.]

Therefore, we are opposed to the legislation at this time. We trust the
Justice committee of the National Assembly will take note. [Time expired.]

Mr L G LEVER: Chairperson, the Bill before us encompasses an amendment to
the Constitution, which will allow for public representatives at local
government level to change their political allegiance, or, to put it in
another way, to cross the floor.

The matter comes to this House before the process of public hearings has
been completed. The explanation for adopting this process given to a
colleague of mine this morning was that the Constitution required the Bill
to be introduced in this way and that if he wanted to change it, he should
approach the Constitutional Review Committee.

With the greatest respect to the person who expressed this view, the
Constitution does not require the Bill to be introduced in this House
before the process of public hearings is completed. The Constitution and
the Rules of this honourable House allow the Bill to be introduced in this
manner. There is an important distinction here, and I am going to repeat
it. The Constitution allows for this process; it does not require it.

The DP believes that despite the fact that no decision is made by this
House, it is unseemly for this House to debate a matter before the citizens
and the electorate of South Africa have had an opportunity to give voice to
their opinions on this topic.

We are compelled to ask: What is the purpose of initiating the debate in
this way, before the voice of the people has been heard, when Parliament
itself called for such opinion to be directed to it? If this is not
contempt of the parliamentary process, it is certainly contempt of public
opinion.

Is this another grubby deal behind the backs of the voters between the New
NP and the ANC?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! If the hon member could take his seat.

Mr M V MOOSA: Chairperson, will the hon member take a question regarding
the correction of his views?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Would the hon member take a question?

Mr L G LEVER: No, Chairperson.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: The hon member is not prepared to take a
question.

Mr L G LEVER: Is this another grubby deal behind the backs of the voters
between the New NP and the ANC? We know how sensitive the New NP is on this
topic. In the region of 10 by-elections have taken place since the New NP
left the DA, and they have not challenged any one of them. In a week's time
there is a by-election in Hermanus, a former NP stronghold, and still they
will not face the voters of South Africa to test public opinion on their
conduct. Everybody knows why, and I do not have to elaborate on this issue.
[Interjections.]

With regard to the concept of a public representative being allowed to
change his or her political allegiance, the DP supports such a concept as a
feature of democracy, provided it takes place within the framework of the
broader electoral reform envisaged.

As regards the Bill in its present form, the DP will not support it, inter
alia, because it has the potential to destabilise many local governments.
To allow local government councillors to cross the floor every six months
within the relevant window period may mean a change of administration every
six months in those local governments in which the balance of power is held
by a slim margin.

This matter was recently discussed at our congress, and it was resolved
that, and I quote:


  Congress supports the principle of allowing public representatives to
  cross the floor as a feature of democracy, does not support the proposed
  legislation in its present form and mandates the parliamentary colleagues
  to introduce amendments that will promote stability in governance,
  especially in local councils, where regular opportunities for defection
  may cause instability.
  Congress furthermore notes that the proposed legislation must also be
  evaluated in the light of the possible changes to the electoral system
  evidenced by the appointment of the Van Zyl Slabbert commission.

With regard to the instability, we would prefer to see, in local
government, that the crossing-of-the-floor legislation is only allowed, for
example, once a year in the window period. These are in essence the
objections and the position of my party at the moment.[Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon members, before I call on the next
speaker I would like to deal with what I regard as a fairly serious
accusation and statement imputing bad faith on the part of the presiding
officer, myself, because I have placed this matter for debate on the Order
Paper on the basis of the Rules of the National Council of Provinces. These
Rules indicate that the Chairperson must table the particulars submitted by
the Minister at the first sitting of the Council - I repeat, the first
sitting - after their receipt. To imply that the Chairperson is playing a
party-political role in submitting the particulars for the debate is an
unacceptable imputation of my character and integrity, and I will not
accept such a statement being made with regard to myself.

I therefore would like the hon member to withdraw the statements he has
made and the implication that a party-political role is being played when
the Rules - and the particular Rule is 85(2) - of the National Council of
Provinces are referred to.

Mr L G LEVER: Chairperson, I have no knowledge of when these issues are
received and I do not directly impute any bad faith on your part and, to
that extent, I withdraw the statements that I have made.

Mr M V MOOSA: On a point of order, Chairperson, there is one other matter
regarding this particular issue. The hon member has also misread and
misrepresented the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa. I do not
know what the procedure in the House should be when a member represents the
Constitution to be something it is not. But I would assume that the House
should probably set up an inquiry.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! That is not a point of order, hon
member. If you wish to assist the member with respect to the Constitution
you may do so outside this House. The member made particular statements
about the manner in which this subject was placed. This relates to the role
of the presiding officer and the Rules of this House, hence the correction.


What you are raising is a matter, really, of information that perhaps the
members could share outside the House and not on the floor. I have
previously indicated that I really believe that it is important for members
of Parliament who represent our country to know the Constitution of our
country. But, I believe, that could be pursued outside the House and not
here.

Mr P A MATTHEE: Chairperson, as it appears from both this Bill itself and
the memorandum on the objects thereof, this Bill is closely linked to the
Loss or Retention of Membership of National and Provincial Legislatures
Bill, the ``membership Bill''. It would be totally illogical to have a so-
called antidefection provision operating at local government level if there
is no longer such a clause at the national or provincial level.

As is stated in the Bill, the need therefore exists for uniformity within
the three spheres of government regarding loss or retention of membership
of any legislature or municipal council in the event of a change of party
membership, or mergers, or subdivision, or subdivision and merger of
parties.

Whereas item 23A of Schedule 2 to the interim Constitution of 1993, which
was incorporated into our present Constitution, provides that an Act of
Parliament may be passed to amend that item and item 23 in order to provide
for the manner in which it will be possible for a member of a legislature
who ceases to be a member of the party which nominated that member to
retain membership of such legislature, and any existing party to merge with
another party, or any party to subdivide whilst allowing members of a
legislature affected by such changes to retain membership of such
legislature, the Constitution at present does not provide for similar
changes of party membership, mergers between parties or subdivisions of
parties in the context of local government.

This Bill will now address this lacuna as there can certainly not be any
reason whatsoever to differentiate in this regard between public
representatives in the provincial and national sphere and public
representatives in the local government sphere.

Public hearings will still be held in the Portfolio Committee on Justice
and Constitutional Development of the National Assembly in respect of this
Bill and the membership Bill.

I do not think it appropriate to deal with the details of the Bill at this
stage, but rather wish to address the principles underlying it, which
principles we fully support.

The NP, which it was at that stage, together with the DP and the IFP,
opposed the antidefection clause in the Constitution at the certification
hearing of the 1996 Constitution in the Constitutional Court. I personally
appeared on behalf of the NP in the Constitutional Court on that occasion.

One would have hoped that these parties still supported these principles
and that they did not get cold feet in the meantime. I was quite amazed by
the previous speaker now having changed their tune to such an extent. One
wonders what they are running scared of suddenly. [Interjections.]

During 1994 and 1995, by way of a private member's Bill proposed by Mr
Colin Eglin, the DP sought to have section 43(b) deleted from the interim
Constitution. During 1996, in the Constitutional Assembly and its
committees, the DP opposed the inclusion of item 23A of Annexure A of
Schedule 6 in the new democratic Constitution. And it was said that the
decision of the DP to oppose the original section 43(b) and the current
item 23A was not taken lightly, nor without serious consideration of all
the complex and interacting factors in the composition, election and the
functioning of South Africa's national legislature.

So what is the position there now? Is it that they feel that this position
may be the case as far as the national and provincial legislatures are
concerned, but that at local government level councillors should not have
that same opportunity, whereas we certainly regard the sphere of local
government as an independent sphere of government. We believe that
councillors should have the same rights in this regard as other public
representatives, and that they are public representatives just as others at
provincial and national levels.

An antidefection clause is, in most parliamentary democracies all over the
world, held to be irreconcilable with the principles of representative
democracy. The free mandate applies - and here I refer to what the ACDP
said - in many Western democracies irrespective of the type of electoral
system, be it constituency-based, or where all members or a portion of the
members are elected via a party list system of proportional representation.
That is the position in most democracies all over the world.

Members of legislatures or councillors should represent not only the
interests of their constituency, their party or their ward, but should
represent the best interests of the entire nation, province or
municipality. I think that is what the previous speaker should maybe take
into account - that as public representatives we owe it to the nation to
represent not only our small ward, constituency or party. If legislatures
and councillors are not free to form their own conclusions independently,
legislatures and councils become irrelevant talk-shops. Debates then have
no meaning because the persuasive force of debate and logic is lost. This
is certainly not in accordance with the principles of democracy.
An antidefection provision, in effect, makes the Government of the country,
the province or the municipality, accountable to a few party executives,
which is most undemocratic. The measure of the accountability of a
legislature can never only be seen as the calling of the people to the
ballot at intervals of several years to respond to attempts by political
parties to justify their acts.

If members of legislatures and councillors were to be no more than mere
subordinates, they would be incapable of responsibility. In this regard, I
refer to an editorial of The Argus of 9 February 1995, which aptly
described the position as follows:


  The provision that members of Parliament who quit their party must
  automatically resign their seats makes individual parliamentarians too
  beholden to party discipline. It turns them into caucus-voting fodder,
  effete pawns in the political chess game which, apart from making for
  boring politics, is simply not in the public interest.
Historically, in South African politics, crossing the floor or taking to
the cross-benches has been an accepted component of dynamic democracy.

A fact of our recent history which is easily overlooked is that if the
right-wing members of the then National Party could not resign from the NP
without losing their seats, and therefore did not resign and form the
Conservative Party, the NP would most probably not have been in a position
to bring about the fundamental changes which were necessary to bring about
the new dispensation in South Africa at the time when they did so. Our
recent history would then have been totally different, and we would most
probably have ended up in a bloody civil war, which could have destroyed
all of South Africa and all of us.

The interesting thing is that in the DP's submission to an ad hoc
committee, they described in detail why there should be no anti-defection
provision in our parliamentary system. They say the purpose of the
Constitution is to provide the country with the basis for good governance,
not to provide party leaders with blunt instruments for opposing party
discipline. They say it places extraordinary, coercive powers in the hands
of party leaders, indeed so extraordinary that they have the potential to
undermine the concepts of transparency and democracy within the political
parties themselves. They further say it prevents, in an arbitrary,
undemocratic and often secretive way, the natural and evolutionary process
of political regrouping and political realignment from taking place. It
freezes and fossilises the process of party politics in our country,
irrespective of the moods and trends of the people outside this House.

This was said by the DP in 1997, under the signature of Mr Colin Eglin.
What has happened in the meantime? [Interjections.] It is still the same
for councillors in local government. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Cllr M DIKOKO (Salga): Chairperson, I am here on behalf of Salga. At Salga
we view ourselves as a sphere of government, and not a tier of government.
We have an equal right to deliberate on these issues which directly affect
us.

Firstly, as Salga, we wholeheartedly support the Bill. However, there are
just a few minor issues which we would like to raise. The first is the
concern regarding the consistency with which national, provincial and local
government are treated in terms of the Bill. When one looks at the Bill,
one sees that national and provincial government are not dealt with as
elaborately as local government. Our view is that local government should
be treated the same as national and provincial government, while details
can be dealt with as in the case of the Local Government Municipal
Structures Act. It should not be amended in the Constitution. We also feel
that, if that is then the case, section 158A does not need to be included
the Constitution.

The second aspect is that Salga is raising a concern, a serious one for
that matter, with regard to the frequency, that is February and September.
As local government we feel that it is very problematic and might
destabilise local government. We feel that it would be best to have this
just once, in September. The reason we are raising a concern about February
is that, firstly, as things stand currently, this would be at a time that
we are reviewing our IDPs. Secondly, it would be at a time when we will be
dealing with our budgetary processes. If this applies in February, it might
have a serious impact on local government. Currently, this is not the case
with regard to the national and provincial spheres of government. We are
only raising this concern from local government's point of view. We are
aware that there is a process of trying to integrate all three budgetary
processes, national, provincial and local, but we are talking of the
current state of affairs.

Thirdly, we want to request the drafters to reconsider the fact that a ward
councillor can cross the floor to become an independent councillor, while a
PR councillor must move from one political party to another. We will
appreciate it if that disparity and inconsistency could be considered, but
this is not a serious thing.

Finally, there is the issue of subsections 5(b)(i) and (ii), as well as
section 6(b), which refer to the municipal manager. Our view is that a
municipal manager is an employee of the council. It would be best to
replace the term ``municipal manager'' with ``IEC'', because they are best
suited to deal with electoral aspects.

We are very thankful for the time the Council has allocated and members'
generosity. We want to use only the time allocated. [Applause.]

Ms J L KGOALI: Chairperson, it is not mere coincidence that this
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Amendment Bill aims to
regulate changes of party membership, mergers and subdivision of parties at
local government level. The provisions of this Bill are largely modelled on
the principles contained in the membership Bill, which does not make
provision for local government.

Section 46(1)(d) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa
requires an electoral system for the National Assembly that results in
proportional representation. Similarly, the same Constitution, in section
105(1)(d), requires an electoral system for provincial legislatures that
results in general in proportional representation.

On the other hand, section 157 of the Constitution requires an electoral
system for local government comprising either proportional representation,
or proportional representation combined with a system of ward
representation, ensuring that the total number of members elected from each
party reflects the total proportion of the votes recorded for those
parties. Therefore, this Bill stems from the fact that no provision has
been made in the Constitution in respect of local government for a
councillor to retain membership of a municipal council, where such a
councillor ceases to be a member of the party which nominated that
councillor, and also does not provide for any party to merge with another
party, or any party to subdivide into more than one party, or any party to
subdivide and any one of the subdivisions to merge with another party,
whilst allowing a member of the council affected by such changes to retain
membership of that council.

This Bill before us is carefully designed to achieve uniformity within the
three spheres of government - the hon Dikoko represents a sphere, not a
tier of government - regarding the loss or retention of membership of a
legislature or municipal council in the event of a change of party
membership or the subdivision or merger of parties.

Our Constitution, as we have observed, allows for various permutations in
the electoral system and these were left for legislation to decide upon.
The party system was decided on. In practice one first waited for the
election results before adjusting the numbers of the seats so that they
would be proportionally representative. In terms of the ward side of the
election, the candidate who received the largest number of votes would win
the election. District councils were different because they did not have
wards. Councillors were elected from party lists. A distinction was made
between proportional representation and the ward councillor. An independent
ward councillor may not join a party and a ward councillor elected on a
party ticket may not became an independent. The present structure allows
for the councillors to construct subcouncils, and a potential problem of
crossing the floor was that, should crossing take place at either council
or subcouncil level, the other councils would then not necessarily be
proportionally representative.

This situation necessitated this constitutional amendment, and I would also
like to share some of its provisions with hon members. I would like to
concentrate on the new principle which has been introduced by the Bill and
was not contained in the membership Bill. It provides that during a period
allowed for the changes of membership, mergers or subdivisions of parties,
no party represented in a municipality may suspend or terminate the party
membership of a councillor representing that party or perform any act
whatsoever which may cause such a councillor to be disqualified from
holding office as a councillor or change such councillor's position on a
party list related to the said municipal council.

Lastly, this Bill provides that during a window period allowed for
crossings, mergers or subdivisions, a councillor is allowed to change party
membership only once and a party may merge or subdivide only once.

I also want to concur with the hon the Minister that this legislation does
affect our House as the National Council of Provinces because if any
movements take place in the province, definitely the NCOP is affected.

I do not want to comment on what the hon Lever said. I think a party that
should be having a problem with this Bill is the ANC, because of its
majority. Should we not fear that we are going to lose the majority of our
members to other parties? Because we are concerned as a party that we need
to give freedom to every individual to do whatever he or she thinks is
right, this Bill is before us. The hon member's cold feet will show in the
next elections.

As for the hon member from Salga, I am not sure about the role of Salga as
we have been trying to figure it out in this House. Maybe their
participation, if they take their correct position in this House and begin
to participate in some issues that are being deliberated on and that affect
them as a sphere of government, would help them to understand some of the
issues that are being raised here.

We therefore invite them to come on board. Let us deliberate on the issues
so that we all move together as the three spheres of government. I support
the Bill. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, I
first and foremost thank hon members for what I think has been a very good
debate on this Bill. I certainly have no intention of diluting Mr Matthee's
appropriate response to hon Mr Lever's remarks. Instead I will just commend
Mr Matthee for an erudite response.

One would have thought that the DP in particular would have been overjoyed
at the prospect of these proposed amendments, because, as has been said by
Mr Matthee, the DP was at the forefront of those who were saying no to an
antidefection clause in the Constitution. Perhaps those of us who listened
eventually became sympathetic to them and persuaded the ANC that we should
have a clause such as we had in item 23A of the interim Constitution.

I think it is silly, really, for anybody then to turn around and say there
are all sorts of conspiracy theories at play here. There are none. We are,
if anything, bending over backwards to accommodate those hon members and in
the process they do not even appreciate that. The hon Kent Durr accuses us
of participating in gerrymandering the Constitution. He cannot be said to
be gerrymandering a constitution that allows us to do what we are doing.
[Interjections.] It says we may do so by means of an Act of Parliament.
Now, when we then do it exactly that way, the hon member cannot, for God's
sake, be right in saying that that is gerrymandering. Then again, a whole
lot of people exhibit the very interesting tendency of a disjuncture or a
disconnection between their lips and their heads. One does hear these silly
statements.

There is no gerrymandering here. We are recognising a reality in the
Republic of South Africa, namely that there are people who do not want to
belong to the parties which brought them into this institution and similar
legislative institutions in the country. Indeed, short of a fundamental
overhaul of the electoral system, we will do what the Constitution allows
us to do in order to accommodate those people. It makes it very easy for
them to make choices. They cease being unwilling prisoners or captives of
parties they no longer want to belong to.

Madam Chairperson dealt with the question of how this Bill came to be
before this House. I want to say that she dealt with this only in part. If
one looks carefully at Section 745(c) of the Constitution itself, one will
read - I am assuming hon members can read - that it says:


  At least 30 days before a Bill amending the Constitution ...

Which this one purports to be doing -


  ... is introduced in terms of section(73)2, the person or committee
  intending to introduce the Bill must ...

It says ``must''. It does not say ``may''. It would say, ``shall'' in the
more complex legal language -


  ... submit, in accordance with the rules and orders of the National
  Council of Provinces, those particulars to the council for a public
  debate ...

I leave the rest to those who do care to read it. We are doing nothing less
and nothing more than that. If this is not a public debate then I would
have to be convinced of what it is.

I want to venture that this is a public debate which we are holding in
accordance with the Constitution and the Rules of this Council.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! As has already
been indicated, this Bill is only before us for debate. We take this
opportunity to thank the hon the Minister for clarifying some of the issues
that some of us seem not to be clear about.

Debate concluded.

       CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW COMMITTEE

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.
 THE POTENTIAL EFFECTS OF THE OUTCOME OF THE RECENT PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION IN
                                  ZIMBABWE

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Ms C S BOTHA: Chairperson, in 1980 I cut out of the newspaper a photograph
of a young black man returning home to his father. He was in rags and he
looked very tired, but his father looked very proud. He returned after
having won the bush war and the photograph was entitled ``Coming home''. It
was for me, as for many other South Africans, something the Nationalists
would not understand. It is a vindication of the belief that all who loved
Africa belonged in her and that she belonged to them. I have it still.

In the 1980s Robert Mugabe was elected President and, as an SABC
interviewer recently commented, he was the man who brought his people
liberation, education, health, loads of prosperity and now land. Twenty
years on we look again. Robert Mugabe has been re-elected president and all
the hope has faded from my picture. What was once the most successful and
peaceful country in the world, with no unemployment, the lowest crime rate
and thriving tourism and a currency stronger than the US Dollar, now
officially has 60% unemployment, 120% inflation, no tourism and it takes
400 Zim dollars to purchase one US dollar. Starving is rife and the once
thriving farming sector has been destroyed. Five hundred illegal immigrants
cross the northern borders to South Africa per day. This is the state of
our neighbour. This is not distant Palestine or Israel. This is what lies
directly north of the Limpopo. This is our entry into Africa and into
Nepad. This is where we are joined at the hip. Whatever happens in Zimbabwe
will have an effect on South Africa. The debate can only be about the
degree.

At the World Economic Forum, before the elections, we asked if the manner
in which countries such as South Africa deal with the crisis in Zimbabwe
will not be a test case for Nepad. President Mbeki agreed that Zimbabwe was
a cause for concern and that there was consensus in SADC that whosoever was
elected President must be - here comes the word we see time and time again
- ``legitimately'' elected to that position. Hence the situation of the
hapless Sam Motsuenyane, being placed in the ridiculous position of having
to declare the universally deplored election, characterised by fundamental
and serious violation of the rule of the law and human rights over an
extended period of time, legitimate. This preordained position caused
immense damage to South Africa's credibility.

It was Harare's suspension by the Commonwealth which saved Nepad at the G8
and thus ourselves. In October 2001 the President spelled out the
preconditions for the achievement of Nepad:


  We have to address the negative perception amongst investors who see
  Africa as a high risk area.

Rightly so, for as we know, after our R25 million investigation, the
displeasure with which Zimbabwe was viewed by the world was expressed
through the devaluing rand. Add to this the erosion of productivity and
buying power in Zimbabwe, knocking out South Africa's biggest export market
on the African continent, and the effects of the presidential election are
written in bold letters across our balance sheets.

To date, interestingly enough, I have not seen a single condemnation from
the ANC of Zanu-PF's latest assault on the country's Indian business
community. The War Veterans Association recently said that they would now
target the Asians, accused of being economic looters. Be sure that it will
not go unnoticed in South Africa's Indian community, nor by international
investors or the underwriters of Nepad.

The Mugabe land grab is what rests most heavily on South Africa and on the
psyche and the economy of South Africa. What has happened in agriculture in
Zimbabwe has nothing to do with land reform and a minimal connection with
drought. In his abuse of power and patronage, Mugabe has systematically
destroyed the agriculture of that country. Zimbabwe has gone from being net
food exporter - and so it should be, considering its climate - to the
situation today where Mugabe has been forced to declare a national disaster
in an effort to stave off mass starvation. Mugabe has created this
starvation in Zimbabwe. Of course we must help and South Africa will carry
the burden, but we must also stop the rot.

[Die skepe sal vol graan in die hawens lê, terwyl mense sterf weens
honger.'' Hierdie onheilspellende woorde kom van mnr Bully Botma,
Voorsitter van Graan SA. [Mr Bully Botma, Chairperson of SA Grain, made the
ominous statement that ships would be docked in the harbour, laden with
grain, while people were dying of hunger.]

Regular warnings of impending doom were airily dismissed by the Minister
for Agriculture and Land Affairs and the Minister of Transport. Some 12
months ago Minister Didiza paid more attention to the clownish rantings of
Minister Made, arranging workshops on how land reform could be achieved by
means of the Zimbabwean model, than to the predictions of the present
estimated shortage of maize in neighbouring countries of two million ton
per month. Our dilapidated rail system can handle 130 000 tons per month.
Mr Mugabe is today still, according to the news, intensifying his
relentless legislation to drive productive farmers and farmworkers off the
land.

Donors have been withdrawing from the African continent at an alarming
rate, accelerated by the Zimbabwe Democracy and Recovery Act of 2001. This
directly affects South African civil society, which is also dependent on
donor funding. Imagine the effect on international donors of the Mugabe
supporters who celebrated their electoral victory by parading coffins
draped with US flags and pictures of opposition leaders.

Game conservation and transnational parks are an integral part of South
Africa's potential tourist market. The situation of game in Zimbabwe is
becoming more dire by the day. I am also very, very concerned about what is
happening on account of foot-and-mouth disease, which will surely cross the
Limpopo and its brought-down fences and bring us back to the near tragedy
of Camperdown. Considering the dismantling of Onderstepoort, our first line
of defence against African animal diseases, our stock farming may never
recover from that potential threat. There are very many fields on which ...


Ms Q D MAHLANGU: You do not care about the Zimbabwean ... [Interjections.]

Ms C S BOTHA: The member should care about the black people dying in
Zimbabwe. I shall then take her seriously.

As is the case in South Africa, a loyal, watchful and independent
opposition in Zimbabwe may yet be the deciding factor in countering the
destructive effects of the recent presidential election in Zimbabwe.
[Interjections.]

What racist remarks is that hon member making now? Mr Chairperson, could
you perhaps ask the hon member to make her racist comments out loud?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Would you
continue to address the House, hon member?

Ms C S BOTHA: I am addressing the House, Chairperson. It is interesting
that in this House at a time when we are supposed to have moved away from
racism and are looking at ways of making sure that racism is not a feature
of this continent, all one can think of is the fact that whites in Zimbabwe
can be sacrificed to racism. As long as we pay attention ...
[Interjections.]

If the lady wishes I will also look at Alexandra. I certainly do that for
my own home town. I do not know what she does in Alexandra, if she does
anything at all. [Interjections.]

Mr J L THERON: Mr Chairperson, on a point of order: Could you please call
that member to order and protect the speaker?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! I will do so,
but I do not need your advice. [Interjections.] Order! I do not
need your advice, hon member. [Interjections.] Could the hon member
proceed, please?

Ms C S BOTHA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I must say the hon member Mahlangu
does not distract my attention at all. This debate is about Zimbabwe, and
therefore I will talk about Zimbabwe. When we have a debate about
Alexandra, I will certainly talk about Alexandra, if it will make her
happy.

In South Africa a loyal, watchful and independent opposition, such as the
one presented by the MDC in Zimbabwe, may yet be the deciding factor in
countering the destructive effects of the recent presidential election in
Zimbabwe and its spillover into South Africa and, believe me, also into the
economy of Alexandra. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Hon members
should not expect to hear what is good for them, and they must give other
members the opportunity to speak.

Mr R Z NOGUMLA: Chairperson, allow me to begin by paying tribute to the
late hon Minister of Safety and Security, Comrade Steve Tshwete. I am not
doing this in order to undermine the statement that has been made, but
because of the history that I shared with that comrade.

I worked with him when I was on a delegation from the University of
Transkei and he was on a delegation from the Border region during the
formation of the UDF, and we kept in touch since that time. When he went
into exile, he was my commissar in the army. The day I was arrested in King
William's Town was the day on which he was coming back after having been
sent by the ANC to come and brief the democratic structures in the country.
That it why on this day I feel I must say something before I address myself
to the topic.

He was a man of many humble characteristics and qualities, a man who shone
a light wherever he went. No words could describe his enormous contribution
to this country. His words, actions and commitment to the people have left
a legacy for us to follow and, indeed, to ensure that this century does
become an African century. Therefore the debate on Zimbabwe today is very
important, for it touches the very core of our vision of making this
century an African century.

Before I get to that issue, I would like to respond to a statement which
was made by the speaker before me that the ANC is silent about what is
happening in Zimbabwe. This reminds me of the days of the apartheid
parliament in South Africa. The founders of that member's party were also
there. When the South African government was invading and attacking
Zimbabwe, and supporting the people who were running away from Zimbabwe and
who wanted to topple Mugabe's government, that member's party never said a
single word to say no. [Interjections.]

During that time the ANC fought in Zimbabwe, not because we thought
Zimbabwe was South Africa, but because we were assisting in the formation
of and the struggle for liberation in Zimbabwe. Again, after independence,
the ANC worked very hard to prevent the country from getting into civil
war. By that time they were assisting in destabilising Zimbabwe, hence the
formation of the alliance between Zapu and Zanu. The government that is in
power is a government of the alliance of these two parties.

There are two parties in Zimbabwe today. The party led by Mr Tsvangirai is
also leading Zimbabwe. The issue for us is that we have to assist the
people of Zimbabwe, and not just blame them and make public statements
about poverty in Zimbabwe, as if in the past they were assisted to get out
of poverty. They pulled themselves out of poverty on their own and were not
assisted by the then South African government and the parties which are
here in Parliament. [Interjections.]

The eyes of the continent today are, amongst other situations we are
facing, on Zimbabwe, particularly the post-election period. This period has
posed one important question, and that is: What is to become of Zimbabwe
after the election? We have heard both optimistic and pessimistic opinions
about the fate of Zimbabwe. Some are rather more pessimistic than others.

Indeed, in following a particular route, we should adopt a more pragmatic
and optimistic approach. Instead of spending time blaming, moaning and
complaining about the wrongness and the rightness of a situation which has
already occurred, we should dwell more on coming up with what will benefit
Zimbabweans and on building the Zimbabwean economy so it can achieve high
and sustained economic growth, in order to ensure that the people of
Zimbabwe enjoy a rising and decent standard of living.

The focus for us as fellow Africans should be on how we can be of
assistance to our sister country so that it can achieve sustainable peace
and prosperity. What can Zimbabweans do to come up with sustainable and
workable solutions which will ensure that peace, prosperity and democracy
are sustained in Zimbabwe?
It is important to note not only that Zimbabwe is our neighbour, but also
that we share a similar history and therefore understand some of the
challenges it has had to face and is still facing. We also share a common
destiny, which is that of a broader African success. However, we cannot
obtain African success if one of our fellow African countries is socially,
politically and economically unstable.

We are also part of that Africa which is marginalised economically and
politically in global terms. Zimbabwe is also one of our trading partners
whose role is central both to the objectives of Nepad and SADC. Zimbabwe is
part of us and we are part of it, and we are all part of the greater
Africa. Whatever happens to one of us will affect all of us, whether
directly or indirectly. Indeed, divided we will definitely fall.

It is thus very important that we do not lose focus of our shared vision of
African unity and solidarity. [Interjections.] The Renaissance, sustainable
socioeconomic development, and growing global village, in which the richer
are becomimg richer and the poor are becoming poorer, are a realities. It
is therefore crucial that when we look at the situation in Zimbabwe, we
should focus on coming up with workable solutions that will lead Zimbabwe
to prosperity.

Zimbabweans took a very important step not so many months ago. They went to
the polls to vote for a government that will serve their needs. The
elections, though not perfect, were relatively peaceful. [Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: Disgraceful!

Ms Q D MAHLANGU: Who are you to judge?

Mr R Z NOGUMLA: The question that needs to be addressed is that of a
positive way forward. The way forward, I believe, is for Zimbabweans to
realise that their fate lies in their own hands, and that they need to come
together in search of reconciliation and unity for their common good.

Who can better understand and extend a hand of support to that process than
we in South Africa, as we share a similar past? After our own 1994
democratic elections, we were faced with similar challenges. I cannot begin
to emphasise the importance of the difficult challenge of land reform, as
we have witnessed both in Zimbabwe and in our very own country.

Land reform in any civilisation has always been a very challenging area to
deal with. There is no doubt that, like South Africa, Zimbabwe has
experienced extensive land dispossession of the indigenous majority.
Therefore the land question should constitute an important part of our
respective national agendas, for it is a sensitive area that unfortunately
needs to be dealt with in order to transcend the past and correct the
wrongs that were done in the past.

Unless the issue of land restitution is addressed, we are bound to have
massive problems. How we deal with it, though, has to coincide with respect
for human rights, the rule of law and democracy. How Zimbabwe deals with
it, requires that all Zimbabweans come together to come up with a workable
solution that does not jeopardise their future, but instead invests in it.

In conclusion, what is important is that the ills of the past and the
challenges that any country faces must not become obstacles to progress,
development, prosperity and democracy in any country. It is therefore
crucial that Zimbabweans do not allow those ills to be obstacles, but join
hands in deciding the fate of their country and tackling the problems that
they are facing, thereby ensuring that peace and prosperity prevail.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Hon members, I
think the noise is becoming irritating. I would not want to bother anybody
again, or call anybody to order.

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, I have to say before I begin that it gives one
no pleasure to witness and talk about the tragedy that is taking place on
our northern border. It is bad news for them, but it is bad news for us.

In that respect, of course, my hon colleague who has just sat down was
quite correct. What is happening in Zimbabwe and the spillover into the
Northern Province of South Africa and elsewhere is no surprise to the ACDP,
because we warned of what was likely to happen well over a year ago in
motion after motion in this House. That nation, which had a currency
stronger than the American dollar, was a major food exporter and definitely
the most prosperous country in Africa, has been reduced to powerless ruin.

These motions were opposed and pooh-poohed by Government at the time. Just
as with Aids, Government simply chose to ignore the facts. The ongoing
actions of a delinquent Zimbabwean president, and the government on our
borders, has already had and continues to have a far-reaching and negative
impact on our country, on countries in our region and on our continent.
Millions face starvation and we are seeing the destruction of wealth and
wealth-producing structures on a huge scale in that country. We are seeing
the looting of a country by a political elite that has not been
legitimately elected.

The South African Government's contribution of handling that state with kid
gloves - and I am not now questioning the motives of the South African
Government, I am sure the motives are excellent - but shielding them has
come at a terrible price for South Africa, both materially and in reducing
our credibility generally, including our commitment to human rights and
good governance, let alone the rule of law. It stands in stark contrast
with the strident judgment and partial position of our Government on Israel
and the problems they are experiencing.

Now we are sitting with the situation which is almost incapable of
resolution, with a delinquent Zimbabwean government and a rogue president
that have created a crisis that could run on for years. First there is a
maize shortage. Next week it will be eggs, milk, fruit, oil, seeds, fuel. I
do not know who is paying their fuel bill now, and the electricity which
they are drawing from us, and will take from us this winter.

What is the Zimbabwean government's answer to the crisis? It is to loot
even more farms and to drive the country deeper into hopelessness - and yet
the winter lies ahead. The maize crop is estimated to 20% of demand at 200
000 tons, and they have no money to pay for imported food.

Our Government's position is that Mugabe and the MDC should talk to each
other, and of course if they would that would be wonderful. Nobody
questions the sentiment that they put their heads together. But unhappily
it is an unrealistic objective. There is no way the MDC will talk to Zanu-
PF unless such talks are accompanied by the announcement of the retirement
of Robert Mugabe with a commitment to fresh elections within, say, six
months. To expect anything else is unrealistic.

There are no solutions for Zimbabwe which include President Mugabe in
anything but a transitory role. The problem is that failure to resolve the
Zimbabwean crisis and South Africa's strident pro-PLO position come
together in a double whammy that is bound to derail or threaten Nepad. I
have personal experience of that. I speak to businessmen almost daily. It
is the common refrain that I am hearing. Certainly it will dampen
enthusiasm for Nepad and divert resources from it. These actions send a
signal which the world has noted. The South African Government must look
carefully to its duty to its own citizens and interests, and rethink our
position.

Thank God that in Zimbabwe there is a democratic successor, the MDC, that
could act as a safety net to restoring democracy and prosperity to that
country. Let them draw on South Africans to help them rebuild that country.
We hope it does not take too long to do that.

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, South Africa and Zimbabwe need hope, not
just prophets of doom. But to look at the Zimbabwean situation, we have to
look a bit wider. We cannot look at it in isolation.

There are certain questions that should be asked about Africa and the plans
on the table to turn around Africa as a whole. When President Mbeki became
the second democratically elected president in 1999, a general pessimism
towards Africa prevailed in the outside world. From the West, there was a
perception that Africa was governed, in general, by dictators who very
often had no respect for human rights and democracy. On the other hand,
Africans in general perceived the West as a group of white governments with
racist agendas against Africa. Dialogue between these two groups often
ended in mere criticism of each other, and not in listening to each other.

President Mbeki knew about these two positions and all the negativity
around it, but he was committed to building bridges. He believed from the
outset that a sincere partnership with the West should be built. He spoke
about the need for an African Renaissance even before he became President.
But what does this entail? Directly and indirectly, President Mbeki called
on African leaders to commit themselves to clean and accountable
government, to democracy and respect for basic human rights. This was a
search to integrate Africa into the global economy through free-market
principles.

As a counter-gesture, the West must react to the aforementioned willingness
by opening up its markets to Africa to help reduce the continent's US $300
billion debt. Three years later President Mbeki is seen as achieving the
transformation of the dream of an African Renaissance into reality, with
definite policies and action plans. It started off in 1999, when the
Organisation of African Unity gave President Mbeki, President Obasanjo of
Nigeria and President Bouteflika of Algeria the mandate to convince the G7
countries to get involved in reducing the continent's debt burden and to
assist in eradicating the information technology backlog in Africa.

This led to the establishment of Map, the Millennium African Project.
During this period President Wade of Senegal started his own plan called
Omega, but Map and Omega amalgamated and formed the New African Initiative.
During October last year the African leaders worked on a more detailed
approach and Nepad was formed.

But what does this entail? It entails that Africa must be politically and
economically accountable. Doing the above should create a climate in which
foreign capital can flow into South Africa and Africa. The industrial
countries will then give Africa bigger access to their markets, help to
reduce or even eradicate the African debt burden and guarantee help to
Africa.

Now the questions that will have to be addressed to keep Nepad on track are
the following: How are - and this brings balance into the whole argument
and not just doom and gloom - the African states going to monitor each
other to keep to the commitment? What about power politics in Africa? What
role is division going to play in Nepad? How is the commitment to this plan
by the non-African partners going to be enforced, so that it does not stay
on paper, but become a commitment with specific plans and action? What is
the possibility that President Gaddafi of Libya and President Mugabe of
Zimbabwe form their own Nepad? Is the negative perception of Africa being
changed and is the attitude of Africa towards its Nepad partners changing?

There is no doubt that the situation in Zimbabwe has a negative impact on
the above, and that it stimulated the exodus of Zimbabweans to South
Africa, where the Northern Province is the first destination, to the
detriment of local South Africans. It is calculated that South Africa
already has about four million illegal immigrants, although they are not
all from Zimbabwe.

But to be practical, I want to put a real case study to hon members on the
impact the situation in Zimbabwe has directly on some South Africans. The
question that we asked is: What is South Africa's policy on protecting the
property rights of South African citizens in foreign countries such as
Zimbabwe? The official answer to this question by the Minister of Foreign
Affairs is that the South African Government will address this through
diplomatic channels. In connection with the properties of South African
citizens that had been threatened in Zimbabwe, the Minister stated
previously that the department, as well as the South African High
Commissioner in Harare, took the following steps to protect the property
rights of South Africans in Zimbabwe. The Director-General of Foreign
Affairs also called on the Zimbabwean High Commissioner in Pretoria during
2001 to protest against such actions. The South African High Commissioner
in Harare also consulted with the Zimbabwean government in this regard. But
then the Minister, towards the end of March 2002, stated that as a result
of the aforementioned interventions the situation was considered to have
normalised.

Dit is hierdie laaste gedeelte wat ons bekommerd maak, want die
omstandighede het nie genormaliseer nie. Ek het 'n afskrif van 'n brief
deur 'n Suid-Afrikaner en dié Suid-Afrikaner het 22 jaar gelede begin belê
in Zimbabwe. Die barre grond wat hy in 1953 gekoop het, het hy ontwikkel
tot een van die mees gesogte landgoedere in die Zimbabwiese laeveld. In
1970, en veral in 1980 ná onafhanklikheid, het hy, met die samewerking van
die Zimbabwiese Reserwebank, miljoene belê. Dié betrokke Suid-Afrikaner het
oor dié tydperk nooit enige winste uit Zimbabwe geneem nie en dit eerder
weer in die projekte belê. Hy het dus nie Zimbabwe gebruik om hom in Suid-
Afrika te verryk nie. Sy motiewe lyk dus bo verdenking.

President Mugabe het in 'n stadium aangekondig dat verbeterings vergoed sal
word, maar nie die grond nie, aangesien dit ``gesteel'' is. Dié
aankondiging is nooit amptelik oorgedra nie en inteendeel, die implemente,
besproeiingstoerusting en trekkers van dié betrokke Suid-Afrikaner is deur
die oorlogveterane bloot gekonfiskeer sonder enige vergoeding. Daar bestaan
geen regsisteem in Zimbabwe waarop die Suid-Afrikaner hom kan beroep nie.
Die man is in Zimbabwe binne een jaar finansieel totaal en al geruïneer.
Dié persoon het om hulp geskryf aan die President, maar het nog nie 'n
antwoord gekry nie. Ons glo dat dit binnekort sal gebeur.
Die Minister van Buitelandse Sake het haar verbind om Suid-Afrikaners se
eiendomsreg in die buiteland te beskerm. Aangesien die omstandighede in
Zimbabwe dus nie genormaliseer het nie, moet die agb Adjunkminister net vir
ons 'n aanduiding gee oor wat hy en die departement hieromtrent gaan doen
en kan doen. Wat is die omvang van Suid-Afrikaners se direkte skade? Die
indirekte koste van die verlies van burgerskap en die bedreiging van
werkloosheid en dit wat daarmee saamgaan, is baie moeilik kwantifiseerbaar,
maar wesenlik. Ons weet hierdie is 'n probleem wat aangespreek word en
definitief aangespreek moet word vir die globale prentjie van die hele
Afrika. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[It is this latter part that is giving us cause for concern, because
circumstances have not returned to normal. I have a copy of a letter by a
South African and this South African had started investing in Zimbabwe 22
years ago. He developed the bare ground that he bought in 1953 into one of
the most sought-after estates in the Zimbabwean lowveld. In 1970, and
especially after independence in 1980, he invested millions in co-operation
with the Zimbabwean Reserve Bank. This particular South African never
removed any profits from Zimbabwe, but instead re-invested in the projects.
He therefore did not use Zimbabwe to enrich himself in South Africa. His
motives therefore appear to be beyond suspicion.

President Mugabe announced at a certain stage that there will be
compensation for improvements, but not for land, as that was "stolen". This
announcement was never conveyed officially and, on the contrary, the
implements, irrigation equipment and tractors of this specific South
African were simply confiscated by the war veterans, without any
compensation. There is no judicial system in Zimbabwe to which the South
African has recourse. This man has been ruined completely and utterly in
Zimbabwe within one year. This person wrote to the President for
assistance, but he has not yet received a reply. We believe that this will
happen soon.

The Minister of Foreign Affairs committed herself to protecting the
property rights of South Africans abroad. Since circumstances in Zimbabwe
have not returned to normal, the hon the Deputy Minister should just give
us an indication of what he and the department are going to or can do about
this. What is the extent of the direct damage suffered by South Africans?
The indirect cost of the loss of citizenship and the threat of unemployment
and everything associated with it is very difficult to quantify, but it is
considerable. We know that this is a problem that must be dealt with and
will definitely have to be dealt with for the sake of the global picture of
the whole of Africa. [Applause.]]

Mr M J BHENGU: Chairperson, I think I will be allowed to begin by saying
that the most important point that needs to be emphasised, particularly
when we debate about Zimbabwe, is to say that Zimbabwe is indeed a
sovereign and independent state. Having said that, I remember that when I
was a student I studied the history of Zimbabwe, how it was colonised and
how they actually got their independence. I mean, that background is a very
interesting one.

But having said that, I think one must say that there is this situation
which has developed right now, a situation of economic, social and
political deterioration in Zimbabwe, which is a great cause for concern for
quite a number of people. The leadership of this country has actually
expressed themselves about that disintegration. I think it is important
that we begin to express our support of the people of Zimbabwe, who are
actually the final arbiters of their destinies and who will have to find
the strength, courage and inspiration to deal with the historic misfortune
of their present circumstances.

Reports undoubtedly do indicate that there is that kind of disintegration
of the rule of law and there is actually, according to the reports, a
systematic violation of fundamental human rights and liberties, and, of
course, of proper governance. And if we say that we are part of Zimbabwe
and it is part of us, we do need, in the spirit of Nepad, to help Zimbabwe
not to go down the drain, as somebody put it.

Therefore, I think we do need to say ``brothers, do not do this'', but we
certainly cannot impose sanctions on Zimbabwe. We actually need to plead
with the democratic countries of the world not to impose economic sanctions
on Zimbabwe. We have experience, as the people of this country, of how
painful it is to see people who are hungry. Hunger is the most terrible
thing a human being could actually experience.

I am saying that, within the spirit of Nepad once again, we need to be
strong enough to say to our neighbours ``do not do this'', as our President
has actually said. ``Do not do this, but please do that, because if you do
this it will affect us.'' We should do that throughout the entire
continent. Any country on the entire continent should actually be told that
they should not do certain things but should do others, so that the dream
we have, the dream of the African Renaissance, which is encapsulated so
beautifully in Nepad, is actually realised. Otherwise, it cannot be
realised.

Therefore, I am trying to say that we believe that the ongoing talks right
now between Zanu-PF and the MDC will actually bear fruit, and those people
will begin to realise the beauty of their country within the African
continent. [Applause.]

Mr J O TLHAGALE: Chairperson and hon members, my task in terms of the
subject of discussion is not about whether the elections were fair or not,
nor whether I am comfortable with the party that won the elections or not.
My task is to deal with the effects of the result of that election on the
Nepad initiative, Zimbabwe itself and our northern provinces. However, I am
hampered from saying what I could say by time limitations.

The greatest impact of this election was expected to be on the Nepad
initiative. Western countries - the United Kingdom, the United States,
Scandinavian countries, Australia and New Zealand in particular - had
advocated a hard-line approach against Zimbabwe. To various degrees, they
have imposed different types of sanctions on Zimbabwe. Some of those
sanctions are that senior government and political leaders would be denied
entry into those respective countries of the West. It is said that they
would also freeze any assets or bank accounts of those leaders in their
countries. As yet, no indication of any measure of success has been
reported. However, the suspension of Zimbabwe from membership of the
Commonwealth seems to have satisfied the Western countries for now and
obviated any potential danger to the Nepad initiative which is currently on
course and enjoying their full support.

Zimbabwe's difficulties, as I see them, have been long in the making and
will take long to solve. Its economy and agricultural potential are in
tatters. It has changed from being a bread basket to being a begging bowl
of Southern Africa. Regardless of who won the elections, the problems
remain unchallenged. The only way to help that country is through a
concerted effort of the neighbouring SADC countries, accompanied by
agricultural and economic experts to address its problems.

Prior to Zimbabwe's elections, there was much speculation amongst the media
that there would be chaos in that country if the opposition parties did not
win, with the result that the northern provinces of South Africa would be
flooded with millions of refugees. However, the border officials at Beit
Bridge reported that they only received two persons seeking political
asylum and that a refugee centre set up by the Police Service, Home Affairs
and SANDF in that neighbourhood did not get any refugees to accommodate.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Thank you, hon
member. Your time has expired. You must ask for more time from the Chief
Whip, hon member.

I call the hon member B J Tolo. [Interjections.] It is Tolo who is next
according to my programme. I see Mr Windvoël, whose name is not on the list
I have.
Mr V V Z WINDVOëL: Chairperson, I want to ask whether it is in order that
while the House is in session a party holds a caucus in the corner of the
Chamber and leaves one member in the cold here. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Thank you. Mr
Tolo, can you address the House. [Laughter.]

Mr B J TOLO: Chairperson, thank you for affording me the opportunity to
participate here in this debate. Before I actually start on my speech, I
would like to join those who conveyed condolences to the late Comrade Steve
Tshwete's family. I will remember him for an episode that he told me about
in 1985 when he was the army commissar.  This episode happened when he was
on the island. He said that there was an Afrikaner warder who had said to
him: ``Ek gee nie om nie. Julle kan maar daardie Kaapstad vat. Julle kan
maar Johannesburg vat - enige dorp.'' [``I don't care. You can have old
Cape Town. You can have Johannesburg - any town.''] That Afrikaner warder
was from Stellenbosch. And he said: ``Maar in Stellenbosch, daar gaan julle
k...k.'' [``But in Stellenbosch, that's where you are going to sh...t'']
[Laughter.] So I remember him for that. He was actually defending
Stellenbosch and not any other part of the country.

The elections in Zimbabwe have come and gone. It is of no use for us to sit
here and lament about those elections or what happened on the day of the
elections. To repeat the truisms about what happened there is not going to
put food on the table of the Zimbabwean people. What is important for us is
what we as South Africans and, indeed, part of the community of nations,
can and must do to help the Zimbabwean people to come out of the quagmire
in which they are today. It is exactly in that spirit that we, as public
representatives who determine the opinions of the people out there, should
approach the post-election period in Zimbabwe. We are under no illusions
about the enormity of the task at hand and the emotions involved.

What is certain is that nobody is denying the fact that the elections were
permeated by the kinds of problems and tension that one would expect of
what was a highly charged and an emotional experience for all Zimbabweans.
We would think that it was natural. Whipping up emotions with inflammatory
statements for political mileage and irresponsible media coverage is not
going to contribute to alleviating the dire plight of the Zimbabwean
people. Let us not forget, as neighbours and fellow Africans, the umbilical
cord of colonialism, oppression and discrimination that binds us to the
Zimbabwean people. We are therefore convinced that the complexities of
Zimbabwe's political, economic and social turmoil will only be resolved
through African wisdom and solutions and not recrimination and acrimony.

We, as the ruling party, believe that in the endeavour to search for
answers for the Zimbabwean question, our guidance should come from the
Zimbabwean people themselves as nobody else can solve their problems. We
can only help, but we cannot solve their problems. Let us remember that
they are a people scarred by a low-intensity civil war for almost two
years, in the main due to the vexing land question which up to this day has
not been solved. We must also bear in mind that the hands of the government
of that country were bound by the Lancaster House agreement, and that is
why they could not settle their problem as soon as many would have liked.
They should be given all the support that they need to resolve their
problems.

Moreover, the Zimbabwean economy has in this period taken a severe pounding
and confidence both among its citizenry and foreign investors needs to be
restored as a matter of urgency. Neither the West, nor we can or will be
able to write the script for them. We have no doubt that any solution, as
we indicated before, will come from them. Solutions, therefore, must be
embraced by the people of Zimbabwe if they are to succeed.

It is for this reason that we, as the majority party, strongly advocate
that the ruling Zanu-PF and the MDC co-operate and chart the destiny of all
Zimbabweans together. We remain convinced that together as a people they
can find solutions to the acute food shortage, help resolve the land
question and put that country on the road to economic recovery and social
reconstruction. Maybe, as our President suggested, they should look
seriously at the possibility of a government of national unity. A closer
look at the Zimbabwean economy leaves us in no doubt that this is indeed
the only way for President Robert Mugabe and the opposition to go.

Reconciliation between the main political parties is absolutely essential
if we are to avoid a mass exodus of starving Zimbabweans coming to our
shores, and not only to our shores, but to the region as a whole. Moreover,
it is the only instrument that will ensure political and socioeconomic
stability and restore the rule of law and confidence of Zimbabwean people
in their government.

It is against this background that we, as South Africans, are supporting
the views and the position of our Government. Our track record on
interacting with Zanu-PF and the MDC, as well as with the international
community, from as early as 1998 or 2000, about the creation of conditions
that are conducive to democratic elections bears testimony to our
commitment to that country.

The other day I read an article in a newspaper in which President Chissano
of Mozambique told our President, Thabo Mbeki, that 10 years ago the ruling
party, Frelimo, in Mozambique signed a peace accord with their, up to then
arch rival, Renamo. He was relating to President Mbeki how that accord has
brought peace and stability to Mozambique. That country today is a hive of
economic activity, as world capital and indeed even South African capital
flows into that country.

We have no doubt, therefore, in our minds that if Zimbabwe can emulate this
good example of co-operation between people with different political
persuasions and who do not see each other, or one another, as enemies but
as political opponents who can work together for the sake of their entire
country or their people, their war against poverty, backwardness and all
other negative tendencies shall have been halfway won in that country.

As the ANC we support unreservedly the efforts of our President, Thabo
Mbeki, and the Nigerian President, Obasanjo, in constructive engagement in
Zimbabwe. It is only the doubting Thomases who will have reservations about
this engagement. [Interjections.] This will inevitably bear fruit in our
country.

In conclusion, I just want to respond a little to some of the insinuations
made by the members of the .... [Interjections] ... oh, DP. I thought it
was the Democratic Alliance. [Interjections.] Okay, it is the DP. I really
wonder when the DP became activists of human rights. [Interjections.] I
really wonder when they started becoming activists of human rights. We will
remember that their leader today, Tony Leon, was among those people who
maimed our people in this country; killed them. It was in this Parliament,
even during the times when we were struggling for human rights.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order!
[Interjections.] Hon members, I have said I need order in the House, and I
do not think my patience is endless. Can we hear a point of order?

Ms C S BOTHA: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it acceptable for a
member to accuse a member of this Parliament, the leader of the DA, of
having been guilty of murder? [Interjections.] And if I may ask, in terms
of a response from the floor, is it acceptable for a member from the floor
to support the suggestion that our leader has been guilty of murder? I
object most vociferously.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Mrs Mahlangu,
I have said I will send you out. Can you go out now. Hon Tolo, did you say
that the leader of the DA has killed people, because if you did so you need
to withdraw those words?

Mr B J TOLO: Chairperson, I said that he served in an army that killed and
maimed our people.
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): As there is a
dispute, we need to check the exact wording and then we will give a ruling.
Continue, hon member.

Mr B J TOLO: Chairperson, I just want to say that it is not correct for the
DA to claim to be human rights activists. We are the ones who can
rightfully claim to be human rights activists. We have actually worked in
such a way that we deserve that title, and not the DA or the DP. And we
have liberated them, of course.

There is an old saying, in conclusion, that goes: Once your enemy praises
you, you must pause to think what serious mistake you have committed. But
once your enemy taunts you and attacks you left, right and centre, you must
know that you are on the correct path. [Interjections.] As the ANC, we are
on the correct path as long as we are being attacked by the DA and the DP.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! I take this
opportunity to welcome the hon Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs and call
upon him to address this House. [Interjections.] Oh sorry, Ms Botha, your
response. Sorry about that.

Ms C S BOTHA: Chairperson, first of all I would like to say, on the lighter
side of things, that I would have objected to the hon Tolo's use of what I
considered unparliamentary language in what he said right in the beginning,
if it was not that I thought he said exactly what the other people had said
in this debate.

I want to respond to several issues in the debate. Unfortunately the hon
member Mahlangu is now absent, but I would like to respond to her arrogance
in imputing the right of whites in this country to make a value judgment on
Zimbabwe. I think it is time that we realised that as whites we can be as
moral, as immoral, as supportive of human rights ....

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Hon member, please
take your seat. Chief Whip, why are you rising?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I rise on a point of order. Is
it correct for a member to respond to remarks made by members from the
floor, rather than to the person who is participating in the debate? I can
understand the relevance of responding to a person who is participating in
the debate, but a remark made by a spokesperson does not form an integral
part of the debate. I would imagine that under those circumstances the
response is not relevant.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Mr Chief Whip, if it
is something said within the House - if this issue was said and raised
within the House - there is no reason why somebody cannot react to it. That
is why we can call a member out of order, that is, somebody who says
something and he or she was not one of the speakers. That person can be
called out of order. So, accordingly, I hold that she is in order.
Mr V V Z WINDVOëL: Mr President, L: Chairperson, will the member take a
question, if she is confident of what she is debating?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Hon member, are you
prepared to take a question?

Ms C S BOTHA: Chairperson, I am perfectly confident, but I am not
interested in answering the question at this moment. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Thank you. Can you
continue, hon member.

Ms C S BOTHA: I appreciate your ruling, Chairperson, because I think it is
time we started looking at this country, at all the people who are living
here and who intend living here, and perhaps even moving to Zimbabwe, if we
so feel, and becoming citizens there. There is not a country in Africa, to
my understanding, where I should not be welcomed as a human being, and it
is about time that we all understood that race is something that we should
be putting in the past. [Interjections.]

It should not constantly be thrown in my face that I cannot make a value
judgment on anything in this country, on what Mugabe does, on what a black
man does to another black man and to black men and women in Zimbabwe. I
certainly have opinions on those things; the DA has opinions on those
things. White people, coloured people and black people have varying
opinions on those things and I am totally entitled to voice them.

It is a kind of arrogance that I am constantly ... [Interjections.] I am
part of this House, I am part of this Parliament and I am part of this
debate. And I may have an interest in anything in this country, in any
subject, and I will voice my opinion on them, and I will voice my opinion
on Zimbabwe as well. [Interjections.] It is time that hon members realise
that our contribution ... and they ask for money from the West all the
time, on whom they rely for support for Nepad, from people who have
opinions and whom hon members should start listening to. I have the right
to do so, and I will insist, and I will continue to do so.

I am as much a citizen of this country as those hon members are. I fought
for their right to be ... [Interjections] Yes, I – me ... [Interjections.]
... as I stand here. Therefore I will continue, as I fought for those hon
members' right to be sitting in this House today. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order, hon members!
Order! I do not want to say you behave like children, but on a serious
note, you do behave like children, because you want to hear what you want
to hear. Can you not allow somebody to express his or her opinion, whether
you like it or not?

I mean, it is our democratic right to express our opinion and to state our
facts as we deem fit, so that the Minister will have an opportunity to
listen and to respond to those questions, hon members.

Ms C S BOTHA: Chairperson, on a point of history, they are asking: When did
we become activists of human rights? I wonder how quickly they have
forgotten, or have they ever known, about people who stood up here alone.
For 13 years, as a matter of fact, Ms Suzman stood here fighting for human
rights, for which she is still to this day recognised throughout the world.
That is just a tiny little fact.

Then, if I may say so, I wonder what those hon members' revered leader,
Oliver Tambo, a man who slept in my house, would have thought today if he
heard those members and the way they continue to talk about whites in this
country. I leave that thought with those members. [Interjections.]

I want to respond to the issue of Zimbabwe as a sovereign independent
state. It is here where we are often confronted with problems when we try
to defend the indefensible by saying it occurs in sovereign independent
states. I want to point out to the hon members something they may not be
aware of, which their own President is calling for, that the collective
approach and sanctions are precisely what Nepad envisages.

Nepad binds an entire continent. It speaks not of some African standard of
human rights, but gives in article 79 a fundamental and international
commitment. With Nepad, Africa undertakes to represent the global standards
of democracy whose core components include political pluralism, allowing
fair, open, free ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! I see an hon
member raising a hand. What is wrong?

Ms J L KGOALI: Chairperson, I just wanted to find out from you whether it
is parliamentary for the hon member addressing the House and the President
of this country to say ``your President''. Is he not her President?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Well, I think that is
how she wants to express herself. Continue and conclude, hon member.
Ms C S BOTHA: I will certainly respond to that particular point as well. I
would like to call President Mbeki ``our President''. I would like him to
speak of ``our people''. I too often see that he also makes the distinction
between ``us'' and ``them''. When we are able, as South African citizens in
this country, to speak of ``us'', our country and our right to speak about
Zimbabwe, then, perhaps, we will have progressed. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Chairperson, members of the House,
let me once again thank you for giving us an opportunity to discuss with
you yet another issue of profound importance not only to South Africa, but
to the region and, indeed, the continent as a whole, and I refer to the
issue of Zimbabwe.

I think this debate is very timely, because it takes place in the context
of a process of rapid globalisation with all its challenges and dangers. In
this context some colleagues have said that the African Renaissance is an
important challenge for all of us and, within that framework is Nepad.
Therefore it is quite important that we begin to discuss issues in a way
that helps us to move forward, and to not get lost in slogans and verbage
that do not have much meaning. Indeed, let me say that whatever else Ms
Botha has said, we have to start on the premise that Zimbabwe is not the
tenth province of South Africa. Whatever we can do to influence Zimbabwe
has to be done in the context of relations from country to country.

I sometimes get the impression that some of our colleagues in Parliament,
especially from the opposition, really believe that, given their own
understanding of the situation in Zimbabwe - and I do not know who they
will choose next - we will be able to send in the troops and impose the
form of government that they think should be imposed.

I think that is a danger that we must guard against, because it reflects a
very dangerous tendency that emerges in some of our parliamentary political
parties. I am happy that most of the people who spoke expressed concerns,
but were positive by trying to ask what we should do to help solve the
situation.

I start by saying that if we do not understand that the development and
peace and stability of Zimbabwe are fundamentally important to the future
of South Africa and therefore demand that we take action that does not
endanger the peace and stability in Zimbabwe, we will be making a profound
mistake.

Indeed, we cannot therefore say that peace and stability cannot take into
account the land issue. I see I was a bit late, but I hear that Ms Botha
has said the land issue is not the problem. The land issue is a fundamental
problem, and that includes South Africa. This is a question of how one
deals with the land issue in a way that takes on board the Constitution,
the rule of law and prevents violence.

But in no way can we be so ignorant as to say that the land issue is not an
important issue; it is a major issue. We also have to accept that there is
fundamental polarisation that has taken place in Zimbabwe over the past few
years. Any action that we as South Africa take, in concert with our region
and the international community, must be able to allow us to help to deal
with the polarisation that is now deeply rooted in the Zimbabwean
situation, reflected by and large by a  rural-urban divide.

The economic situation in Zimbabwe was there prior to the elections. This
Government and, indeed, the private sector in this country in partnership
with others, were attempting to deal with the economic crisis in Zimbabwe
long before the elections came into play. And, indeed, I think we must all
agree that whatever action we take must prevent the economy from collapsing
further, and that we must take Zimbabwe out of this dangerous situation of
an economic collapse to one in which the economy begins to grow again and
in which the stability of the country as a whole can be sustained. Because
if Zimbabwe collapses, it will have a profound effect, as I have said, on
all of us.

This is not an imaginary spectre of millions of Zimbabweans coming across
the border. Indeed, I am glad my colleague from the Northern Province
indicated that the statistics do not give one any indication that in the
last few months thousands of these black hordes have been coming across our
borders. This is a fear that members keep putting across. It is an
illogical attempt to deal with serious matters. I think we must get rid of
arguments like that.

Secondly, discussion of such crucial issues should take place on an
informed basis. We cannot just read a few newspaper articles and perhaps
speak to one businessman here and one businessman there, who is then
purported to have told my colleague from the ACDP and my colleague from the
DP that Zimbabwe is having a profound effect on Nepad and on South Africa
generally. Why did they not say something to the effect that the South
African economy is now regarded as the best economy in all emerging
markets, and the recovery of our rand in the last few months makes it the
best of all emerging currencies in the world? That proves the fact that the
Zimbabwe spectre that people have been putting forward is a false one.
Thirdly, let me say that we all welcome concerns expressed about
developments in other countries, but we must not do this selectively, and
we must do it with genuine concern about what we are talking about. We must
avoid the emotional outbursts that have taken place and continue to take
place on the Zimbabwean issue.

I hear what Ms Botha said, that we are all South Africans and we must
deracialise politics. Well, that is a long cry coming to us in the ANC. The
ANC's whole existence has been based on the deracialisation of politics.
But sometimes members of the opposition, in talking of deracialisation, use
exactly the race argument to frighten our minorities, to put the fear of
God into them about black rule, etc. Unfortunately even if that is not
one's conscious understanding, how one acts does give substance to that
sort of argument.

The very fact that today Ms Botha raised the spectre of an attack against
the Indians is a reflection of how she tackles politics of a fundamental
nature on a racist basis. In fact, I have been at pains to explain that
with regard to this story about war veterans attacking the Indians,
threatening the Indians, the Zimbabwean government has quite categorically
stated that those comments were not made on behalf of the war veterans or
the Zimbabwean government. To bring it in is a simple election ploy, once
again to give the Indian minorities the fear that it was the whites
yesterday, tomorrow it will be Indians, and the day after the coloureds.
That, in the nonracial South Africa that we are trying to build, is very
dangerous and not acceptable.

I think we need to come to grips with this because what Ms Botha and her
party are doing, is really to racialise politics when many parties in South
Africa, the ANC included, are trying to deracialise politics and to deal
with the issues at hand, rather than to keep introducing the racial
spectre, as she does.

Let me also say that these parties continually express concerns and become
agents of doom and gloom. Sometimes, the ACDP does it, followed by the DA;
sometimes the DA does it, followed by the ACDP. But I have yet to see one
concrete suggestion from them to say how we as South Africa, as Africans,
can help the Zimbabwean people to come out of the crisis they are having at
the moment. If they do that, it will be to their credit and show that they
are not just playing party politics, but are trying to stabilise one
country in the context of the whole region of Southern Africa and Africa. I
think they will be more respected than they are at the moment.

Regarding the attack on quiet diplomacy by my colleague who used to be our
ambassador in London, nobody has told us what the alternative to quiet
diplomacy should be. All the threats and noise made by various individuals
in South Africa and some governments outside did not in the end prevent the
Zimbabweans, despite the pre-election problems, from expressing their will
on who they wanted to elect as their president.

Those parties do not give an alternative to quiet diplomacy. Again it
raises the question of what they want us to do. Do they want us to impose
sanctions. The MDC says they do not want sanctions. Do those parties want
us to send our troops in? That is a ridiculous notion. What do they want us
to do rather than trying, in our interaction, to ensure that we help to
stabilise the political and economic situation. Quiet diplomacy does not
mean that one does not raise critically what one sees as problems in a
country.

I do not know which businessmen the DP and ACDP meet, but we meet
businessmen all the time. The President sees more businessmen than I think
they have breakfasts. Nevertheless, perhaps they see businesspeople who
come from a particular angle. With the right-wing trend that is going on in
Europe and North America, maybe that is the sort of businesspeople they
see, and therefore they reflect that sort of understanding of issues. We
are concerned about what has been going on. We are concerned about working
with the Zimbabweans to help them to come out of the serious economic and
political crisis.

Kent Durr says it is ridiculous for us to expect that the MDC and Zanu-PF
will talk. Well, maybe where he comes from, his party can say a lot of
things because they make no real impact. As a Government we have a
responsibility to try to ensure that the two parties do get together to
deal with the problem that they face.

Let me quote what the Commonwealth has said. [Interjections.] One cannot
negotiate with Zanu-PF without Mugabe. Who gives those members the right to
choose the leaders for Zanu-PF? It is not their right, it is the right of
the people of Zimbabwe. They should forget that suggestion.

The Commonwealth statement on Zimbabwe says, and I quote:


  The committee expresses determination to promote reconciliation in
  Zimbabwe between the main political parties. To this end the committee
  strongly supported the initiatives of the president of Nigeria and the
  president of South Africa in encouraging a climate of reconciliation
  between the two main political parties in Zimbabwe.

It goes on to say that they considered it essential to address the issues
of food shortages - everything we have been talking about - economic
recovery, the restoration of political stability, the rule of law and
conducting of future elections.

Unfortunately, what my colleagues in the DA and the ACDP say is correct, it
is not new, but every time they try to say something that is more creative
it is absolutely false and not right. This is the sad thing we have with
the people.

The Commonwealth statement further called on us to work together to deal
with the land issue through the UNDP and to use our initiative to get the
two parties together. If members do not know, the Secretary-General of the
ANC and Prof Adedeji of Nigeria have been mandated on behalf of the
Commonwealth to bring the two parties together. This is not an easy task,
given the polarisation that has taken place in Zimbabwe. But now an agenda
has been agreed, and they are expected to start meeting in a few days.

Let me give members an example of what happens when we work with false
information and make a big issue out of it. This whole story of an MDC
woman being decapitated was in our newspapers for days. Morgan Tsvangirai
threatened to walk out of the discussions because he said this had
happened. What happened? We asked: ``Where is this corpse?'' We kept being
told about this decapitated woman, so we said there must be a corpse. Where
is the corpse? Now they have discovered there is no corpse, that this has
been a false report.

I must say, honestly, for me this is a worrying factor. I am not saying
there has been no violence, from both sides, by the way. Maybe there was
relatively more by one side or the other, but there has been violence. But
we all worked on this corpse, and now we cannot find the corpse. How many
other stories are there like this? Unfortunately some of our people battle
without there been any substance to it. This is not helping us to get the
two parties to forget incidents here and there, and to deal with the issue.


Let me remind members: In this country, before the first elections, we had
more deaths than at any other time in the history of apartheid South
Africa. We should therefore not be holier than the Pope. It is not that we
condone the violence, but because there is some element of violence we
cannot now say that because of that the elections were not free, etc. We
had more deaths in this country than anywhere in Zimbabwe, more than at any
other time in the history of apartheid.

Zimbabwe is fundamental to our future, but we will never accept anybody, in
the words of Ms Botha, telling us that they will use Zimbabwe as a litmus
test whether to support or not support Nepad. We have quite categorically
stated that one supports Nepad on the basis of one's acceptance of the
programme.

Today it is Zimbabwe and tomorrow it will be another country. We cannot
accept those sorts of conditions. We will accept, as mutual friends and
partners, support from every country that thinks that this is a plan for
mutual benefit. No longer can we as African countries be subject to a
determination of what will happen on the basis of somebody's understanding
of what they think is a correct way forward. We will form equal
partnerships and we will deal with them on an equal basis and I think on
that we have no question or doubts.

Those who do not want to support Nepad must not support it. Nepad, in the
end, is a partnership with the private sector, and both those parties
should know that the private sector goes where profit is made. If Nepad is
a good programme they will go in there as partners. I have no doubts about
that element of it. The businessmen that hon member talks to probably do
not even invest in Africa and do not even know where Africa is. The ones we
talked to have a fundamental vested interest in Africa because it is
mutually beneficial for them.

Now let me end by saying this. We have major challenges. We must do
everything possible to bring about national unity in Zimbabwe, because, if
the Zimbabweans from all sides do not accept that the future of the country
is much greater than their own individual interest and therefore the
country makes a decisive impact on the future of everyone, we will be in
serious difficulties. So national unity based on reconciliation has to
remain our objective.

It is not easy, of course. If anything was easy, why would we be in
Government? We would have left it to those hon members. It is because
government is difficult that we are in Government. Therefore I am not
saying that it is an easy task, but it is a task we need to take on.

Let me deal with the economic recovery. Incidentally, I do not know which
supporters the hon member is talking about. We are talking to the
agricultural unions, both black and white, to Business South Africa, to
members of the business sector in South Africa who have interests in
Zimbabwe and those who do not have interests, to trade unionists and to
religious leaders to see how we can all work together to achieve peace and
stability and then economic recovery.

The food crisis was mentioned. It is only Zimbabwe that is going through a
food crisis. The drought issue has brought about a serious disaster in
Malawi, parts of Mozambique, and parts of Zimbabwe. That does not mean that
we do not have to look at certain economic policies that certain countries
have undertaken to see how, together, we can get them to change certain
directions in order to make and use better the possibilities that arise in
their countries. Zimbabwe must not continue to be an issue that we use for
political purposes.

I am totally convinced in my mind - I hope hon members can prove otherwise
- that sometimes Zimbabwe has selectively been taken up as an issue because
of the kith-and-kin phemomenon, but also, more importantly, because there
is unconscious fear in people's minds that if it is happening in Zimbabwe
today it is going to happen in South Africa tomorrow. That is why this
issue of Zimbabwe has become so emotional and so heated amongst elements of
the opposition.

My own argument would be that it is not so that if it happens in one
country it can happen in another country. If we do not want it to happen in
South Africa, we must work together to create a genuinely nonracial South
Africa; where we better the lives of all our people and not just a few.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): I thank the hon the
Minister for agreeing to participate in this important debate. Obviously
when Zimbabwe or Palestine is being talked about, that generates a lot of
heat. I thank hon members for a lively debate.

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 16:56.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS
                           THURSDAY, 28 MARCH 2002

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Dr S C Cwele has been appointed as chairperson of the Joint Standing
     Committee on Intelligence with effect from 22 March 2002.

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     The vacancy which occurred in the representation of the Province of the
     Western Cape has been filled with effect from 15 March 2002 by the
     appointment of Mr F Adams. Mr Adams was sworn in as a permanent
     delegate to the National Council of Provinces on 27 March 2002.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Truth and Reconciliation Commission for 2000-2001 [RP 16-2002].


     (2)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         South African Diamond Board for 2000-2001 [RP 29-2002].

2.    The Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology:


     (1)    The Agreement on Science and Technological Co-operation between
         the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
         of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, tabled in terms of section
         231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (2)    The Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Federal Republic of Nigeria on Co-operation in the
         Field of Arts and Culture, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of
         the Constitution, 1996.

3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     (1)    Report of the Judicial Service Commission for 2000-2001.


     (2)    Report and Financial Statements of the Legal Aid Board for 2000-
         2001, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2000-2001.
4.    The Minister of Communications:


     Annual Report and Financial Statements of the Department of
     Communications for 1999-2000.

5.    The Minister of Labour:


     Strategic Plan of the Department of Labour for 2002-2005.

                            FRIDAY, 5 APRIL 2002

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bills:


         (a)     Social Grants Appropriation Bill [B 9 - 2002] - Act No 2
                  of 2002 (assented to and signed by President on 27 March
                  2002);
         (b)     Burundi Protection Support Appropriation Bill [B 10 -
                  2002] - Act No 3 of 2002 (assented to and signed by
                  President on 27 March 2002);


         (c)     Unemployment Insurance Contributions Bill [B 85 - 2001] -
                  Act No 4 of 2002 (assented to and signed by President on
                  27 March 2002); and


         (d)     Division of Revenue Bill [B 5D - 2002] - Act No 5 of 2002
                  (assented to and signed by President on 27 March 2002).

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government on 21 February
         2002 submitted a draft of the Disaster Management Bill, 2002, as
         well as the memorandum explaining the objects of the proposed
         legislation, to the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint
         Rule 159. The draft has been referred to the Portfolio Committee
         on Provincial and Local Government and the Select Committee on
         Local Government and Administration by the Speaker and the
         Chairperson, respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).


     (2)    The Minister of Finance on 15 March 2002 submitted a draft of
         the Collective Investment Schemes Control Bill, 2002, as well as
         the memorandum explaining the objects of the proposed legislation,
         to the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The
         draft has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance and
         the Select Committee on Finance by the Speaker and the
         Chairperson, respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).


     (3)    The Minister of Health on 15 March 2002 submitted drafts of the
         Health Donations Fund Repeal Bill, 2002, and the Occupational
         Diseases in Mines and Works Amendment Bill, 2002, as well as the
         memoranda explaining the objects of the proposed legislation, to
         the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The
         drafts have been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Health and
         the Select Committee on Social Services by the Speaker and the
         Chairperson, respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Economic and Foreign Affairs:


         Strategic Plan for the Department of Foreign Affairs for 2002-
         2005.
     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs:


         (a)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the State of Qatar concerning Co-
              operation in the Military Field, tabled in terms of section
              231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (b)     Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
              Republic of South Africa and the Government of the People's
              Republic of China concerning Defence Co-operation, tabled in
              terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (c)     Arrangement between the Department of Defence of the
              Republic of South Africa and the Minister of Foreign Affairs
              of the Netherlands, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
              Constitution, 1996.


         (d)     Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
              Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
              Burundi concerning the South African Mission in Support of the
              Implementation of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
              Agreement for Burundi, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of
              the Constitution, 1996.


         (e)     Specific Arrangement between the Government of the
              Republic of South Africa and the Kingdom of Belgium on The
              Funding of the South African Protection Support Detachment in
              Support of the Implementation of the Arusha Peace and
              Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi, tabled in terms of
              section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (f)     Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
              Republic of South Africa and the United Nations contributing
              Resources to the "Mission de l'Organisation des Nations Unies
              au Congo" (MONUC), tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
              Constitution, 1996.


         (g)     Documents in terms of section 9(1) of the Promotion of
              National Unity and Reconciliation Act, 1995, regarding the
              Remuneration, Allowances and other employment Benefits of the
              Staff of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry:
     (1)    Government Notice No R.652 published in Government Gazette No
         22472 dated 20 July 2001, Norms and Standards in respect of
         Tariffs for Water Services, made in terms of section 10(1) of the
         Water Services Act, 1997 (Act No 108 of 1997).


     (2)    General Notice No 1775 published in Government Gazette No 22527
         dated 1 August 2001, Draft Regulations under the National Veld and
         Forest Fire Act, 1998 (Act No 101 of 1998).


     (3)    Government Notice No 757 published in Government Gazette No
         22577 dated 24 August 2001, Determining of an Interest Rate, made
         in terms of section 59(3)(a) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act
         No 36 of 1998).


     (4)    Government Notice No 850 published in Government Gazette No
         22652 dated 7 September 2001, Invitation to submit written
         comments on Proposed Directions with regard to the Control and
         Management of General Communal and General Small Waste Disposal
         sites, made in terms of section 20(5) of the Environment
         Conservation Act, 1989 (Act No 73 of 1989).


     (5)    Government Notice No 1096 published in Government Gazette No
         22801 dated 9 November 2001, Determining of an Interest Rate, made
         in terms of section 59(3)(a) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act
         No 36 of 1998).


     (6)    Government Notice No 1173 published in Government Gazette No
         22830 dated 13 November 2001, Regarding the Prohibition on the
         making of Fires in the Open Air: Western Cape, made in terms of
         the Forest Act, 1984 (Act No 122 of 1984).


     (7)    Government Notice No 1174 published in Government Gazette No
         22830 dated 13 November 2001, Regarding the Prohibition on the
         making of Fires in the Open Air: Districts of Clanwilliam,
         Piketberg, Ceres, Tulbagh, Worcester, Caledon, Paarl,
         Stellenbosch, Strand and Somerset West, made in terms of the
         Forest Act, 1984 (Act No 122 of 1984).


     (8)    Government Notice No 1175 published in Government Gazette No
         22830 dated 13 November 2001, Regarding the Prohibition on the
         making of Fires in the Open Air: Districts of Swellendam and
         Montagu, made in terms of the Forest Act, 1984 (Act No 122 of
         1984).


     (9)    Government Notice No 1201 published in Government Gazette No
         22839 dated 23 November 2001, Regarding the Establishment of the
         Thabina Irrigation Scheme Water User Association, District of
         Mopani in the Northern Province, Water Management Area Number 2,
         made in terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


     (10)   Government Notice No 1306 published in Government Gazette No
         22904 dated 14 December 2001, Regarding the Transformation of the
         Kalahari West Water Board, Division of Gordonia, Province of the
         Northern Cape, into the Kalahari West Water User Association,
         Water Management Area Number 14, Province of the Northern Cape,
         made in terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


     (11)   Government Notice No 1307 published in Government Gazette No
         22904 dated 14 December 2001, Regarding the Transformation of the
         Kalahari East Water Board, Division of Postmasburg and Kuruman,
         Province of the Northern Cape, into the Kalahari East Water User
         Association, Water Management Area Number 10, Province of the
         Northern Cape, made in terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act
         No 36 of 1998).


     (12)   Government Notice No 1308 published in Government Gazette No
         22904 dated 14 December 2001, Regarding the Transformation of the
         Kat River Irrigation Board, Division of Stockenstroom, Victoria
         East and Fort Beaufort, Province of the Eastern Cape, into the Kat
         River Valley Water User Association, Water Management Area Number
         15, Province of the Eastern Cape, made in terms of the National
         Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


     (13)   Government Notice No 1309 published in Government Gazette No
         22904 dated 14 December 2001, Regarding the Transformation of the
         Great Letaba Major Irrigation Board, Districts of Letaba and
         Pietersburg, Northern Province, into the Letaba Water User
         Association, Water Management Area Number 2, Northern Province,
         made in terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


     (14)   Government Notice No 1357 published in Government Gazette No
         22929 dated 14 December 2001, Assessing DWAF's compliance with the
         NEMA Principles, made in terms of the National Environmental
         Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).


     (15)   Government Notice No 42 published in Government Gazette No 23037
         dated 25 January 2002, Regarding the Transformation of the Blyde
         River Irrigation Board, Magisterial District of Phalaborwa,
         Northern Province, into the Lower Blyde River Water User
         Association, Water Management Area Number 4, Northern Province,
         made in terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


     (16)   Government Notice No 89 published in Government Gazette No 23053
         dated 1 February 2002, Regarding the Establishment of the Lebalelo
         Water User Association, Districts of Letaba and Lydenburg, in the
         Northern and Mpumalanga Provinces, Water Management Area Number 4,
         made in terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


     (17)   Government Notice No 91 published in Government Gazette No 23053
         dated 1 February 2002, Directions with regard to the Control and
         Management of General Communal and General Small Waste Disposal
         Sites, made in terms of section 20(5)(b) of the Environment
         Conservation Act, 1989 (Act No 73 of 1989).

2.    The Minister of Transport:


     (1)    Report and Financial Statements of the Road Accident Fund for
         2000-2001, including the Report of the Auditor General on the
         Financial Statements for 2000-2001 [RP 31-2002].


     (2)    Strategic Plan of the Department of Transport for 2002-2003.

3.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation:


     Strategic Plan of the Department of Sport and Recreation for 2002-2004.

4.    The Minister of Correctional Services:


     Strategic Plan of the Department of Correctional Services for 2002-
     2005.

                            MONDAY, 15 APRIL 2002

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
     Committees, viz:
     Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women:


     Appointed: Mathibela, N F; Mbuyazi, L R (Alt); Ngubane, H (Alt);
     Roopnarain, U.
     Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth and
     Disabled Persons:


     Appointed: Dhlamini, B W (Alt); Mbuyazi, L R.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Finance:


     (1)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Republic of the Seychelles for the
         Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion
         with respect to Taxes on Income, tabled in terms of section 231(2)
         of the Constitution, 1996.


     (2)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Double Taxation Agreement between
         the Republic of South Africa and the Republic of the Seychelles.

2.    The Minister of Transport:


     (1)    Air Transport Agreement between the Government of the Republic
         of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of Germany,
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (2)    Bilateral Air Services Agreement between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Federal
         Republic of Brazil, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

3.    The Minister of Safety and Security:


     Strategic Plan of the Independent Complaints Directorate for 2002-2005
     [RP 51-2002].

4.    The Minister of Communications:


     Annual Report and Financial Statements of the Department of
     Communications for 2000-2001, including the Report of the Auditor-
     General on the Financial Statements for 2000-2001.

5.    The Minister of Labour:


     Annual Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Education
     and Training Authority for 2000-2001, including the Report of the
     Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2000-2001 [RP 19-2002].

                            FRIDAY, 19 APRIL 2002

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development on 7
         March 2002 submitted drafts of the Constitution of the Republic of
         South Africa Amendment Bill, 2002, and the Constitution of the
         Republic of South Africa Second Amendment Bill, 2002, as well as
         the memorandums explaining the objects of the proposed
         legislation, to the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint
         Rule 159. The drafts have been referred to the Portfolio Committee
         on Justice and Constitutional Development and the Select Committee
         on Security and Constitutional Affairs by the Speaker and the
         Chairperson, respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).


     (2)    The Minister of Minerals and Energy on 11 April 2002 submitted a
         draft of the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Bill,
         2002, as well as the memorandum explaining the objects of the
         proposed legislation, to the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms
         of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Minerals and Energy and the Select Committee on
         Economic and Foreign Affairs by the Speaker and the Chairperson,
         respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).


     (3)    The following Bill was introduced by the Minister for Justice
         and Constitutional Development in the National Assembly on 18
         April 2002 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Insolvency Amendment Bill [B 14 - 2002] (National Assembly
              - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
              introduction published in Government Gazette No 23231 of 15
              March 2002.]
         The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
         and Constitutional Development of the National Assembly.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.


     (4)    The following Bill was introduced by the Minister of Minerals
         and Energy in the National Assembly on 19 April 2002 and referred
         to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
         of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Bill [B 15 -
              2002] (National Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of
              Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
              Government Gazette No 23316 of 12 April 2002.]


         The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Minerals
         and Energy of the National Assembly.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.


     (5)    The following Bills were introduced by the Minister for Justice
         and Constitutional Development in the National Assembly on 19
         April 2002 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Amendment
              Bill [B 16 - 2002] (National Assembly - sec 74) [Bill and
              prior notice of its introduction published in Government
              Gazette No 23218 of 11 March 2002.]


         (ii)Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Second Amendment
              Bill [B 17 - 2002] (National Assembly - sec 74) [Bill and
              prior notice of its introduction published in Government
              Gazette No 23218 of 11 March 2002.]


         The Bills have been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
         and Constitutional Development of the National Assembly.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     (1)    Government Notice No R.37 published in Government Gazette No
         23029 dated 18 January 2002, Magistrates Courts: Amendment of the
         Rules of Court, made in terms of section 6 of the Rules Board for
         Courts of Law Act, 1985 (Act No 107 of 1985).


     (2)    Government Notice No R.38 published in Government Gazette No
         23029 dated 18 January 2002, Magistrates Courts: Amendment of the
         Rules of Court, made in terms of section 6 of the Rules Board for
         Courts of Law Act, 1985 (Act No 107 of 1985).


     (3)    Proclamation No R.9 published in Government Gazette No 23119
         dated 15 February 2002, Commencement of sections 10, 14, 16, and
         51, made in terms of the Promotion of Access to Information Act,
         2000 (Act No 2 of 2000).


     (4)    Government Notice No R.187 published in Government Gazette No
         23119 dated 15 February 2002, Regulations regarding the Promotion
         of Access to Information, made in terms of the Promotion of Access
         to Information Act, 2000 (Act No 2 of 2000).


     (5)    Government Notice No 292 published in Government Gazette No
         23176 dated 28 February 2002, Directives made in terms of section
         7 of the Criminal Matters Amendment Act, 1998 (Act No 68 of 1998).


     (6)    Proclamation No R.15 published in Government Gazette No 23149
         dated 15 February 2002, Commencement of the Criminal Matters
         Amendment Act, 1998 (Act No 68 of 1998).


     (7)    Government Notice No R.213 published in Government Gazette No
         23149 dated 28 February 2002, Determination of remuneration
         payable to curator ad litem, made in terms of section 29 of the
         Mental Health Act, 1973 (Act No 18 of 1973).


     (8)    Government Notice No R.214 published in the Government Gazette
         No 23149 dated 28 February 2002, Regulations prescribing the
         tariff of allowances payable to psychiatrists who appear as
         witnesses in court, made in terms of the Criminal Procedure Act,
         1977 (Act No 51 of 1977).


     (9)    Strategic Plan for the Department of Justice and Constitutional
         Development for 2002-2005.

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     Written comments received from the public and provincial legislatures
     on the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Second Amendment
     Bill [B 17 - 2002], submitted by the Minister for Justice and
     Constitutional Development in terms of section 74(6)(b) of the
     Constitution, 1996.


     Referred to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
     Affairs.

                            MONDAY, 22 APRIL 2002

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Finance:


     (1)    Proclamation No 17 published in Government Gazette No 23169
         dated 28 February 2002, Commencement of the Financial Intelligence
         Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of 2001).


     (2)    Proclamation R.19 published in Government Gazette No 23196 dated
         1 March 2002, Fixing of date on which sections 37(1), 38(1) and
         48(1) shall come into operation, made in terms of the Revenue Laws
         Amendment Act, 2001 (Act No 19 of 2001).


     (3)    Government Notice No R.256 published in Government Gazette No
         23196 dated 1 March 2002, Determination interest rate for purposes
         of paragraph (a) of the definition of "official rate of interest"
         in paragraph 1 of the Seventh Schedule, made in terms of the
         Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


     (4)    Proclamation Notice No 20 published in Government Gazette No
         23207 dated 15 March 2002, Appointment of members of the Special
         Courts for the hearing of income tax appeals, made in terms of the
         Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


     (5)    Government Notice No R.335 published in Government Gazette No
         23246 dated 18 March 2002, Draft Treasury Regulations, made in
         terms of section 78 of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
         (Act No 1 of 1999).

2.    The Minister of Home Affairs:

    A list of approved early naturalisation applications in terms of
     section 5(9) of the South African Citizenship Act, 1995 (Act No 88 of
     1995).

    Copies of the list of applications are available at the Office of the
     Clerk of Papers on request.

                          WEDNESDAY, 24 APRIL 2002

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The Minister in the Presidency submitted the umTheto wokuThuthukisa
     zokuRhatjha mazombe kunye neHlangano ejamele iindlela zokurhatjha
     ezahlukeneko [B 2 - 2002] (National Assembly - sec 75) to the Speaker
     and the Chairperson on 23 April 2002. This is the official translation
     of the Media Development and Diversity Agency Bill [B 2 - 2002]
     (National Assembly - sec 75), which was introduced in the National
     Assembly by the Minister on 4 February 2002.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     General Report of the Auditor-General on audit outcomes for 2000-2001
     [RP 58-2002].

                           THURSDAY, 25 APRIL 2002
ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bill was introduced by the Minister of Social
         Development in the National Assembly on 24 April 2002 and referred
         to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
         of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Probation Services Amendment Bill [B 18 - 2002] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              23072 of 8 February 2002.]


         The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Social
         Development of the National Assembly.
         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.


     (2)    The following Bill was introduced by the Minister for Justice
         and Constitutional Development in the National Assembly on 25
         April 2002 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Prevention of Corruption Bill [B 19 - 2002] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              23336 of 18 April 2002.]


         The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
         and Constitutional Development of the National Assembly.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs:


     The Strategic Plan for the Department of Agriculture for 2002-2005.

2.    The Minister of Health:


     (1)    The Strategic Plan for the Department of Health for 2001-2004.


     (2)    The Operational Plans of the Department of Health for 2002-2003.

                            MONDAY, 29 APRIL 2002

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:
1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration on 11
         April 2002 submitted a draft of the State Information Technology
         Agency Amendment Bill, 2002, as well as the memorandum explaining
         the objects of the proposed legislation, to the Speaker and the
         Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been
         referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
         Administration and the Select Committee on Local Government and
         Administration by the Speaker and the Chairperson, respectively,
         in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).


     (2)    The following Bill was introduced by the Minister of Health in
         the National Assembly on 29 April 2002 and referred to the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule
         160:


         (i)     Health Donations Fund Act Repeal Bill [B 20 - 2002]
              (National Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
              prior notice of its introduction published in Government
              Gazette No 23251 of 20 March 2002.]


         The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Health of
         the National Assembly.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Meat Board for 1999-2000 [RP 37-2002].


     (2)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Citrus Board for 1999-2000 [RP 47-2002].


     (3)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Maize Board for 2000-2001 [RP 46-2002].

2.    The Speaker:


     (1)    Submission of the Financial and Fiscal Commission on the
         Division of Revenue for 2003-2004, tabled in terms of section 9 of
         the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act No 97 of
         1997).


     (2)    Report of the Public Protector on an investigation pertaining to
         the purchase of pieces of jewellery by the Minister of Minerals
         and Energy.
         Report is tabled for information and copies of the report are
         available from the office of the Clerk of the Papers.

3.    The Minister of Finance:


     (1)    Proclamation No R.28 published in Government Gazette No 23284,
         dated 28 March 2002, Determination of date of commencement of
         Unemployment Insurance Contributions Act, 2002 (Act No 4 of 2002).


     (2)    Proclamation No R.30 published in Government Gazette No 23292,
         dated 28 March 2002, Commencement of Division of Revenue Act, 2002
         (Act No 5 of 2002).

                           TUESDAY, 30 APRIL 2002

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance:


         (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission for 2000-2001 [RP
              16-2002].


         (b)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              of the South African Diamond Board for 2000-2001 [RP 29-2002].
     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Education and Recreation:


         (a)     The Agreement on Science and Technological Co-operation
              between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
              Government of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, tabled in terms
              of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (b)     The Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
              South Africa and the Federal Republic of Nigeria on Co-
              operation in the Field of Arts and Culture, tabled in terms of
              section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (c)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Sport and Recreation
              for 2002-2004.


     (3)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs:


         (a)     Report of the Judicial Service Commission for 2000-2001.


         (b)     Report of the Financial Statements of the Legal Aid Board
              for 2000-2001, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
              the Financial Statements for 2000-2001.


     (4)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises:


         (a)     Annual Report and Financial Statements of the Department
              of Communications for 1999-2000.


         (b)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Labour for 2002-2005.


     (5)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Public Services:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Road Accident Fund
              for 2000-2001, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
              the Financial Statements for 2000-2001 [RP 31-2002].


         (b)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Transport for 2002-
              2003.


     (6)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Land and Environmental Affairs:


         (a)     Government Notice No R.652 published in Government Gazette
              No 22472 dated 20 July 2001, Norms and Standards in respect of
              Tariffs for Water Services, made in terms of section 10(1) of
              the Water Services Act, 1997 (Act No 108 of 1997).


         (b)     General Notice No 1775 published in Government Gazette No
              22527 dated 1 August 2001, Draft Regulations under the
              National Veld and Forest Fire Act, 1998 (Act No 101 of 1998).


         (c)     Government Notice No 757 published in Government Gazette
              No 22577 dated 24 August 2001, Determining of an Interest
              Rate, made in terms of section 59(3)(a) of the National Water
              Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


         (d)     Government Notice No 850 published in Government Gazette
              No 22652 dated 7 September 2001, Invitation to submit written
              comments on Proposed Directions with regard to the Control and
              Management of General Communal and General Small Waste
              Disposal sites, made in terms of section 20(5) of the
              Environment Conservation Act, 1989 (Act No 73 of 1989).


         (e)     Government Notice No 1096 published in Government Gazette
              No 22801 dated 9 November 2001, Determining of an Interest
              Rate, made in terms of section 59(3)(a) of the National Water
              Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


         (f)     Government Notice No 1173 published in Government Gazette
              No 22830 dated 13 November 2001, Regarding the Prohibition on
              the making of Fires in the Open Air: Western Cape, made in
              terms of the Forest Act, 1984 (Act No 122 of 1984).


         (g)     Government Notice No 1174 published in Government Gazette
              No 22830 dated 13 November 2001, Regarding the Prohibition on
              the making of Fires in the Open Air: Districts of Clanwilliam,
              Piketberg, Ceres, Tulbagh, Worcester, Caledon, Paarl,
              Stellenbosch, Strand and Somerset West, made in terms of the
              Forest Act, 1984 (Act No 122 of 1984).


         (h)     Government Notice No 1175 published in Government Gazette
              No 22830 dated 13 November 2001, Regarding the Prohibition on
              the making of Fires in the Open Air: Districts of Swellendam
              and Montagu, made in terms of the Forest Act, 1984 (Act No 122
              of 1984).


         (i)     Government Notice No 1201 published in Government Gazette
              No 22839 dated 23 November 2001, Regarding the Establishment
              of the Thabina Irrigation Scheme Water User Association,
              District of Mopani in the Northern Province, Water Management
              Area Number 2, made in terms of the National Water Act, 1998
              (Act No 36 of 1998).


         (j)     Government Notice No 1306 published in Government Gazette
              No 22904 dated 14 December 2001, Regarding the Transformation
              of the Kalahari West Water Board, Division of Gordonia,
              Province of the Northern Cape, into the Kalahari West Water
              User Association, Water Management Area Number 14, Province of
              the Northern Cape, made in terms of the National Water Act,
              1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


         (k)     Government Notice No 1307 published in Government Gazette
              No 22904 dated 14 December 2001, Regarding the Transformation
              of the Kalahari East Water Board, Division of Postmasburg and
              Kuruman, Province of the Northern Cape, into the Kalahari East
              Water User Association, Water Management Area Number 10,
              Province of the Northern Cape, made in terms of the National
              Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


         (l)     Government Notice No 1308 published in Government Gazette
              No 22904 dated 14 December 2001, Regarding the Transformation
              of the Kat River Irrigation Board, Division of Stockenstroom,
              Victoria East and Fort Beaufort, Province of the Eastern Cape,
              into the Kat River Valley Water User Association, Water
              Management Area Number 15, Province of the Eastern Cape, made
              in terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


         (m)     Government Notice No 1309 published in Government Gazette
              No 22904 dated 14 December 2001, Regarding the Transformation
              of the Great Letaba Major Irrigation Board, Districts of
              Letaba and Pietersburg, Northern Province, into the Letaba
              Water User Association, Water Management Area Number 2,
              Northern Province, made in terms of the National Water Act,
              1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


         (n)     Government Notice No 1357 published in Government Gazette
              No 22929 dated 14 December 2001, Assessing DWAF's compliance
              with the NEMA Principles, made in terms of the National
              Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).


         (o)     Government Notice No 42 published in Government Gazette No
              23037 dated 25 January 2002, Regarding the Transformation of
              the Blyde River Irrigation Board, Magisterial District of
              Phalaborwa, Northern Province, into the Lower Blyde River
              Water User Association, Water Management Area Number 4,
              Northern Province, made in terms of the National Water Act,
              1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


         (p)     Government Notice No 89 published in Government Gazette No
              23053 dated 1 February 2002, Regarding the Establishment of
              the Lebalelo Water User Association, Districts of Letaba and
              Lydenburg, in the Northern and Mpumalanga Provinces, Water
              Management Area Number 4, made in terms of the National Water
              Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


         (q)     Government Notice No 91 published in Government Gazette No
              23053 dated 1 February 2002, Directions with regard to the
              Control and Management of General Communal and General Small
              Waste Disposal Sites, made in terms of section 20(5)(b) of the
              Environment Conservation Act, 1989 (Act No 73 of 1989).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Transport:


     (a)    Bilateral Air Services Agreement between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Islamic
         Republic of Pakistan, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement.

2.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs:


     The Medium Term Strategic and Operational Plan of the Department of
     Land Affairs for 2002-2006.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Joint Committee on Constitutional Review, dated 30
     April 2002, as follows:


         The Joint Rules of Parliament provide that the Committee must
         review the Constitution annually and report on the review to the
         Assembly and the Council. The Rules also provide that the
         Committee must, by notice in the public media by 1 May, invite the
         public to submit to the Committee, within 30 days after placing of
         the advertisement, written representations on any constitutional
         matter (Joint Rule 102(1) and (2).


         As a result of a very full parliamentary programme, the Committee
         requests the Assembly and the Council to give it permission to
         place its advertisement referred to in paragraph (2) above before
         10 May 2002.


     Report to be considered.

                            THURSDAY, 2 MAY 2002

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following Bill was introduced by the Minister for Provincial and
     Local Government in the National Assembly on 2 May 2002 and referred to
     the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
     Rule 160:


     (i)    Disaster Management Bill [B 21 - 2002] (National Assembly - sec
         76) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
         introduction published in Government Gazette No 23254 of 28 March
         2002.]


     The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and
     Local Government of the National Assembly.


     In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of the
     Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary working
     days.

                             FRIDAY, 3 MAY 2002
TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Correctional Services:


     Annual Report of the Judicial Inspectorate on Prisons and Prisoners for
     2001-2002 [RP 61-2002].

                             MONDAY, 6 MAY 2002

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Transport:


     (1)    Bilateral Air Services Agreement between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Federal
         Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
         of the Constitution, 1996.


     (2)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement.
2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     (1)    Trade Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the Republic of Bulgaria, tabled in
         terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (2)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement.


     (3)    Trade and Economic Co-operation Agreement between the Government
         of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic
         of Belarus, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.
     (4)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement.

                             TUESDAY, 7 MAY 2002

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Home Affairs:


     (1)    Annual Report and Financial Statements of the Electoral
         Commission for 1998-1999, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 1998-1999 [RP 11-2002].


     (2)    Annual Report and Financial Statements of the Electoral
         Commission for 1999-2000, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 1999-2000 [RP 12-2002].


     (3)    Annual Report and Financial Statements of the Electoral
         Commission for 2000-2001, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2000-2001 [RP 13-2002].

2.    The Minister of Housing:


     Strategic Plan of the Department of Housing for 2002-2004.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on
     Kyoto Protocol on Climate Change, dated 6 May 2002:


         The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having
         considered the request for approval by Parliament of the Kyoto
         Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
         Change, referred to it, recommends that the Council, in terms of
         section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Protocol.


     Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Social Services on the Mental
     Health Care Bill [B 69B - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 76), dated 30
     April 2002:


         The Select Committee on Social Services, having considered the
         subject of the Mental Health Care Bill [B 69B - 2001] (National
         Assembly - sec 76), referred to it, reports the Bill with
         amendments [B 69C - 2001].


