---
title: 'National Assembly - 24 June 2002'
layout: debate
year: 2002
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2002/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2002-06-24
---

MONDAY, 24 JUNE 2002
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Chairperson of Committees took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

Mr S A MSHUDULU: Chairperson, I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the DP supported the introduction of the legislation that
           allows politicians to cross to other political parties without
           losing their seats in all tiers of legislatures; and


       (b)  the leader of the DA is now calling for fresh elections in the
           Western Cape and KwaZulu-Natal, having realised that the DP/DA
           will now lose members to the ANC;


  (2) believes that this U-turn and inconsistency of the DA about this
       legislation reflects the political opportunism of the DP/DA and its
       leader, the hon Tony Leon; and


  (3) calls on the DP/DA to adhere to basic political principles and not to
       use the laws of the country for political expediency.

[Applause.]

Mr K M ANDREW: Mr Chairman, on behalf of the DP - we speak on behalf of the
DA - I hereby give notice that I shall move:


  That this House -


  (1) notes with interest that Marthinus van Schalkwyk's first action as
       Western Cape Premier was to appoint his friends and cronies to civil-
       service jobs at salaries ranging from up to R400 000 per annum;


  (2) recognises that this will transfer to the taxpayers' account over R3
       million of the National Party's expenses;


  (3) notes further that the ANC/New NP intend increasing the number of
       Cape Town subcouncils and ward committees at a cost of almost R40
       million per year to the ratepayers; and


  (4) therefore resolves that this plundering of the public purse should
       not be tolerated and requests that elections be held to allow the
       voters to decide their own future.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]
Mr J H SLABBERT: Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) received with astonishment the news that a 28-year-old man, Vernon
       Armugga from Verulam, KwaZulu-Natal, has been accused of ripping off
       the Road Accident Fund to the tune of more than R10  million;


  (2) is dumbfounded that this man touted 600 fake claims for various
       attorneys;


  (3) commends the KwaZulu-Natal police task team for arresting this
       alleged fraudster;


  (4) continues to be puzzled at the ease with which people and syndicates
       defraud this noble service aimed at alleviating emotional and
       economic trauma suffered by road accident victims; and


  (5) requests both the Department of Transport and of Justice and
       Constitutional Development to introduce legislation that will enable
       the criminal justice system to strike off the roll all attorneys
       involving themselves in scams that are aimed at defrauding the fund.

Mr G D SCHNEEMANN: Chairperson, I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the ANC-led Metropolitan Council of Johannesburg resolved
       on 20 June 2002 to extend free basic municipal services on
       application from 1 July to the city's poor, unemployed, orphans and
       HIV/Aids patients;


  (2) believes that this reflects the commitment of the ANC to improve
       service delivery in all tiers of government and to build a better
       life for all our people; and


  (3) welcomes the move by the Metropolitan Council of Johannesburg to
       provide free services to the poorest of the poor.

[Applause.]

Mr I J PRETORIUS: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move on
behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  Belinda Scott, a former DP KwaZulu-Natal Chief Whip, has joined
           the list of senior disillusioned DP/DA members by defecting to
           the ANC;


       (b)  her move was, according to her, motivated by -


           (i)   the absence of a principled opposition;


          (ii)    her desire to contribute to the transformation of society
                    and the betterment of the country, clearly something
                    that was not possible in the DA;


         (iii)   the hon Leon's frenetic scramble for power;


           (iv)  the DA's greed and cheap opportunism - at the expense of
                    KwaZulu-Natal and the country; and


          (v)     the fact that the DA had abandoned all the characteristics
                    of the DP, which had sought to serve as a principled
                    opposition in South Africa; and


  (2) believes that the list of disillusioned DP/DA members will continue
       to grow because the DP/DA has lost its credibility as an effective
       and principled opposition.

[Applause.]

Mr S ABRAM: Chairperson, I give notice that I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that when President Mbeki and other African leaders meet with
       G8 leaders in Canada on Wednesday, Nepad will be facing a mammoth
       challenge in securing commitments and we wish the leaders well in
       their deliberations;


  (2) further notes that the success of Nepad will be determined by the
       extent to which African leaders commit themselves to and ensure that
       good governance is paramount and that the abuse of power is dealt
       with demonstrably; and


  (3) expresses concern that the attainment of these goals will be hampered
       by evictions from Zimbabwean farms due to start today, which will
       detrimentally affect the farmers, but will also render an estimated
       232 000 farm workers jobless, homeless, futureless, foodless and
       hopeless.

Mr G B MAGWANISHE: Chairperson, I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes reports that the hon Cassie Aucamp and Danie Schutte have been
       elected to the leadership positions of the New National Action, a new
       political party that will cater specifically for the needs of South
       Africa's former ruling white minority;


  (2) believes that the establishment of this ``race-based'' party does not
       contribute positively to the spirit of national reconciliation and
       national unity that the Government and the people of South Africa are
       working very hard to achieve;and


  (3) calls on all members of this party and its leadership to-


       (a)  work towards building a new nation and fostering national
           reconciliation amongst our people; and;


       (b)  join forces with the ANC and President Thabo Mbeki to work hard
           to fight tribalism and racism in our country.

[Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, I give notice on behalf of the ACDP that I shall
move at the next sitting of the House the following motion:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with interest the lawsuit by US attorney Ed Fagan against three
       Swiss banks on behalf of the victims of apartheid;


  (2) further notes that the nature of the lawsuit is about the alleged
       billions the banks loaned to the previous SA Government;


  (3) also notes the comment from South Africa's ambassador to Switzerland
       that the government distances itself from the lawsuit;


  (4) debates the merit or demerits of the lawsuit; and


  (5) makes a statement on whether it supports this type of class action.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson, I shall move on behalf of the UCDP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern that the fluidity of politics in the country as a
       result of the piece of legislation that allows for the on-off loss
       and retention of membership will lead to polarisation among the
       people of South Africa;


  (2) further notes that the coming into being of another fringe
       conservative party for whites only, the National Action, over the
       weekend will make the political climate even more volatile; and


  (3) appeals to citizens of this country to -


       (a)  exercise restraint while facing the political problems squarely
           in the face; and


       (b)  desist from the ineffective yet costly exercise of registering
           new political parties at every turn while national issues such
           as poor health, abuse of children, crime, moral degeneration and
           others are on the increase by the day.

Mr R P Z VAN DEN HEEVER: Chairperson, I shall move on behalf of the ANC:
  That the House -


  (1) notes that the hon Marthinus van Schalkwyk, the leader of the New
       National Party, was sworn in as premier of the province of Western
       Cape on Friday, 21 June 2002;


  (2) congratulates the hon Marthinus van Schalkwyk on his new assignment;
       and


  (3) expresses its confidence in the ANC/New NP partnership, that it will
       bring political stability, development and improvement of quality of
       life for all the people of the Western Cape.

[Applause.] [Interjections.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move on
behalf of the DP and the DA:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the Zimbabwean government's order to certain commercial farmers
       that they cease farming operations;


  (2) further notes that -


       (a)  cereal production in Zimbabwea has collapsed by 67% since
           President Mugabe began his reign of terror;


       (b)  about 6 million people in Zimbabwe are facing starvation,
           according to the International Red Cross/Red Crescent; and


       (c)  232 000 farmworkers will lose their jobs today if the farmers
           obey the government; and


  (3) therefore calls on President Mbeki to recognise that the disastrous
       conduct and irresponsible actions of the Mugabe regime risk
       undermining Nepad ahead of the G8 meeting in Canada.

[Applause.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, on a point of order: When the hon Mr Seremane
stood up, somebody sitting over there referred to him as ``baas boy''. I
would like to establish who that came from and may that hon member withdraw
that comment. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, order! Did anybody refer to the
hon Seremane as ``baas boy''? Please let us maintain particular decorum in
the House and not call each other names. It does disrupt the proceedings of
the House. Can we please observe the rules of the House.

Mr W J SEREMANE: Chairperson, I was reacting to the point of Order, but I
would not mind giving an invitation of a hot fierce debate to whoever said
that. I am quite willing to face them. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON: The hon Seremane, I think we have ruled and I think there
is agreement that we will observe the rules.
Prince N E ZULU: Chair, I give notice that I shall move on the next sitting
of Parliament:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with grief that 32 people died of suffocation in Northern
       Tanzania after an air compressor failed to oxygenate in one of the
       mine shafts;


  (2) notes with shock that recovering the bodies was a daunting task due
       to the lack of equipment to effect meaningful rescue operations;


  (3) condemns the slow pace at which technology and mine safety
       regulations were being developed in that part of the world; and


  (4) calls on Africa to take giant steps in formulating policies that
       guard against the loss of life and limbs.

Miss M N BUTHELEZI: Chairperson, I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  President Thabo Mbeki revealed on 16 June 2002 that a site has
           been set aside for a park to commemorate the country's cultural,
           natural and political history; and


       (b)  the Freedom Park will be built at Salvokop next to the
           Voortrekker Monument in Pretoria and will cost about R350
           million;


  (2) believes that this park will educate future generations about the
       history of South Africa and its people and will contribute positively
       to building one nation with diverse cultures; and


  (3) welcomes the launch of the Freedom Park, as it expresses the will of
       the government and the people of South Africa to build a united
       nation.

[Applause.]

Mr J SCHIPPERS: Chairperson, I hereby give notice on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with shock the brutal killing of five petrol attendants at a
       petrol station in Grassy Park last night;


  (2) further notes that it appears that these men have lost their lives
       for a mere R1 000;


  (3) expresses shock and outrage that human life has become so cheap in
       South Africa;


  (4) welcomes the fact that the Western Cape Minister of Community Safety,
       Mr Leonard Ramatlakane, already visited the scene this morning and
       said ``perpetrators of this massacre must be removed from the
       community''; and


  (5) calls on -


       (a)  petrol stations to ensure the safety of their petrol attendants,
           especially during the night; and


       (b)  the community to assist the police in the murder investigation.

[Applause.]

                        DEATH OF PIET (WESKUS) MARAIS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Me ANNELIZÉ VAN WYK: Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:


  Dat die Huis -
  (1) kennis neem -


       (a)  van die dood van Piet (Weskus) Marais, wat as openbare
           verteenwoordiger drie dekades lank sy land gedien het;


       (b)  dat wyle Piet Weskus, wesenlik 'n praktiese en verligte
           politikus, 'n stem in die wildernis was binne die Nasionale
           Party oor kleurkwessies, maar dat hy nietemin volhard het; en


       (c)  dat hy, ten spyte van vernedering aan die hand van NP-leiers van
           die tyd, alles in die stryd gewerp het om gesindhede oor
           kleurkwessies te help verander en uitgesproke was oor die
           apartheid-gebaseerde dubbeldorppatroon in veral die Wes-Kaap; en


     2) sy innigste simpatie en meegevoel met die Marais-gesin uitspreek met
        hul swaar en onherstelbare verlies, en dat God die Almagtige hul mag
        bystaan in hierdie tyd van beproewing.
(Translation of Afrikaans without motion follows.)

[Ms ANNELIZÉ VAN WYK: Chairperson, I move without notice.


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the death of Piet (Weskus) Marais, who served his country as
           public representative for three decades;


       (b)  that the late Piet Weskus, essentially a practical and
           ``verligte'' politician, was a voice calling in the wilderness
           within the National Party regarding colour questions, but that
           he nonetheless persevered; and


       (c)  that he, despite his humiliation at the hands of NP leaders of
           the time, did all he could to help change attitudes towards
           questions of colour, and was outspoken over the apartheid-based
           pattern of double towns in especially the Western Cape; and


  (2) expresses its sincerest sympathy and condolences to the Marais family
       at their great and irreparable loss, and that God Almighty may
       succour them in this time of trial.]

Agreed to.

  EXTENSION OF DATE FOR AD HOC COMMITTEE ON APPOINTMENT OF PUBLIC PROTECTOR

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Chairperson, on behalf of
the Chief Whip, I move the draft resolution printed in his name on the
Order Paper:


  That, notwithstanding the resolution adopted on 7 May 2002, the date by
  which the Ad Hoc Committee on Appointment of Public Protector must
  complete its task be extended from 21 June 2002 to 8 August 2002.

Agreed to.

      CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF TASK GROUP ON SEXUAL ABUSE OF CHILDREN

Mr E (Cassim) SALOOJEE: Mr Chairperson and hon members, all of South Africa
was shocked and outraged by the spate of child rapes that were reported in
our country towards the end of last year. We were, all of us, in agreement
that something had to be done very urgently to improve our ability to fight
this scourge. There were even very strong calls from organisations and
individuals in civil society that suggested that Government did not care
about children. Although there were, at that time, a number of highly
publicised cases that seized our attention, the reality is that sexual
abuse of children has been part of our lives for very many decades and it
is still occurring.

Nineteen thousand seven hundred and fifty-five cases of rape and attempted
rape of children under eighteen years were reported in 1996. The number of
cases reported in 2000 had increased to 21 438, while the number of cases
reported between January and September last year totalled almost 16 000.
Those who work with survivors of abuse on a daily basis suggest that these
statistics reflect only the tip of the iceberg. Therefore, we must
consistently act against sexual abuse of children through appropriate
measures and not only react when there is a public outcry about the abuse
of children.

The public hearings that were held by the parliamentary Task Group on
Sexual Abuse of Children in March were an important step in refocusing our
attention on what we, as a society, and particularly as Government, should
be doing to protect children from sexual abuse. The expectation arising
from the public hearings is that the task group will make substantial
recommendations to Government concerning the most critical areas of
legislation, policy and services aimed at protecting children.

Our findings and recommendations are before the members today. One of the
most important insights shared by many presenters is that sexual abuse
occurs across all socioeconomic communities. It happens in both city and
rural environments. We believe that there has been a considerable increase
in the reporting of abuse because of a greater awareness of human rights
and, in particular, children's rights over the last decade. We must
therefore caution against simplistic assumptions about the linear
relationship between poverty and abuse, as voices from some corners would
have us believe.

However, conditions of poverty and social disintegration make it more
difficult to protect children effectively. A mother may, for example, be
unable to report abuse because of her financial dependency on an abuser.
Or, a child might be more vulnerable to sexual abuse because his or her
family does not have access to childcare facilities while the parents are
at work. Our efforts at reducing children's vulnerability must therefore be
closely related to the broader developmental programmes of different
government departments.

We must have a clearly enunciated and integrated approach to sexual abuse
that is shared by all government departments and service providers. The
task group would therefore recommend that Government should develop a joint
understanding for interdepartmental co-operation in protecting our
children, and that this understanding should be spelt out in a national
strategy. We believe that such an approach must be tackled as a matter of
urgency, as it should underpin all our future efforts.

The intersectoral nature of the response required for the protection of
children cannot be overemphasised. Let me start with the social development
sector. The policies in the Department of Social Development very clearly
have a preventive rather than a curative thrust. However, we need to
reassess the manner in which preventive child and family welfare services
are funded, and how that affects our department's ability to provide
services such as early childhood development services, parenting skills,
support services and childcare services. Currently, professionals in
government services struggle to cope with the workload expected of them.
That leads to low morale and limits the scope of interventions.

We recognise the critical importance of the work of civil-society
organisations in providing large portions of child and family welfare
services. However, a number of these organisations have not moved
significantly in the direction of a developmental approach to their work. A
possible way to address this question is to increase government subsidies
so that these organisations would be able to attract appropriately skilled
professionals, or expand services into the preventive field. It is crucial
that we finalise and implement a clear financing policy for such
organisations because the work that is being done by the voluntary sector
is seriously affected by the current difficulties in regard to funding.

Another issue that arises is whether those organisations of civil society
that receive the bulk of government funding are effectively rooted in
communities. We believe that the sector should interrogate its own
commitment and progress with regard to real transformation and serving the
needs of a small minority, and to being responsive to the development needs
of the majority of our people.

The report before this House also makes a number of recommendations in
relation to legislation. I want to highlight some of those. We have
repeatedly pointed out that our legislation on children is inadequate. We
expect that the SA Law Commission will present a draft Bill to the
Department of Social Development by the end of June and that that historic
new legislation will speak to the needs of all our children.

We want the new legislation on children to define sexual abuse as a
particular form of abuse that requires a distinct response from Government.
An area of concern in our discussion has been whether the legislation
should contain positive obligations on government departments and service
providers. It has been argued that an important step towards ensuring an
integrated response from government agencies would be for new legislation
to be explicit on the basic basket of preventive and protective services
that Government needs to make available.

In relation to the question of reporting of abuse, we support the view that
the obligation to report abuse should be located only in the children's
law. We also believe that it would not be feasible for the legislation to
require all members of the public to report abuse, or be liable for
prosecution should they fail to do so. We recommend that the new
legislation should be clear about the responsibility of certain categories
of professionals to report abuse or suspected abuse and the question of
criminal liability in cases where someone in any of these categories does
not report abuse immediately.

In addition, the question of protecting the identity of a child survivor is
extremely important. In a number of cases highlighted in the press
recently, the identity of survivors has been repeatedly revealed. We must
ensure that our legislation is very clear and that members of the media are
not allowed, under any circumstances, to reveal a survivor's identity. The
provisions of the Criminal Procedure Act may need to be strengthened. But,
we believe that the children's statutes must also spell out the criminal
liability and heavy sentences that would be incurred, should this principle
be breached.

Allow me to reflect now on some of the responsibilities of other government
departments in protecting children. Research has suggested that about one-
third of all instances of sexual abuse occur within the school and that
makes the school a primary area of intervention. Policy and legislation in
the Department of Education make it possible, for example, for the SA
Council of Educators to bar any teacher from the profession should they be
found guilty of sexual abuse of a child, whether the child has consented or
not. We want to commend the council for having already taken steps to
deregister teachers found guilty of abuse. We urge the council to continue
to use this legislation effectively to ensure that we make a drastic impact
on abuse in the education system.

We welcome programmes by the Department of Safety and Security to roll out
facilities that are responsive to the needs of child survivors of sexual
abuse at police stations across the country. We would like to encourage the
department to continue to strengthen their programmes in this regard. In
addition, we will ask that the Department of Safety and Security ensures
that the specialised family-violence, child-protection and sexual-offences
units are adequately resourced and supported to ensure that they can
function optimally. We further urge the department to ensure that
disciplinary measures are taken against police officers who obstruct the
investigation of a sexual offence matter, either by ineffective police work
or corruption.

It is at the level of prosecuting perpetrators of abuse that very many
reports of secondary abuse of survivors are located. We want to recommend
that the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development, through the
National Directorate of Public Prosecutions, take measures that will
address the way that child survivors of sexual abuse are dealt with in the
courts. This includes speeding up the trial process, making use of child-
friendly interviewing rooms and recognising that children are vulnerable
witnesses who need special protection by the courts. It also includes
producing the best possible forensic evidence to support a child's
testimony. Here, we recommend that the Department of Health should fast-
track high-quality forensic training for medical personnel who are
responsible for dealing with survivors of sexual abuse.

The primary responsibility for protecting children and preventing abuse
lies with the family. There is a need to constantly reinforce awareness
among communities about the effects of abuse on children. But, it must be
reiterated that there is a need for a Government strategy that will spell
out a holistic approach to preventing sexual abuse of children, including
the roles and responsibilities of social workers, the police, medical
personnel, court officials and educators.

With a view to monitoring the extent to which the recommendations made in
this report are taken on board by the different departments, the task group
recommends that the portfolio committee and joint monitoring committees
that contributed to its work should report back to Parliament on these
matters before the end of the first session of Parliament, in 2003. We
trust that this will enable Government to take action where shortcomings
have been identified, and that we will be able to say that as a country,
within a year from now, in the interest of all our children, we have stood
up and acted. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, I want to make an appeal
that we should listen to this important debate. There are far too many
private meetings going on and the noise level is far too high. This is a
very important debate. I would like us all to pay attention.

Mrs S V KALYAN: Chairperson, seven cases of child abuse were reported in
September and October last year. These horrific crimes on little people
naturally sparked an outrage and resulted in Parliament setting up the task
team, among other things, to understand the nature of sexual violence,
highlight shortcomings in existing legislation that should protect children
and to understand the shortcomings in Government responses, as well as come
up with solutions.

Childline reported that, over the last 10 years, there has been a massive
increase in the number of reported cases of child sexual abuse. This is an
increase of up to 400%, and 50% of those children being seen by Childline
in KwaZulu-Natal are under the age of 7 years. According to the
Johannesburg Child Welfare Society, although concern and awareness has
escalated in the area of child abuse, services have deteriorated, with much
of the blame lying at the door of the Department of Social Development.

In fact, one presenter went so far as to say that the Department was
presently only doing traffic control, in that the child is merely routed
from one home to the other. Furthermore, due to high case loads, social
workers work more in reactive mode when the ugly deed has already been
done, as opposed to being able to implement preventive strategies. Many
organisations registered their concern that they do not enjoy a good
relationship with the state.

NGOs have a critical role to play in the awareness, prevention and
management of child abuse. Besides the Department of Social Development, no
other agencies make adequate funding available. One example is the
allocation of large amounts of money by the National Lottery Fund to sports
organisations. Yet another concern is that the NGO sector has no formal
representation on the national plan of action for children. The question to
ask is: Why?

The justice system also came in for some heavy criticism. The SAPS is
understaffed, but more importantly, undertrained to provide an effective
service to the sexually abused child. Poor collection of evidence and not
treating sexual abuse with the seriousness it deserves, results in only 9%
conviction rate. Given that there were 20 000 reported rape cases in 2001,
this record is nothing to be proud of. The task team heard of a 13-year-old
of who was raped by her uncle and became pregnant as a result, but had her
case dismissed on the grounds of lack of evidence. I ask hon members
whether a child carrying a child is not enough evidence. Unfortunately, the
present justice system, as it stands, is contributing to secondary abuse,
and the existing pre-trial conditions and processes are similar to a second
rape for that abused child.

There is concrete evidence to confirm a strong link between the possession
of child pornography and sexual abuse. In fact, 87% of rapists regularly
used pornography, and 57% actually copied or re-enacted pornographic scenes
when raping.

The present situation is that there are loopholes in the Film and
Publications Act, and South Africa does not have specialist police units to
deal with child pornography. The task team found that the incidence of
sexual abuse in South Africa is unacceptably high and acknowledges that
there is a distinct lack of co-ordination of services between the different
government agencies.

The present Child Care Act is failing children because it is silent on
sexual abuse and the specific responses and interventions required.
Furthermore, the abuser seems to have more rights than the abused child.
The task team is unanimous in its recommendations that national Government
has to fast-track legislation relating to the protection of children,
because at present, there is no single understanding of the seriousness of
sexual violence against children.

There is great merit in the call for a South African offenders Act and a
national register of sex offenders, provided that a limited group of
persons or professionals has access to the register and that the main role
or object is for monitoring purposes. In keeping with the theme of the
United Nations Special Assembly for Children held in May this year, let us
as South Africans also work towards making a world fit for children.

Children who have been abused are very sensitive to anger, and abuse is
known to affect the child's performance in school. Later in life, it can
lead to depression, anxiety, and even abusive and criminal behaviour. There
are many critical challenges which face us, and we have to have specific,
targeted interventions with the aim of rapid success. The National Strategy
on Child Abuse, Neglect and Exploitation should be completed as a matter of
urgency. Amendments to the Sexual Offences Act must be tabled as soon as
possible, and Government must give effect to the plan of action of the
World Congress Against Sexual Exploitation of Children.

The Department of Social Development and the Government have a duty to
declare every day a child-protection day, rather than one week a year. In
conclusion, I thank the task team who sat in on all the hearings, and a
special word of thanks goes to the researchers who worked into the late
hours to make this report a success. [Applause.]

Ms N M TSHEOLE:  Chairperson, allow me to thank Madams Speaker and Deputy
Speaker as well as this august House for today's debate.

It is ironical that one has to thank or be grateful for a debate on such an
unpleasant subject, the sexual abuse of children, an ill that is plaguing
our society. However, we have to be grateful only because of the
significant implications of this debate. Firstly, this debate signifies our
collective and joint acknowledgement that our nation has a problem which
requires special attention. I would like to thank Ms Kalyan on the way she
approached the debate, and I hope other members will follow suit.

Secondly, we are sending a message to our electorate of the commitment and
determination of this Parliament to fully exercise its oversight role and
further that this role extends beyond passing laws and monitoring oversight
but also involves some introspection and acknowledgement by Parliament that
nation-building involves more that laws. It involves the soul of a nation.

Gompieno ga se letsatsi la go supana ka menwana. Ke letsatsi la go kopanya
ditlhogo, go ikaga le go aga setshaba. Ke setse ke buile gore ke eletsa fa
re ka akanya re gopotse bana ba ba neng ba eme fa pele ga rona, jaaka
maloko a Task Team, ba lela e bile ba re neela maikutlo a bona le dipogiso
tsa bona. (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[Today is not a day to point fingers at each other. It is a day for
thinking, for building up ourselves and the nation. I have already said
that I wish we could think about the children who stood in front of us, as
members of the task team. They are crying, and they are revealing their
feelings and hardships.]

I hope that speakers who will follow, I hope hon member Dudley is
listening, are going to say whatever they are saying keeping this in mind
that the children who came to us to present their pain, drenching their
clothes in tears from the pain they had experienced will not get an
impression that we are using their grief and pain for point-scoring. I hope
that that is the approach that we are going to take. I hope we are going to
make an effort.

Re ya go tsaya matsapa a go phimola dikeledi tsa bona. Re se ka ra lwela go
ba gotlha marama re leka go ba bontsha gore rona re itse go phimola
dikeledi tsa bona go phala ba bangwe. Tla re tshwaraganeng ka matsogo.
(Translation of Tswana paragraph follows.)

[We are going to take pains in consoling them. We should not try to make
ourselves better than everyone else. Let us join hands.]

I would like to make an appeal to the whole House to hold hands to
symbolically show the nation that we are together in addressing this
problem. I was hoping that when I said this that members would extend their
hands to their neighbours to symbolically show the nation that we are
together, but members did not. But, I would like to thank those who did.

I know that rising above political differences for the good of the nation
is a challenge that requires bravery. I am appealing to us to rise above
our political differences when we address these issues. Let us not be
cowards.

A re se ke ra boela morago jaaka magatlapa. Gompieno re bua ka kgang e ka
Sepedi ba reng ke ``dipshesa mare''. [Let us not retreat like cowards.
Today we are talking about a topic which in Sepedi is said to be
disgusting.]
Usually, we rarely talk about child abuse. We know that it is only lately
that people started talking about it. It used to be hidden. It was never
talked of and that is why I am saying that we have to show bravery.

Re tshwanetse go nna bokgotlamaswe. [We should be some of those that touch
the mess.]

In Setswana bravery is shown by people who can go anywhere and touch a
mess. In talking about this issue, that is the message that we are sending
to the nation that we are not afraid to publicly talk about sexual abuse of
children. Re kgotla maswe gompieno. [Today we touch the mess.]

The task group has already heard from the chairperson regarding the process
that we went through in getting evidence from people regarding this. But,
most of the things were referred to the departments, and we also got
different departments coming to give evidence on the efforts they have
made. I will confine myself to Social Development and Health. They also
came and gave examples of pieces of legislation and programmes they have in
their departments. The truth is that as we have heard from hon Kalyan and
the chairperson, Mr Saloojee, most of the legislation and issues that are
there address the problem after it has occurred. That is the truth.

In the Health department, programmes that are there mainly deal with abuse
after it has happened. Even when we say that the evidence is not strong and
when we talk of forensic nursing, it is after the abuse has occurred.

With regard to Social Development, the chairperson has indicated that among
all the other issues, we find challenges like budgetary constraints. It is
almost a tradition that 90% of the Social Development budget goes to social
security and only 10% is for social services. There is no way in which that
10% of the budget could deal with this massive issue and prevent it. As a
result of this, policies that have been drafted, like family intervention
and other issues to identify vulnerable families, cannot be carried forth.
We find that 10% has to take care of everything. Therefore, despite
beautiful policies, like the White Paper on Social Development, the
programmes that are in place cannot be taken forth because of budgetary
constraints.

I know that when we are talking about such issues, it might be sensitive at
times. But as I said earlier, if we are going to address these issues we
have to be bokgotlamaswe. [We have to touch the mess.] We are going to do
introspection. We are appealing to the Department of Finance and hope that
the Committee on Finance will look into these issues when dealing with
budgetary matters, and in future know that an achievement does not only lie
in coming up with policies that we cannot implement.

The other issue that I would like to emphasise with regard to Social
Development and Health for intervention is basically with regard to the
issue of the regeneration of family units, to which the chairperson
referred. If we can look at families, we can come with laws and sentence
people to life imprisonment. But, all the things that we are doing come
when abuse has occurred. The appeal that we would like to make with regard
to issues that have been indicated by the task team is that as Government
we need to achieve intervention and preventive measures.

If we as Parliament can insist, as the chairperson indicated and as the
report recommends, that each portfolio committee that was represented in
the task team should later interact with the relevant department to ensure
that programmes are put into place. Let us ensure that whatever programmes
are implemented are not only going to be curative but there should also be
preventive programmes. In this way, we will be dealing with the
intervention and reduction of the sexual abuse of our children. Let us
ensure that we are going to follow the advice of the Secretary of the
United Nations, Dr Kofi Annan, when he indicated that achievements can be
made, and I quote:


  A child born in 1954 came into a world that had never even sent a
  satellite into space. In the year that the child turned 15, a man landed
  on the moon. A child born in 1964 came into a world where tens of
  millions of people were infected with smallpox. In the year that that
  child turned 15, smallpox had been officially eradicated.

He goes on quoting incidents. He further says, and I quote:


  If they could accomplish all these things within the spell of one
  childhood, how can we fail to do the same with the pledges that have been
  agreed to by all countries of the world.

But, in our case that have been agreed to by all of us from different
departments and portfolio committees. Let us not fail our children.
[Applause.]

Dr O S B BALOYI: Chairperson, hon members, I stand here in support of this
report. My colleagues will also outline the experiences that they gained
during the course of the hearings.

I wish to dedicate my talk to those brave children who trusted us enough to
share very painful moments in their lives with us. Their strength and
ability to share the greatest hurts that they had experienced in their
lives have assisted the task group to compile this report. We trust that
the members of this House will not only take ownership of the issues that
are raised in this report, as well as the recommendations made, but will
also strive to ensure that all the recommendations herein will be
implemented with the urgency required. We owe that to the children of the
country.

We also applaud the contribution made by all those who participated in the
hearings. The concern and commitment shown was immense. The standard of
presentation was also very good, even with the divergent views that were
expressed. All these things enhanced the task group's understanding of the
subject of the sexual abuse of children. The report summarised the findings
and recommendations according to the broad headings of: social development
services, education, health issues that are related to the sexual abuse of
children, the criminal justice system, international instruments for the
protection of children, commercial sexual exploitation and the media.

I will not attempt to cover all the things that are written in the document
which is tabled today. I will only touch upon a few areas. Violence against
children, worldwide, is on the increase. Sexual abuse occurs in all
communities, irrespective of socioeconomic status. There is no simplistic
linear relationship between poverty and abuse, although abject social
conditions, together with substance abuse, may contribute to the sexual
abuse of children.

The sociopolitical and economic history of South Africa has impacted
negatively on family and community life and resulted in a society
characterised by extreme forms of violence, of which sexual abuse is but
one. It was clear from the hearings that the developmental needs of
vulnerable communities have to be addressed holistically. The family unit
has broken down in many homes. Special attention and support must be given
to affected families. Communities must be strengthened and social cohesion
ensured by making neighbourhoods safe. Conditions of social deprivation
must be eliminated as they contribute to rendering children more vulnerable
to abuse. The responsibility for services to vulnerable children and their
families seems to be fragmented between the Presidency, the national
Department of Social Development, the provincial departments of social
development as well as the child protection agencies in the criminal
justice system.

The ill-defined co-ordination between the departments and the lack of clear
consensus on who is responsible for which services are matters of grave
concern. Of further concern is the lack of a clear and integrated strategy
for both preventive and protective interventions to ensure adequate
provision of the required services. Social workers have to deal with
extremely high case loads under often very difficult circumstances. They
tend to react to situations of abuse but are unable to implement preventive
strategies. In many instances, even their reactions amount to too little
too late.

It is of great concern to us that the morale among the social service
professionals is at a dangerously low level because of, among other things,
the low levels of remuneration in relation to their training and the volume
of work which is expected of them.

The task group is of the view that family preservation programmes,
parenting skills programmes, childcare programmes for single working
parents and programmes that focus on alcohol and substance abuse, if
provided in an integrated manner, could more effectively contribute to
addressing some of the conditions that make children more vulnerable to
abuse. For this to be successful, social workers, police officers and
medical personnel, among others, must agree on the nature of the services
to be provided and on who has the responsibility for which aspects of the
services. They must work closely with the communities.
Allow me to digress a bit and share with the members what I believe is a
challenge for us all. If the children are the clay that the adults, in
particular, and society, in general, can mould, the challenge then for us
is to address this question: What should go into moulding these children?
Our children watch us closely. They model themselves on what they observe -
our behaviour, values and attitudes. If we are hateful and violent, they
will become hateful and violent. If we are loving and caring, they will be
like us. One of our most important tasks is to teach our children values
and behaviours that will guide them to behave with love, kindness, faith
and hope, compassion and nonviolence, and make them value how to treat each
other with respect and dignity. That must begin with children in the infant
stage because babies, too, observe us very closely and understand far more
than we think.

It should be further accepted that Government alone is not in a position to
do all the work in this field. Social service organisations, especially
those that are working in underresourced areas, if well funded, may be very
effective. Other organisations which work with volunteers to assist social
workers must also have ongoing support to assist them in order to deal with
the issues of sexual abuse of children. The large disparities between the
provision of services in urban areas and those in rural areas must be
addressed.

We support the recommendation that all these programmes should be
adequately funded and that the attention of the national Treasury should be
sought to ensure that budgetary allocations to the departments allow for
the implementation of the relevant policy objectives.

The hearings allowed one to come to the conclusion that it is necessary to
understand the sexual abuse of children in its broader social context,
nature and magnitude, and to develop interventions for primary prevention
and the prevention of long-term consequences.

We would like to highlight the important role that needs to be played by
Parliament and its structures such as the committees and the departments
that are the backbone of this Parliament. Many useful recommendations have
been tabled in the report that is being discussed today. Each is to be
taken forward by the respective department and committee. It is imperative
that progress is monitored as to whether the recommendations have been
pursued after the adoption of this document. I need to share with the hon
members the concern that many documents, and very useful documents, are
tabled in this House but when one follows up on what needs to be done, one
finds that beautiful strategies are lying unused. We hope and trust that
that will not happen with this report.

The IFP supports the call by the task group that Parliament should be given
a progress report in the next six months by all affected departments or
committees. In other words, the document has attempted to outline in more
detail specifically which task team, which portfolio committee or which
department needs to address which issues. We trust that members will
acquaint themselves with the recommendations and act accordingly. Another
updated report can follow, maybe not later than in 12 months' time. But,
essentially, action must be taken.

The IFP unreservedly supports this report. [Applause.]

Mr S L DITHEBE: Chairperson, today I would like to dedicate my speech to my
daughters who are present in Parliament because every child is my child,
that is, through them.

The country's most vulnerable and innocent civilians, our children, have
been at the receiving end of brutal sexual assault by heartless and
ruthless criminal elements from both inside and outside their families.

The ANC has heard the cries of our country's beloved children in particular
and of their mothers in general. Therefore, we recommit and rededicate
ourselves to one of our basic pillars, as contained in the ANC's strategy
and tactics document, namely, and I quote:
  To deepen our democracy and culture of human rights and mobilise the
  people to take active part in changing their lives for the better.

We are heartened by the efforts of the Office on the Rights of the Child in
the Presidency; the National Plan of Action for Children as well as its
provincial structures, that is the provincial plans of action; NGOs, and
community-based organisations in combating the scourge of the sexual abuse
of children, which often goes with its twin sister, the sexual and physical
abuse of women.

At this hour in the history of our country, we say: ``Vukani makhosikazi.
Mosadi o tshwara thipa ka bohaleng, mme maatla ke a rona. [The Setswana-
speaking communities would say, and I quote:] Mabogo dinku a thebana.
Sedikwa ke ntswapedi ga se thata. [Unity is the power.]

To demonstrate our unflinching resolve to give child abusers no quota, the
toll-free Childline number, 08000 55555, must be inscribed in our hearts
and minds, and we must use it to inculcate a culture of zero-tolerance in
respect of incidents of child and woman abuse.

We are ranked amongst the leading countries in the world that have ratified
international instruments that protect the welfare and rights of children.
We have also attended, through our representatives in this Parliament, the
United Nations General Assembly session on children in May this year. Out
of that session, came the outcome document and our children, on 31 May this
year, had an opportunity to share its contents with the other children whom
they represented in New York.

A better Africa and a better world means that the New Partnership for
Africa's Development must succeed and world poverty must be halved by 2015
so that South Africa, Africa and the world can be fit for children. We dare
not fail them.

I would like to share with this House some of the incidents, not only on
our shores but elsewhere, where children are still being abused. I want to
refer to the story reported in the Economist of 1 June which states that,
in the US alone, 400 000 children are trafficked every year. Most of these
children are American whilst others come from countries such as Israel,
Russia and Asia as well, and that they are paid as much as $35 for these
dastardly acts by those who are masterminding trafficking in children.

I would like to say that I am heartened also by the spirit that has
characterised this debate because, as hon Ntshadi Tsheole said, so far,
there has been no finger-pointing, which demonstrates the agreement that
prevailed during the deliberations of the task group on the sexual abuse of
children. All of us were outraged and enraged by the deeds of those - be
they uncles, fathers or strangers - who have decided that children will
become their sex objects.

We must revitalise the core values of African culture, which has always
respected children. I would like to say that there are many fathers who
love and care for their children. It is not necessarily every father or
uncle that sees his child or niece as a sex object. We would like to call
on those fathers to continue to love and care for their children, and on
all of us to make our communities, villages and every corner of our country
a safe haven for our children because one can imagine what would happen if
incidents of sexual abuse of children went unreported and unpunished. All
that we would have is a very sick society, a society that would not produce
future leaders who would today be at the helm of leadership of such
institutions as our Parliament.

We have not lost any hope because, as I have said, our country is one of
the leading countries. Perhaps it is ironic that countries such as the
United States, which boasts a culture of human rights and also has some
very good legislation, such as that initiated by Senator Holdings dealing
with the trafficking of children and punishing those countries that were
doing so, has not ratified the UNCRH and yet South Africa, young democracy
as it is, is leading as one of those countries that has ratified it. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]
Mr C M MORKEL: Chairperson, I want to thank Madam Speaker and the
Chairperson of the NCOP in their absence for the seriousness with which
they have taken this matter and for putting it on the agenda of Parliament.
I also want to thank the members of the task group, especially Chairman
Saloojee, for the efforts that they put in and the spirit with which we
were able to make rapid progress on this report. It was a clear indication
that we are able to rise above petty party-political bickering and forge
consensus on issues of national importance such as this one.

I also wish to thank the committees section, the researchers and the public
participation unit of Parliament, as well as the media for all their
valiant efforts. Most of all, we need to thank the public for responding to
our call for submissions. The outpouring of the accounts of sexual abuse,
especially by the children, was in itself a clear indication that the
hearings were not simply just another talkshop, but that we were able to
move beyond theorising about faceless perpetrators and victims. The
children, as hon members heard earlier, spoke at the hearings.

With prematurely aged faces, many sobbing children shared some of their
most traumatic experiences and this reinforces the view that children must
be given the opportunity to share their experiences with Parliament,
government departments and with the judiciary more often  and in a far more
sensitive and specialised manner. The leaders of our nation just do not
listen to our children often enough. This is one of the worst forms of
paternalism and sexism. We must ensure that we listen to, and represent,
the interests of our nation's children.

I am of the view that the event of the public hearings is but only the
start of a comprehensive programme of action that will be part of the
healing process. The final report tabled before hon members today
sufficiently interrogates the overwhelming content of both oral and written
submissions in a comprehensive and analytical manner, focusing on the
clusters of government and the action that they should be taking.

It makes easy reading and all members must respond appropriately during the
forthcoming six months. At that time, as the committee has recommended,
Parliament should review the actions taken by the various parties. The
final report must result in a review of certain government policies and
programmes, and it has been suggested that this could best be driven by an
interministerial committee, as some submissions made would reflect, whose
political will must co-ordinate the urgent work of an interdepartmental
committee on the sexual abuse of children.

Secondly, all relevant legislation is to be reviewed, demanding the
undivided attention of Parliament over the next couple of months. This
includes the draft Child Justice Bill. Thirdly, the process of monitoring
and oversight by Parliament must also remain focused on the crisis until we
are satisfied that we have eliminated all the challenges that have been
presented to Parliament.
Out of this report, some of the key areas that emerge include a
consolidation of the sectoral research and the causes and effects of sexual
abuse on both victims and perpetrators; the need for a comprehensive and
action-orientated policy; programmatic and legislative review, and the need
for public awareness and participation in interventionist plans and
programmes of action.

Identified role-players must report back within the recommended period of
six months. We would need to reach constructive consensus on further
substantive issues of contention, which include the assertion that many
perpetrators have themselves been victims of sexual abuse as children; the
impact of censorship policies and the availability of pornographic
material; the impact of certain cultural myths and practices, including the
misconception that having sex with a virgin could prevent or cure HIV/Aids;
the need for a register of sexual offenders, as some members of Parliament
of both Houses are in favour of; the need for child-friendly trauma
counselling; the mandatory testing for exposure to HIV/Aids within and
beyond the incubation period of both victim and perpetrator, and the
precautionary administration of antiretrovirals within a 72-hour period of
being raped.

I would like to, once again, take this opportunity to say that our
challenge now is to sustain and expand the involvement of children in
Parliament's activities. We annually have the South African Youth
Parliament. SADC now also has a youth parliament. We need to localise those
activities into being more than just events.

We must act now to break this exponentially spreading virus that lurks deep
like a cancer, eating away at the soul of our nation, spreading from
perpetrators to victims, who themselves become perpetrators.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, may we have some order,
some good decorum and a little bit of Ubuntu so that the person who is
trying to communicate with you can do so.

Ms ANNELIZÉ VAN WYK: Chairperson, during last year, a number of incidents
of child rape and sexual abuse received high media coverage. It was the
rape of baby Tshepang that released emotions of outrage, shock and
condemnation throughout the South African community. The task team's
report, which flows from that, reads like a charge sheet against a system
failing the young and vulnerable. It is a charge sheet against an adult
community that not only fails its young but is also its biggest threat.

I would like to focus on the role that the criminal justice system plays
and the contribution that it can make in improving what is clearly an
intolerable situation. Through the public hearings, a clear picture started
developing, one of utter frustration and discouragement: stories of how
police personnel refused to open a case because the accused is a respected
member of the community and, in the mind of the police, will not commit
such a crime; child survivors being kept in the same area as the accused;
child survivors not seeing a district surgeon for as long as 24 hours;
cases finalised as long as 18 months to two years after they were opened,
resulting in young survivors forgetting details; witnesses moving and cases
being withdrawn.

More often than not, the criminal justice system results in secondary abuse
to the survivors of sexual abuse cases. The discrepancy between the number
of actual reported cases of abuse and conviction statistics for rape and
sexual offences suggests that the majority of reported cases are not
successfully prosecuted. The blame for this should be carried by all role-
players within the criminal justice system, and improvement will only be
reached if every sector of the criminal justice system seriously accepts
its responsibility in bringing about improved services.

As lawmakers, we cannot accept and should not tolerate when those who are
responsible for the implementation of legislation passed by this House make
public pronouncements stating that it is not possible to police such
legislation. This is particularly true where the said legislation was
intended to protect the vulnerable such as women and children. We cannot be
serious about defending our children when the Commissioner of Police
publicly states that it is impossible for the SAPS to police the Domestic
Violence Act.

On the contrary, members of the Portfolio Committee for Safety and Security
were informed by the Institute for Security Studies that it was not only
possible to implement the Act but absolutely necessary to police it. This
we should expect from every sector involved in the criminal justice system.
It is very often these early warning signs that can alert us to a serious
problem. They can also lead to prevention. If this House is serious about
putting an end to this intolerable situation, it must communicate its
commitment by strongly and in no uncertain manner, communicating that it
will not accept these kind of statements and attitudes from senior
officials.

I associate myself with every recommendation made in this report. The
question that comes to mind is: What happens now? From the UDM's side, we
would like to urge that the ownership of this report be taken by,
preferably, the Speaker of the House, as the presiding officer.

The report places a number of reponsibilities on a number of departments
and committees of this House. It will only become more than mere words on
paper if it is actually followed up and through. The UDM will go further
and suggests that, within a year's time, the task team or similar body for
that purpose be asked to evaluate progress made regarding the
recommendations published in this report. We know and accept that ownership
of this report is needed in order to effect positive change.
Every incident of sexual abuse against a child is one too many. It shames
us as a nation and as a people. We cannot claim that the youth is our
future but then create an environment that is hostile to their immediate
circumstances. I plead that we should distribute this report as widely as
possible to each and every role-player, whether they participated or not,
so that it becomes public knowledge what we expect from the system that
should provide protection. This expectation should be a general one and
should become a reality.

The fact that many organisations participated in this process is a clear
indication that South Africans are ready to rid society of these disgusting
actions. The UDM would like to express its appreciation for the
participation by civil society. We would also like to commend the children
who participated, many of whom were survivors themselves, pleading the
cases of their peer group.

I would also like to commend the chairperson for the manner in which he
conducted the process and the committed work of the researchers without
which the final report would have been impossible. Their action indicates
the manner in which we should approach the matter further.

Let us channel our disgust, outrage and condemnation into positive energy
aimed at ridding our society of these animal-like perpetrators. [Applause.]

Ms M M SOTYU: Mhlalingaphambili, mandiqale ngokubonakalisa imbeko kumalungu
onke eNdlu yoWiso-mthetho, kuluntu ngokubanzi nakuMphathiswa wezoKhuselo
noKhuseleko, ongene ezihlangwini zikaQabane uSteve Tshwete. SiyiKomiti
yoKhuselo noKhuseleko sithi KuMphathiswa: ``Ungene walingana twatse
ezihlangwini zikaThangana.'' (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[Ms M M SOTYU: Let me show respect by first begin by greeting the hon
members of the House, the general public and the hon the Minister of Safety
and Security, who has replaced comrade Steve Tshwete. We, as the Portfolio
Committee on Safety and Security say to the hon Minister: You are suitable
for the place of Thangana (Mr Tshwete's clan name).]

Modulasetulo, ke tla bua jwaloka mme, eo ka tsatsi le leng a ileng a pepa,
a ba le bana, haholo bana ba basetsana. [Chairperson, I will speak here as
a mother who once gave birth to children, especially female children.]

Sexual abuse and violence against children is a gross violation of human
rights. According to the latest information, police have handled almost 16
cases of child rape for children of 17 years and under, between January and
September 2001. There is a grave concern about the manner in which some SA
Police Service members handle cases of sexual abuse. Poor police response
and lack of proper investigation of such cases is also of serious concern.
For example, there is the case of baby Tshepang, where, in some instances,
the capability of some of the police is questioned.

During the public hearings, many concerns were raised. Some concerns,
amongst others, were the poor police response to sexual abuse of teenagers
who are being abused by their boyfriends. Such cases are disregarded, as
the girl is considered to be sexually active anyway. Also, when a
relationship exists between the victim and the perpetrator, there is always
a tendency to withdraw cases by the relatives. This makes the work of the
police very difficult. Let us not corrupt our police by bribing them in
order for them to destroy sexual abuse case dockets.

Ke rata hore, haholoholo ke bue le bomme mahaeng mane. Ha re tloheleng ho
sireletsa bomabeta ba bana ba rona, haholoholo bana ba rona ba
bashemanyana, ditsotsi tse betang masea a rona. O kile wa utlwa kae Malome
a beta Motjhana wa lesea le kgwedi tse leshome? (Translation of Sotho
paragraph follows.)

[Particularly, I'd like to talk to mothers back at home. I'd like to say to
them: Shall we please stop protecting our children's rapists, who are in
most cases our own male children who have become criminals that are raping
our babies. Have you ever heard of a situation where an uncle has raped his
ten-month-old niece?]

Indoda yomXhosa yathi ngenye imini: ``Mayiqalekiswe imini ekwathi ngayo xa
inkosikazi yasikwa yinimba yabeleka usana oludlwengulwayo namhlanje. [A
Xhosa man once said: ``Let the day on which the woman bore the child that
is being raped today be cursed.'']
Ekaba setjhaba sa heso, e fetohile tlhapa na thoriso ya Mosotho ha a re
`Mma ngwana o tshwara thipa ka bohaleng'? Re kopa setjhaba se sebedisane le
sepolesa sa rona, ho lwantshana le motabo maseaneng a rona. Setjhaba ke
sona leihlo la mmuso wa rona. Ha re beng karolo ya diCPF ka hara motse,
bomabeta re ba tlalehe sepoleseng. Mmuso wa rona o lekile ka tsela tse
ngata, ho tlisa melawana e sireletsang tlhekefetso ya bana le bomme. Jwale
ho ho rona ho re re phethise seo, ho thusana le mmuso wa rona. (Translation
of Sotho paragraph follows.)

[I wonder if the ever-popular Sotho traditional praise that says: ``Mma
ngwana o tshwara thipa ka bohaleng'', ie no matter how difficult or
dangerous the situation might be, a child's mother will always be by his or
her side, has since turned into an insult. Has it?

We appeal to the community to work hand in hand with the police in order to
protect our children against rape. The community is the eye through which
our Government can be enabled to identify this crime. Let us be part of the
CPFs within our communities and report these rapists to the police. Our
Government has tried in many ways to implement laws that are protecting
women and children from being harassed. It is therefore up to us to put
those laws into meaningful practice, to help our Government to protect us.]

Abazali mabadlale indima yabo nabo. Akukho nto ixabiseke ngaphezu kwempilo
yabantwana bethu, kuba isizwe esinabantwana abangaphilanga, abanesingqala,
asisosizwe siza kuphathwa kakuhle ngomso. Umzali ofunyaniswe engenankathalo
kusapho lwakhe ngokuthi avumele ukuxhatshazwa kwabantwana ngesondo, asuke
athi: ``Ngumcimbi wasekhaya'', naye makakhalelwe ziintsimbi. (Translation
of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[Parents should play their role as well. There is nothing that is as
important as the life of our children, because a nation with sick children
will not have good leaders in the future. A woman that has been found
guilty of neglecting her family by allowing sexual abuse of children and
who would say: ``It is family matter'', should be imprisoned.]

Waar het iemand al gehoor van 'n man of pa wat van sy vrou se warm bed
opstaan en in 'n agtjarige seuntjie se bed klim en sy eie kind verkrag? Dit
is 'n skande. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Where did anybody hear of a husband or father that gets up from his wife's
warm bed and gets into an eight-year-old boy's bed to rape his own child.
It is a disgrace.]

In conclusion, I would also like to commend all those police, women and men
in blue, for their endeavours to eradicate crime in our society.

Ha re sireletseng bana ba rona, batswadi. [We as parents must protect our
children, it is our obligation.]

Masikhuseleni abantwana bethu, sincedisane noRhulumente kwiinzame azenzayo.
Masiyeke ukuthi singoomama sikhusele imitshato yethu ngokuthi sithengise
ngabantwana bethu. Abantwana baxabiseke kakhulu ukuba singathenga uthando
ngabo. [Kwaqhwatywa.] Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[Let us protect our children and assist the Government in its efforts. As
women we should stop protecting our marriages at the expense of our
children. Children are too valuable for us to think that we can use them to
buy love. [Applause.]]

Ms C DUDLEY: Chairperson, hon members, working with the task group,
although time-consuming, was a privilege and, I hope, a worthwhile
opportunity. I would like to thank the hon Mr Saloojee, the small group of
members who actually committed to the process and the support staff who did
an excellent job.

Many important recommendations have been made and relevant portfolio
committees will be expected to oversee the progress with regard to
implementation. I was impressed by the task group's discipline in
tolerating suggestions that challenged party positions, even though,
ultimately, issues that cut across Government policy had to be rejected.
The task group at least appeared to consider their relevance.

Recommendations focusing on the criminal justice system are particularly
encouraging in light of our experiences as a party, working with rape and
abuse victims in communities. A major concern, however, is whether
recommendations will result in much-needed trained counsellors being placed
at police charge desks, as it is critical for Aids-trained and sympathetic
counsellors to be at the point of rescue, where a case is made or
destroyed.

The ACDP's head of its social action desk in KwaZulu-Natal, Jackie
Branfield, has successfully introduced Bobby Bear into many police
stations. This very special bear has multiple tasks but, most importantly,
a counsellor, with the help of Bobby Bear, can have the forensic evidence
necessary for a conviction in the case of child rape within 10 minutes. We
have, to date, only lost two cases out of almost 100 where Bobby has been
used. We recommend this approach and hope departments will promote this
project, which accurately addresses the needs.

Childline is at present not able, or geared, to meet the needs for
counselling and protecting abused children. Additional resources must be
found.

I am also pleased to see the task group did not ignore alcohol, adult
pornography or life skills. Although these subjects made them decidedly
uncomfortable, they dared to make minor recommendations. They even
recommended that legislation dealing with conditions of bail be amended to
include the rape of boys under 16 and that sexual relations with a male
under the age of 16 years be criminalised as statutory rape. I was
astounded and impressed.

When it came to discussions around statutory rape in general, however,
members got extremely agitated. I reminded the task group that statutory
rape is not being reported by TOP or abortion facilities, and that because
there is no limit on the age of children who can access these facilities
without parental consent or knowledge, abusers are able to send children to
TOP facilities for abortions and contraception so that the abuse can
continue without consequences for themselves.

The task group refused to comment in the report on the reporting of
statutory rape. They said it would impact on access to abortion, which they
pointed out is legal and, as far as the task team is concerned,
untouchable. They refused to consider an age restriction for children
accessing abortion clinics without parental consent or knowledge and were
not concerned that children as young as 11 years are confidentially
aborting babies and receiving contraception, so that the abuse can
continue. In fact, certain members did not feel statutory rape was rape at
all.

Trafficking was another touchy issue. Strangely enough, the members
seriously doubted reports that trafficking was taking place in South
Africa. They were skeptical about Molo Songololo's report, which stated:
South Africa's child sex industry is one of the fastest growing and most
lucrative criminal enterprises in the world, with estimated profits of
about $12 billion; economically desperate and sometimes abusive parents
sell children as young as four to local and foreign syndicates, who force
them into the sex trade. There are 38 000 child prostitutes in South Africa
and Cape Town is fast becoming the world's top sex tourism destination.
Welfare organisations fear that the country may emerge as a safe haven for
sex tourism.

These fears are not unfounded, considering the ANC, DP and New NP's support
for sex tourism, as witnessed when they collectively blocked ACDP proposals
against sex tourism in the Cape Town unicity last year. The June 2002
official US government ``Trafficking in Persons Report'' listed South
Africa as a destination and transit country and reported that women were
trafficked internally. The report said traffickers advertise in local
newspapers, offering good jobs at high pay in exciting cities. They also
use fraudulent employment, travel, modelling and matchmaking agencies to
lure young men and women. In local villages, they pose as a friend of a
friend and mislead parents into believing that their children will be
taught useful skills or a trade, or that they will marry their daughters.
Sometimes children are abducted or kidnapped.

Children are inherently valuable as human beings, because they are made in
God's image. In South Africa, the value of children is measured by whether
or not they are wanted. Abortion is the ultimate child abuse, and by
allowing, and even promoting, the termination of unborn children as a
woman's right, the protective role society should play towards little ones
is undermined.

Government is making a lot of noise about moral regeneration and even
appeals to churches to help, but consistently undermines any efforts with
subversive legislation and policies. Unfortunately, the usefulness of this
report will also be limited if only politically acceptable solutions are
contemplated: Discipline, for example, is taboo for children, and criminals
have more rights than law-abiding citizens.

The report refers to children as ``our most valuable resource for the
future of our country'' and Government has put our future into the hands of
organisations like Love Life and Planned Parenthood, who are proudly
antifamily, proabortion, prolicentious sex and deviant lifestyles. They are
committed to promoting oral sex as positive behaviour for children and
youth, regardless of the risks.

Expecting children to have sex and seducing them with licentious talk
entraps them, and it is an insult to those children who are committed to
abstinence. Government itself has been seduced by Love Life and Planned
Parenthood, who have become untouchable.

Adult pornography is an additional story. [Time expired.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson, hon members, apart from being Members of
Parliament, we are adults, but above all, most of us are parents. As
elected representatives, our business is to minister to the needs of our
constituents across all social, racial, gender, age and other divides. The
future of any country depends on the investment it makes regarding its
children. Children brought up without love will never love. Children
brought up with fear will be fearful all their lives. Children brought up
in abusive circumstances will grow up to be abusive.

Contrary to what has been said about apartheid, and without apologising for
apartheid, there is no empirical correlation between incidents of child
abuse and race. Child abuse is as prevalent among whites as it is among
blacks, in Africa as it is across the seas and among the educated as it is
among the unschooled.

The multisectoral task team of Parliament, whose report we are considering,
came to the conclusion that, among others, there are deficiencies in
legislation that seeks to empower those who are charged with the
maintenance of law and order. The establishment of the new family-violence,
child-protection and sexual-offences units are most welcome. Our plea,
however, is that they should not serve only as job stations, but that they
will consist of people who will work hard to eradicate this scourge called
child abuse. Laws are there to be implemented. The aforementioned examples
have to be set when perpetrators are arrested.

On Youth Day, 16 June, the Kids Alive Foundation, a nongovernmental
foundation in Soweto, staged a long walk to Durban in an effort to educate
young people about child abuse. They visited schools and held discussions
along their long haul. These are the kind of efforts that we expect. Gone
are the days when people could speak from a moral high ground, but do
nothing. I would like to convey our thanks to Mr Martin, the leader of the
group, for this initiative.

How many children have been burnt to death, because their mothers have left
them locked in a hut, or shack, to fetch water nearby? How many have been
run over by cars, because they were sent to buy liquor or cigarettes? Such
errands are abuse of the first order and must be discouraged. Socioeconomic
depression is not a licence to abdicate parenthood. It is in such trying
times that parents have to show that they are made of sterner stuff. Adults
have a responsibility, and they have to exercise this responsibly. No child
should be reduced to servitude, be it at home, school or any place in
society.

We, in the UCDP, fully support the adoption of the report, but go on to
challenge parents and adults to be just that: Parents and grown-ups, and
not grown-up or adult children.

Mnr D V BLOEM: Voorsitter, agb lede, ek dink in my vorige toespraak in
dieselfde debat het ek alreeds die standpunt baie duidelik gestel. Ek wil
vandag net opvolgwerk doen.

Ons glo die verantwoordelikheid vir jeugmisdadigers rus op die Departemente
van Korrektiewe Dienste, Justisie, Gesondheid, Onderwys en Welsyn. Ons glo
dat dit die verantwoordelikheid van die Departement van Korrektiewe Dienste
is om kinders wat gevonnis is in veilige bewaring te hou. Die
verantwoordelikheid van die Departement van Welsyn is om om te sien na die
welstand van alle verhoorafwagtendes, beide jeugdiges en ander gevangenes.
So ook moet die Departement van Gesondheid omsien na gesondheid in tronke.
Die Departement van Onderwys moet toesien dat daar 'n onderwysplan en
-program vir jeugdiges in tronke is, sodat hulle die nodige onderrig kan
kry om hulle voor te berei vir die samelewing daar buite.

Die Departement van Justisie is verantwoordelik vir die kind se beweging
deur die justisiestelsel. Die probleem met al hierdie departemente is dat
daar geen kollektiewe samewerking ten opsigte van verantwoordelikheid is
nie, gevolglik raak die kind verlore in die stelsel.

Gevangeniskap van jong oortreders tesame met geharde volwasse gevangenes
verwek weer geharde jeugdige gevangenes. Baie jong oortreders raak
agterdogtig oor die justisiestelsel en gradueer in 'n lewenstyl van
oortreding. Dit verminder die waarskynlikheid van die jeugdige om
gerehabiliteer te word en om 'n verantwoordelike jongmens te word.

Die staat bestee tans omtrent R675 miljoen aan kinders wat gebots het met
die gereg. Die getal jeugoortreders verhoog daagliks. Hoewel ons weet dat
daar kinders is wat baie ernstige misdade gepleeg het, is daar diegene wat
minder ernstige misdade gepleeg het. Hulle hoort glad nie in die gevangenis
nie. Die afgelope week het ons gesien hoe grootskaalse korrupsie in die
Grootvlei Gevangenis in Bloemfontein oopgevlek is. Belangriker is dat
gesien is hoe jeugdige oortreders vir seks binne die gevangenis verkoop
word. Dit is kommerwekkend.

Gevangenes het beëdigde verklarings afgelê wat daarop dui dat beamptes die
verhoorafwagtendes uit hul onderskeie seksie gaan haal, en hulle dan aan
die ouer geharde gevangenes vir seks verkoop. Ons erken dat omstandighede
in ons oorvol tronke 'n aantal uitdagings vir die Departement van
Korrektiewe Dienste inhou. Die tekort aan personeel en lae moraal, wat
gepaard gaan met lae lone, skep 'n broeiplek vir korrupsie. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, hon members, I think I already stated the
position very clearly in my previous speech in the same debate. Today I
would just like to do follow-up work.

We believe that the responsibility for juvenile offenders rests with the
Departments of Correctional Services, Justice, Health, Education and
Welfare. We believe that it is the responsibility of the Department of
Correctional Services to keep children who have been sentenced in safe
custody. The responsibility of the Department of Welfare is to see to the
welfare of all awaiting trial, both juveniles and other prisoners. In the
same way, the Department of Health must see to health in prisons. The
Department of Education must see to it that there is an educational plan
and programme for juveniles in prison, so that they can receive the
necessary tuition to prepare them for society outside.

The Department of Justice is responsible for the child's movement through
the justice system. The problem with all these departments is that there is
no collective co-operation with regard to responsibility, and consequently
the child is lost in the system.

The imprisonment of young offenders with hardened adult prisoners in turn
breeds hardened juvenile prisoners. Many young offenders become suspicious
of the justice system and graduate to a lifestyle of crime. This reduces
the probability of the youth being rehabilitated and becoming a responsible
young adult.

The state is currently spending approximately R675 million on children who
have clashed with the law. The number of juvenile offenders is rising
daily. Although we know that there are children who have committed very
serious crimes, there are those who have committed less serious crimes.
They do not belong in prison at all. During the past week we have seen
large-scale corruption exposed at the Grootvlei Prison in Bloemfontein.
More importantly, we saw how juvenile offenders are sold for sex in prison.
This is worrying.

Prisoners have made sworn statements which indicate that officials fetch
those awaiting trial from their respective sections, and then sell them to
the older, hardened prisoners for sex. We concede that conditions in our
overcrowded prisons present a number of challenges for the Department of
Correctional Services. The shortage of staff and low morale, which are
coupled with low wages, create a breeding ground for corruption.]

We also recognise the efforts of our Minister, Mr Ben Skosana, in taking
strong action against corruption in our prisons. In consultation with our
President, the Minister appointed the Jali Commission of Inquiry. The
purpose of the Jali Commission, which is to root out corruption in South
Africa's prisons, is important for the transformation of our justice
system.
We commend the Minister and the Commissioner for their commitment to good
governance. We commend their integrity in suspending the 22 warders found
culpable of wrongdoing, but more importantly, we commend those individuals
who were brave and courageous enough to come forward to the Jali Commission
and expose corruption.

With the positive steps taken against corrupt warders, we also need to move
in a positive direction to address youth justice. Our Constitution outlines
the rights of children, and also outlines the fact that child prisoners
should be specifically protected and should receive specific treatment.

In terms of the Correctional Services Act, Act 111 of 1998, child prisoners
are to receive compulsory education and have access to educational
programmes. The Commissioner also has the obligation to provide every child
prisoner with social work services, religious care, recreational programmes
and psychological services.

Educational programmes should be made compulsory. It should be made clear
that young offenders do not have an option whether or not to attend
educational classes. Although these basic services are to be provided by
the department, we still need a comprehensive policy guide regarding the
imprisonment of young offenders. The draft Child Justice Bill proposes that
children who have committed less serious offences should be diverted to
other means of sentencing.

This is based on restorative justice principles, which place emphasis on
reconciliation and restitution, rather than punishment and retribution.
According to the Freedom Charter, which was adopted in 1955, no punishment
must be meted out against anybody who has committed a petty crime,
especially children. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Chairperson, we are a sick nation: a nation that abuses its
women, the aged and its children. We are a nation that must confess its
wickedness and sins in order to receive redemption and healing.

We have one of the best constitutions in the world, with an impeccable
Charter of Human Rights. The real problem is that documents or declarations
alone cannot save people. The real problem is that we have rights without
responsibilities. Remember the story of Adam, Eve and the snake. Adam said:
`` I did not eat the fruit, it is the woman who said I should eat it.'' The
woman, Eve, said: `` It is the snake.'' We must condemn the abuse of women
and children, and not accept any excuses. Those who are guilty of these
offences must be roundly condemned and severely punished.

Poverty is a contributory factor. We must tackle poverty head-on. Living
conditions and houses that have no privacy, like vesi-nyawu houses, bring
about moral degradation. It also affects the victims who may be bribed into
abuse.

Cultural factors also need to be taken into account. The breakdown of
society and its cultural norms make it completely vulnerable. People with a
sense of pride suddenly become nobodies. People are forced to go to work,
and they leave their children without adequate care. The ``grandmother
factor'' in African society is a case in point. If parents have to work, we
must build structures or institutions in which grandparents can play an
important role in looking after children.

Religious institutions should be made to play an important role in creating
centres or cells for care. These can be broken down to street centres so
that peace havens can be established where children can be looked after.
The most difficult cases are those that happen inside homes where no
external observation post can penetrate. These cases need spiritual
treatment.

One can install a guard to watch over a situation, but the classical
question is: Who guards the guard? Here we fall back on the need for moral
regeneration. The Grootvlei Prison episode is our most recent example.
Moral degeneration knows no boundaries. Moral degeneration is a slow death.
A nation that is dying cannot save itself alone. It needs a saviour - a
powerful living God. Amen. [Applause.]

Hon MEMBERS: Amen.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Amen.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the issue of sexual abuse of children is
horrific, traumatic, unacceptable, demoralising, disgusting, intolerable,
and I can go on and on. In earlier days, the issue of child abuse was often
hushed and it was preferred that it be swept away under the carpet due to
fear of bringing shame to the family name. The change today, in the
recognition of child abuse as a something that is criminally wrong, is
liberating in the sense that perpetrators of this horrific crime can no
longer get away with it.

Child molestation crosses all socioeconomic levels. Unfortunately, sexual
offenders come in all shapes and sizes, making it hard for them to be
identified prior to abuse. What is even more devastating is that the victim
often knows the offender. So, who should they trust?

We cannot demarcate areas of offence within our constituencies, for
instance, in Chatsworth and Phoenix. It is sad and horrific to note the
statistics of child abuse, amongst all other forms of abuse. There is no
level or area, throughout South Africa, that has not been tainted by these
horrific incidents. It affects, for example, family, relatives, friends,
teachers, religious teachers, victims and offenders.

The MF strongly voices its support of the Task Group on Sexual Abuse of
Children. It is certainly inspiring to note the different participants who
were involved in compiling this report. We note the contributions that were
made by so many interesting and caring participants. It is encouraging that
the community is determined to put a stop to the sexual abusers of
children.

The MF expresses its support for the manner in which the task group has
compiled the report and for the participation that it invited. Members know
the importance of the participation of different bodies and persons. They
would, certainly, serve to contribute to establishing a firmer hold on the
situation and would come up with a greater defence against child sexual
molestation.

The MF supports the approach that has been suggested by the task group. The
need for clarity in policy concerning child abuse is also supported with
good reason. The strengthening of Government and civil society relations is
the key in the fight against abuse. Further, the provisions to inculcate
awareness programmes and training in prevention and legal rights, in view
of the sexual abuse of children, are strongly supported by the MF. Let us
all, today, send a message to those who commit this terrible and sinful
crime and say: Please, for our innocent children's sake, stop this terrible
crime.

The MF salutes all those who are involved in the fight against the sexual
abuse of children. Members should remember the saying: Your child is my
child, my child is your child.
Ingane yakho iyingane yami, nengane yami iyingane yakho. [Ihlombe.] [Your
child is mine and mine is yours. [Applause.]]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Chairperson, in a report which was compiled by the SA
Human Rights Commission and dated April 2002, the following is reported,
and I quote:


  On the whole, sexually abused children's experience with the criminal
  justice system compounds their trauma. An ineffective system also means
  that the sexual abuse of children continues unabated and that Government
  is failing to live up to its commitments, in terms of the Constitution
  and other international human rights instruments.

What this quotation conveys is that the future of our children does not
only lie in the many laws that we continue to legislate; the safety and
good health of our children does not only depend on the many discussions
and conferences that we hold to discuss this issue.
The evidence that we now have at our disposal points clearly to the fact
that our criminal justice system needs a little bit of a shake-up. It is,
indeed, now the time to act and implement, very firmly, the various
instruments that are at our disposal. If our laws are wanting, it is our
duty to draft new legislation. Our preoccupation should now be geared at
addressing the permanent trauma that our children go through. When we do
that, we should bear in mind that policies and programmes, by themselves,
do not mean anything. Azapo believes that we, the adults in society, should
bear the responsibility for the future of our children.

Many reports that deal with the issue of child abuse have, without
exception, identified possible enemies of children. Men, in particular, are
singled out for the role they play in cases of sexual abuse. Women have
also contributed their share to a lesser degree. Societal conditions of
existence have also contributed their share, particularly in areas of acute
deprivation. We therefore need a holistic strategy that deals with enemies
of children and addresses other positive factors in our society.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, some of you are
still conversing a little too loudly. If you will, please allow for the
speaker at the podium to be heard.

Prof S M MAYATULA: Chairperson, allow me to quote from some of the
presentations made before the public committee.

The Aids Orphans Community Programme identified the breakdown of the family
unit as one of the causes of sexual abuse of children, which breakdown
takes many forms. As parents, some of us are too busy doing other things to
have time to be with our kids.

The Southern African Catholic Bishops' Conference identified, and I quote,
``moral breakdown in society'' as one of the causes of this problem. As a
result, the most vulnerable in society fall victim to those people who have
lost their moral bearings.

The Domestic Violence Helpline in Durban said, and I quote:


  .... increase in the number of younger females between the ages of two
  and five years who are victims of sexual abuse. In more than 60% of the
  cases, the perpetrators are fathers or stepfathers.

If the perpetrators are fathers and stepfathers, who is going to protect
these kids? I think the Department of Education does have a role to play in
this regard, and that is the angle from which I am going to come.

A number of organisations made different observations. One of them proposed
that the Department of Education should be encouraged to include in its
life-skills education programme the teaching of human rights, impulse
management and responsible sexual behaviour. These skills should be taught
to all learners.

Another presenter said that educators who are perpetrators should not be
granted bail and should not be allowed to teach again. It was also proposed
that there should be a code of conduct that prohibits sexual harassment and
sexual relations between educators and learners; that there should be an
implementation of compulsory sex education for teachers and learners at all
levels; that schools at all levels should be targeted for an awareness
campaign in order to inform and educate children about sexual abuse; and
that social workers should address learners during guidance periods as part
of the school curriculum.

The hon Kalyan referred to the problem of monies being given to sporting
bodies, and I would like to put that in context. Although we do need to
give more money to organisations that are involved in this area, I do not
think that it would be fair to take money out of sport, because sport does
play a very important role, especially as far as the youth are concerned.
It is the youth who are not involved in anything who become involved in
drugs, sexual abuse and other things. By funding those programmes, we are
diverting those kids from such things and directing them to a better life.

What is the Department of Education doing? When it came before the
committee, it reported, among other things, on the Safe Schools Project,
which was launched in 1999 in order to create a safe and disciplined
learning environment that celebrates innocence and values human dignity. In
2000, a module on Managing Sexual Harassment and Gender-based Violence was
developed for schools. It provides schools with the knowledge and skills
needed to deal with the different facets of sexual harassment.

The department, together with the SA Police Service, completed a workbook
on Signposts to Safe Schools in 2001. A teacher's manual on gender equity
in education has been developed to ensure that schools become friendly to
girl learners. The focus of the Life Orientation programme within
Curriculum 2005 is intended to develop the skills, knowledge, values and
attitudes that are essential for participation in a democratic society. The
department launched a self-defence programme in 2002 to empower girls to
extricate themselves from difficult situations.

On the legislation front, the amendment to the Employment of Educators Act,
which was introduced in 2002 should enable education authorities to combat
abuse in schools. The amendment provides for the dismissal of a teacher who
has been found guilty of engaging in a sexual relationship with a learner,
with or without the consent of such a learner.

In addition, the SA Council for Educators Act allows for the deregistration
of a teacher who has been found guilty of sexual abuse of a learner and
prohibits him or her from ever being appointed as a teacher again. To date,
Sace has compiled a Code of Ethics for Teachers and has already
deregistered a number of teachers. The Manifesto on Values, Education and
Democracy is also intended to address these issues. There are 10 areas
which it addresses in particular.

From the above, it is clear that the relevant laws and policies are in
place in the Department of Education. Our duty, both as members of
Parliament and as individuals, is to see to it that they are implemented.
As part of its oversight and monitoring function, the portfolio committee
will keep the Department of Education on its toes to make sure that these
policies are implemented.

I would also like to make a call to all members to see to it that all these
documents that I have referred to are available in schools, so that
together we can assist in changing and improving the lives of our kids.
[Applause.]

Mev P W CUPIDO: Mnr die Voorsitter, dit is vir my jammer om vandag waar te
neem dat hier nie 'n enkele Minister van hierdie Regering in hierdie Huis
teenwoordig is nie. Dit wys net vir ons hoe hulle belangstelling is. Ons
hoop hulle kollegas gaan dit aan hulle oordra. [Tussenwerpsels.]
Daar was groot applous in hierdie deel van die Huis toe 'n prominente lid,
die Minister van Veiligheid en Sekuriteit, aangekondig het dat hy en sy
kollegas vir drie minute op 'n straathoek gestaan het, en geen verkragting
gesien het nie. Hoe selektief en ongevoelig kan 'n mens wees, wanneer so 'n
tragiese situasie bespreek word.

Ek staan volkome saam met die agb Kalyan en vele ander kollegas wat reeds
in hierdie Raad vandag gepraat het. My vraag is egter: Hoekom nou eers 'n
taakspan aanstel om die omstandighede van kinderverkragting en
-mishandeling te ondersoek? Kiesers en verskeie NROs het vir etlike maande
in 2001 om hulp geskree, voordat die Regering op 11 Februarie 2002 'n
taakspan aangewys het om sake te ondersoek en voorstelle te maak.

Wie is die rolspelers wat betrokke is by sake van kindermishandeling? Dit
blyk asof die Ministers van Polisie en Justisie toeskouers is. Hoekom het
hulle nie al voorheen opgespring en geskree nie: Genoeg is genoeg! Hoekom
het Minister Zola Skweyiya nog nie besef dat armoede en geen
staatsondersteuning vir skoolgaande kinders 'n groot deel van hierdie
probleem is nie? Sulke kinders wat nie skoolgeld het nie en by die huis
bly, word blootgestel aan werklose mans en mans in die huisgesin.

Mnr Saloojee het beweer dat hierdie saak, in sy woorde, as ``a matter of
urgency'' hanteer moet word. Dit het hierdie Regering agt maande geneem om
tot by hierdie debat te vorder. Tydens hierdie agt maande is daar verskeie
gevalle in die media bekend gemaak van brutale verkragtings, onder meer die
geval van 'n 11-jarige dogtertjie in Uitenhage wat in die kritieke
sorgeenheid in 'n hospitaal opgeneem is; asook die jongste geval verlede
week toe 'n man vry uit die hof uitgestap het, omdat 'n hofamptenaar nie
die dogtertjie se besonderhede behoorlik geformuleer het nie. Daar is nog
vele ander sulke gevalle. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs P W CUPIDO: Mr Chairman, it is sad to notice that there is not a
single Minister of this Government present here in the House today. That
just goes to show what their level of interest is. We hope that their
colleagues will relay this to them. [Interjections.]

There was huge applause in this part of the House when a prominent member,
the Minister of Safety and Security, announced that they stood on a street
corner for three minutes and did not see any rape taking place. How
selective and insensitive can one be when such a tragic situation is being
discussed?

I fully support the hon Kalyan and many other colleagues who have already
spoken in this Chamber today. However, my question is: Why has a task team
only been appointed now to investigate the circumstances surrounding child
rape and child abuse? Voters and various NGOs cried out for help for
several months in 2001, before the Government decided on 11 February 2002
to appoint a task team to investigate cases and to put forward proposals.

Who are the role players involved in cases of child abuse? It seems that
the Ministers of Police and Justice are mere spectators. Why did they not
jump up and shout earlier: Enough is enough! Why has Minister Zola Skweyiya
not yet realised that poverty and lack of government assistance for school-
going children comprise a big part of this problem? Children who do not
have school fees and stay at home are exposed to unemployed men and men in
the family.

Mr Saloojee claimed that this case must be handled, in his words, as ``a
matter of urgency''. It took this Government eight months to progress to
this debate. During these eight months there were various incidents made
public in the media of brutal rapes, amongst others the incident of the
eleven-year-old girl in Uitenhage who were admitted to the intensive care
unit of a hospital, as well as the latest incident last week when a man
walked out of court a free man because the court official did not formulate
the little girl's particulars correctly. There are many other similar
cases.]

It is true that the hon Marthinus van Schalkwyk said last year that this
Government stumbled from the one crisis to another, one after the other.
[Interjections.]
Die wapenskandaal, Mbeki se Zimbabwesage, die toenemende vigsepidemie, die
verkragting en mishandeling van vroue en kinders, mishandeling van
bejaardes en die jongste geval, grootskaalse korrupsie, wanbestuur, en
verkragting van kindergevangenes in tronke in Suid-Afrika: Waar gaan dit
alles eindig?  (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The arms scandal, Mbeki's Zimbabwe saga, the increasing Aids epidemic, the
rape and abuse of woman and children, abuse of the aged and the latest
incident of large-scale corruption, the mismanagement, and rape of child
prisoners in prisons in South Africa: Where will it all end?]

``There is no security on this earth, only opportunities'' are the words of
a general in World War II. This world we live in does not offer any lasting
security. It cannot. What it does offer is trials and challenges and a
whole lot of opportunities. Our security in this country can only be found
in our obedience to God's call on our lives. When leaders have the drive
and the will to demonstrate competency, genuine concern for others and
admirable character, people will naturally follow and will trust such
leaders. Followers can endure a wide spectrum of differences in their
leaders, but these three elements are non-negotiable.

Let me remind the House that Singapore was granted independence in 1959 and
has gone through a similar experience, economically, in terms of social
disturbances and otherwise, as we have experienced in this country since
our new Government came to power in 1994. They attached themselves to
Malaysia in 1963 but it did not work. The country's young leader, who was
42 years old then, Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew, felt that his country had
been cast adrift with few prospects and little hope. He realised that there
was only one thing to do and that was to really work themselves out of a
horrible situation. Today, Singapore boasts with many successes and
continues to change.

Wanneer ons kyk na die kaliber van sommige staatsamptenare en politici,
soos in die geval van die Grootvlei-gevangenis, besef ons dat daar vir ons
'n groot taak voorlê. [Tyd verstreke.][Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[When we look at the calibre of some of the public officials and
politicians, like in the case of the Grootvlei Prison, we realise that a
mammoth task lies ahead. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, the following speaker is
J J Dowry. This will be his swan song. He will be leaving this legislature
to join the executive of the Western Cape government. [Applause.] He has
therefore asked the House to excuse him from addressing the topic under
debate and to be given leave to take his farewell of this House. I am
certain you will be happy to allow him to do so.

Mr J J DOWRY: Mr Chairperson, since I started my career in politics over
eight years ago, I have witnessed many changes in our country. As I stand
here today, I am proud to have been part of the changes that have taken
place since 1994. Since then, more than a million new houses have been
built, people received water and electricity and, in the end, they are
experiencing a better life. Although many people's circumstances are still
far from the ideal, I am proud to play a role in creating a better life for
all South Africans through participatory governance.

As MPs we can never lose sight of our goals and the responsibility that has
been placed on our shoulders. South Africa's future lies in our hands and
our actions are determining the future of tomorrow's generations. If we do
not provide them with the future they deserve, we will all be guilty of
failing the people of South Africa.

It has been an honour for me to serve in this House, and I would like to
thank all the members of this Parliament with whom I have been fortunate to
cross paths, especially those in the communications committee and its
chairperson. A special word of thanks goes to my leader, Mr Marthinus van
Schalkwyk, for his guidance and the trust he has put in me.
[Interjections.]

To my fellow party members, I wish to thank them for their loyalty and
support. I would also like to thank the Speaker and other presiding
officers for their indulgence and fairness at all times. Just as I have
strived to serve the people of South Africa in this House, I will continue
to do so in my new capacity. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you, hon member. We wish you
well. I call on the hon L Mabe from the ANC.

Mrs P DE LILLE: It's ``Maybe''. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, would you just give me an
idea of how your name is pronounced, because the hon Patricia de Lille is
trying to mislead the Chair?

Ms L MABE: Chairperson, it is ``Mabi''.

Ms L MABE: Thank you Deputy Chairperson. It is quite interesting that there
are still people who believe that if a child terminates pregnancy before
the age of 16, that is abuse. The unfortunate part is that those people do
not understand that a child cannot have a child. It is immoral for a child
to have a child, and that is not abortion, that is termination of
pregnancy, because the child is not ready for that task in life.

It is very clear that the ACDP is not committed to moral regeneration. The
way they are addressing this problem, they do not even see that as South
Africa we have a problem that the morality of our society has gone down. To
them it is success; to them it is an achievement. That is why they are not
committed to the moral regeneration of our South African society. It is so
funny that some members like talking about being seduced. How can the
Government be seduced by Love Life. How is that possible? I wonder what
goes into some of our minds, when we discuss these things.

Why does hon Cupido ask, why appoint the task team now? Why does she ask
that? She should be happy that at least this Government made the effort and
had the guts to appoint the task team to look into the problem of child
abuse. I am happy that she never saw it as relevant in the past that this
is a problem. I want to indicate that the issue of sexual abuse of children
is a major problem across the world and should not be treated as simple as
all that.

The ANC as a majority party in Government has put in place various
mechanisms and strategies, for her information, to deal with this problem,
which you like rejoicing in. The Department of Justice and Constitutional
Development, tasked the South African Law Commission, to conduct an urgent
investigation into the matter. So that they can provide a legal framework
in dealing with sexual abuse of children.

The sexual offences Bill broadened the definitions of what is child abuse
and what is rape. For the members' information, she must know that all the
children, both boys and girls, who are under the age of 16 years, cannot be
regarded as adults. Therefore if such actions are done against them, that
is an abuse. The Bill also contains guiding principles, in terms of
implementing and interpreting the law. The Department has rolled out and is
busy rolling out specialised courts in various parts of the country in
terms of sexual abuse offences.

This is to ensure that the vulnerable witnesses and victims are protected,
and do not face intimidatory court environments. The guiding principles
will also help to sensitise and capacitate the officials in the Criminal
Justice System.

Ga twe ngwana ga a betelelwe ka ntlha ya fa a ikgogetse babeteledi. Bana ba
rona ba tshwanetse go nna le kgololosego ya go tsamaya kwa ntle ga letshogo
fa ba romiwa, mme gongwe le gongwe kwa ba tsamayang teng, ba itse gore ba
babalesegile. (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[It is said that a child cannot be sexually abused because she invited the
abusers. Our children should have the freedom to go anywhere, and
everywhere they go, they should know that they are safe.]

The Department has come up with Saturday courts, to deal with the backlog
in the disposal of cases. The project was successful in many parts of the
country and we expect that the magistrates will cooperate with prosecutors
to reduce the time taken to finalise sexual abuse cases. It is also
expected that the police must investigate thoroughly to reduce the number
of cases that are withdrawn, due to lack of enough evidence and prolonged
trauma on the victims.

Go botlhoko gore maphodisa a fiwe dintlha tsotlhe ka kgetse, mme ba bo ba
sa di kwale. Se, se busetsa tiro ya batshotshisi kwa morago mme se
pateletsa bommagiseterata gore ba se bone disenyi molato ka lebaka la gore
ga go na mabaka a a utlwalang.

Re le mokgatlho wa ANC, re leboga setshaba sa rona sa Aforika Borwa go bega
dikgetse tsa petelelo ka gore mo malobeng ditiro tse di ne di tsewa e le
khupamarama ya selegae. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[It is sad when the police are given all the details of the case, and they
do not write them all down. This prejudices the work of prosecutors and it
forces magistrates to acquit criminals because there is not enough
evidence.

As the ANC, we thank South Africans for reporting cases of sexual abuse,
because in the past they were kept internally secret.]

They used to be the secrets of the family. Now the people can go out and
pronounce on what has taken place in their families.

Se e bile se thusa gore bana ba rona ba se ka ba gola ba ntse ba na le
mogopolo wa gore ba ne ba tshwarwa makgwakgwa, mme le bona ba tshwara bana
ba bona makgwakgwa. [This also helps our children not to grow up with the
mindset that they were ill-treated, as they might also bring up their
children in the same way.]

Rape is one of the serious offences listed in the Criminal Law Amendment
Act, and this Act provides for a mandatory life sentence of persons
convicted of two or more offences of rape, but had previously not been
sentenced for such convictions. Repeat sex offenders for rape are liable
for minimum sentences of life imprisonment, and we expect the courts to
pass minimum sentences that will send a clear message to perpetrators and
to the community that Government is serious about the business of child
sexual abuse.

The Criminal Procedure Act of 1997 makes provision that a person charged
with an offence like rape should be refused bail. We expect that the courts
will fully utilise all legislation passed to assist them in dealing with
crime. Trial bail application and imposition of minimum sentences will give
a good message to young offenders who emulate adult offenders. If rapists
have easy access to bail and are given mild sentences, a wrong impression
is given to the society. Thus the judiciary undermines legislation and its
objectives.

This may lead to our people losing confidence in the judiciary system that
has to protect their rights. The community must also not put unnecessary
pressure on the criminal justice officials, because this has a negative
impact on the outcome of the judgement of cases. The Freedom Charter states
that all national groups shall be protected by law against insult to their
race and national pride. Therefore rape and sexual abuse are insults to our
national pride as South Africa and should be dealt with without any mercy.

The brutality of apartheid has impacted negatively on the morals of our
society. As ANC-led Government, we have taken a bold step in the moral
regeneration of our society. People must not rejoice and say that the moral
regeneration is doing nothing to this community. It is doing a lot of
wonders, and one would not believe one's ears.

Ke ditlhong le thogako mo go Ma-Aforika Borwa gore fa batsadi ba betelela
bana, e ka bo e le ba bona kgotsa ba baagisani, ke matlhabisaditlhong a
magolo. E bile ke ditlhong gape gore batho ba bagolo ba tsamae ba ntse ba
buabua gore Puso e a itumela fa bana ba betelelwa, ka gore ga ba bue nnete
ka Puso e ya ANC, e e beileng tsosoloso ya botho ba rona kwa pele. [It is
shameful to South Africans for parents to sexually abuse children; whether
it is they themselves or their neighbours, this remains shameful. It is
also shameful for adults to keep saying that the Government is happy when
children are sexually abused, because they are not telling the truth about
the ANC-led Government, which has prioritised our humanity.]

Moral regeneration comes first to the ANC Government.

Bagolo na tshwanetse go tsaya ngwana, e le wa bona kgotsa e se wa bona,
jaaka ngwana wa bona.

Ke rata gape go raya batho ba rona ba Aforika Borwa gore fa ba bona go na
le bobodu ba dikgetse tse e leng gore fa di tshwanetse gore di lebelelwe,
ga di lebelelwe ka leitlho le le ntshotsho, ba se ka didimala ba nna mo
lefifing, mme ba bue. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[Parents should embrace any child as their own, whether it is theirs or
not.

I would also want to say to South Africans that when they see cases of
corruption which were supposed to be attended to, or scrutinised, they
should not keep quiet, but talk.]

The public must speak out, so that the Government will know what is
happening, and we can do our oversight role to ensure that they are
protected.

E bile gape ke rata gore ba bagolo mo mafapheng a rona, fa dilo tse di
direga ba se ka ba ipelaela go tsaya dikgato tse di masisi kgatlhanong le
badiri ba tiro e, ka gore ba a re sotla re le Puso. Ga re ba duelele gore
ba re sotle.

Ke maikarabelo a malapa, Puso le ba ba diragatsang molao o re o fetisang
gangwe le gape gore botlhe re tshwaragane, re kgone go babalela bana ba
rona. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[I would also want to say to senior officials in our departments that when
these things happen they should take the necessary steps against the
perpetrators because they are embarrassing us as the Government. We are not
paying them to embarrass us.

It is the responsibility of families, Government and those upholding the
laws that we are passing to unite and protect our children.]

We must protect our children, and this is a tripartite alliance of ensuring
that children are protected.

Ke rata go leboga ba ba neng ba tlile fa re ne re dira ditheetso,
babatlisisi, komiti le ba ba neng ba se teng jaaka boCupido le Dudley, ba
ba e tsayang fela mo moweng mme ba ise ba utlwe gore bana ba rona ba ne ba
utlwa botlhoko bo bo ntseng jang. Ke re a go tle mo ditlhaloganyong tsa
bona gore fa ba bua ka ngwana, ba itse gore ngwana yo le bona ke wa bona.
Go ka diragalela ngwana wa gagwe ka moso, a bo a sa bue ka mokgwa o a buang
ka teng. [Legofi.] (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[I would like to thank those who were present when we held hearings,
researchers, the committees; and those who were not present, like members
Cupudi and Dudley, who just heard through the grapevine and have never felt
the pain that our children felt. I say that they should keep in mind, when
they talk about a child, they should know this, that it is also their
child. This could happen to their child tomorrow, they should not talk in
the manner that they are talking.]

Debate concluded.

Report adopted.

               PRECEDENCE TO QUESTIONS TO THE DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without
notice:

  That, notwithstanding the provision of the interim questions procedure,
  questions to the Deputy President that have been set down for oral reply
  on 26 June 2002 be brought forward and given precedence on Tuesday, 25
  June 2002.

Agreed to.

The House adjourned at 16:18.
                                 __________

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:
     (1)    The Minister of Transport on 14 June 2002 submitted a draft of
         the Road Accident Fund Amendment Bill, 2002, as well as the
         memorandum explaining the objects of the proposed legislation, to
         the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The
         draft has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Transport
         and the Select Committee on Public Services by the Speaker and the
         Chairperson, respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).


     (2)    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs submitted the
         Wetsontwerp op die Beplanningsprofessie [W 76 - 2001] (National
         Assembly - sec 75) to the Speaker and the Chairperson on 24 June
         2002. This is the official translation of the Planning Profession
         Bill [B 76 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 75), which was
         introduced in the National Assembly by the Minister on 26
         September 2001.


     (3)    The Minister of Communications submitted the Wetsontwerp op
         Elektroniese Kommunikasies en Transaksies [W 8 - 2002] (National
         Assembly - sec 75) to the Speaker and the Chairperson on 21 June
         2002. This is the official translation of the Electronic
         Communications and Transactions Bill [B 8 - 2002] (National
         Assembly - sec 75), which was introduced in the National Assembly
         by the Minister on 5 March 2002.


     (4)    The following Bill was introduced by the Minister of Transport
         in the National Assembly on 24 June 2002 and referred to the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule
         160:


         (i)     Road Accident Fund Amendment Bill [B 27 - 2002] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              23487 of 6 June 2002.]


         The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Transport
         of the National Assembly.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.


     (5)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 24 June 2002 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following Bill as a money Bill
         (section 77):


         (i)     Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 26 - 2002] (National
              Assembly - sec 77).

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on Protocol on Establishment of African Court on Human and
     Peoples' Rights, dated 21 June 2002:


         The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
         having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
         Protocol on the Establishment of the African Court on Human and
         Peoples' Rights, referred to it, having consulted widely,
         including obtaining a legal opinion, and having noted that -


         1. in terms of section 167(3)(a) of the Constitution of the
              Republic of South Africa, 1996 (hereafter referred to as the
              Constitution), the Constitutional Court is the highest court
              in the land in respect of all constitutional matters;


         2. in terms of article 50 of the African Charter on Human and
              Peoples' Rights (hereafter referred to as the African
              Charter), the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights
              (hereafter referred to as the African Commission) can only
              deal with a matter submitted to it after making sure that all
              local remedies, if they exist, have been exhausted, unless it
              is obvious to the African Commission that the procedure of
              achieving these remedies would be unduly prolonged;


         3. the jurisdiction of the African Court on Human and Peoples'
              Rights (hereafter referred to as the African Court), when
              established in terms of article 1 of the Protocol on the
              Establishment of the African Court on Human and Peoples'
              Rights (hereafter referred to as the Protocol), shall in terms
              of article 3(1) of the Protocol extend to all cases and
              disputes submitted to it concerning the interpretation and
              application of the African Charter, the Protocol and any other
              relevant human rights instrument ratified by the States
              concerned (in terms of article 7 of the Protocol the African
              Court shall apply the provisions of the African Charter and
              any other relevant human rights instrument ratified by the
              States concerned);


         4. in terms of article 2 of the Protocol, the African Court shall,
              bearing in mind the provisions of the Protocol, complement the
              protective mandate of the African Commission conferred upon it
              by the African Charter;


         5. if adopted, the Protocol will result in a complementary system
              of protection of human rights, one in terms of our
              Constitution and the other in terms of the African Charter (in
              other words, a case relating to the protection of human rights
              in terms of the African Charter must be adjudicated through
              our court system in terms of our Constitution before it can be
              dealt with in terms of the African Charter by the African
              Court);


         6. it will not be possible to appeal on human rights matters from
              the Constitutional Court to the African Court or from the
              African Court to the Constitutional Court;


         7. in terms of article 5 of the Protocol, only the African
              Commission, State Parties and African Intergovernmental
              Organisations have direct access to the African Court;


         8. in terms of article 34(6) of the Protocol, access to the
              African Court may be extended to relevant Non-Governmental
              Organisations and individuals in certain respects;


         9. the two systems will largely be complementary and mutually
              reinforcing of each other (on the one hand, our Constitutional
              Court, in terms of section 39(1)(b), is compelled, when
              interpreting the Bill of Rights, to consider international
              law; in this regard the pronouncements of the African Court
              will have a significant bearing on the development of our
              human rights jurisprudence; on the other hand, the African
              Court will, in terms of the Vienna Convention and the
              practices of international tribunals of a like nature, be
              influenced by the pronouncements of our courts);


         10.     from a literal reading of articles 28(2) and 30 of the
              Protocol and a comparison thereof with section 167(3) of the
              Constitution, it has been suggested that there may be a
              potential conflict (however, in view of the above, the
              possibility of a conflict actually happening is remote within
              such a complementary system of protection of human rights);
         11.     in terms of section 231(4) of the Constitution,
              international agreements only become law in the Republic when
              it is enacted into law by national legislation;


         recommends that-


              the House, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
              approve the said Protocol.


         The Committee further resolves that if the Executive at any stage
         makes a declaration in terms of article 34(6) of the Protocol
         accepting the competence of the Court to receive cases under
         article 5(3), such a declaration shall first be tabled in
         Parliament for approval.


     Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Taxation Laws
     Amendment Bill [B 26 - 2002] (National Assembly - sec 77), dated 21
     June 2002:


         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the Taxation
         Laws Amendment Bill [B 26 - 2002] (National Assembly - sec 77),
         referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a
         money Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy on the
     Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Bill [B 15 - 2002]
     (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 24 June 2002:


     The Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy, having considered the
     Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Bill [B 15 - 2002]
     (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
     Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, presents the Mineral and
     Petroleum Resources Development Bill [B 15B - 2002] (National Assembly
     - sec 75).
     The Committee further reports as follows:


     A.     Committee Process


         The Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 19 April 2002.
         The Committee received extensive briefings on the Bill from the
         Department of Minerals and Energy, both before and after its
         introduction in the National Assembly.


         The Committee, jointly with the Select Committee on Economic and
         Foreign Affairs of the National Council of Provinces, then
         proceeded to advertise for public comment on the bill. A large
         number of submissions were received (a list of submissions
         received is attached as addendum A). Based on these submissions
         the Committee requested certain organisations and individuals to
         present oral evidence before it during the public hearings on the
         Bill. The public hearings were held at Parliament from 4 to 11
         June.
         The Committee, jointly with the Select Committee on Economic and
         Foreign Affairs, commenced its deliberations on the Bill on 12
         June and has worked long hours together with the Department and
         the State Law Advisers in order to process the Bill. During these
         deliberations it became evident that due to the extensive nature
         of the amendments being envisaged it would be feasible to present
         to Parliament a redrafted bill.


         In addition the Committees also conducted provincial public
         hearings from 8 to 9 June. Reports on these public hearings are
         detailed below.


     B.     Provincial Public Hearings


         1. Northern Cape, Springbok


              Mr M Moosa from the NCOP and Prof I Mohamed and Ms E Ngaleka
              of the National Assembly, accompanied by Ms F Sotenjwa
              (Committee Secretary), attended the public hearings in
              Springbok. The following organisations were in attendance:


              *   Nama Khoi District Municipality
              *   Pula Transformation Committee
              *   Namakhoi Ward Committee
              *   Richtersveld Municipality
             *    Richtersveld Transformation Committee
              *   Nama Khoi Diamond Fund Trust
              *   Richtersveld CPA
              *   Alexkor
              *   Swanson Enterprise
              *   Nama Khoi Klein Myn
              *   Groenhoekies Myn
              *   Black Mountain
              *   Trans Hex Group
              *   SAPD
              *   Provincial Department of Minerals and Energy


              The delegation also received a written submission from Mr
              Niewoudt from the Pula Transformation Committee.


              Mr B van Wyk explained the background of the Bill and its
              objectives. The three delegates from Parliament gave a
              detailed briefing of the Bill (clause by clause) to the
              audience. They also explained extensively the difference
              between prospecting rights, mining rights and mining permits,
              which seemed not to be clear to the communities. It was
              explained that the Bill intends to bring the small and big
              companies to work together, as well as how this should be
              done.


              The following concerns from the communities of the region were
              noted:


              (a) General concern from municipalities


                  The key concern from representatives of municipalities of
                  the region was the benefit of municipalities from this
                  law. The small miners indicated that the Bill lacks the
                  financial provision for the government to support the
                  small miners to run their mines. Also, the State should
                  indicate the criteria it will use to differentiate
                  between the small and the big mine. It was noted that the
                  small miners were concerned about whether the government
                  would make suggestions when small and big miners enter
                  into joint ventures contracts, and about how the
                  government would monitor corruption in those contracts.
                  The communities felt that workers should be the
                  shareholders in companies. The government should assist
                  the communities of Namaqualand to add value to many
                  different minerals available in the region.


              (b) Clause 21 - application for renewal of mining right


                  The concern from small miners was, if the first miner
                  mines and rehabilitates and the second miner applies for
                  the mining right for the same mine, whether the State
                  would consider granting the permit to the second
                  applicant.


              (c) Clause 24 - application for, issuing and duration of
                  mining permit


                  The communities felt that the two-year period of the
                  mining permit that the Bill makes provision for, is too
                  short. Due to funding problems the small miners would not
                  have prospered enough within two years.


                  The community of Namaqualand showed an interest to
                  support the Bill.


         2. Limpopo Province, Mankweng


              Public hearings scheduled to take place in Mankweng on
              Saturday, 8 June 2002, did not materialise. It was found that
              communication between Parliament and the Provincial
              Legislature and between the Legislature and stakeholders were
              poor. Traditional leaders and leaders of civil society were
              not consulted. In addition, there was no feedback from the
              stakeholders as to whether they would be attending the
              hearings or not, and publicity in the media was not
              sufficient.


              The delegation was deeply concerned by non-attendance of the
              Provincial Legislature's committee members, though the matter
              was communicated to the provincial chairperson and to the
              provincial Speaker. Provinces should note that although this
              piece of legislation is classified as a national competence in
              terms of section 75 of the Constitution, the implications
              still have a direct bearing on provinces.


              The delegation also noted that conducting public hearings on a
              weekend is problematic for a number of reasons. It was also
              clear to the delegation that Mankweng was not a strategic
              place for hearings.


              The delegation recommended that the hearings for the Limpopo
              Province be rescheduled for a later date and that the
              Legislature should identify two or three venues at a time or
              Pietersburg. Furthermore, the day for hearings should be a
              normal working day. The Regional Office of the Department of
              Minerals and Energy should also be engaged more effectively in
              administrative and support areas. The House of Traditional
              Leaders in the province should also be directly consulted.


         3. North West and Free State


              The delegation consisted of Mr M Goniwe (Chairperson), Mr J
              Nash, Mr S K Louw, Ms N Cindi, Ms B Tinto, Mrs M M Ramakaba-
              Leseia and Mr S Mongwaketse of the National Assembly and Mr Z
              Kolweni of the National Council of Provinces. The delegation
              was accompanied by Ms N Hlasa (Committee Secretary).


              Public hearings in North West were held on 8 June and in the
              Free State on 9 June 2002. These hearings were advertised both
              nationally and locally in newspapers and on radio. In
              addition, an invitation was also extended to the provincial
              governments as well as to the relevant provincial portfolio
              committees, to attend the hearings and to give their views on
              the Bill, if they deemed it necessary.


              The following persons made oral presentations during the
              public hearings:


              North West


              *   Bantom Digging W/Stad
              *   Itireleng Small Diggers Association
              *   Forever Diamond W/Stad
              *   Thapelo Korai
              *   Manyeli Diamond Mining CC
              *   SAWIMA
              *   Natalia Tsietso
              *   Ubuntu Development Consol
              *   Mogopa Youth Commission
              *   Mogopa Trust
              Free State


              *   NUM
              *   Harmony Gold Mine (Me Malaola)
              *   COSATU Welkom (Teleko Maloka)
              *   Z A Twala
              *   Gold Fields Free State (MK Jolly)
              *   Oupa Khoabane (Premier's Office)
              *   Molapo Qhobela
              *   Lerato Lengau
              *   Branshish Brandy
              *   ANC Elijah Baray Branch
              *   Matjhabeng Municipality


              The Committee also received the following written submissions:


              *   Manyedi Diamond Mining & Associates cc
              *   Simon Maroga


              The organisations and members of the public who were at the
              public hearing recommended as follows:
              *   The Bill should also include a timeframe of issuing of
                licences


              *   Protect the rights of women in the mining business


              *   Educational capacity-building


              *   Health and safety of workers


              *   "Retrenchment Policy" - the number be reduced from 500 to
                maximum 200


              *   More clarity required on "Joint Venture", (Clear mechanism
                on how it should work and how people will be protected)


              *   "Social Plan" - a notice of at least 24 months must be
                given to implement the social plan. This requirement must be
                in the terms of reference


              *   "Geological Report" should be made available before
                signing contracts


              *   "Ownership" - are people not going to loose their lands?


              *   The Bill must include more environmental issues


              *   Contractors should be monitored in terms of LRA and BCE


              *   Risk Management Programmes be developed and properly
                implemented


              With regard to definitions:


              *   "Employee" should be the same as the definition in the
                Mining Act


              *   "Historically disadvantaged" should specifically mention
                women


              *   "Development" - the host towns should be developing as
                part of Social Plan


              *   "Mining area" should be clearly defined in the Bill


              The following concerns were also raised with the delegation:


              *   They received invitations to the public hearing very late
                and as a result they did not have enough time to go through
                the Bill


              *   The approach to the hearing in future should be that
                participants be grouped into three different categories:
                individuals, community and co-operations


              *   After the government has taken ownership, it must not
                privatise the mining industry


              *   The security fee is too high


              Apart from all the recommendations and concerns raised,
              organisations and members of the public were very happy that
              at long last the government is going to take control of all
              resources of this country and therefore the wealth will be
              distributed equitably.


     C.     Majority Party view


         The ANC fully supports the Bill, in the belief that it is wholly
         consistent with the policies of the current government, as well as
         in the best interests of the country as a whole.


         The ANC views the Bill as a milestone in the process of
         transforming the economy in order to undo the destructive legacy
         of apartheid. Mining and related industries still form the basis
         of the South African economy. Any piece of legislation which
         attempts, as the Bill does, to significantly change the ownership
         and control of such a sector, will arouse significant public
         controversy and opposition, especially from established players.
         This Bill has done so, and sharply divergent views have
         characterised the extensive public hearings and deliberations.
         Nevertheless, the ANC regards the process of deliberation on the
         Bill as thorough and in keeping with the exercise of the duties of
         Parliament.


         During the public hearings, various alarming allegations were
         raised against the Bill, including unconstitutionality, violation
         of bilateral and multilateral trade agreements, and undermining
         security of tenure. The ANC has carefully considered these
         potential pitfalls in the Bill, and is of the opinion that these
         are without substance. Where possible, amendments were made to the
         Bill to accommodate substantive stakeholder concerns, particularly
         with respect to rural communities which currently own mineral
         rights, and the inclusion of a labour component in the social
         plan. Other amendments were made to tighten up certain regulatory
         aspects of the Bill and to lower barriers to entry. The
         fundamental principles of the Bill were not compromised in this
         process.


     D.     Minority views


         1. Democratic Party


              The Democratic Party cannot support this Report.


              Firstly, it believes that the process for passing the Bill in
              the Committee has been rushed and totally inadequate
              contemplation has been given to the 80-odd representations to
              Parliament on the Bill. While some of the representations went
              to the principle of the Bill, many were constructive
              suggestions which addressed the structure and coherency of the
              Bill.


              Secondly, areas of the Bill which have not adequately been
              addressed, are the following:


              * The Bill's direct assault on the property rights clause of
                the Constitution


              * Security of tenure


              * The Minister's discretion


              * Lack of appeal to courts


              * Smooth transition from old order rights and new order rights


              * Beneficiation


              It must be emphasised that the Democratic Party is supportive
              of the broad empowerment and social objectives of the Bill,
              but believes that the delicate balance between these
              objectives and the need for the continued investment into the
              industry has not been achieved.


         2. United Democratic Movement


              The UDM supports the Bill in principle and recognises that the
              Bill is in line with the transformation of the mining and
              petroleum industry. The UDM further recognises that the
              objects of the Bill are internationally accepted and that the
              Bill seeks to address the inequalities and imbalances of the
              past and to promote equitable access to the nation's mineral
              wealth to all people in South Africa. There is no doubt that
              the Bill seeks to promote economic growth and development in
              South Africa.


              The UDM's concerns centre around the following:


              (a) Expansion of opportunities for previously disadvantaged
                  persons


                  The UDM finds it irreconciliable that some previously
                  disadvantaged communities or persons to whom
                  opportunities are supposed to be expanded, are in terms
                  of the Bill going to be dispossessed of their mineral and
                  surface rights. The Bill does not give recognition to the
                  rights in land, inclusive of mineral rights, of the
                  communities who have occupied and developed their land
                  for several generations and centuries, e.g. the Bafokeng
                  and Mphahlele tribes.


              (b) Land surface rights


                  Black communities were harassed, tortured and their
                  leaders detained and dispossessed of their land by both
                  the colonial and apartheid regimes. They were made aliens
                  in the land of their birth. Black South Africans will
                  never forget apartheid's forceful removals, which were
                  intended to deprive them of their ancestral land, e.g.
                  King Makgoba, Chief Letsoalo, King Sekhukhune, Matoks
                  communities and Chief Machaka and Chief Ramokgopa, to
                  name a few. It will be unfortunate if black communities
                  will still find themselves subjected to the above evils
                  in terms of clauses 50, 51 and 52 of the Bill. The UDM
                  believes and proposes that the provisions of clause 50(1)
                  should not apply to previously disadvantaged people, in
                  particular those who were affected by the obnoxious laws
                  of forceful removals by the colonial and apartheid
                  regimes. Alternatively a clause could be inserted which
                  will provide that previously disadvantaged people will
                  not be subjected to forceful removals.


                  The UDM proposes further that communities which own land
                  or who are occupiers of land where prospecting and mining
                  operations are to be conducted should not be affected by
                  the provisions of clause 51(1) and (2). The communities
                  should instead be assisted to obtain prospecting and
                  mining rights, while the State remains the custodian of
                  the nation's mineral rights. The Minister's powers to
                  expropriate in the present format of the Bill will
                  undoubtedly result in confrontation and forceful removal
                  of a large number of communities, as was the case during
                  the dark days of the apartheid regime. The UDM agrees
                  with the Legal Resource Centre (LRC) that one of the
                  primary purposes underlying the enactment of sections
                  25(6) to 25(8) of the Constitution is the need to redress
                  the injustices flowing from the failure of the colonial
                  and apartheid regimes to afford recognition and dignity
                  to land rights held in terms of indigenous law. It
                  further agrees with the LRC that the Land Restitution Act
                  gives effect to the constitutional requirement (i.e.
                  section 25(7) of the Constitution) to provide either
                  restitution or equitable redress to people or communities
                  dispossessed of their land after 19 June 1913 as a result
                  of racially discriminatory laws and practices of the
                  past. The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs is on
                  course in implementing this constitutional requirement.
                  We strongly believe that the provisions of sections 50,
                  51 and 52 of the Bill will defeat the object of land
                  restitutions.


              (c) Constitutionality of Bill


                  The UDM agrees that the Constitutional Court in one of
                  its previous judgments found that it was extremely rare
                  to make mention of mineral rights within a property
                  clause in some other Constitutions, and that it could
                  certainly not be said to be a universally accepted
                  fundamental right. In case of Lebowa Mineral Trust
                  Beneficiaries Forum vs. President of South Africa, the
                  ruling by Judge J Daniels was based on the fact that
                  mineral rights were not protected by section 25 of the
                  Constitution. The UDM believes, however, that Judge J
                  Daniels based, with all humility, his finding on a
                  misunderstanding of the previous judgment of the
                  Constitutional Court. It is true that the Constitutional
                  Court never found that the constitutional drafters did
                  not intend to protect mineral rights in section 25.


                  The UDM's information is that the Lebowa Mineral Trust
                  Beneficiaries Forum still contend strongly that section
                  25(4) of the Constitution does not restrict the concept
                  of property to land only, but that whatever the wide
                  scope of the constitutional meaning of property may be,
                  it would include the real rights in respect of land. It
                  is for this reason that the Lebowa Mineral Trust
                  Beneficiaries Forum is preparing to test the
                  constitutionality of the Abolition of the Lebowa Mineral
                  Trust Act in the Constitutional Court. The UDM believes
                  that a land-owner remains owner until such time as the
                  mineral is severed from the earth.


              (d) Royalties


                  The UDM supports the view that provision for payment of
                  royalties should be made in the money bill, and proposes
                  consequently that both the Minerals and Petroleum
                  Resources Bill and the money bill be considered by the
                  National Assembly concommitantly. The UDM proposes, in
                  conclusion, that royalties should be paid to communities
                  in whose areas mining takes place.


              (e) Transitional arrangements


                  The UDM's area of concern in this regard is security of
                  tenure over existing prospecting and mining and mineral
                  rights, existing agreements between mining and
                  exploration companies and holders of "old order" rights,
                  and compensation for foreign investments made into South
                  African minerals industry. The UDM's main concern is that
                  ambiguity and uncertainty which may exist upon passage of
                  the Bill may scare foreign investors and thus defeat the
                  objects of the Bill.


                  The UDM suggest therefore, in conclusion, that the Bill
                  be sent to the Constitutional Court for concurrence
                  before it is promulgated.


     E.     Conclusion


         The Committee wishes to express its appreciation to all those
         stakeholders who made submissions to and interacted with the
         Committee during its deliberations on the Bill.




         Addendum A - List of Submissions Received (71)


         NO NAME


         [A]     MATTEW LOTTER
            SA DIAMOND PRODUCERS
            ORGANISATION


         [B]     PETER MEAKIN
            AIAVSA VALUER


         [C]     J KATZEFF
            LIME SALES LTD


         [D]     L V READ
            EXICO
         [E]     POST MOLOTO
            MINERAL RIGHTS ASSOCIATION  OF
                       INDIGENOUS PEOPLE IN SA


         [F]     ANTON VON BELOW


         [G-G1]  FOREIGN INVESTORS
                       PROSPECTING & MINING FORUM SA (A SAAD)


         [H]     RICHARDS BAY MINERALS


         [I]     KELGRAN AFRICA & MARLIN CORPORATION


         [J,J3]  NEW DIAMOND CORPORATION (NDC)
         [J1]    NAKA


         [K]     RIO TINTO


         [L]     PLACER DOME SA


         [M-M1]  TOTAL EXPLORATION SA (PTY) LIMITED
         [N]     FUEL RETAILERS ASSOCIATION OF SA


         [O]     JOHN HANDLEY


         [P]     ANDREAS SEEPI


         [Q]     BRINK, BONSMA & DE BRUYN


         [R]     M ROSENBERG ATTORNEYS


         [S]     NAMAQUALAND TRANSFORMATION COMMITTEES


         [T-T3]  PETROLEUM AGENCY SA


         [U]     PROSPECTORS & DEVELOPERS ASSOCIATION
            OF CANADA (PDAC)


         [V]     BHP BILLITON


         [W-W1]  AGRISA


         [X-X3]  LEGAL RESOURCES CENTRE
         [Y]     WERKSMANS ATTORNEYS


         [Z]     CHAMBER OF MINES


         [AA-AA1]      ANGLO AMERICAN PLATINUM CORPORATION LTD


         [BB]    RUSTENBERG PLATINUM MINES LTD


         [CC]    POTGIETERSRUST PLATINUMS LTD


         [DD]    LEBOWA PLATINUM MINES LTD


         [EE-EE4]      DE BEERS


         [FF]    SAMREC (WEBBER, WENTZEL, BOWENS)


         [GG]    MAROTA MOHLALETSE TRIBAL AUTHORITY


         [HH]    AFC LIMITED


         [II]    CHIEF REGISTRAR OF DEEDS


         [JJ]    MICHAEL MARTINSON


         [KK]    PIONEER NATURAL RESOURCES SA


         [LL]    FOREST EXPLORATION INTERNATIONAL
            (SA) (PTY) LTD


         [MM]    ANGLOGOLD LIMITED


         [NN]    AQUARIUS PLATINUM


         [OO]    RANGOLD & EXPLORATION


         [PP]    MINE HEALTH & SAFETY COUNCIL


         [QQ]    NORTON ROSE


         [RR]    ROYAL BAFOKENG NATION


         [SS]    ASIA MINERALS SA


         [TT]    JACOBA LANGLEY


         [UU]    FREE MARKET FOUNDATION
         [VV-VV1]      IMPALA PLATINUM HOLDINGS


         [WW]    J SCHEEPERS


         [XX]    F J KRUGER & G LEVIN


         [YY]    ENF ENVIRONMENTAL LAW DEPARTMENT


         [ZZ-ZZ3]      OFFSHORE PETROLEUM ASSOCIATION OF SA (OPASA)


         [AAA]   LISA PLIT


         [BBB]   ANGLO AMERICAN


         [CCC]   HAROLD MOTAUNG (AFICAN MINERALS ASSOCIATION)


         [DDD]   DIAMOND DEVELOPMENT GROUP


         [EEE]   SA MINING DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION


         [FFF]   RIGGERS DIGGERS MINING & EXPLORATION CO
         [GGG]   MMAKAU MINING


         [HHH]   BAKGATLA-BA-KGAFELA


         [III]   BAKWENA BA MOGOPA


         [JJJ]   MIKE BALL


         [KKK]   ADV BHEKI NDLOVU


         [LLL]   GEORGE KHUNOU


         [MMM]   PAT MKHIZE ATTORNEYS


         [NNN-
         NNN1]   WEBBER, WENTZEL, BOWENS


         [OOO]   COSATU/NUM


         [PPP]   PROF THOMAS WALDE


         [QQQ]   CNR


         [RRR]   KODUMELA MINING CONSORTIUM
         [SSS]   PAUL JOURDAN

4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and
     Technology on Visit to Vlakplaas, dated 4 June 2002:


     The Portfolio Committee of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology (the
     Committee), having visited Vlakplaas from 14 to 16 December 2001,
     reports as follows:


    A.      Introduction


         1. National Centre for Traditional Healing and Reconciliation


              One of the categories of Indigenous Knowledge Systems (IKS) is
              institutions, the oldest and most complex of which, with great
              potential to contribute to the 21st century, is traditional
              healing.


              There are different aspects of traditional healing which need
              scrutiny, analysis and understanding so as to find their
              relevance to modern life and the healing systems of the 21st
              century within the context of the global village. The history
              of traditional healing in South Africa needs to be recorded.
              If South Africa is the cradle of humanity and the source of
              the first forms of life, traditional healing here must be the
              oldest in the world. As indicated by the different aspects of
              traditional healing, it is a basis, a point of reference of
              culture in South Africa, as well as a cultural guardian and
              custodian.


              All public hearings and discussions on IKS have consistently
              pointed out that, because traditional healing is one of the
              oldest forms of IKS, and one of the most enduring and
              functional, it features in all discussions and is cross-
              cutting among categories, e.g. social, biodiversity and
              technology. In its relation to culture, it seeks to harmonise
              the nation through healing, and is consistent in linking
              healing and human life to its sources and basis. It is also
              insistent on relating the individual to the whole and the
              community to the individual.


              The discussions held with the Traditional Healers' Forum (the
              Forum) from 14 to 16 December 2001 revealed two very distinct
              categories within traditional healing:
              *   Healing


              *   Witchcraft


         2. Healing


              In common with most healing systems, the traditional healing
              system is linked to a system of beliefs. The basic belief
              system of traditional healing is the link between the science
              of healing and the prevailing power of ancestors and God.
              There is, however, special emphasis on the intervention and
              prevailing powers of ancestors. It is on this basis that
              healing, in its holistic approach to health, involves
              spiritual, mental and physical health, using Ukuphahla
              (praising the ancestors), Amathambo (bones) and Umuthi
              (medicine) to retain quality of life for the human being.
              Diagnosis of a person involves the environment, the community,
              the extended family and the family lineage into life after
              death, which makes people's dreams most relevant to their
              lives and their healing. The detail of all of these aspects
              overlap in respect of religion, science, technology and IKS in
              terms of rituals and symbols. Occidental medicines are also
              recognised and its healing systems and institutions are used
              through referrals.


         3. Witchcraft


              If by witchcraft is meant activities informed by evil
              knowledge and evil intentions which harm other human beings,
              then most traditional healers, "Inyanga, Dingaka",
              disassociate themselves from it. However, as far as the system
              of traditional healing has objectives to protect, defend and
              promote (as captured in the African philosophy "Motho ke Motho
              ka Batho", that can be paraphrased as "a person is a person
              because of others"), all means can be used to defend the
              existence of that philosophy. It is here where the
              Constitution and the law, as with every other human activity
              in the country, must intervene as far as traditional healing
              is concerned. It is also for this reason that traditional
              healing in South Africa must be recognised, organised and
              located within the 21st century and global village context. It
              is only then that its potential for social, cultural and
              economic value and contribution can be fully realised.


         4. 14-16 December - Vlakplaas


              On these days, an unprecedented event took place in Pretoria,
              when approximately 700 traditional healers converged on the
              apartheid killing field of Vlakplaas. The aim was, first and
              foremost, to hold discussions about the role and future of
              traditional healing in the new South Africa and to signal to
              the nation the healing and reconciliatory role of traditional
              healing. In addition, the institution of traditional healing
              wished to declare its position on many key issues of nation
              healing, witchcraft, crime, HIV/AIDS politics, culture, the
              economy, etc.


              The deliverables for 14 to 16 December included:


              (a) Laying a basis for the creation of one voice for one of
                  the oldest institutions in our country.


              (b) Signalling to the nation the role of traditional healing
                  in the 21st century and in the global context.


              (c) Considering the viability of Vlakplaas being transformed
                  into a National Centre for Traditional Healing and
                  Reconciliation.


              (d) Expressing willingness to participate in the national
                  effort for a moral regeneration of our society.


         5. Meetings held: 14 and 15 December 2001


              It is important to point out that the event held on the
              abovementioned days at Vlakplaas, which has set in motion a
              process for traditional healing to be recognised, reorganised,
              regularised and located in its own right and on the basis of
              its belief system within 21st century healing systems, was a
              joint organisational effort of the:


              (a) Committee


              (b) National Department of Health


              (c) National Department of Arts, Culture, Science and
                  Technology (the Department)


              (d) National Department of Public Works


              (e) National Forum of Traditional Healers
              (f) IKS Steering Committee (Steering Committee)


              (g) Clinix Health Group


         6. Meetings held


              (a) Clinix is the Organisation of African Doctors in SA and
                  the Forum of Traditional Healers. Agreements were reached
                  to explore collaboration and co-operation based on an
                  understanding that the two could complement each other in
                  respect of providing healing and health to the nation.


              (b) The Committee met with the Forum in a public hearing, with
                  about 700 traditional healers present. Agreement was
                  reached to further explore the feasibility of Vlakplaas
                  being transformed into a National Centre for Traditional
                  Healing and Reconciliation, and that the Committee would
                  explore the feasibility of legislation to effect the
                  above.


              (c) The Steering Committee also met with the Forum, and
                  agreement was reached to form a joint team to put in
                  place terms of reference and a modus operandi for a task
                  team to advise the Steering Committee on what must happen
                  after 16 December, in order to ensure the realisation of
                  the emergence of the National Centre for Traditional
                  Healing, effectively transforming Vlakplaas.


              (d) Other discussions were held between the Department, the
                  IKS Secretariat and the Department of Public Works, the
                  Department of Health, the Committee, the National Forum
                  of Traditional Healers, Clinix and the IKS Steering
                  Committee. The result of these discussions was a common
                  understanding on Vlakplaas and on what the objectives of
                  the event of 15 and 16 December 2001 would be.


         7. Funders


              The Department and the Business Trust against Crime were the
              major funders of the event. Other funders were the CSIR, the
              NRF, SAFA, Eugene Jackson of Sorghum Breweries (who
              contributed mqombothi), SAB and the ARC, Dr Peter Matseke of
              Eskom (who provided electricity), and the Municipality of
              Tshwane (who provided clean running water).


         8. 16 December - National Reconciliation Day


              On the evening of 15 December, a cow was slaughtered as a
              sacrifice and as a request for the ancestors to bless the
              proceedings on 16 December, which started at 08:00 and ended
              at 13:00. Each province, after sacrificing a chicken and a
              goat the previous day, had to drum, sing and dance to invoke
              the ancestors to bless the symbolic ceremony for
              reconciliation, and to realise the wishes, intentions and
              requests expressed in the main ceremony. It was a most moving
              moment as the approximately 700 traditional healers from the
              nine provinces came together with one agenda, expressing their
              wish to be recognised by the nation and to locate the oldest
              of the IKS institutions in the 21st century in support of the
              African Renaissance.


     B.     Observations and conclusion


         Is it true that there are 200 000 traditional healers and that the
         number is growing rapidly, with more and more professionals
         joining the ranks of this institution? Is it true that 80% of our
         population, across race, class, sex and religious denominations,
         use traditional healers? Is it true that an immune booster for
         HIV/AIDS patients exists collectively among traditional healers,
         to the extent that it can improve quality of life in this area? Is
         it true that, besides being a counselling service for a large
         section of our population, including terminally ill patients,
         traditional healing also serves as a community hospice? Are these
         facts? Are they significant and is it true that this sector, this
         institution which plays a very important role socially, especially
         among the poor, but also among the wealthy, educated and
         professional, remains informal, underground, unrecognised,
         unregulated? Is it true that besides the role it plays in healing
         and in health, it has a key role which is unrecognised in the
         environment?


         The event of 14 to 16 December at the notorious Vlakplaas, which
         took place through the initiative and support of the stated
         organisations and individuals, was extremely important for South
         Africa. It was the opening of dialogue with the poor,
         disadvantaged and marginalised sections of our society, through
         their most trusted healing and health institution; it is a means
         to go back to the drawing board to consider the moral fibre and
         moral regeneration, as well as the spiritual, mental and physical
         health of the nation; it is a possibility given to us to re-
         explore the flora and fauna of our land by using oral research to
         understand the potential which exists within these for human life;
         it is a moment of potential to find successful treatments for
         diseases like malaria, cancer, HIV/AIDS, etc, and other chronic
         diseases like asthma, diabetes, high blood pressure, etc.


         It is believed that if we engage this institution objectively, we
         will unearth all kinds of possibilities. Here, in the year 2002,
         we will discover under-utilised human resources that are vital for
         our nation, but challenges us to think big and turn the unknown
         into the known to enhance this oldest form of practice, using its
         experience and transforming the institution from being one of
         resistance to being a tool of the African Renaissance.


         Prepared by: Mongane Wally Serote IKS Chairperson


     C.     Objectives of visit
         In November 1997, a group of African intellectuals met at Venda
         University. It was agreed that the Committee should spearhead the
         following process:


         *  Discuss and formulate strategies that can enhance public
             awareness of Science and Technology within marginalised and
             disadvantaged communities


        *   How the Public Awareness Programmes and processes can be
             implemented


         It was further agreed that the National Centre of Indigenous
         Knowledge at Vlakplaas was tasked with bringing to the fore the
         frustrations of IKS, also to take the IKS to a practical level.
         Vlakplaas, by virtue of its potential to grow natural vegetation,
         was identified as a site that could encourage job-creation
         projects and as a place of healing. The focus would be to preserve
         herbs and plants linked to traditional healing. Other objectives
         of the visit were:


         1. To safeguard, preserve, research and promote the cultural
              heritage and empirical IKS.


         2. To ensure the survival of indigenous cultures and recognition
              of customary laws and practices.


         3. To facilitate access to indigenous medicines and encourage
              traditional medical practitioners.


         4. To integrate, enhance and validate traditional and local
              knowledge and practices.


         5. To create, encourage and support SMMEs in the field of IKS.


     D.     Delegation


         Delegation to Vlakplaas


         Dr M W Serote -     Leader of delegation (ANC)
         Mr S L Dithebe      -    ANC
         Mrs M A A Njobe     -    ANC
         Ms N M Tsheole      -    ANC
         Mrs S F Baloyi      -    ANC
         Ms A M Maziya -     ANC
         Mrs N D Mbombo      -    ANC
         Ms H M Mpaka  -     ANC
         Ms N S Mtsweni      -    ANC
         Ms O N Mndende      -    UDM
         Ms T Gayi     -     Committee Secretary
         Ms S Mashao   -     Committee Assistant


         Members of Forum


         Mr S J Mhlongo      -     KwaZulu-Natal (Chairperson)
         Mr S Nduku    -     Eastern Cape
         Mr L Moropodi -     Gauteng
         Ms M Gamndana -     Mpumalanga
         Mrs M E Mahumapelo  -    Northern Cape
         Mr M Ramothwalo     -    Northern Province
         Ms N Hawker   -     Western Cape
         Mr J Moloi    -     Free State
         Ms M Motsiwa  -     North West


         IKS Secretariat
         Ms S Williams -     Project Co-ordinator
         Mr O Ntsoane
         Ms J Mufamadi
         Dr P M Guma
         Mr B Mtimkhulu
         Ms J Chawapiwa-Pama


         Arrival and welcoming - 14 December 2002


         The first group of people to arrive at Vlakplaas was the Forum and
         the Committee Secretariat. Upon arrival, caterers were already
         busy and lunch was served.


         Meetings
         The first meeting was held between Forum members and the Clinix.
         In attendance was Dr Serote, Mr Peter Matseke (MD Clinix), Dr
         Matsidiso Kaeane (Vaal Independent Practitioners' Association), Dr
         T P Thulo (Clinix) and Jean Chawapiwa-Pama (CSIR Communication),
         all members of the Forum.


         The delegation from Clinix gave us a brief background about
         Clinix. It was formed by a group of black doctors, whose task was
         to organise all general practitioners to work together in terms of
         managing projects related to HIV and traditional healing.


         The traditional healers raised concerns on:


         *  The delegation's relationship with "Doctors for Life", who came
              to Parliament and created a bad impression


         *  The attitude doctors have when it comes to traditional healing


         *  A lack of respect and not being recognised as healers


         *  Doctors who do not refer patients to them


         *  Herbs originally found by them, but them not being mentioned in
              the end product


         *  Traditional healers are not recognised by medical aid schemes


         The delegation responded to these concerns very positively - they
         are not related to "Doctors for Life". It has been their wish to
         work with traditional healers. They found that some of their
         diagnoses were good - for example, when a patient needed a blood
         test, they would refer him to hospital. There are doctors who work
         directly with traditional healers and show them how to perform
         circumcision. They have been to Nigeria, where they observed that
         many western doctors do work with traditional healers. The doctors
         are prepared to form a very close relationship, work on areas of
         common interest and share knowledge they have. A lack of
         communication is the main cause for the gap between doctors and
         traditional healers.


         Task team meeting with members of Forum - 14 December


         A second meeting was held with the Forum and IKS, and was chaired
         by Dr Serote. All Forum members were present, except one from
         North West. Gogo Stella reported back, being leader of the task
         team. The main purpose of the meeting was for the task team to
         report back on the logistics, preparations and developments of the
         function. This included the hiring of tents for the nine
         provinces, chairs, toilets and catering.


         Dr Serote introduced members of the task team, and briefed Forum
         members on how the task team had been formed. It was elected on 24
         November 2001 to see to the smooth running of and logistics behind
         the organisation of the event. The report of the task team was
         then delivered by Ms Stella Williams.


         Report of task team


         *  Ms Stella Williams explained the situation at Vlakplaas, and
              how everything was organised up to the last day. Nine tents
              were organised for each province, and there was also a tent
              that served as dining hall for guests and MPs. One tent was
              reserved for meetings and two tents served as bathrooms for
              females and males. Toilets were also organised and kept clean
              at all times


         *  Catering was organised
         *  The SAPS was there for security reasons 24 hours a day


         *  Paramedics were available for emergencies


         Sponsors


         *  National Sorghum Brewery    -    traditional brewery


         *  SAPS - stage


         *  Jacksons - two cows


         *  CSIR


         *  ARC


         *  SA Breweries - beer


         *  The Department


         Questions raised
         It being common knowledge that the place was not familiar to most
         people, some were not even sure if the ceremony would erase the
         past and whether people were going to react positively to what was
         being done at Vlakplaas. A lot of questions were raised by
         concerned individuals, especially traditional healers.


         *  What will happen after 16 December 2001


         *  Will more people visit the place, or is the place going to be
              restricted


         Each province could offer a chicken and a goat as sacrifice to the
         ancestors. By this, they were uniting the spirit and souls of the
         people who died at Vlakplaas and their ancestors, so as to ensure
         that they would rest in peace. They were healing the wounds of
         those who had suffered during the apartheid era, who had died
         because they believed they have a right to be free.


         During this time all the traditional healers were beating drums,
         dancing and singing, according to their different cultures. One
         could see they were really feeling that the past was behind them.
         They were pouring their hearts out to the ancestors, and were very
         emotional. All prayers and sacrifices meant that they were there
         to claim the place.


         15 December 2001


         A meeting was held between the Committee, the Forum and IKS. The
         meeting was chaired by Ms Tsheole, MP.


         Dr Serote welcomed all the people who came from different
         provinces to honour this special day. He mentioned that people who
         died at Vlakplaas were freedom fighters, fighting for liberation
         and democracy for all in South Africa.


         Traditional healers were there to share views with MPs and come up
         with questions and comments:


         *  How will traditional healers use Vlakplaas, should it be given
              to them


         *  As they were moving around, they asked where they could plant
              traditional herbs


         *  How an Act of Parliament could help them


         *  Why were hospitals not sending people to them, even though they
              had sent patients to hospitals


         *  What was the difference between traditional healers who heal
              and those who practice witchcraft


         Traditional healers were so impressed to be given an opportunity
         to express their views that they said it was the first time they
         felt the government was starting to recognise their existence,
         even before any Act existed. It was an historic occasion - the
         healers felt proud to see MPs listening to their views and beliefs
         and watching their performances.
         They were quite happy, although there was no formal law
         recognising them at that point, but the presence of government
         delegations meant a lot to them. They did not want to dwell on
         history, when the government treated them very badly. This has
         been overcome by what was happening at that moment.


         The traditional healers' mission to visit Vlakplaas was to set the
         record straight, because a lot of incorrect information had been
         spread about them and they had not had a chance to rectify these.
         They also appreciated the presence of the media, as they felt
         these were the people broadcasting wrong information, be it rape
         or witchcraft. They were also concerned about the absence of white
         MPs during such a memorable occasion.


         They believed the rivers and mountains are home to the ancestors,
         but in Vlakplaas it was the other way round. These were used for
         killing people by the apartheid government. They felt the meeting
         was so useful to them because in their history it was the first
         time to meet as traditional healers from all nine provinces of
         South Africa.


         They explained themselves by pointing out that there are different
         categories of traditional healers - there are those born with the
         calling, and then those who, when they grow up, experience a need
         to join the calling. There are traditional healers who specialise
         in treating certain kinds of sicknesses and illnesses.


         They would appreciate if an agreement could be reached with the
         government on the issue of Vlakplaas. Above all, they hoped to
         convert the place into a learning school for traditional healers,
         and to build a hospital so that those in the learning stage could
         learn healing and plant herbs there, and would also be able to
         test the herbs, which could be of valuable use for the community.
         It could be used as a laboratory and a traditional healers'
         hospital.


         Some traditional healers who went to the river, found some
         valuable and good herbs, used to cure certain illness. One example
         was that of a healer recognising a herb that can help someone who
         does not have enough blood.


         They pleaded with MPs and government officials to take their
         request and knowledge to Parliament - that they are able to cure
         many diseases, including high blood pressure. Their main problem
         as traditional healers is that they need funds to run some of
         their projects. They do not get financial assistance from banks to
         buy houses. Some of them, although illiterate, have an abundance
         of knowledge of herbs, healing, plant life, environmental care,
         etc. They hoped that the meeting would be the start of creating a
         resource centre on traditional healing, based on research and
         experience.


         Traditional Leaders (Chiefs) also voiced their gratitude for being
         invited to such an historical event. They could go back to their
         respective provinces with proper information about traditional
         healing. They said that in their culture traditional healing was
         their foundation. They also knew of some church leaders who used
         herbs to strengthen their churches, but in cases like these they
         did not want to come forward.


         16 December 2001


         The meeting on the last day of the ceremony was chaired by Gogo
         Stella. The provinces wanted to show their traditional dances, and
         every province was given a chance to do so.


         Dr Serote greeted everyone and confirmed that it was a very
         beautiful ceremony and that the sun was shining, also a sign of
         beauty. For the past three days beautiful things have been done -
         meetings about Vlakplaas becoming a Centre for Traditional
         Healing; we have prayed to God to bless us; and the traditional
         healers have also talked to our ancestors so that the whole
         ceremony could be pleasant, as it has been.


         Dr Serote assured the people that the spirit of no surrender of
         the freedom fighters who were murdered here, exists in Parliament
         as well, and that it also exists in the history of traditional
         healing, which means that a spirit of no surrender will also apply
         to Vlakplaas to help keep this place for us.


         He thanked everyone who worked with him from the beginning in
         planning the ceremony. He thanked the MPs for making time to
         attend, despite their many commitments. Even when the issue of
         Vlakplaas was discussed, they were also keen to make this a day to
         remember and also to be there when this place was recognised as
         the Centre for Traditional Healing and Reconciliation. A word of
         special appreciation was extended to people like Gogo Stella
         Williams, who went out of her way to make the event as memorable
         and as special as it was, IKS members who were always there when
         asked to attend meetings, Azeza Fredericks, who could not attend
         the ceremony due to religious constraints but who also worked very
         hard to make the event a success, Jean Chawapiwa-Pama (CSIR
         Communications) and her team who worked tirelessly in respect of
         communications, making sure that everyone was informed about the
         event, Natasha Ramiah, Tamara Gayi (Committee Secretary) and
         Shirly Mashao (Committee Assistant) for the wonderful work they
         have done. The Chairperson of the Forum was also thanked for
         everything he had taught us. He also mentioned that he had worked
         with Mr Mhlongo, and as a result a task team was formed that would
         see how the place could be used in future.


         Dr Serote further mentioned some of the problems that traditional
         healers are experiencing and some of the bad things they are
         always accused of. For instance, traditional healers are always
         accused of referring people who are HIV-positive to sleep with
         little babies so that the disease can be cured - traditional
         healers claim that they never tell people to do that. They are
         always accused of stealing children to make medicine. All this is
         not true about traditional healers, as they heal people, not kill
         them. There is a difference between them and witch doctors, those
         believed to practise witchcraft.


         Speaking on behalf of the Committee, Dr Serote assured everyone
         that all MPs present there to witness the event would listen to
         everything said and done and forward it to Parliament. He also
         told all traditional healers that the doors of Parliament are wide
         open for them if they need to discuss anything, and also assured
         them that the partnership they have formed will be effective and
         efficient. Also speaking on behalf of everyone there, he wanted
         the President of the country to know that here was an African
         Renaissance and that history has been started at Vlakplaas. They
         also wanted him to know everything about what has been discussed
         and done at Vlakplaas.


         The following session was chaired by Mr Solly Nduku


         Mr Nduku asked all traditional healers to sing traditional Zulu
         songs, and the Chairperson of the Traditional Healers in KwaZulu-
         Natal was also asked to come forward. Each group was given 15
         minutes to come forward and perform their dances.
         Mr Mhlongo greeted everyone and thanked Dr Serote for bringing
         them to Vlakplaas and to experience such a wonderful ceremony. He
         continued by saying that he had been suspicious that Baba Serote
         is a traditional healer and has confronted him about that -  he
         was told that his great-grandfather and his grandfather were
         traditional healers. He then introduced the Members of the
         Traditional Healers' Forum and asked them to come forward: Baba
         Moloi (Orange Free State), Ms Nomsa Hawker (Western Cape), Mr
         Solloy Nduku (Eastern Cape), Baba Moropdi (Gauteng), Baba
         Ramotwala (Northern Province) MaDlamini Gamndana (Mpumalanga).


         After introducing all the members of the Forum, Mr Mhlongo said
         there were allegations about encouraging people to rape children
         to cure HIV/AIDS, and that he believed that none of the
         traditional healers present there had ever made such a statement.
         If there was any such person, he would ask that person to come
         forward. He urged traditional healers to distance themselves from
         people who do dirty things in the name of holiness.


         On the issue of HIV/AIDS, they categorically denied the
         accusations put to them. He pleaded to traditional healers to
         consider the HIV/AIDS matter seriously, and not to neglect it.
         [There is a Zulu idiom, of which the literal translation is: "Once
         you are attacked, the attacker can kill you, therefore everyone
         must be extremely careful".] He also said he believed that in
         Africa there is a cure for AIDS and that it lies upon our
         shoulders to go out there and search for the cure. Furthermore, he
         said he believed in our medicine, but also in our ancestors to
         enlighten and assist us in discovering the cure and to protect us,
         as we are now going to be protected from those "thieves" who come
         and steal our knowledge and medicine and sell these at higher
         prices. He urged the government to encourage doctors and hospitals
         to send people to traditional healers so that they can also
         participate in the healing of this deadly disease.


         He went on to say that that day was the Day of African
         Renaissance, to revive humanity, because seemingly humanity has
         lost "ubuntu". People are killing one another, they commit
         suicide, they rape children and are disrespective of elders. This
         all shows that we have lost "ubuntu". He concluded by saying that
         traditional healers have taken a back seat in leading, which is
         why society has lost direction.


         One of the major problems of traditional healers is the media, who
         is always reporting badly on traditional healers and not praising
         them when they perform well. The Ukuphahla KweSizwe document was
         distributed to everyone and was read by Mr Mhlongo. Everyone was
         asked to stand and follow him as he read the document.
     E.     Recommendations


         1. Part of the land can be used to grow herbs, as the area is
              known to be very rich in herbs. Some traditional healers have
              already recognised some of the herbs they use to heal people
              and urged that no herbs are taken until the ceremony is over
              and until the place is declared a tourism centre.


         2. A museum could also be built to reflect what is happening at
              Vlakplaas, so that tourists and families could visit it and
              learn more.


         3. The place could also act as a tourism village, where each and
              every South African culture could be represented.


         4. A business plan needs to be drawn up in accordance with the
              pace of the organisation, and it should be 60% funded by the
              government.
         5. Private companies should be operating there.


         6. There should be a clinic where general practitioners and
              traditional healers could have their practices.

