---
title: 'National Assembly - 05 November 2002'
layout: debate
year: 2002
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2002/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2002-11-05
---

TUESDAY, 5 NOVEMBER 2002
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:08.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayer or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

 APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT AND DEPUTY MINISTER OF
                                   HEALTH

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, I have to announce that the Secretary to
Parliament has received a letter from the Office of the President informing
Parliament that Mr D M Malatsi has been appointed Deputy Minister of Social
Development and Mr R S Schoeman has been appointed as Deputy Minister of
Health with effect from 4 November 2002.

Mr Malatsi is not a member of the National Assembly and has been appointed
under section 93(1)b of the Constitution. This is by way of information. I
think since Mr Schoeman is here, we may congratulate him.

      MOTION WITHOUT NOTICE MOVED BY MISS S RAJBALLY ON 31 OCTOBER 2002

                               (Announcement)

THE SPEAKER: Hon members, before we proceed, I wish to draw your attention
to the fact that last week, on 31 October, the House adopted a motion which
had been moved by the hon Miss Rajbally without notice. It concerned
illegal marriages of foreigners to South African citizens.

When the signed text became available to the Chair, it became clear that
the motion that was adopted was incomplete and did not make sense on its
own.

There was reference in the resolution to a document which the member had in
her hand which identified a victim of this practice, which she claimed
provided proof of such incidents occurring, but that information was not
part of the resolution adopted by the House. Without that information, the
resolution becomes meaningless, and I am therefore unable to communicate it
to the executive.

I would have hoped that members would have noticed this before adopting the
motion. I now request parties to look urgently at the decision the House
took, as printed in the Minutes of Proceedings of 31 October 2002, and to
take whatever steps are necessary to revise the resolution.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr D C MABENA: Madam Speaker, I shall move on behalf of the ANC:
  That the House -


  (1) notes that the focus theme of November is ``protection of the
       environment'';


  (2) further notes that the owner of a South African hake fishing vessel
       appeared in court on 4 November 2002, facing charges related to
       illegal harvesting of fish worth R12 million;


  (3) believes that the protection of our marine resources is


       (a)  consistent with the national agenda for eradication of poverty,
           environmental protection and sustainable development; and


       (b)  in line with the Johannesburg plan of implementation, which
           seeks to put environmental consideration at the centre of the
           agenda for sustainable development;


  (4) commends members of the Scorpions Unit who seized a vessel owned by
       this company; and


  (5) calls on all those involved in fishing to observe laws regulating
       this industry.

[Applause.]

Mr T D LEE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) expresses its dismay at the loud-mouthed, overbearing and crude
       comments of the hon Minister of Sport and Recreation at a meeting
       with the UCB;


  (2) notes that the Minister acknowledges his race-based agenda by stating
       that he is not interested in players who are white;


  (3) resolves that the Government and, in particular the Minister, should
       set an example by avoiding making racist comments; and


  (4) resolves further that if the Minister denies making the remarks
       attributed to him by the UCB, he agrees to undergo a lie-detection
       test before apologising to the people of South Africa.

[Applause.] [Interjections.]

Nkosi M W HLENGWA: Madam Speaker, I wish to move on behalf of the IFP at
the next sitting ...

The SPEAKER: Order! Please proceed, hon member. I was trying to get less
noise in the House.

Nkosi M W HLENGWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

I wish to move on behalf of the IFP at the next sitting of Parliament:


  That the House -


  (1) recognises the social awareness and responsibility of Divpack, which
       made available to the youth in the Thoyana Clan the following items:


       (a)  15 garden hoes with handles;


       (b)  15 garden rakes;


       (c)  15 garden forks;


       (d)  15 garden spades; and


       (e)  15 watering cans;


  (2) believes that -


       (a)  donations such as these definitely go a long way to helping
           people to produce food; and


       (b)  all communities need to rekindle the practice of growing food
           rather than buying it;
  (3) wishes to support a return to the practice of each household
       producing as much food as possible; and


  (4) acknowledges the lead given by Divpack and challenges other companies
       to do the same.

Dr B G MBULAWA-HANS: Madam Speaker, I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that a five-month-old baby is in a critical condition after she
       was raped in Hillbrow on Saturday night;


  (2) further notes that the Mankweng police arrested a 17-year-old youth
       for allegedly raping a three-year-old baby;


  (3) believes that these child-rape cases are indicative of an enormous
       challenge facing our country to rebuild the moral fibre of our
       society;
  (4) resolves to continue mobilising the people of South Africa to build a
       nation that cares for, loves and cherishes its children;


  (5) expresses its profound disapproval and outrage, and strongly condemns
       all those who subject children to these horrible and criminal acts;
       and


  (6) calls on all communities to work with the police to ensure that
       perpetrators are brought to book.

[Applause.]

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move on
the next sitting day of the House on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that Mr David Malatsi and Mr Renier Schoeman of the New NP were
       appointed as Deputy Ministers of Social Development and of Health,
       respectively;


  (2) furthermore notes that these appointments emanate from an agreement
       of co-operation between the ANC and the New NP; and


  (3) agrees that participatory governance at national, provincial and
       local level will develop a unity of purpose to confront the great
       challenges that face our country, such as poverty, unemployment,
       homelessness, crime and HIV/Aids.

[Applause.]

Mr T ABRAHAMS: Madam Speaker, I shall move on behalf of the UDM at the next
sitting of this House:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the President has appointed two members of the New NP to
       junior Cabinet positions;


  (2) expresses its condemnation of this blatant public consummation of the
       ANC/New NP bed-hopping at the cost of the taxpayer;


  (3) recognises the significance of the New NP being favoured over
       alliance partner, Cosatu, for portfolios on which the labour
       federation has campaigned vigorously, often to the embarrassment of
       the ANC;


  (4) expresses its misgivings about the appointment of Mr Malatsi, given
       the pending public prosecutor case against him; and


  (5) acknowledges the dire need to improve capacity in the Health
       Ministry, and that Mr Schoeman can hardly be described as a person
       qualified to fill the current managerial vacuum in the Ministry, and
       that his appointment smacks of political expediency, which the
       Sowetan of today describes as a ``tactical retreat'' for the ANC to
       extricate itself from its mismanagement of HIV/Aids.

The SPEAKER: Order! Order! Hon member, please! You all have 60 seconds to
make your point. Your resolutions will be published in full.

Mrs D G NHLENGETHWA: Madam Speaker, I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes a report that 541 children in the Umvoti district in KwaZulua-
       Natal are eligible for a child support grant, but cannot apply
       because they do not have birth certificates;


  (2) further notes that the Department of Social Development has embarked
       on a mass campaign to ensure that eligible children are registered
       for a child support grant;


  (3) believes that widening the social grant to absorb more children who
       are eligible will contribute to alleviating poverty and will reduce
       the negative social impact of poverty on our communities; and


  (4) calls on government officials in the Departments of Social
       Development and of Home Affairs and volunteers to work towards
       ensuring that all children are registered.

[Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move on
behalf of the ACDP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with surprise allegations that some traditional leaders are
       threatening to respond with violence if the Government pressed ahead
       with a Bill that would change land ownership patterns in rural areas;


  (2) further notes with appreciation the fact that traditional leaders
       have over many years brought about order, stability and peaceful
       communal living in areas under their jurisdiction;


  (3) calls on traditional leaders to persuade any of their members who may
       be talking about violent resistance to change their intended way of
       resolving their differences by making an urgent appeal to the
       Government to reconsider their concerns and constructive proposals;
       and


  (4) appeals to Government to delay the passing of the Communal Land
       Rights Bill and to, one more time, engage traditional leaders in
       discussions to ensure that their concerns are also taken on board.

Mr N E MAGUBANE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that a 61-year-old pensioner, Zachariah Ntuli, collapsed and
       died while standing in a queue for his pension grant last Tuesday in
       Pietermaritzburg;


  (2) further notes that the Minister of Social Development, the hon Zola
       Skweyiya, has promised to investigate claims that the welfare office
       provides poor quality service to pensioners;


  (3) believes that the aged must be treated with dignity and respect;


  (4) further believes that public servants and communities must lend a
       helping hand in ensuring that the collection of pension grants is
       made as painless as possible for the aged;


  (5) welcomes the announcement made by the hon Skweyiya to investigate
       claims of poor service-delivery; and


  (6) calls on public servants to execute their responsibilities in a
       professional and efficient manner in line with the spirit of Batho
       Pele.

[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, there are too many meetings in the House. There
is supposed to be only one.

Mr R J HEINE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  parastatal companies are owned by South Africa's taxpayers and
           are answerable to the taxpayers through the Minister of Public
           Enterprises;


       (b)  the Minister of Public Enterprises is a senior and influential
           member of the ANC; and


       (c)  it is reported that some parastatals are paying R140 000 to the
           ANC to exhibit at the ANC conference in Stellenbosch this year;


  (2) believes that this is an improper use of taxpayers' money to swell
       the coffers of the ruling party; and


  (3) resolves to ask the Public Protector to investigate whether this
       payment to the ruling party by parastatals is in the best interest of
       democracy and good governance.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]
Mrs I MARS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that it is vitally important for public representatives to have
       access to information on Government poverty alleviation projects in
       order to properly fulfil their oversight functions;


  (2) expresses its appreciation to the Speaker for the debate on
       Parliament's role in fighting poverty, which took place on 31 October
       2002 and which highlighted the need for unfettered access to
       information;


  (3) further notes with alarm media allegations of fraud and corruption in
       poverty relief programmes to the effect that project leaders were
       enriching themselves at the cost of needy communities; and


  (4) underlines the fact that public representatives cannot effectively
       exercise oversight over poverty alleviation programmes without
       unconditional access to the relevant information.

Ms N R NTSHULANA-BHENGU: Madam Speaker, I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Minister of Sport and Recreation, the hon Ngconde
       Balfour, has in the past week been subjected to serious attacks which
       are part of an orchestrated campaign aimed at undermining the
       transformation process in general and the transformation of sport in
       particular;


  (2) further notes that this campaign has been waged following the
       Minister's statement on his commitment to foster transformation in
       cricket;


  (3) believes that this orchestrated campaign is a mischievous and lame
       attempt aimed at distracting attention from key transformational
       challenges facing cricket in particular and the country in general,
       and is driven by those in our country who still harbour some
       sentimental yearning for the past policies of white racial
       superiority; and


  (4) commends the Minister of Sport and Recreation and the department for
       standing firm in championing the cause of transformation in sport.

Mr J DURAND: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move on
behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that political analysts, amongst others, Dr Dirk Kotzé, have
       said that -


       (a)  the DA's confrontational approach towards the Government may
           have alienated it from blacks; and


       (b)  the hon Leon's attempts to make an impact on the ANC Government
           has failed, partly because his approach was typical of a
           political style not suitable for South African politics;


  (2) further notes that the recent revival of far-right extremism shows
       clearly that some of the DA's supporters have construed the DA's
       ``fight back'' campaign as a ``fight blacks'' campaign; and


  (3) believes that the DP/DA's confrontational opposition style has
       incited the fears of minority groups and is hindering reconciliation
       in South Africa.

[Applause.]

             FIRE IN JOE SLOVO AND MOOITRAP INFORMAL SETTLEMENTS
                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE ANC: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  more than 400 families at Joe Slovo informal settlement and more
           than 300 families at Mooitrap informal settlement were left
           homeless as a result of fire over the weekend; and


       (b)  these unfortunate events affected negatively learners who are
           sitting for their end of the year examinations;


  (2) believes that these incidents also point to the need for us to work
       tirelessly towards eradicating poverty and to speed up the process of
       providing secure housing for the people;
  (3) expresses its solidarity with those families who have lost their
       belongings as a result of fire at the Joe Slovo and Mooitrap informal
       settlements; and


  (4) calls on all the people to lend a helping hand in assisting the
       victims of these fires to rebuild their homes.

Agreed to.

The SPEAKER: Hon Ministers, it would be appreciated if you were to allow
the debate to take place. [Laughter.]

The first item on the Order Paper ... Hon Minister! [Laughter.]
[Interjections.] Hon Minister of Labour! I have repeatedly appealed to you
to heed the debate and to refrain from making private signals across the
floor of the House!

          SOUTH AFRICA'S POSITION ON THE POSSIBLE INVASION OF IRAQ

                          (Subject for discussion)

Mr C W EGLIN: Madam Speaker, when this debate was first requested in
September, the situation regarding the Iraq issue looked bleak and as if it
could rapidly deteriorate into a bloody and protracted war. Since then, a
number of events have taken place that have impacted one way or the other
on the world, and its concern for peace and stability.

On the positive side, in spite of some hawkish statements coming from the
United States and preparations, both logistical and political that that
country has made for military action against Iraq, the United States
administration has thus far adhered to what could be called the ``United
Nations route'' for endeavouring to resolve this issue.

On the negative side is the bomb blast in Bali, the Phillipines, the
hostage drama in Moscow, secular killings in various parts of the world,
the bomb attack on a French oil-carrying vessel and the admission by the
North Korea that it had reached an advanced stage of developing nuclear
capability. These recent events added to existing areas of tension, and the
emotions they have evoked have increased the brittleness that is developing
in the field of international affairs.

It is against this background of international unease that it is important
that the Iraq issue be dealt with decisively and expeditiously. Having said
that, let me add that we believe it must also be dealt with firmly within
the framework of international law, of which the United Nations Charter is
the main instrument.

Much has been said about Saddam Hussein. I shall dispense with some of the
rhetoric and simply say that, based on his record of behaviour, since
taking power through a military coup more than 20 years ago, his record
includes the launching of two wars of aggression against his neighbours,
the ruthless suppression of the Kurds and the Shiite Muslim minorities in
Iraq, the use of chemical weapons during two of those conflicts, and his
non-compliance with numerous UN Council resolutions. Hussein is certainly
not someone who could be trusted with weapons of mass destruction.

Taking all the relevent factors into account, the DP believes that the
Government should act in the following manner in respect of this issue.

Firstly, the Government has to make it clear that action to find a solution
to Iraq must be taken multilaterally, and must be based on the UN Charter
and on the tenets of international law. Frankly, military action against
Iraq taken without UN sanction, but outside the framework of international
law, is bound to have far-reaching unintended consequences, not least of
which could be increased polarisation within the international community
and an undermining of the fragile unity that has been created around the
concept of combating terrorism.

Secondly, the Government must do all in its power that it can to get the UN
Security Council to send UN weapons inspectors back to Iraq, armed with a
mandate that will enable them to establish, once and for all, whether
Hussein has weapons of mass destruction and, if so, where these are, and to
arrange for their destruction.

Thirdly, the Government must use its influence in the Non-Aligned Movement
to induce the Iraqi government to co-operate fully with the UN Security
Council and its weapons inspectors.

Fourthly, the Government must support the UN Security Council in whatever
steps it considers necessary to ensure that the weapons inspection process
is carried through to completion, and that any weapons of mass destruction
are found and destroyed, and any facilities for their manufacture are
dismantled.

We hope that it will not come to a stage when the UN Security Council would
consider it necessary to authorise the use of force. Yet, cognisance should
be taken of the fact that Article 42 of the UN Charter provides for the
Security Council to have the power to authorise the use of military force
if it considers this to be necessary.

Indeed, the Security Council has authorised the use of force in no fewer
than 11 occasions over the past 12 years. Most of these authorisations were
in relation to conflicts within countries. Yet, in cases such as East
Timor, Kosovo, Afghanistan and the Gulf War, the authorisation involved
conflicts that had an international character.

Fifthly, economic sanctions which the United Nations imposed on Iraq as a
consequence of the Iraqi government's repeated refusal to comply with
Security Council resolutions have frankly not succeeded with their
objective. They have brought hardship to the people of Iraq, but they have
not brought a change of behaviour on the part of the Iraqi government.

We believe that it would be in the interest of the Iraqi people, and indeed
the world economy, for the sanctions to be ended, but here again the South
African Government has a role to play. On the one hand, it should use its
influence to persuade the Iraqi government to comply with all of the UN
resolutions. On the other hand, it should do what it can to encourage the
United Nations to speed up the weapons inspection process so that the issue
of Saddam Hussein and the weapons of mass destruction can be resolved in
its entirety.

We hear today that the Deputy Minister has received an invitation from
Saddam Hussein for the hon the President Mbeki to visit Iraq. The DP does
not believe this is an appropriate time for South Africa to indulge in
goodwill visits of this nature. [Interjections.] However, it is a time for
straightforward upfront diplomatic actions in which the focus of South
African communication with Iraq must be to persuade Saddam Hussein to play
his part in resolving the crisis that has developed around him.

The Iraq issue is one of deep international concern. There is a concern
about the threat to peace and stability. There is a concern about the
imminent danger of war and its consequences. There is also a concern that
the established structures of world government might not be able to cope
with the complex issues that face the globalised world today.

Indeed, the crisis that has developed around Iraq has, in fact, become a
watershed issue for the United Nations as an instrument of world
government. The UN Charter charges the United Nations Security Council with
the responsibility for dealing, not only with acts of aggression and
breaches of peace, but also to take action in respect of threats to peace.

If the United Nations shows that it has the will and the effectiveness to
discharge this responsibility in respect of the Iraq issue, we believe that
it would enhance its stature and establish its viability as a key element
of world government.

As the world's economy becomes globalised, as national borders become  less
significant in ordering societies, as the destiny of nations becomes
increasingly intertwined, so it becomes essential for us to have an
effective and accepted world body that can act to ensure that the people of
the world can live in peace.

One of the tasks of South Africa must be to ensure that the United Nations
is reformed, as it may be necessary to reflect the changed circumstances
since it was formed some 56 years ago. Out of this crisis, it becomes an
effective and accepted instrument of world government, bringing peace and
stability to mankind. [Applause.]

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Madam Speaker, members of Parliament, comrades and ladies
and gentlemen, we in the ANC, given our history, today beseech the people
of America in particular, and the world at large, that there must be peace
and friendship in the world. Without this, we as humans, in pursuit of
power, avarice and greed will one day destroy this planet totally. If we
subscribe to the view that we do not inherit this earth, but we borrow it
from our children, then it is necessary for us to note that the impending
invasion of Iraq by the United States of America will be a contributing
factor to deny us the opportunity to co-exist. I am confident that all
South Africans, regardless of their political and religious persuasions, do
not want war.

We rejected war and violence to sort out our own differences here. It has
to be done everywhere and every time. If we as human beings have to leave a
heritage for succeeding generations, then let it be pinned with peace and
friendship, co-existence and mutual respect, not religious bigotry, hate
and prejudice, avarice and domination.

South Africa does not ignore the menace of terrorism, nor do we ignore the
development of chemical, biological or nuclear weapons. We abhor and reject
them, whether they are in the possession of Iraq, the United States of
America or any other nation. This is why we voluntarily dismantled whatever
we had that could have contributed to mass destruction, in this case, our
nuclear capacity.

We want to say to the people of the United States and Britain that their
leaders in government are wrong, because, in most countries of the world,
we know that, on the question of terrorism, the mujahedeen was created by
the United States in 1979 to fight the Soviet Union. An estimated 100 000
militants from 40 countries were trained in Pakistan by the CIA. Bin Laden
is one of them.

Whilst we hold no brief for Iraq with regard to chemical or nuclear weapons
and the disregard for a human rights culture, and assuming that Saddam is a
brutal despot, the United States itself enthusiastically provided his
regime with the technology to develop weapons of mass destruction until
1991, including nuclear and chemical weapons. If developing these weapons
is enough to trigger an American invasion, then Iran, North Korea,
Pakistan, India, China and even Israel are the United States' so-called
legitimate targets.

And had we in South Africa not voluntarily abandoned our nuclear capacity,
we too could have been a target if we did not toe the American line or if
we had an abundance of oil.

Our request to the world, through the United Nations, is to adopt policies
that facilitate and enhance the scope of a global community, respecting
diversity and rooted in universal values.

While South Africa acknowledges the claim that the United States has the
right to seek out terrorists who attacked her on September 11, we reject
the claim by the Bush administration that there is a clash of
civilisations, as if Saddam represented one, and Bush and Blair the other.
If it were so, then the Saudi, Kuwaiti, Pakistani and Turkish alliance with
the United States would be hard to understand. In this context, as early as
1999 a reputed writer in the Foreign Affairs Journal wrote:


  Whilst the US regularly denounces various countries, in this case Iraq,
  as a rogue country, in the eyes of many countries, it is becoming the
  rogue superpower - the single greatest threat to their societies.

If this is legitimate, the United States must immediately engage in and be
part of a total ban on nuclear arms and disarmament. She must sign the
Kyoto Protocol. She must recognise through her deeds the nature, role and
the legitimacy of the United Nations.

Without being an apologist for Iraq or Saddam Hussein, the world has not
forgotten that it was the United States that bombed Nagasaki and Hiroshima,
and that it was the United States that used napalm in Vietnam.

Today I believe people everywhere, especially American and British, have to
realise that the United States' foreign policy is characterised by layer
upon layer of hypocrisy, deceit and media manipulation in the service of
one superpower hegemony.

All South Africans, regardless of party affiliation, are committed to good
governance and democracy. The arrogance of interfering with the sovereignty
of Iraq, with total disregard of the United Nations, and its unambiguous
support and creation of the Mabutus, Savimbis, Yah Yah Khans and the Sauds
is the highest form of hypocrisy. I do not believe that the vast majority
of Americans can support this, even if these kinds of double standards are
supported by the Rumsfields, Cheneys and Rices of the Unites States'
administration.

With the disintegration of the Warsaw pact countries and the rise of
American unipolarism, we in Africa, who have acted for the greater good of
the continent and the world, and who were and are seen to be limiting our
own sovereignty by, among other things, a peer review to judge and act on
our misdemeanours with respect to democracy, peace, security and stability,
take serious note of the United States  administration's disregard of a
review and overview process of the United Nations in respect of the United
States' own international belligerency as the big brother dictating terms
to the rest of us.

The near annihilation of Iraq's educational, health care and social service
system, known to have been among the best in the Middle East during the
Gulf War, cannot be any less a disaster than the consequences of September
11. And if one has to go one step further on the consequences of the the
Gulf War, then the estimated loss of the Arab states in 1991 was $800
billion, of which $200 billion affected Iraq alone. Another consequence of
Gulf War was that the United Stated succeeded in strengthening its economic
position, not only at the expense of the Middle East, but also at the
expense of other competitors, above all, Britain and France. So I would
like to ask the hon Eglin: What is new? Perhaps Blair, too, now seeks the
spoils of war, in this case, oil.

Gleaning from the report by Blair on Saddam, he says:


  Unless we face up to the threat, not only do we risk undermining the
  authority of the United Nations, whose resolutions he defies, but more
  importantly, we place at risk the lives and prosperity of our own people
  ...

It is my belief that it will do British integrity well if such a stance was
taken with Israel's defiance of the United Nations resolutions and that
country's total onslaught on the lives of Palestinian children, women and
men.

To break the chain of violence in the Middle East, we seek to do so with an
invocation to our own morality on the one hand and our commitment to ensure
that Africa's resuscitation is not impeded on the other.

This is why President Mbeki, both as our President and the Chairperson of
NAM, is in contact with Iraq. This is why Iraq seeks our intervention. Our
commitment to peace, justice, human rights and a stable global community is
our strength and our vision. Just as we ask Iraq to commit herself to peace
and the dismantling of all the arsenals of mass destruction, we also ask
the United States and her allies to do so. These arsenals are not safe, nor
are they justifiable in any one country's hands, but especially not the
United States, which has unleashed nuclear weapons and napalm onto our
planet which has since become a global village.

Lastly, the ideal of human civilisation does not and cannot be allowed to
lie in the isolation of arrogant independence, but in the sisterhood of
interdependence of individuals as well as nations, in all spheres of
thought and activity. I quote one called Stephen Ambrose to contextualise
what I have just said, in his writings in Rise to Globalism:


  The United States has a military alliance with 50 nations, over a million
  soldiers, airmen and sailors stationed in more than 100 countries, and an
  offensive capacity sufficient to destroy the world many times over. It
  has used military force to intervene in Indochina, Lebanon, the Dominican
  Republic, Grenada, Central America and the Persian Gulf, supported an
  invasion of Cuba, distributed enormous quantities of arms to friendly
  governments around the world, and fought costly wars in Korea and
  Vietnam. But, despite all the money spent on armaments and no matter how
  far outwards America extended her power, America's national security was
  constantly in jeopardy.

It is hoped that we as South Africans contextualise the true significance
of the present crisis that our human race is facing in Iraq, and hat we do
not isolate and treat the symptoms, but that we treat the root cause. I
would like to thank the hon Eglin for having the vision to initiate this
debate, and I hope and pray to God that Mr Eglin and his party will be at
one with us to ensure that peace and harmony in our world exist, especially
in Iraq. [Applause.]

Mr E J LUCAS: Madam Speaker, in the aftermath of the 11 September tragedy,
American feelings of revenge against terrorists and their desire to rid the
world of these faceless perpetrators of random violence can easily be
justified. We can also easily relate to the suffering experienced by
Americans during the attacks on their homeland. It should also not come as
any surprise that the level of loss of life and destruction of property,
synonymous with American global power, could drive leaders and followers to
extremes.

Notwithstanding the dreadful events of 11 September, there rests a duty on
all world leaders and governments to preserve global peace. We can
understand the American so-called war against terror, but care should be
taken not to simply equate this drive to root out terrorism with military
action against Iraq.

Yes, there are fears that Saddam Hussein is supporting terrorist groups,
and increasing fears that he is attempting to produce weapons of mass
destruction that may end up in the hands of terrorists. Their targets would
no doubt include American interests and citizens. However, if Iraq is
manufacturing weapons of mass destruction and this fact can be determined
without any shadow of a doubt, then the international community must take
the appropriate action or mandate its members to do so collectively or
individually. The decision should not be left to the Americans, but to the
Security Council of the United Nations.

Recently, the Iraqi government indicated its willingness to accept the
return of UN weapons inspectors and to grant them unconditional access to
suspect facilities. It is no surprise that America and Britain view this
offer with a large measure of scepticism, based on Iraq's past performance.

They may have a case. We should not forget that Saddam Hussein used
chemical weapons against his own people and in the war against Iran, or
that he invaded another sovereign country, or that he made every effort to
thwart the UN weapons inspectors between 1991 and 1998. However, if he
should attempt to do so again, the UN must take action and see to it that
Iraq sticks to the agreement and its commitment to allow weapons
inspections. This should not be left to a unilateral decision by the
Americans.
Russia and other countries that have regular dealings with Iraq should also
make every effort to persuade Saddam Hussein to honour his commitment to
allow weapons inspections. They should impress upon him that if he does
not, he will be isolated and military action will follow.

The last thing the world needs is a war in the Middle East. It is
historically one of the most volatile regions in the world, and its
volatility impacts on the entire world. The world economy has just started
to show signs of recovery from the 11 September attacks. A war with Iraq
will undo much of the recent recovery. Furthermore, a war with Iraq that
has not been properly mandated by the United Nations will have wider
implications for relations between the West and the Arab nations in the
Middle East, and will no doubt increase anti-West and anti-American
sentiment among extremists and fundamentalists. This could easily spawn a
whole new generation of terrorists.

Recently, the British government released a so-called dossier containing
the case for a war against Iraq, but analysts and experts generally believe
the dossier makes a strong case for weapons inspections and not for war.

The international community should take note and ensure that new weapons
inspections are started as soon as possible, and that Iraq complies fully
with Security Council resolutions relating to inspections and weapons of
mass destruction. However, it should also make it clear to Iraq that if it
did not comply fully, an international coalition would be mandated to use
force to ensure compliance and the destruction of any weapons of mass
destruction.

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: I fully agree with the previous speaker. If Saddam
Hussein once again fails to comply with UN resolutions, action should be
taken against him.

With all due respect, former President Nelson Mandela has it wrong when he
says the USA is a threat to world peace. [Interjections.] The person who is
a threat to world peace is Saddam Hussein who for the past 11 years has
blatantly defied 16 UN resolutions demanding the destruction of all weapons
of mass destruction; who has already used chemical and biological weapons,
not only against his enemies, but also against his own people; a man
capable of making his deadly arsenal available to terrorist groups, with
devastating consequences for the free world, which could even dwarf the
September 11 catastrophe.

The people who also pose a threat to world peace are those members of the
UN Security Council who for years have helped Iraq defy international law
which they themselves imposed. The debate today should therefore not be
whether the USA should attack Iraq, but whether the UN Security Council
should not, once and for all, live up to its responsibilities in terms of
international law.

Resolution 1284 has become null and void and a new, tougher and much more
comprehensive resolution forcing Iraq to destroy all weapons of mass
destruction is needed, which could prevent a unilateral attack by the USA
on Iraq.
Should Saddam Hussein then once again defy international law, Article 43 of
the UN Charter should immediately come into effect, obliging, inter alia,
all members of the United Nations to give military and other forms of
assistance to the Security Council for the purpose of maintaining
international peace and security. Naturally, South Africa will also have to
meet its obligations in terms of this resolution, and a position of
neutrality then will be out of the question.

The onus to prevent a unilateral attack by the USA on Iraq therefore rests
squarely on the shoulders of the UN and Iraq itself. The USA in turn should
also give a second thought to a unilateral attack on Iraq, because it may
not serve the best interests of that country.

The global war against terrorism is far from over because Osama bin Laden
is still at large. The tragic events in Bali are proof of that. A
unilateral attack on Iraq by the USA may terminate the global coalition
against terrorism, without which the war against terrorism will not be won.
An article in the Financial Times of September 24 pointed out that the most
lethal weapon against tyrants are not so much military action, but the
people who suffer under them.

Dit word bevestig deur die gebeure in Oos-Europa. Toe miljoene onderdruktes
vreedsaam in die strate op regeringsgeboue afgestap het, kon geen
kommunistiese diktator of weermag hulle keer nie. Dit mag dalk net die
moeite werd wees vir die VSA om benewens planne vir militêre aksie, ook
moeite te doen om opposisiekragte binne Irak te mobiliseer.

In die Bybel is daar 'n interessante verhaal in dié verband.
[Tussenwerpsels] Toe Joab, veggeneraal van Dawid, 'n stad beleër het, het
'n vrou hom gevra hoekom hy so 'n mooi stad wil vernietig. Hy sê toe hy is
net op soek na 'n booswig, Seba, en wil nie die stad vernietig nie. Die
vrou gooi toe die kop van Seba oor die stadsmuur en die beleg van die stad
is dadelik beëindig. Saddam Hussein se kop moet spreekwoordelik deur sy eie
mense oor die stadsmuur gegooi word sodat Irak weer sy regmatige plek in
die internasionale gemeenskap kan inneem. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[This is confirmed by the events in Eastern Europe. When millions of
oppressed people marched peacefully down the streets to government
buildings, no communist dictator or armed forces could stop them. It might
just be worthwhile for the USA, in addition to plans for military action,
to be at pains to mobilise opposition forces within Iraq as well.

There is an interesting story in this regard in the Bible. [Interjections.]
When Joab, field general of David, laid siege to a city, a woman asked him
why he wanted to destroy such a beautiful city. He replied that he was only
looking for a criminal, Seba, and did not want to destroy the city. At this
the woman threw Seba's head over the city wall and the siege of the city
was immediately ended. Saddam Hussein's head should proverbially be thrown
over the city wall by his own people so that Iraq can once again take its
legitimate place in the international community.]
In conclusion, it would not be in the best interests of South Africa should
President Mbeki accept Saddam Hussein's invitation to visit Iraq.

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, I wish to ask you, please, to acknowledge
the presence in our midst of a delegation from the Australian parliament,
led by Senator Tierney and the deputy delegation leader, Miss Ellis, and
members of that parliament. [Applause.] We welcome them to this National
Assembly meeting.

Mr S ABRAM: Madam Speaker, in his speech here this afternoon, the hon Colin
Eglin said that the weapons inspection in Iraq should be speeded up.
However, I wish to direct the attention of the House to the fact that the
search for an Iraq resolution in the United Nations began on 12 September
when US President George W Bush challenged world leaders at the UN General
Assembly to deal with Iraq's failure to comply with resolutions, demanding
the elimination of its weapons of mass destruction or to stand aside as the
United States acted. That is very important to take note of that.

Furthermore, on 31 October, US Secretary of State, Colin Powell, said in
Washington that the debate would likely be concluded towards the end of
this week, but he stressed that US action in Iraq will not be decided by
the United Nations. There is nothing, and I quote him, ``that we would
propose in this resolution or we would find acceptable in a resolution that
would handcuff the President of the United States in doing what he feels he
must do'', Powell said, reiterating the administration's view that the US
Congress had already given its authorisation for US military action against
Iraq. Now, who is really holding up the process of UN-sponsored weapons
inspections?

I therefore wish to take issue with the hon Geldenhuys. In no way do we
see, in the current climate, the Iraqi government as being a threat to
world peace. A threat to world peace is a war-mongering George W Bush, who
is willing and prepared to cast aside the Charter of the United Nations in
order to satisfy his personal ego.

Judging the record of George W Bush, I have absolutely no doubt in my mind
that Iraq is going to be attacked by the United States, irrespective of
whether there is a UN resolution or not. And that is why we believe the
position taken by the South African Government, namely that any action
against Iraq should be UN-sponsored, is the correct stand and needs to be
supported. However, let us look at what Iraq says. They maintain that they
have no weapons of mass destruction and that all such weapons were
destroyed. [Interjections.]

Ek dink daardie lid lieg. [I think that the member is lying.]

Let me rather come to the end now, because this thing is flashing. There
are going to be people in this House ...

Mr T D LEE: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of order.
The SPEAKER: Order!

Mr T D LEE: Die agb lid hier - as hy net sal sit - het na een van ons lede
verwys en gesê hy lieg. [The hon member here - if only he would sit down -
referred to one of our members and said he was lying.]

``Lieg'' in English, Madam Speaker, is ``lie'', and I think that is
unparliamentary.

Mr S ABRAM: Madam Speaker, I have an immediate response for the Chair ...
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, you will wait for me to rule.

An HON MEMBER: Sit down, man!

The SPEAKER: Order! Did you in fact refer in the terms that have been
raised in the point of order?

Mr S ABRAM: Madam Speaker, whilst I was speaking, a member from that side
...
The SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, I am not asking for a debate. Will you
kindly withdraw the words you used which amounted to ``you lie''?

Mr S ABRAM: Madam Speaker, I was told that I am ...

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, you will abide by my ruling!

Mr S ABRAM: Madam Speaker, fine.

Hy lieg nie; hy vertel 'n onwaarheid. [Gelag.] [He is not lying; he is
telling an untruth. [Laughter.]]

Madam Speaker, may I just conclude?

The SPEAKER: Order! No, you may sit down.

Mr T D LEE: Madam Speaker, he did not withdraw his statement.
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Well, if you all will let me, I am about to say that.
Mr Abram, I asked you to withdraw the words you used, please.

Mr S ABRAM: Madam Speaker, not because that hon member ...

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon member! You will withdraw without any debate. Hon
member! Will you withdraw?

Mr S ABRAM: Madam Speaker, I withdraw the word ``lieg'' out of respect for
the Chair.

The SPEAKER: Order! Thank you.

Mr S ABRAM: Madam Speaker, I want to conclude. There are members in this
House who would like to outpace Tony Blair. To them I just want to quote
the little Afrikaans song:


  Waai jou stertjie, brakkie, waai dit heen en weer; waai jou stertjie,
  brakkie, waai dit op en neer.

[Laughter.] [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Order, hon members!

Adv Z L MADASA: Madam Speaker, the Iraqi regime's record on human rights is
indefensible according to our own Nepad criteria, but the issue is how to
deal with the Iraqi regime, and we submit that this should be done
according to the United Nations' decision.

The South African Government has affirmed the right of the US to strike
Iraq in self-defence. The Government has also stated that such a strike
must be based on evidence that Iraq is involved in terrorism, was involved
in the 9/11 attack and is producing weapons of mass destruction, and, if
the attack is appropriate, it must be authorised by the UN.

We in the ACDP believe that this position accords with international law,
but we would like to add that Iraq must allow unconditional inspection of
its weapons. The ACDP does not agree that the following considerations are
good reasons to start a war: selfish interests, a need for regime change
and Iraq being part of the so-called ``axis of evil''. As Christian
democrats, we would like to caution against declaring other states evil, as
that is a recipe for religious wars and the loss of innocent lives, and is
contrary to religious tolerance and world peace.

All democratic and peace-loving nations have a collective responsibility to
act responsibly in order to isolate extremists and thereby discourage
international terrorism. As Christian democrats and friends of the US, we
urge them to think about innocent women and children before starting a war.
Women and children are inevitably always at the receiving end of a war.

The US is an important trading partner and a friend of South Africa.
Therefore we in the ACDP will not join the anti-American chant. We need the
USA. We ask its leaders, as our friends, to subject themselves to peer
review by the United Nations. We say to President Bush: Let any action on
Iraq have the blessing of the United Nations.

Dr P W A MULDER: Mevrou die Speaker, die onderwerp is ``Wat is Suid-Afrika
se posisie ten opsigte van 'n inval in Irak?'' Die antwoord is glad nie so
eenvoudig en maklik as wat sommige mag dink nie.

In die ou dae van die Koue Oorlog was die wêreld baie eenvoudiger. Daar was
Oosbloklande aan die een kant, met die Sowjet-Unie as leier, en die Weste
aan die ander kant met Amerika as leier. Afrika en die onverbonde lande as
'n derde blok was ver bo hul ekonomiese en militêre mag belangrik, want in
die magsbalans tussen Oos en Wes kon hulle die deurslag gee. Met die val
van die Berlynse Muur en die Sowjet-Unie is die Koue Oorlog vir altyd
verby, en dié twee supermoondhede en twee blokke is daarmee heen.

Vandag het ons een supermoondheid - Amerika. In plaas van 'n Oos-Wes
indeling van lande, deel Amerika lande in as ``vir Amerika'' of ``teen
Amerika''; ``vir terrorisme'' of ``teen terrorisme''. Pakistan se regering
is nie demokraties verkies nie, maar hy word as aan die kant van Amerika
gesien en teen terreur, en daarom is hy reg. Irak se regering is ook nie
demokraties verkies nie, maar hy word as aan die verkeerde kant gesien en
daarom is hy vir terreur.

Die VF maak beswaar teen Amerika se dubbele standaarde. Die indruk word
geskep dat die VSA sy magsposisie in die wêreld misbruik net vir eie gewin
misbruik, en dikwels as 'n boelie gesien - daaraan is geen twyfel nie. Maar
terselfdertyd is Irak, met sy ondemokratiese regering, met sy vergrype van
menseregte en veral sy onderdrukking van die Koerde as 'n minderheidsgroep
en 'n geskiedenis van invalle in Koeweit ook nie vir die VF aanvaarbaar
nie.

Internasionale politiek is nie logies nie. Internasionale politiek het geen
morele standaarde of hoë reëls nie. Kom ons kies nie ``vir Amerika'' of
``vir Irak'' nie, maar ons kies ``vir Suid-Afrika''. Wat beteken dit? Dit
beteken dat die reël wat geld, is wat in belang is van Suid-Afrika. Dit is
om ekonomiese redes dom van Suid-Afrika om Amerika as 'n vyand te hê, maar
dit is nie verkeerd vir Suid-Afrika om Amerika te kritiseer as hy alleen
wil ingryp aan die ander kant nie. Terselfdertyd sê ek egter vir lede dit
is dom om te naby aan Irak te beweeg in hierdie stadium; dit is nie in Suid-
Afrika se belang nie. Jammer oor al die morele argumente na watter kant
ookal.

Die Regering moet oppas dat sy onderrok nie uithang wanneer hy sy keuse
maak nie. Dit is 'n gevaarlike spel. Suid-Afrika se keuse is ons keuse; kom
ons kies vir Suid-Afrika. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Speaker, the subject is ``What is South Africa's
position in respect of an invasion into Iraq?'' The answer is not as simple
and easy as some people may think.

In the olden days of the Cold War the world was much simpler. There were
Eastern Bloc countries on the one hand, with the Soviet Union as the
leader, and the West on the other hand, with America as the leader. Africa
and the nonaligned countries were, as a third bloc, important for over and
above their economic and military power, because in the power balance
between East and West they could tip the balance. After the fall of the
Berlin Wall and the Soviet Union, the Cold War became a thing of the past
and these two superpowers and two blocs followed suit.

Today we have one superpower - America. Instead of an East-West division of
countries, America is dividing countries into those ``for America'' or
``against America''; ``for terrorism'' or ``anti-terrorism''. Pakistan's
government was not democratically elected, but it is regarded as an ally of
America and opposed to terrorism, and therefore it is right. The government
of Iraq was also not democratically elected, but it is regarded as being on
the wrong side and therefore it is in favour of terrorism.

The FF objects to America's double standards. The impression is being
created that the USA is abusing its position of power in the world solely
for its own gain, and America is often seen as a bully - there is no doubt
about that. However, at the same time Iraq, with its undemocratic
government, with its violation of human rights and especially its
oppression of the Kurds as a minority group and a history of invasions into
Quwait, is equally unacceptable to the FF.

International politics is not logical. International politics has no moral
standards or higher rules. Let us not choose ``for America'' or ``for
Iraq'', but ``for South Africa''. What does this mean? It means that the
applicable rule is what is important to South Africa. For economical
reasons it would be stupid of South Africa to regard America as an enemy,
but on the other hand, it is not wrong for South Africa to criticise
America for wanting to intervene on its own. At the same time, however, I
am telling members that it is stupid to move too close to Iraq at this
stage; it is not in the interests of South Africa. It is a pity about all
the moral arguments in whatever direction.

The Government must guard against letting its petticoat hang out when it
makes its choice. This is a dangerous game. South Africa's choice is our
choice; let us choose for South Africa.]

Mrs F MAHOMED: Madam Speaker, in the name of God, the most gracious, the
most merciful, I wish to remind Dr Mulder that terrorism is terrorism, and
it has neither side nor boundary. So, he must remember that.

Not so long ago, world political leaders met at the United Nations General
Assembly to commit themselves to co-operating regarding matters of
maintaining peace, justice and prosperity throughout our universe. This
united resolve to create a world free of pain and oppression, free of war
and violent conflict, and free of poverty and injustice gives hope to all.
However, the blatant defiance of the United Nation's resolutions by the
United States is a cause for concern as the organ's integrity and
credibility is at stake.

The US needs to understand that all countries are interdependent and need
to co-exist by recognising the global challenges of diverse nations.
Respect for all sovereign states and equitable treatment of all nations is
imperative for ensuring world peace. The US also needs to introspect by
reviewing its foreign policy objectives. No nation state or so-called
``superpower'' has the right to adopt a carte blanche approach or to
interfere with the integrity of any country or impose its will on the
people.

It is definitely not a prerogative of any country to choose a leader of
another country. No arbitrary military bombardment can be ordered by a
military boss of any country on the basis of sheer speculation by a certain
nation state.

Iraq has agreed that the United Nations inspections can continue
unconditionally, and many believe that Iraq no longer has the industrial
base necessary to produce weapons of mass destruction. The question is: Why
is the US still threatening a unilateral invasion of Iraq? It should allow
the UN to complete its inspection. It is important that the US should not
rely on baseless speculation and pre-empt any invasion.

The seriousness of an invasion of Iraq by the US will have disastrous and
catastrophic consequences in and around the whole world. Indeed, this will
have a ripple effect on our own country's economy and it will hamper our
Nepad and our African Union objectives.

It will divide and destabilise the Middle Eastern region, and give rise to
sporadic civil unrest, which will explode into devastating and undesirable
consequences. Severe repercussions will destroy many economies, which will
have direct socioeconomic implications globally. Armed conflict and
indiscriminate military attacks, equivalent to war crimes, have already
resulted in massive devastation where we have witnessed children dying in
the arms of their mothers.

It is interesting that the US's interest in cheap oil works in tandem with
its military budget. The defence industries in the US continue to profit
hugely by the naval blockade in the Gulf. The mighty corporations continue
to produce new warplanes, tanks, bombs and ammunition that compel them to
continue war in regions without respecting international humanitarian law.
It is true that every 10 years there is a need to test its weapons and
technology to ensure its utility within the context of a military strategy.
We all know that the weaponry was tested in the context of Afghanistan.

We need to remind ourselves that the United Nations Charter stipulates that
war no longer constitutes an acceptable means of settling disputes between
states. The credibility of multilateral organs will be threatened if nation
states arrogantly ignore the role of such important institutions. The US
continues to say that they will continue to act against Iraq, with or
without the United Nations. The question then remains: What respect or
authenticity remains for multilateralism? The double standards are self-
evident and emphatic when the so-called `superpower' pontifies baseless
rhetoric about good governance, democracy, justice and equality.

Iraq has not fully recovered from the devastation and ravages of the Gulf
War. We all know that. About 144 documented bombings in Iraq by the US and
British war planes in 1999 killed hundreds of innocent civilians, including
women and children. About 200 to 300 casualties have been reported. The
civilian infrastructure which was targeted is a clear violation of the
Geneva Convention. Sewer systems, telecommunications, oil refineries and
power plants were destroyed and the country has never recovered.
[Interjections.] If the hon members pay attention to what has to be said,
to what is the truth and what can be seen by the whole world, they will
learn what is known except by themselves. [Interjections.]

It needs to be noted that before 1999, Iraq's economy was booming, but
after the devastation of war and sanctions, the country has suffered huge
losses and has severe food shortages. Although the UN's humanitarian relief
programme ``Oil for Food'' has only averted the famine, chronic
malnutrition still continues.

Iraq's environmental damage has severe repercussions on human health and
welfare. The UN sanctions on specific medicines caused hundreds of people
to die of cancer and other related diseases. Even lead pencils are not
allowed as it is assumed that weapons are made of such commodities.
Assumptions can be very dangerous.

The acquisition of oil by the world's superpower is the single most
important threat to world peace. It needs to be recognised that Iraq has
112 billion barrels of undiscovered oil, and it is the second largest
reserve after Saudi Arabia. The US has been excluded from Iraqi oilfields
since the late 1980s.

Russia and China are both interested in Iraqi oil, and the US and Russia
have signed an energy treaty.

The former Director of the CIA, James Woolsley said:


  If France and Russia assist in moving Iraq towards decent government,
  then we will ensure that the new government and American companies work
  closely with them, but if they throw in their lot with Saddam then it
  will be impossible to convince the new government to work with them.

Again, it is ironical that camouflaged rhetoric about justice, transparency
and good governance by certain leaders seems to be interpreted in a very
peculiar way.

I must remind the hon Geldenhuys of something, and I urge him to reflect
somewhat on the fact that Israel has continuously flouted UN Security
Council Resolutions 242 and 338, and it has nuclear weapons and reasons to
want to use them.

The SPEAKER: Hon Ms Mahomed, will you please take a seat?

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Madam Speaker, is the hon member prepared to take a
question? [Interjections.]

Ms F MAHOMED: No, I am not. I do not have the time. I will address the
member's question later.

The US is silent about regime change in Israel, but rather talks about
leadership change in Palestine. Why should Israel have these weapons when
Iraq is not even allowed to have the capability to produce them?

We unequivocally condemn terrorism in all its forms. Throughout the past
200 years, some governments continue to subscribe to the idea of ``the
conspiracy of the few'' to hang on to the power they hold. I must reiterate
that, at all times, policies that continue to promote global insecurity and
clashes among cultures, will not only destabilise the entire region of the
Middle East, but will continue to point towards chaos and the destruction
of all peace efforts by all people in the whole wide world.

We must emphasize that a unilateral invasion of Iraq is not the answer to
ensuring world peace, security and stability. We need to respect and uphold
our commitment towards multilateral organs, and terrorism must be dealt
with holistically so that peace and security prevail for all human beings.
[Applause.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Madam Speaker, the possible invasion of Iraq by the
United States government and its allies poses a serious threat to world
peace and stability. The effects of such actions will be felt for many
years to come long after the planned attack. An invasion of Iraq has the
potential to divide nations, and such an action will, at the very least, be
counterproductive to the mission of disarming it, if Iraq even possesses
such weapons of mass destruction.

It will also be a drawback for a fight against terrorism and any form of
aggression by a state that wishes to create its own world order. South
Africa's position should be informed by a need to create a world that is
free from biological warfare threats, and by contributing to the
destruction of such weapons through dialogue, as violence breeds violence.
We have to do our bit to save the world from the brink of a possible third
world war. If ever President Saddam Hussein cared for his people and has
nothing to hide, he will comply. It is we as South Africans who need to
lobby the United Nations and other states to give sufficient time to the
Iraqis to seriously consider the implications of noncompliance.

An invasion of Iraq will invariably give credence to other terrorist
organisations to continue with their activities to destabilise the post-
Cold War delicate world peace. How we fight world aggressors is more
important than the actual attack. We should desist from attacking countries
perceived to be a threat to world peace at the slightest suspicion or
provocation.

Nations of the world that are committed to world peace should join forces
and fight for the sake of humanity and peace through peaceful means.

Rona ka Setswana ra re tsielala. Gaabo motho go thebe phatswa. Bana ba
motho ba tshwarana ka matsogo lefifing. [In Setswana we say farewell. There
is no place like home. In difficult times, siblings stick together.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, it is the PAC's view that in order to
eradicate poverty and accelerate economic development, especially in the
former colonised countries of Africa, there must be peace in the world. The
governments of America and Britain are endangering world peace by their
intended aggression against Iraq. If American and British governments want
any action taken against Iraq, then this action must be authorised by the
United Nations Security Council, according to the Charter of the UN.

As permanent members of the Security Council, Britain and America must be
exemplary in upholding the UN Charter and mankind's ideals for peace and
prosperity in the world. The PAC salutes the People's Republic of China,
Russia and France, permanent members of the Security Council, which are
upholding the UN Charter and opposing any unilateral actions by America and
Britain regarding Iraq. Iraq is under threat of being attacked because it
is believed to be manufacturing or possessing weapons of mass destruction.
Seven countries in the world, including Britain and America, possess
weapons of mass destruction. It must also not be forgotten that, when the
apartheid regime tried to develop nuclear weapons here, Britain and America
did not threaten any attack on apartheid South Africa. Instead, they turned
a blind eye, just as they do regarding Israel. Iraq is prepared to be
inspected, but are the military arsenals of Britain and America open for
inspection? In fact, Tony Blair should be making peace with the IRA in
Northern Ireland instead of threatening war on Iraq. George Bush must make
peace with North Korea, which has admitted that it is developing its
nuclear weapons.

The PAC is against double standards in international affairs. If this is
allowed, the UN will collapse in the same way its predecessor, the League
of Nations, was destroyed. The PAC is opposed to aggression against Iraq.
Izwe lethu. [Our country.]
Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, the possible invasion of Iraq has been quite
a worry since the world has experienced so much bloodshed of late.
Afghanistan, though liberated in many ways, is still suffering from the
aftershocks of the United States invasion and the attack to flush out
terrorists thought to be harbouring in the area. Though the need to get a
handle on terrorism is urgent, the sacrifice of many innocent lives is not
acceptable.

Since the September 11 attacks, there has been much hostility and tiptoeing
locally. Iraq's possible involvement in nuclear arms is questionable, to
which a threat of invasion and bloodshed is extreme. The MF understands the
USA's panic and precautionary steps to protect its people, much influenced
by the September 11 tragedy. However, the attack on Islam, rather than
persons responsible for the attacks, has enraged Muslims globally.

The Israeli-Palestinian battles do not make such hostility any easier.
Perpetrators are being attacked and pinpointed by their religion. Global
relations need to be handled more strictly. If anything holds a possibility
of resulting in bloodshed, it should be avoided at all costs. Matters can
and should be dealt with in a civilised manner. Action may be taken only in
extreme cases.

The MF supports our President in complimenting the Iraqi leader for
allowing the weapons inspections. If anything, this shows that compromise
is possible and guns should be kept at bay.

Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, at school I learned about claustrophobia and in
Parliament about xenophobia. Today I learned from the hon Ramgobin and the
hon Saddam Abram about something called ``Yankeyphobia''. [Laughter.]

Dit het die afgelope tyd mode geword om president Bush en Amerika te
demoniseer. Die AEB waarsku ernstig teen 'n ongegronde klimaatskepping teen
die VSA en 'n gepaardgaande blindheid vir die gevaar wat Saddam Hoessein
vir wêreldvrede inhou. [Tussenwerpsels.] Die AEB herinner skeptici daaraan
dat die wêreld in die vroeë-30s ook maar die oë toegemaak het vir die
magsopbou in Nazi-Duitsland, met vernietigende gevolge vir die hele wêreld.

President Bush het die probleem van Irak en die gevaar wat dit vir
wêreldvrede inhou vierkantig in die hande van die VN geplaas. Hy het 'n
legitieme beroep op die VN gedoen om òf sy eie geloofwaardigheid in te boet
òf toe te sien dat sy eie resolusies met betrekking tot Irak eerbiedig
word. Wat is daarmee verkeerd? [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[It has recently become fashionable to demonise President Bush and America.
The AEB cautions in earnest against creating an unjustified climate against
the USA, with a concomitant blindness to the threat that Saddam Hussein
poses to world peace. [Interjections.] The AEB reminds the sceptics about
the early 30s when the world also turned a blind eye to the build-up of
power in Nazi Germany, which had devastating consequences for the whole
world.

President Bush undeniably put the problem with Iraq, and the threat it
poses to world peace, squarely in the hands of the UN. He made a legitimate
call on the UN to either forfeit its own credibility or to ensure that its
own resolutions with reference to Iraq are respected. What is wrong with
that? [Interjections.]]

The AEB deplores reports of Iraq's continuing efforts to develop weapons of
mass destruction, as well as Iraq's failure to co-operate fully and
honestly with the UN's efforts to monitor its compliance with Security
Council resolutions. There should be no doubt about the realities of the
situation.

Saddam Hussein is a brutal and dangerous dictator who is guilty of the most
reprehensible acts against his own country and against countries in the
region. He deserves no sympathy, and realistic action should be taken by
the international community to ensure that he cannot further threaten his
neighbours or humanity in general. He definitely does not deserve a
courtesy visit from our President.

The AEB does not believe that the USA should launch any unilateral
preventative action against Iraq without a mandate from the UN and without
substantial support from the international community. On the other hand,
the UN, as the responsible institution, has to take a firm stance against
Iraq. They must have the will to enforce it.

Dan is die bal volkome in die hande van Hoessein en kan al die ander mense
- die agb Abram en Ramgobin ingesluit - ophou kla. [Tussenwerpsels.] [Then
the ball is entirely in Hussein's court and everybody else - including hon
Abraham and Ramgobin - can stop complaining.] [Interjections.]]

Mr S E OPPERMAN: Madam Speaker, it will be a grievous fault if anyone of us
falls into the trap of megalomania or blameshifting, and in the process
underestimates the complexity and gravity of the situation under
discussion. Certain reports reveal that UN inspectors, when poking around
in Iraq after the Gulf War, were shocked at the extent of Bagdad's
commitment to chemical weapons. According to the report they found 50
chemical-filled ballistic warheads, 12 694 mustard gas-filled artillery
shells and over 10 000 Sarin-filled 122mm artillery and rocket warheads;
and 300 tonnes of bulk agent for use.

Following the departure of the weapons inspectors in 1998, there has been
an accumulation of intelligence indicating that Iraq is making concerted
covert efforts to acquire dual use of technology and materials with nuclear
applications. Iraq's known holdings of processed uranium are under
international supervision. There is intelligence that Iraq has sought the
supply of significant quantities of uranium from Africa. Iraq has no active
civil nuclear power programme or known nuclear power plants. It therefore
has no legitimate reason to acquire uranium.

It is also an open secret that one of the other countries in the Middle
East has stockpiled thousands of bombs with Sarin and VX-nerve agents. One
of the other countries has a small but fully deployed nuclear arsenal with
several delivery systems, including missiles and bombers. Another country
just outside the Middle East borders has a force of 24 Red October-style
typhoon class SSBNs, equipped with upgraded SS-SN-20 ballistic missiles,
and is busy developing and manufacturing the most deadly binary chemical
agents and warheads known to man.

One of the agents called Novichok is reportedly ten times more toxic to
humans than any nerve gas. Some of these agents are carried on very fine
particles, and are capable of penetrating some filter systems. Add to this
the nuclear capability of Israel and all the military hardware America can
add to this cocktail. No wonder a world-renowned gifted, sophisticated and
highly regarded intelligence expert speaks of the ``arsenal from hell''.
Unless there is serious intervention, there will be blood and fire and
pillars of smoke, the sun shall be turned into darkness and the moon into
blood and there will be no place to hide. The recent events in Moscow will
be like a Sunday school picnic.

Daar is geen manier dat daar toegelaat kan word dat die vonk in die
kruitvat aangesteek word omdat die VN nie toesien dat sy talle resolusies,
soos aangeneem deur die Veiligheidsraad, nie uitgevoer word nie. Die
gevierde Afrikaanse digter A D Keet skryf in een van sy gedigte, ``Die lied
van die koringboer'':


  O sing my die lied, sing my die lied,
  wat my hart so raak.
  Van die onderveldboer en sy koringmied,
  En die donder wat dreun en kraak.

En dan vertel hy die verhaal van 'n boer wie se koringmied deur weerlig aan
die brand geslaan is, wat woedend by sy voordeur uithardloop met sy
voorlaaier in sy hand en hoe hy die bliksem vervloek, en dan die
aangrypende vers:


  Roekeloos rig hy sy kleine roer
  Na die sware donderweer
  Dog die bliksem tref die arme boer
  En morsdood val hy neer.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[There is no way that the spark in the powder keg can be allowed to be
ignited because the UN cannot make sure that its many resolutions, as taken
by the Security Council, are implemented. The famous Afrikaans poet, A D
Keet writes in one of his poems,''Die lied van die koringboer'':


  O sing my die lied, sing my die lied,
  wat my hart so raak.
  Van die onderveldboer en sy koringmied,
  En die donder wat dreun en kraak.

And then he relates the story about a farmer whose haystack was hit by
lightning, who then angrily stormed out by his front door with his
frontloader in his hand and how he curses the lightning, and then there is
the poignant verse:


  Roekeloos rig hy sy kleine roer
  Na die sware donderweer
  Dog die bliksem tref die arme boer
  En morsdood val hy neer.]

We can speak and act like this farmer as if we are larger than life itself,
challenging the forces, or we can support the appeal to the powers that be
to act swiftly and decisively in order to avert a worldwide catastrophe.
[Applause.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Madam Speaker, Azapo is not convinced that the US
intention to invade Iraq is correct, the reason being that Iraq has agreed
that the weapons inspection should continue.

If the Americans want to invade Iraq, they should wait until the report of
those who are going to inspect has been delivered to the United Nations.
The unilateral decision taken by the US and supported by the United Kingdom
does, in our view, violate the United Nations declarations on Iraq.

Azapo is concerned about the apparent bullying tactics of the American
establishment. We are of the view that the US, despite its military power,
should not be allowed to unilaterally invade Iraq.

Iraq is a sovereign state, just like any other state in the world. The
people of Iraq need peace. The Gulf region needs peace and stability. The
previous war in Iraq brought untold suffering to women, children and the
people of Iraq.

Azapo continues to hold the view, firstly, that the only reason the US
wants to invade Iraq is that it does not want the democratically elected
president of Iraq there. [Interjections.] Secondly, the US wants to dictate
to those countries it does not like how they should run their affairs.
Azapo cannot allow this to happen. [Interjections.]

Simply put, the US wants to dominate and control the oil industry in the
Middle East. [Applause.] Azapo calls on all freedom-loving Americans to
oppose this diabolic action of the Americans. [Time expired.]

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Chairperson, it has been almost 12 years since the first
war against Iraq by the UN sanctioned coalition forces. Once again, the
world faces another Iraqi crisis and, once again, the clouds of war are
gathering over the Gulf.

Countries across the world will have to determine unambiguously where they
stand in the looming conflict. In the process, South Africa's foreign
policy will be tested against the realities in the global and international
community. In this respect, the ANC Government has a shady reputation. Some
of their closest friends include the most despicable people in the world
with names such as, among others, Fidel Castro and Muammar Gaddafi coming
to mind. [Interjections.] Our silent diplomacy, amid government sanctions,
mass starvation, rape and theft in Zimbabwe is another example.
[Interjections.]

When developing and implementing their foreign policies, most countries
attempt to find a balance between principles on the one hand and national
interest on the other. Global principles of peace and security are
threatened by Saddam Hussein, and the international principles ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, hon member! There is a point of
order.

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Mr Chairperson, on a point of order: Does it serve the
dignity of this House for members of this Parliament to call heads of state
by ugly names, whether they are liked by us or not? I do not think it is
correct. I do not think it is dignified, no matter what the DP thinks of
what we are saying.

Can we allow the use of derogatory terms in direct reference to heads of
state? That is my point of order. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Mr Ramgobin, I would like to look at
what the member said, and report back to the House.

I want to appeal to hon members to not infringe or come close to using
derogatory language.
Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Mr Chairperson, I want to tell the hon member that it is
called freedom of expression. [Interjections.]

Global principles of peace and security are threatened by Saddam Hussein,
and the international principles of the rule of law, basic human rights and
freedoms and democracy are ignored by him. In fact, these are the
principles on which Nepad is based. Applying these principles, however,
appears to be a stumbling block for the ANC. While the world was expected
to rally behind the ANC during the struggle against apartheid, the same ANC
has been silent about the abuse of these principles in other countries.
South Africa's national interest has not been satisfied, and the welfare of
our people not been improved by the ANC's ambiguous foreign policy.
[Interjections.] I wish to tell the hon Ramgobin that this is hypocrisy.

I would like to look at the threat that Saddam Hussein poses to
international peace and security. Iraq has systematically ignored many UN
resolutions over the past few years. Since announcing its readiness to
permit UN inspections, the Iraqi military have fired at British aircraft,
ignoring the no-fly zones on a number of occasions.

The threat of weapons of mass destruction in the hands of Saddam Hussein
must be viewed against the background of international terrorism and his
own track record. Hussein has used weapons of mass destruction against his
own people, and will not hesitate to distribute them to terrorists and to
use them again himself. In 1988 Hussein's military murdered 100 000 Kurdish
men, destroyed 4 000 villages and used chemical weapons against another 60
villages.

Human rights mean as much to Hussein as they do to the likes of Castro and
Mugabe. These are evil men, and in the era of globalisation, the world has
a duty to protect its global citizens against such individuals. Should
Saddam Hussein renege on his decision to allow inspection for weapons of
mass destruction, then the DA and, I hope, our Government, will support any
action necessary to disarm Iraq in the interests of global peace and
security.

It is now time for the ANC Government to indicate which principles South
Africa's foreign policy is based on. [Applause.]

Dr Z P JORDAN: Mr Chairman, hon members and comrades, I want to begin with
a few caveats. Iraq, like every other member state of the United Nations,
should and is expected to abide by Security Council resolutions. The second
caveat is: Weapons of mass destruction are an abomination, and the world
would be a better place without them. And this applies whether such weapons
are in the hands of Britain, China, France, India, Iraq, Israel, Pakistan
or the United States of America. South Africa is the only country that
possessed such weapons and unilaterally destroyed them all. We, on this
side of this House, remain, as in the past, totally committed to nuclear
disarmament and to the eradication of weapons of mass destruction. The
third caveat is: As a nation we are, and I am personally, deeply committed
to the struggle to rid the world of international terrorism.

Fourthly, the USA is an open society, with freedom of speech, freedom of
conscience and freedom of information. It is a law-governed society with a
written constitution that holds regular elections which are free and fair,
most of the time. In that respect, the political arrangements in the United
States are infinitely better than those in a host of other countries,
including Iraq.

Last caveat: Criticism of US foreign policy, now or in the future, should
neither be read as support for undemocratic regimes, tyranny or dictators,
whomever they might be, nor should it be construed as anti-Americanism.

Since 1991, the government of Iraq has been in violation of numerous UN
Security Council resolutions. As a previous speaker has pointed out, they
are, unfortunately, not the only government this applies to. It is a well-
known fact that the government of Saddam Hussein, after waging a brutal and
mutually destructive war with a neighbour, Iran, invaded another neighbour,
Kuwait. For that act of aggression, the international community, quite
correctly, punished Iraq and drove its invading army out of Kuwait.

Inside Iraq, the government led by Saddam Hussein has repressed religious
and ethnic minorities. It has repressed political opinions it does not like
and it persecutes its political opponents. But again, Iraq is not the only
country in the Middle East that is intolerant of opposition, that represses
political opponents, religious and ethnic minorities. The authoritarianism
of the Saddam Hussein government is, regrettably, all too common in that
part of the world. Iraq is also not the only country in that region that
has produced weapons of mass destruction or attempted to acquire a nuclear
capacity.

The great American sociologist Wright C Mills once suggested that US
administrations of his day were beholden to or captives of a military-
industrial complex. The incumbent Bush administration, in its top echelon,
is almost wholly dominated by people linked to the US oil and energy
sector. Indeed, there has hardly been a government anywhere in the world
that is so closely tied to a single special interest group. Consequently, I
was not too surprised to read in this past weekend's Observer, that is the
London newspaper, the following, and I quote:


  The leader of the London-based Iraqi National Congress, Ahmed Chalabi,
  met executives of three US oil multinationals to negotiate the carve-up
  of Iraq's massive oil reserves post-Saddam. Disclosure of the meetings in
  October in Washington, confirmed by an INC spokesman, comes as Lord
  Browne, the head of BP, has warned that British oil companies have been
  squeezed out of the post-war Iraq even before the first shot has been
  fired in any US-led land invasion.

The report continues:


  Although Russia and China have existing deals with Iraq, Chalabi has made
  clear that he would reward the US for removing Saddam with lucrative oil
  contracts, telling the Washington Post recently: ``American companies
  will have a big shot at Iraqi oil.'' Larry Lindsley, President Bush's
  economic adviser, recently said: ``A successful war on Iraq would be good
  for business. When there is a regime change in Iraq, you could add three
  to five million barrels per day of production to world supply'', he said
  in September. ``The successful prosecution of the war would be good for
  the economy.'' Analysts believe that, after five years, Iraq could be
  pumping 10 million barrels of oil per day. Opec is already starting to
  implode, with member nations breaking quotas in an attempt to grab market
  share before oil prices fall.

When the heads of state and government met in Johannesburg in September,
they emerged from that summit with an international programme of action for
sustainable development centred on the eradication of poverty, coupled with
a comprehensive strategy to protect the environment. I fear that what we
are witnessing is the unfolding of an alternative strategy for the world
community. The hon Charles Kennedy, the leader of the British liberal
democrats, not Fidel Castro but that member's friend, has characterised it
as containing 'a hint of imperialism'. I suspect that this is what former
President Mandela was reacting to when he called US policy towards Iraq a
threat to world peace.

The Bush administration, it seems, has abandoned the strategies of
containment and deterrence of a previous era in preference for one of pre-
emptive action. For the first time in decades, the naked display of force
is being explicitly advocated. Those among US foreign policy-makers who are
still shy about this, speak of ``a benign American hegemony". We saw a
variation on this theme from the pen of Ms Condoleeza Rice, President
Bush's national security adviser, carried by one of our weekend newspapers:
``We do not seek to impose democracy on others'', Ms Rice wrote, which is
an extremely commendable sentiment. But, more revealing are the motivations
for the courses of action she advocates when she says:
  We must reject the condescending view that freedom will not grow in the
  soil of the Middle East or that Muslims somehow do not share in the
  desire to be free.

Again, a sentiment we could all agree with. She continues:


  We seek only to help create conditions in which people can claim a free
  future for themselves.

Ms Condoleeza Rice's sentiments have deep roots in the USA's 20th century
past. One scholar has suggested that it echoes the visionary ambition of
President Woodrow Wilson. While President Wilson may well have been driven
by a genuinely felt concern for the welfare of others, he also displayed a
very deep contempt for other cultures and social orders. Witness his anti-
Asian racism! It was President Wilson also who coined the epigram: ``What's
good for General Motors is good for the United States''.

However, there are other traditions from the 20th century United States
history which could serve the world better in this age. President Franklin
Delano Roosevelt inspired many of the institutions the world community
adopted to secure an enduring peace after the Second World War. The
challenge today is translating them into contemporary terms, and this
implies the promotion of a genuine multilateralism based on recognition and
strengthening of the UN and all its agencies; a radical restructuring of
the UN and its agencies so that they reflect the changes that have taken
place in the world since 1945; the reform of the Bretton Woods institutions
to reflect the geo-political changes of the past 57 years, and the
eradication of poverty and want, which are the seedbeds of the desperation
that find  expression in terrorism.

This morning our media report that President Saddam Hussein has appealed to
President Mbeki to use his offices as Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement
to prevent war. And, because war is bad for little children, their mothers,
their fathers and other living things, I think it will be appropriate that
this august House should lend support to our President's efforts.
[Applause.]

                      MERCHANDISE MARKS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, hon members of the House,
this proposed amendment to the Merchandise Marks Act is a follow-up to
certain amendments that were made in 2001. These amendments were prompted
by South Africa's receiving the bid to host the Cricket World Cup and the
likelihood that South Africa will in future host many major sporting
competitions. For example, next year we will also have the President's Cup.

In these situations, it is essential that we comply with the best practice
in international marketing legislation. One of the major problems that
occur in sponsorships of any kind is what is known as ambush marketing,
i.e., using the occasion of a sponsored event to market one's own products
during that event. The earlier amendments that we made were designed to
deal with that problem, but it was pointed out by many of the sponsors and
others that we had not fully dealt with what is now referred to as
intrusion marketing, which is similar to ambush marketing, but is based on
more direct interventions in the actual event. A common practice is to take
many spectators and dress them in the clothing or logo of a particular
company and, in that way, attract a great deal of attention.

The portfolio committee, and I thank them for that, proposed that we should
be a little bit more restrictive, and ensure that small and medium business
were also catered for and that they would not in any way fall within the
ambit of this amendment. We have been very pleased to make that amendment.
It should be pointed out, as well, that this only applies to events that we
have designated, and that means major events, usually of an international
or multilateral type that would take place in South Africa.

I believe that the amendments are sensible, practical and would facilitate
the sponsorship that is necessary for major sporting events in this
country. We urge the House to support the amendments. [Applause.]

Mrs B N SONO: Chairperson, hon members and hon Minister, this Bill seeks to
amend the Merchandise Marks Act so that intrusive or ambush marketing
becomes illegal. It gives the Minister wide discretionary powers in that
respect and applies to events and protected events in that no person may
use a trademark in relation to such an event in a manner which is
calculated to achieve publicity for that trademark.

The motivation behind these amendments is to give the sponsors of the
Cricket World Cup monolithic rights to the marketing of the event, to the
exclusion of others. Some of the main sponsors are Pepsi-Cola, Hyundai, SAA
and LG. I will put that issue in the proper context as we go on.

This Bill has severe implications for small business. How so? The
ministerial proviso to ensure that the organisers have created sufficient
opportunities for small business, particularly in the historically
disadvantaged areas, was not forthcoming from the United Cricket Board at
the portfolio committee briefing. That is crucial to SMMEs, because the
notion that small business have to register with the local organisers in
order to sell at a designated place goes against the grain of free
enterprise and efforts aimed at small business development.

Let us contextualise the implications of the amendments a little bit. There
are cricket ovals which are situated in townships and have small businesses
in their immediate vicinity with billboards of brands like Coca-Cola. What
will happen to small business people who sell Coca-Cola products in the
vicinity of the stadium or even if they wear T-shirts with Coca-cola
imprints, because that contravention will be criminal?

Ngithi kuNqqongqoshe ake sicabange kahle. [I would like to say to the
Minister that we should think properly.]

For example, our people immediately cart their wares to the stadium in
order to sell when there are such big events. The UCB could not give us
assurances even regarding strategies on how they were going to address
that. For instance, the chief sponsor of the cricket oval in Port Elizabeth
is Coca-Cola, and what will happen to the billboards? The UCB said that
they are going to have to pull them down. That is uncompetitive behaviour.

In Soweto, the shops in the immediate vicinity of the cricket oval sell
Coca-Cola products. What is going to happen to those people? How are they
going to sell Pepsi-Cola products which are not on offer in the country?
Will they get those products at designated outlets? If yes, have those
outlets been identified? Against that, however, is the severity of the
impact of this anticompetitive behaviour on small business.

Lastly, this Bill was rushed through without adequate consultation and
consolidation with the competition authorities, and representation of small
business. In conclusion, the DA views this law as draconian. As it stands
now, the DA finds it very difficult to support. [Applause.]

Dr R H DAVIES: Chairperson, I hope that as I proceed, I think we will see
that the reaction that Mrs Sono has come up with is not warranted and that
we have indeed tried to take account of most of the legitimate concerns
that were expressed in the committee. We did indeed hear from a number of
interested parties. We, in fact, extended the period that was available to
accommodate a number of interested parties. This Bill, as the Minister
explained, is intended to provide additional protection to sponsors of
major sport, entertainment or recreational events against what is known as
``ambush marketing''.

``Ambush marketing'' represents an attempt by a, owner of another brand
that is not involved in the sponsorship of the event, to capitalise on that
event in an unauthorised way to try to promote that brand. Legislation
which we already approved in this Parliament last year prohibits what is
known as ``ambush marketing by association'', that is, an attempt by an
unauthorised ambush marketer to present him/herself as a sponsor who
contributed to an event to which they had not made any contribution. The
Bill before the House today provides for the Minister to extend this
protection to sponsors of major events to also cover what is known as
``intrusive ambush marketing''.

This is an unauthorised attempt by an owner of a brand to promote his/her
brand without necessarily trying to present him/herself as a sponsor. It
covers a wide range of activities which could include things like flying
inflatable balloons over an event publicising alternative brands, dressing
up people in an organised way in the logo of a rival brand, putting adverts
in the newspapers which are right next to reports on those events, and so
on and so forth. The motivation for the Bill is clearly to place South
Africa in a stronger competitive position to host these events, while
keeping an eye on the interests of the sponsors of the Cricket World Cup to
ensure they are protected against ambush marketing.

As the scope of the protection in the Bill is quite wide, and as we
discovered in the committee hearings - at which Mrs Sono was present some
of the times, but not all of the time - there are quite a number of grey
areas and areas of concern. The Bill, in fact, restricts the application of
this protection in various ways. For a start, it makes sure that this
protection is available only to events which are specifically designated by
the Minister, and before designating an event, the Minister has to be
satisfied that the event in question is in the public interest. In the
committee stage and after hearing from various stakeholders, we were
concerned to minimise potential unintended consequences on legitimate
activity, particularly by small traders and the media.

We sought to insert an amendment that would make it crystal clear that the
public interest would have to entail an obligation by the organisers of
events to create opportunities for participation by small businesses,
particularly those in previously disadvantaged communities. We were mindful
of the fact that we are legislating not just for the Cricket World Cup, but
for all future events and for Ministers who may succeed the current
incumbent, Minister Erwin. The committee amended the definition of events
that may be designated to exclude the original proposal which included
conferences, cultural and religious events.

The definition of eligible events is now restricted to events of a
sporting, recreational or entertainment nature. We inserted a provision
underscoring the Minister's requirement to engage in proper consultation
before designating an event protected, and we reduced the time when the
protection ends, from a maximum of two to a maximum of one month after the
end of the event. We finally inserted an amendment saying that it would
have to be shown that there was an intention to associate with the event in
order to constitute an offence.

By passing this Bill we are extending protection of an exclusive
intellectual property right. We need to be clear about this. We are doing
so because we hope that it will strengthen our ability as a country to bid
for the hosting of major events which can bring important benefits to our
economy, create employment and create opportunities for small businesses.
We trust and we hope that this legislation will be used to protect the
sponsors against genuine intrusions by rival brand holders. We trust and we
hope that no one will try to use it for frivolous and petty harassment of
small traders and those engaged in legitimate attempts to earn an income.
Any short-term gains, which anyone who tries to follow the second course
may make will, I suspect, be more than off-set in the arena of public
opinion on which ultimately brand promotion depends. The ANC will therefore
support this Bill. [Applause.]

Mr H J BEKKER: Mr Chairman, many of the aspects that I wanted to deal with
have been covered by the hon Davies, and I will therefore summarise
basically the comments that I have to make in this speech. South Africa is
becoming more and more actively involved with international conferencing,
as seen by the World Summit on Sustainable Development and others.
Similarly, international events such as world sporting events, such as the
Cricket World Cup, the Rugby World Cup and, hopefully, the Soccer World
Cup, and even the Olympic Games may come to South Africa one day.

It is of paramount importance that global and local sponsors who are
spending billions of rands to sponsor these events are protected against so-
called ambush marketers. They, in turn, would enter this lucrative market
without contributing anything to the event itself.

In ambush marketing, the marketer has the objective of using the event as a
springboard to promote his or her brand or product without incurring the
financial and other obligations of a sponsor. Ambush marketing by intrusion
may include the placing of adverts for products on the outskirts of a
stadium at which the sponsored event is taking place, running
advertisements making a reference to a sponsored sporting event without
suggesting that the advertiser is a sponsor of the event, or bringing a
product or its promotion to the attention of people interested in a
sponsored event, but without suggesting or implying any form of sponsorship
of that sponsored event.

As was said, we see quite frequently the flying over of small planes
tailing banners, that type of thing, without contributing anything to that
particular event. The Trade Practices Act was amended last year to protect
authorised sponsors against so-called association or associated insignia of
distributors. However, this amendment did only half a job of protecting
events and event organisers against ambush marketing, since events
currently remain unprotected in respect of ambush marketing by intrusion.

The Bill before us now seeks to rectify this situation. The IFP is strongly
in favour of the protection of intellectual property rights and the
conventions thereto. The amendments to the Merchandise Marks Amendment Bill
of 2002 are logical and it makes sense.

The IFP will therefore support this Bill.

Dr R T RHODA: Chairperson, ambush marketing is a very real problem for
large and small sponsors. Some years ago, in my former life, I personally
was the victim of ambush marketing. As a manufacturer of a national brand
of products many years ago, I sponsored a national beauty pageant, and an
opposition company ambushed the pageant under the pretence that they had
also contributed financially towards the event, and this was very
unfortunate. [Interjections.] The queen got her crown in the end.

The Merchandise Amendment Bill provides for protection, particularly of
organisers of sporting events, from intrusive ambush marketing. The main
object of the Bill is to authorise the Minister of Trade and Industry to
protect the organisers of such events, for example, major sporting events,
from what has internationally become known as ambush marketing.

This may include ambush marketing by deliberately placing the advertisement
billboards for a product on the outskirts of a stadium at which the
sponsored event might take place, and thereby gaining free exposure and
advertising; running advertisements making reference to a sponsored
sporting event without suggesting that the advertiser is a sponsor of the
event, or bringing a product or its promotion to the attention of people
interested in the sponsored event without suggesting or implying in any
form sponsorship of the sponsored event.

In this way, the ambush marketer creates a false impression that he or she
is an authorised sponsor or contributor associated with the event. Because
we need commercial investment to sponsor big events, these sponsors need to
be protected from ambush marketing by companies who have not invested in
the event.

The sponsorship of events such as the Olympic Games, the Rugby World Cup,
the Soccer World Cup and the forthcoming Cricket World Cup in South Africa,
is estimated to run into billions of rands.

It is therefore not unreasonable to expect sponsors who have spent so much
money on these special events to reap the full and exclusive benefit of
advertising their brands. An ambush marketer is a marketer who has the
objective of using the event, as has been said before, as a springboard to
promote his or her brand or product without incurring the financial and
other obligations of the sponsor.

Ambush marketing by intrusion has happened in several major events in the
past. We can mention, for example, the Comrades Marathon where I believe
Reebok was the main sponsor. What happened was that they spent a lot of
money on this event, but then Nike gave shoes to the runners. This is an
example of ambush marketing. The New NP supports the amendment.

Mr C T FROLICK: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, the hosting of
sporting events of international importance, such as the Rugby World Cup,
the Soccer World Cup and the Olympic Games have indeed coincided with a
significant increase in sponsorship for these events. Sponsorship is
estimated to run into millions and, in certain instances, billions of
rands. This amending Bill therefore seeks to address the issue of
intellectual property protection by closing the perceived gap in existing
legislation in respect of ambush marketing by ways of intrusion.

Indeed, as the chairperson of the committee has mentioned, certain concerns
were raised by committee members, and by submissions during the committee
stage. These related to the definition of an event and also the impact that
the designation of such an event would have on small businesses and vendors
from previously disadvantaged communities. To a certain extent these issues
have been adequately addressed. However, the application of this amendment
and its impact will only be experienced during the hosting of the Cricket
World Cup in South Africa in 2003.

As matters currently stand, restrictions will be enforced by event
organisers on the public in and around the stadiums. This ranges from
prohibitions placed on the advertising of non-authorised goods and services
to the wearing of certain types of clothing. During the 1995 Cricket World
Cup on the subcontinent, incidents of ambush marketing were indeed rife.
The hosts of such events and the Government have an obligation and duty to
protect the investment of the sponsor.

However, this must be aligned with the promotion of local small businesses
and the daily activities of ordinary citizens. If any unintended
consequences emanate from the practical implementation of this amendment,
immediate efforts must be made to address these shortcomings. However, the
Cricket World Cup Committee in South Africa also has the responsibility to
ensure that they address these shortcomings, and do not apply a rigid
approach with its implementation, but rather accommodate the various
stakeholders.

Adv Z L MADASA: Chairperson, at face value the Bill seems to be too
protective, monopolistic and anti-competitive. However, if one considers
the need to protect organisers of events, who have expended sometimes large
resources, from opportunistic advertising invaders, then this Bill is just
and fair.

The Bill furthermore entrenches the principle of paying for the benefit one
derives. It could be argued that the Bill will exclude small players in the
marketing industry. Section 15(a) and (b) give the Minister powers to
ensure that organisers of events make room for small businesses, in
particular those from previously disadvantaged communities.

Therefore, as the ACDP, we are satisfied with what the Bill intends to
achieve and we accordingly support it.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, having debated this last year, the provisions
relating to ambush marketing and exclusive rights are still fresh in my
mind.

The MF agrees by all means that there are events that call for a limiting
of rights in protecting the dignity, honour and status of an event. For
instance, the preservation of the use of a country's national flag should
be done very strictly owing to the earned respect and honour of each
nation.

However, we live in a society where poverty and unemployment is high and
where people battle to make ends meet. Often new markets and opportunities
such as these auspicious events are used and seen as a means of bringing in
some cash.

The MF, however, maintains that in circumstances such as these forthcoming
games, the organisers should maintain exclusivity, and all those not
associated with such organisation should be able to lodge some type of
appeal in order to form part of the event. The maintenance of such
preservation is not solely to uphold the exclusivity and status of the
event.

The MF supports the Merchandise Marks Amendment Bill. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr C AUCAMP: Chairperson, the hon Donald Lee has asked me to ask whether
the definition of ``ambush marketing by intrusion'' should be extended to
members of Parliament showing the logo of their party at the back of motion
papers during motion time.

Borgskappe van groot sportgeleenthede beloop miljarde rande. Die borg is
daarop geregtig om die myle te kry waarvoor hy betaal. Hy kan nie bekostig
dat enige ander daarop parasiteer nie.

Die AEB glo dat dit in die belang van sport en van volhoubare borgskappe is
dat die borg se belegging beskerm moet word. Die AEB verwelkom in hierdie
geval die diskresie van die Minister. 'n ''One-size-fits-all''-regulasie
sou baie maklik kleiner, informele entrepreneurs sionder meer doodgedruk
het.

Die AEB doen 'n beroep op die Minister om hierdie wet met groot
omsigtigheid toe te pas om enersyds die borge te beskerm, maar andersyds
nie die veelkleurige mosaïek van die ware feeskarakter van groot
geleenthede te demp nie.

Die AEB steun hierdie wetsontwerp. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Sponsorships of large sporting events amount to billions of rands. The
sponsor is entitled to get what he pays for. He cannot afford for anyone
else to parasitise on that.

The AEB believes that it is in the interests of sport and of sustainable
sponsorships that the sponsor's investment be protected. In this case the
AEB welcomes the discretion of the Minister. A ``one size fits all''
regulation could easily have resulted in the unqualified squashing of
smaller, informal entrepreneurs.
The AEB appeals to the Minister to implement this Act with great
circumspection to protect the sponsors on the one hand, but on the other
not to dampen the multicoloured mosaic of the true festival character of
large events.

The AEB supports this Bill.]

Mr S M RASMENI: Chairperson, first of all, I want to deal with the issues
raised by the hon Sono. It seems to me that the hon Sono did not pay
adequate attention to what was happening during the debates in the
committee, because the issues that she raised are issues that were dealt
with by the committee, especially those relating to small businesses, and
amendments were effected in that regard. Perhaps she is not presenting her
own view. She might have taken some instruction from someone else, maybe
the DP, so that she could, once again, raise those concerns here.
[Interjections.]

The main objective of this Bill is to authorise the Minister of Trade and
Industry to protect certain events, for example, major sporting events,
from what is internationally known as ambush marketing, in particular
``ambush marketing'' by way of intrusion.

In ambush marketing, the marketer has the objective of using the event as a
springboard to promote his or her brand or product without incurring the
financial and other obligations of a sponsor. Ambush marketing by intrusion
may include, firstly, placing an advertisement for a product on the
outskirts of a stadium at which a sponsored event is taking place,
secondly, running advertisements making reference to a sponsored sporting
event without suggesting that the advertiser is a sponsor of the event and,
thirdly, bringing a product or its promotion to the attention of the people
interested in a sponsored event, but without suggesting or implying any
form of sponsorship of the sponsored event.

The desirability of this protection in this piece of legislation is to
protect the brand name of the event and to encourage international
sponsorship, especially for world events that are staged in our country,
like the Cricket World Cup 2003. This in turn will attract international
investment and thereby increase opportunities for infrastructure and
economic development. The ANC welcomes and supports this Bill mainly
because it offers great potential for the socioeconomic development of our
people and South Africa as a whole.

The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry decided to introduce an
amendment that aims to balance the need for protected events with those of
national objectives, especially as it relates to the interests of small
businesses. Therefore, the intention of clause 2(2) is aimed at the
proprietors of trademarks and not the small businessperson.

I will therefore deal with this specific amendment, clause 2(1)(b), which
states that:


  The Minister may not designate an event as a protected event unless the
  staging of the event is in the public interest and the Minister is
  satisfied that the organisers have created sufficient opportunities for
  small businesses and in particular those of the previously disadvantaged
  communities.

That is the amendment that the committee has made, I wish to tell the hon
Sono.

We in the ANC move this amendment with the understanding that many people
in the informal sector are unemployed and that unemployment has affected
many young people, women and rural people most acutely. This amending Bill
will serve as a measure that government at all levels will embark on a
programme combining short-term measures aimed at providing a degree of
immediate relief with long-term interventions aimed at sustainable job
creation and alternative income opportunities.

This is in line with Chapter l, section 3(2) of the Constitution, namely
that:


  (a) all citizens are equally entitled to the rights, privileges and
       benefits of citizenship; and
  (b) equally subject to the duties and responsibilities of citizenship ...

[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Mr Chairperson, the members of the
committee of all parties, apart from the first speaker, have very carefully
explained this Act, how it works and what it contains. I think it is
disappointing that such a misunderstanding can occur on the part of one
party as to what the Act is trying to do and what it will achieve.

I think we need to bear in mind some fairly common-sensical and obvious
propositions that at any major event there will be a host of different
products sold by small and big businesses and many other operators. We must
understand the distinction between those that are selling at an event and
those that are advertising and, more particularly, those that attempt the
forms of ambush marketing that were dealt with by this amendment.

The department felt that the small businesses that will be selling at any
event will be protected, but we welcome the portfolio committee's vigilance
on this matter and their further protection of small and medium
enterprises.

It is quite clear that the kind of propositions put forward by the hon Sono
are not, in any way, realistic or opportune in relation to this Act, and I
think they were merely designed to create confusion.

It is very clear that if we want to hold major international events, as is
obviously envisaged by this amendment, we will need very large sponsorship,
and we have to take into account the regulations and rules governing the
protection of that sponsorship's rights.

I believe we have done so in this amendment, both in a manner that will
satisfy sponsors who very often are global sponsors and not only South
African, and in a manner that ensures that no undue abuse can take place of
the rights of sponsorship to prevent ordinary persons and businesses from
undertaking legitimate trade within any major event.

I therefore thank the House for supporting it in the main, and I believe
that this is a good step in ensuring that South Africa will, no doubt,
become a very important venue for international sporting and recreational
activities in the years to come. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time (Democratic Party dissenting).

                           PATENTS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Mr Chairperson, this Bill has attracted
a degree of attention, but I think it is important for me to spell out some
very basic propositions around this, so that we do not have any confusion
or undue and unnecessary speculation as to what it is we are trying to
achieve here.

As is apparent to this House, in South Africa, since 1994, we have been
amending many pieces of legislation that deal with either trademarks or
intellectual property. I should point out that these are not the same
thing. Intellectual property is something that can be attributed to a
patent, and a patent is governed by very strict criteria as to what can be
registered as a patent and what cannot.

A trademark is merely a logo or a brand that a private company or a public
company seeks to protect in one or other way. As the hon Rajbally pointed
out, the national flag and other instruments of state are covered by the
trademark legislation. They are not intellectual property.

With regard to intellectual property, we have stated on record, time and
time again, and I will state it again now very clearly, that this
Government is a strong supporter of a regime that protects intellectual
property. We also believe that new aspects of intellectual property, such
as traditional knowledge and medicines, need to come within this framework
and within this scheme.

So, any idea that this Government is, in some way through its legislation,
attempting to attack the basic fundamentals of patent rights and
intellectual property is mischievous in the extreme.

The amendments that we have made, in our view, are compliant with the trade
and intellectual property system, the so-called TRIPS Agreement, and many
of the amendments that we have made over the past few years are to bring
our law within the framework of that action.

As we have done in certain cases, we believe that national interests must
override intellectual property, and that was the logic and the basis behind
the amendments made in the arena of medicines. There, too, South Africa is
of the view that we fell full square within the TRIPS Agreement, and I
think this was vindicated in the declaration that was agreed upon at the
Doha negotiations.

So, the amendments that we are seeking to make here are, in the main,
relatively technical amendments, designed to remove any lack of clarity.
South Africa is a member of the world's Intellectual Property Organisation
and of many patent protection agreements, and this means that patents that
are lodged in South Africa can also then be lodged elsewhere in the world
system. This is one of the areas of potential confusion that the amendments
seek to clarify.

The major amendment of substance is, I think, very appropriate for South
Africa at this time. Essentially this amendment can be said to be the
following: Quite clearly, as any patent comes near the end of its life, it
is perfectly legitimate, reasonable and necessary that other producers,
other researchers, other companies and other organisations should be
entitled to begin research dealing with that particular patented product.

That is what the amendment does. It says that for non-commercial purposes
and governed by fairly clearly defined and strict access to information
conditions, one can begin to do research on a patented product.

In this regard, obviously, generics are important. A generic is a product
that is not patented by any particular company, either because there is no
unique science or technology that a company can define by its action or
because the patents of that product have expired and this now enters the
general domain of global intellectual property.

So, it is manifestly clear that towards the end of a patent of major
pharmaceutical products, it should be open and possible for companies to
begin doing research on what the generic variant would be. In that case, it
should also be possible to do research on pharmaceutical products that may
be associated with or linked to the patented product. Our previous law did
not allow this.

So, effectively, what happened was that for the full 20-year patented
period, no action could be taken. This is the so-called Roche-Bolar
provision, which says that towards the end of a patented period, research
should be allowed under regulated conditions, and that is what this
amendment has done for South Africa.

We are beginning, as members know, to have the capacity to undertake
certain research and certain pharmaceutical production, and I think, as
this industry begins to expand, this will become an area that we will need.

There are many ways in which this Roche-Bolar provision has been
implemented by countries across the world, and I know that the
pharmaceutical industry made submissions to the committee that they needed
some kind of additional period of protection for the patents. We decided -
and I am pleased that the committee supported us on that - that that is not
needed at this time.

We will, of course, in certain circumstances, have to review that matter.
However, our view is that in the South African situation as it stands now,
as is being done in other countries, the current amendment provides not
only protection for the patent holders, but provides the prospect for our
own economy, our own society and our research institutions doing the
necessary research to ensure that we provide affordable, accessible and
effective pharmaceutical products for our people.

I should stress also - and this is an important point - that this patenting
amendment does not only deal with pharmaceutical products, but with all
other products. So, the tendency to think that patents only relate to
pharmaceutical products is not correct. It relates to all sorts of
products, but because the pharmaceutical industry is the best organised, we
tend to think that that is the only product we are talking about.

That is another reason why we did not want to give extensions or make any
other modification to the amendment. There are many patents in our world,
and this Act applies to all patents, not just pharmaceutical ones.

I would urge the House to support this. I think it is an appropriate and
necessary amendment, as South Africa's economy and capacity to change
develops. [Applause.]

Mrs B N SONO: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, the DA will always put the
interests of the poor and sick first. [Interjections.] It was in terms of
this standard that the DA supported the provision in the SAMTRA Bill
obliging doctors to offer generic drugs, rather than their branded
equivalents, when they are available. Because this Bill goes some way
towards making cheaper generic versions of life-saving drugs available more
quickly, the DA will give its support to this Bill too.

The DA recognises the importance of investment in research and development
in the pharmaceutical industry. With these investments, many killer
diseases have become easily curable and many chronic diseases, including
Aids, have become more bearable. However, while the pharmaceutical industry
needs to be rewarded for its effort, the reward must not be so great that
society ceases to benefit. A balance between the competing needs is
required.

The DA believes that the 20-year patent protection period is adequate time
in which to recoup expenditure and make a profit. This Bill will simply
allow generic manufacturers to produce immediately on expiry of the patent
rather than having to devote further time to developing a saleable product.

The beneficiaries will be the millions of patients in South Africa who
cannot afford brand name products and who will now be able to access
generics more quickly.

However, the DA believes that the Government's effort to make affordable
drugs available to those who are both poor and sick do not go nearly far
enough.

Last year, the DA submitted a private members Bill to Parliament to amend
provisions in the Patents Act regarding the circumstances under which
patents can be by-passed. The Bill would allow Government to declare a
national emergency on Aids and thereby authorise the manufacture of generic
equivalents to antiretroviral drugs. South Africa has a number of generic
drug manufacturers who would be able to supply the drugs in a matter of
weeks.

Although the Bill was submitted a year ago, it still has to see the light
of day in this House. Antiretroviral drugs are used as standard treatment
in Europe and America. Underdeveloped countries like Brazil, which is
manufacturing its own generic drugs, are using them with increasing success
to manage their epidemics. They are widely used in the private health
sector in South Africa and are readily available to government members
through the Parmed Medical Aid Scheme.

Moreover, most antiretroviral drugs are new developments and will not be
affected by the Bill under discussion for a further 10 or 15 years. In the
meantime, 250 000 people per year are dying from Aids, but this Government
is still refusing to take the action needed to stem the deaths. It has yet
to produce a policy on access to Aids drugs in the public sector, even
though in some hospitals more than 80% of patients are HIV-positive, and
even those state hospitals spend R4 billion a year on treating
opportunistic infections.

The impression of lethargy and unwillingness to directly confront the
disease is unavoidable. This Bill is a necessary addition to a stockpile of
weapons needed to fight the disease, but we must not be lulled into
thinking that it is enough. It is not enough, I wish to tell the Minister,
because even in the presentation at the portfolio committee by the generic
drug industry, when we questioned them, they seemed to have a problem with
research capacity. So, that is where we feel that the Government can make
it even more accessible, and intervene positively. The DA supports the
Bill.
Dr R H DAVIES: Chairperson, the fourth World Trade Organisation ministerial
meeting, which was held in Doha in November 2001, adopted a special
declaration on Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights and
public health. One of the most important sections of their declaration
reads, and I quote:


  We agree that the TRIPS Agreement does not and should not prevent members
  from taking measures to protect public health. Accordingly, while
  reiterating our commitment to the TRIPS Agreement, we affirm that the
  Agreement can and should be interpreted and implemented in a manner
  supportive of WTO members' right to protect public health and, in
  particular, to promote access to medicines for all.

The Doha declaration on TRIPS and public health was hard-won. It was a
product of intense struggle and represented an important victory,
particularly for developing countries that face major health challenges.

The stance which was taken by our own Government and people in the case
that was brought against the Medicines and Related Substances Control Act
was an important milestone in the ongoing and still contested struggle to
establish the fundamental principle that the intellectual property rights
of patent holders have to operate in a context within which the health
needs of our people are prioritised.

The Bill before us this afternoon is about aligning our domestic
intellectual property legislation to give effect to one of the hard-won
rights that is available in terms of the TRIPS, and one which could have an
effect of making available to the South African public cheaper generic
medicines at an earlier period than is currently the case.

Article 30 of the Trips allows countries to legislate limited exceptions to
the exclusive rights of patent holders. One such exception, which the
Minister indicated that a number of countries have provided for, is the so-
called Roche-Bolar early working principle in terms of which generic
manufacturers are able to have access to a patented product and information
about its manufacture to allow them to begin research and preparatory work
to apply for registration of a generic product before the expiry of the
patent. The purpose of this, of course, is to ensure that the generic
products are available on the market as soon as the 20-year paper period
expires. Without such provision, there is often a de facto extension of the
patent period by as much as five or six years, this being the time it can
take to do the preparatory work needed ahead of the launching on the market
of generic drugs.

Section 69(a) of the Bill before us introduces just such a principle of an
early working of a patent into our law, and this is the main provision of
the Bill before us today, which otherwise makes only minor and
uncontroversial changes to the Patents Act.

In the public hearings on this Bill in the committee we, in fact, heard no
objection to the principle of introducing the idea of an early working of a
patent into our law. The Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association, which
represents producers and distributors of patented medicines in South
Africa, also indicated its agreement in principle with such a provision.
The Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association, however, asked us to insert
what they called a `balancing provision' for the so-called patent term
restoration, which will be an extension of the patent period, apparently to
compensate the patent holders for any administrative delays in registering
medicines in terms of the Medicines Control Council procedures. This was
strongly opposed by the National Association of Pharmaceutical
Manufacturers, representing the locally based industry, on the grounds that
this would allow the extension of the patent period beyond the 20 years,
which should be sufficient to allow innovative companies to recoup the
costs of their investments.

The National Association of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers also pointed out
that, without a provision for early working, South African generic
medicines producers would be placed at a disadvantage in relation to
competition from producers in foreign jurisdictions where such provisions
exist. At the moment, we rely very heavily on imports for generics and this
Bill will therefore encourage the local production of generic medicines.

When we unpacked the issue of administrative delays in registering drugs
and the principle of patent term restoration, it became clear to us that
there were a number of very complex and highly contested issues involved.
Firstly, there was no agreement and certainly no convincing evidence that
there are inordinate delays in registering drugs with the Medicines Control
Council. The MCC had experienced backlogs, but there were signs that these
were being overcome.

Secondly, there are variations in the way in which the patent term
restoration issues are dealt with in those jurisdictions that do provide
for this. In Australia, for example, it only comes into force if there is a
delay of five years or more. We were also told that the principle was being
reconsidered in the United States, which is the country of origin of that
principle.

At the end of the day, the committee was faced with having to take a
decision about priority. The majority of us decided that the clear priority
in our country was, firstly, to ensure that we take whatever steps we can
to ensure that our people are provided with the best access we can ensure
to affordable medicine.

The second priority is to support local producers. The Roche-Bolar early
working principle embodied in this legislation can make a contribution to
both, and therefore deserves to be supported. This does not mean that we in
the committee were indifferent to issues of bureaucratic inefficiency. We
urged, in the committee, that the Department of Trade and Industry and the
Medicines Control Council engage with stakeholders to ensure that
procedures for registration of patents and medicines were as efficient as
possible. Improving the service is a clear objective of the Companies and
Intellectual Property Office. If, at a later stage, it is necessary to have
further considerations on this point, then this matter could be entertained
later on.

It has been a privilege to have been able to play a modest role in
facilitating the passing of a Bill which I am certain can make a
contribution to confronting the serious health challenges facing us.

The ANC commends this Bill to the House. [Applause.]

Mr H J BEKKER: Chairman, at the outset, let me applaud the Minister for his
unequivocal support of intellectual property rights, because it is
important for South Africa that we spell this out to the international
world. The IFP subscribes unconditionally to the protection of intellectual
property rights. We believe protection of intellectual property rights
would guarantee that international investors' skills and know-how would not
be poached by people or organisations which do not do any research or
development by themselves.

International investors must feel safe and comfortable in South Africa. The
Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association, in principle, supported the Bill,
and even the greater access that is now going to be given to the market for
the manufacturers of generic medicines. During the hearings, it appeared
that the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association would be prepared to
negotiate with the state very much in respect to the objects of the Bill. I
am convinced that with more effort we could have had a unanimous and
general acceptance of the legislation.

The only basic aspect which was a quandary at the end was this patent
restoration period, and I think that there was room for this particular
aspect. Unfortunately, the time factor was against us. With regard to
patent rights on medicine, two portfolio committees had to deal with this
aspect, complicating matters further. Generic medicines are of vital
importance in the struggle to obtain cheaper medicines.

The 20-year protection period for patented medicines is universally
accepted. In future, the manufacturers and patent holders will still have
protection for 20 years. However, the generic manufacturers may now develop
and copy the patented medicine, and prepare the application for
registration during the period of this 20-year protection. They only may
not go on to the market and sell their products during that time.

On the day of expiry of the 20-year term, the generic manufacturer may
lodge its application for registration. The IFP is supportive of the
legislation, but believes that it would have been possible to have brought
everybody on board with minor amendments. The IFP will therefore urge the
state and the Department of Trade and Industry to reflect on the
legislation and, once it has been enacted, to bring this legislation back
for further consideration. In this regard, I also want to compliment the
hon Davies who also mooted the possibility that this could probably be
done.

The IFP will, nevertheless, with these provisos, support and vote for the
Patents Amendment Bill. We support it.

Dr R T RHODA: Chairperson, in a nutshell, the Patents Amendment Bill brings
South African legislation in line with provisions of the Trade Related
aspects of Intellectual Property Law, TRIPS, in permitting research by
persons other than a patent holder, particularly in relation to the
production of generic pharmaceutical products.

Having personally worked in the pharmaceutical research for many years, I
can assure members that it takes an enormous amount of money, time,
knowledge, patience, innovation and risk to produce a successfully marketed
new and useful drug. Patent protection is a necessary and an effective
incentive for research and development of needed products. Medicines are
essential to the wellbeing of our nation, and not just simply another
commodity.

Patents must therefore be managed in an impartial way to benefit the patent
holder and the public at large. It is a business venture and, naturally,
capital must be recouped, and there must be rewards. Therefore, in doing
what must be done, we must be careful not to kill the goose that lays the
golden eggs. Then again, research companies will also agree that scientists
who produce the results for them do not fall from the sky. They come from
our universities.

President Bush says of the big brand drug companies, and I quote;


  You deserve the rewards of your research and development, but you do not
  have the right to keep generic drugs off the market for frivolous
  reasons.

Yes, doctors can diagnose diseases, but without the availability of
effective pharmaceuticals, not much can be done to relieve and cure
patients.

The patent allows an intervention, and prevents others from making, selling
or using an invention for approximately 20 years. The pharmacy prices are
affordable only to the affluent, unfortunately. Poor people who generally
have more health problems than the affluent, are immediately excluded, as
we have seen with AZT and other new formulations.

Sadly, every day poor people in South Africa actually die from curable
diseases, mainly because they cannot afford the exorbitant prices charged
by big brand innovative drug companies for the medicines. In 1999 a survey
was done. It revealed that 66% of respondents cited cost as the main reason
for not seeking health care when sick. Thus public needs justify policies
and laws that would enable our Government to provide access to cheaper
medicines.

It is for this reason that we must limit the unintended extension of a
patent, because millions of dollars are made by the innovative companies
every day that the generic is kept from entering the market. I do not have
anything further to say, other than to say that the New NP supports this
Bill wholeheartedly.[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, as we meet today to debate the Patents
Amendment Bill, it is encouraging to note that this Bill makes provision
for the early entry of generic medicines in South Africa. This is
consistent with what happens in other countries that have managed to
establish and roll out a strong generic medicines policy.

According to the published data, the sources of active ingredients that
perform bioequivalent studies, quality assurance and the compilation of a
dossier for drug registration purposes takes two to three years, and
manufacturing processes add another three to six months. This effectively
means that a period of three to four years is needed for a generic medicine
to be available. This amending Bill will enable all scientific and
regulatory requirements for the registration of generic medicines to be
made during the period of a patent. This will then allow for the immediate
availability of a generic medicine when the patent of the branded name
expires.

This is an important step that will improve access to generic medicines. We
therefore support this Bill fully as this provision will minimise
unnecessary delays that effectively extend patent rights from three to four
years. All this is consistent with our international trade agreements at
the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and public health. Integral to
this agreement is the affirmation that the TRIPS Agreement does not and
should not prevent members from taking measures to protect public health.

In principle, we support the view that there should be appropriate revenue
and security for research and development for new medicines and the value
attached to their improvement in health. Our concerns, which are addressed
by this amending Bill and the Medicines Act as amended recently in this
House, are the high prices of brand name medicines and the delayed entry of
cheaper generic medicines.

The introduction of approximately five to ten generic equivalents of a
specific medicine has a significant impact on price, and it should be noted
that price is an important determinant of access to essential medicines.
Where there are in excess of ten generic medicines in a country, prices
fall by more than 50%, or further entrants may even reduce the price up to
75%. The dramatic rise in the sale of generic medicines has been reported
in the United States of America, as having purchases close to $8-$10
billion in 1994.

The change in legislation to allow for generic medicine entry has
contributed to this. It has further been reported that when more generic
medicine producers enter the market, the prices fall significantly. It has
been estimated that 80% of the profits of generic manufacturers are
obtained within 18 months of the appearance of a generic alternative. The
amending of the Patent Act will promote the early introduction of generic
medicine into the market. This is a stepping stone to the promotion of
local production of generic medicines. This Bill is additional to
provisions in the Medicines Amendment Bill, which is aimed at introducing
measures to make medicines affordable and accessible.

This is a process that builds momentum to fundamental change in South
Africa that will encourage competition in the sale of medicines. We embrace
these changes that we consider to be significant in the process of
strengthening the relationship between trade and health. From a public
health perspective, I see this as an important step and development that
will promote the availability of essential medicines at affordable prices
without unnecessary delays. I want to assure the South African public that
this Government is doing everything possible to ensure that everyone has
access to affordable medicines.

The African National Congress goes further to ensure that every person in
South Africa has affordable access to health care services and that access
to services cannot be determined by ability to pay. This resolve by the
African National Congress is built on the principle of universal access to
basic services and, in particular, basic health care services.

If one looks carefully, one would notice that the record of the ANC speaks
for itself in this regard. The principles enshrined in the Freedom Charter,
the African National Congress Health Plan for South Africa and the national
drug policy of the Department of Health.

Let me clear the myth that cheap drugs equal poor quality. This is totally
untrue and a gospel doom that is preached by those who benefit from the
current system. We have established a reputable Medicines Control Council
whose function it is to ensure that all medicines that enter this country
are of good quality.

Let me assure the public of South Africa that they should not be concerned
that this legislation will open the floodgates for poor quality medicines.
This is not true. The fact is that we are co-operating with the SA Police
Service to monitor counterfeit medicines on an ongoing basis. We are also
doing everything possible to put an immense effort into strengthening the
Medicines Control Council to build its technical and administrative
capacity to process the registration of medicines as quickly as possible
without sacrificing quality.

Finally, I would like to congratulate my colleague, the Minister of Trade
and Industry, and the portfolio committee for this amending Bill.
[Applause.]

Mr C T FROLICK: Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, the
objective of the Patents Amendment Bill is to effect substantive procedural
and technical adjustments to update the Patents Act of 1978.

Amendments to section 45(a) of the Act are required to create a conducive
and enabling environment for researchers and innovators to work on a patent
while it is still in force. The proposed amendments will be of application
especially in the fields of health care and medicines.

In comparing the prevailing situation in South Africa with other countries,
it is indeed worthwhile to note that the United States spends as much as
50% of its total pharmaceutical expenditure on generics. However, in South
Africa only 20% is spent on generics. One of the reasons for this is mainly
the delay in researchers and innovators gaining access to the patent upon
its pending expiry.

While patent protection is a necessity and due incentive for the research
and development of essential products, it must be managed in ways which are
beneficial to both the patent holder and the general public.

This amendment will lead to essential drugs being made more affordable to
the poor, and it also has the potential to stimulate the economy and
drastically undercut public spending on medicines.
The UDM supports the Bill.

Adv Z L MADASA: Mr Chairman, the Bill seeks to allow manufacturers of
generic products to develop and register their products before the expiry
of a patent, though not to sell it commercially.

The aim is to accelerate the entry of cheaper generic substitutes into the
market. As they stand at the moment, makers of generic drugs can develop
their products only after the expiry of a patent, which in effect extends
the length of the patent from 20 years to about 25 or 30 years.

This Bill will encourage local production of generics. The amending Bill is
a welcome intervention by the Government in order to help the country to
deal with the HIV/Aids pandemic more comprehensively. It is another way of
ensuring that HIV/Aids treatment is made cheaper and affordable. The Bill
will generally ensure greater access to medicines and cheaper treatment of
diseases.

The Pharmaceutical Association is on record as not being against the
amendment. The issues of low investor confidence raised by the
Pharmaceutical Association and the possibility of this Bill exacerbating
the situation are baseless and seem to be a decoy to avoid the real debate.
The basic fundamentals of protection of intellectual property are not
threatened in any way by this Bill in our view.

Therefore, the ACDP will support the Bill.

Mrs S F BALOYI: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, last week the
Medicines and Related Substance Amendment Bill was debated, amongst other
Bills. It made provision for generic substitution to make medicines
accessible and affordable at a cheaper price so that the majority of our
poor people have excess to these essential medicines. Generic medicines are
viewed by some as being inferior in quality. This is not so, as generics
are of equivalent quality, safety and efficacy as the more expensive
medicines, and the ANC welcomes and encourages its availability and
utilisation on the market.

Today another key transformatory Bill, the Patents Amendment Bill, is being
debated. This Bill is complementary to the Medicines Amendment Bill. This
Bill represents a major step forward in ensuring more affordable and
accessible medicines at a cheaper price for all our people. The Bill allows
for the early working of a patent before the patent expires. This allows
for the immediate entry of generics after the expiry of a patent.

The ANC welcomes this amendment as it is essential for meeting the health
needs of all the citizens of South Africa, and in line with the
Government's policy of increasing the availability and affordability of
generics. The percentage of locally produced generics is very low compared
to other countries. Many advanced countries have such provisions,
especially developed countries. South Africa is not unique in seeking this
amendment to patent law. Our responsibility and accountability is to our
people and not to those who profit from the pain and suffering of the poor
and disadvantaged masses of our people, who cannot afford the most
expensive medicines and drugs.

Expensive brand name medicine expenditure is 80%. For generics it is 20%.
In the USA it is currently about 50%. Why then should we in South Africa,
with a worse disease prevalence, not be able to manufacture cheap, safe and
quality generics for the sake of many of our people who die from curable
diseases because they cannot afford expensive medicines currently on the
South African market?

The ANC regards the manufacturing of generics as urgent and it is giving
priority to the manufacturing and distribution of generics in respect of
diseases such as malaria, diabetes, HIV Aids and many preventable and
curable diseases that are ravaging our people's health, our economy and our
country. The ANC Government, with this amendment, is taking the health,
social and economic needs of its people and country into account, and
therefore legislating accordingly.

This amendment will keep at bay the flooding of our market with new generic
products by manufacturing companies outside South Africa, as local
manufacturers will now have the same advantage to produce cheap, affordable
generics, thus reducing the price of medicines. Every day that a generic is
kept from entering the market, millions of dollars are made by big
innovator multinational pharmaceutical companies in profit. The ANC
Government's commitment and priority is to improve the health and quality
of life of every citizen of our country. Therefore, early working will
provide substantial benefits to our people, the industry and the economy of
our country.

It is important to produce generics locally to stimulate competition,
promote access and reduce the cost of medicines for the benefit of all. The
2002 Kayser survey showed that rural households spend up to 60% of their
monthly income on medicines and health care. The majority of our poor
people are getting poorer by the day because most of their earnings are
spent on medicines. The ANC will not be deterred in any way from fulfilling
its mandate to care for its people.

Concerns have been raised mainly by those whose who are not happy about the
workings of the MCC about patent term restoration and the efficiency of the
Medicines Control Council. The ANC Government inherited a struggling
council and had to go through a process of transformation and
restructuring, capacity building and dealing with huge backlogs. This took
some time, as one can appreciate that the process had to be properly
addressed.

Since 1998, this Government, through the transformation of the Medicine
Control Council, has allocated more resources, and an expert committee has
been established and legislation passed to harmonise the evaluation and
registration process so that medicines can be registered efficiently and
swiftly. Therefore, the question of the so-called delays is being
effectively addressed. The ANC Government's political will and commitment
to the provision of cheap, accessible and affordable medicine, supported by
community will and active participation in their own health, will go a long
way to strengthening efforts to fight the scourge of disease and poverty.

I think we all can support this Bill with a clear conscience because health
is not a commodity to be traded for profit, and should not be seen to be
converted into a lucrative trade for gain or profit at the expense of the
poor.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Minister, the
Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry and his
committee for supporting this amending Bill. The ANC supports this Bill.
[Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the clarity that this Bill now serves to bring
about is much needed and brings it quite in line with the actual intention
and aim of the first drafting of this Bill. Patent laws are very important.
It refers to an agreed exchange of right that has to be honoured, like
terms of binding contracts. Rights are to be preserved and upheld. It is
what makes such an impact. It is our duty as Government to ensure that such
terms are upheld and fulfilled. It is our duty as Government to ensure the
protection and preservation of such a contract and, most importantly, it is
our duty as Government to oversee that the proper mechanics and lawful
procedures are adhered to.

Corruption is sadly by no means absent from South African society and
Government. It is a weakness that calls for an earnest oversight of events
in all spheres.

Secondly, transparency has to be maintained and the people have the right
to access all information, and so forth, as a democratic right inherited by
the citizenship. It is therefore very important that truth that is shown to
the community contains hard efforts of the Government to control and manage
the sector well. Confidence in the South African Parliament has to be
maintained. Honouring and preserving patent laws is one way of showing how
trustworthy and dedicated our system is.
The MF supports the Bill.

Mr N M DUMA: Chairperson, hon members, we in the ANC rise to support
Government in its work for modification in the trade-related aspects of
international property in order to address issues of global public goods,
affordable medicines and sharing of benefits of bio-diversity development.

We welcome and support these amendments, particularly as they relate to
public health care and the ability of the state to ensure that members of
the public have access to affordable and cheaper medicines. Although
certain aspects of the Act, as currently applied, do not sufficiently
create conditions to meet the above objectives, we in the ANC are satisfied
that this piece of legislation will ensure improved health care in a
positive and developmental manner.

Section 45(a) of the Patents Act as it stands, overly protects the patentee
or holder of the patent. This is so because no person has a right to
conduct any early work on a patent before it expires after 20 years. This
practice of excluding even researchers and innovators has an adverse effect
on innovation, competition, research and development.

In other jurisdictions, such as India, Canada, Australia, certain member
states of the European Union, the United States, Israel and Jordan, the
authorities have legislated in their patent laws that researchers and
innovators should be allowed to conduct early work on patents which have
not yet expired. A proviso is that nobody should commercially compete with
the patentee while the patent is still in force. The advantage of this
practice is obvious mainly in the pharmaceutical sector. Immediately when a
patent expires, generic manufacturing companies are able to release their
new product into channels of commerce. This also encourages competition
which mostly leads to lowering of prices.

Thus, the law should protect the patent right of the inventor and still
allow generic drug manufacturers to benefit as soon as the patent
protection expires. As for now, South African generic companies are
disadvantaged as their competitors from other jurisdictions flood the South
African market with new products as soon as the patent expires.

Equitable access by all South Africans to health care and a reduction of
inequalities between the private and public sector providers must be
realised. We also have to realise the objective of primary health care in
an effective and efficient manner. We welcome the DP's support. They
usually stage violent opposition to all legislation and actions by the ANC
that seek to better the lives of all, particularly the poor. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, I am pleased that we
received support for this amendment from all parties and, I believe it is
well-justified. I would, however, just like to briefly stress, once again,
that this amendment applies to all patents. Because of the topicality of
the issue of pharmaceuticals and generics, we understand that most speakers
have focused on this, but it is really important that we realise that it
applies to all patents. This is something that we should be stressing in
South Africa - our scientific and technological effort on all fronts.

It is precisely because it applies to all patents that I think the issues
of the restoration period and the additional time have to be reviewed in a
different light altogether. We cannot just say, because it is the
pharmaceuticals that may have longer periods for their processes to be
dealt with, that all patents should be affected in the same way. I would
also argue that I think that in respect of any question of delays in the
MCC, firstly, as the hon Baloyi has indicated, considerable progress has
been made there and, from Trade and Industry's point of view, we also would
like efficient and timeous processing of applications, accepting that they
will take time and that one cannot fast-track it unnecessarily, but if
there are delays, I think these can be dealt with by other means.

I would also like to just stress that, from the point of view of
Government, we are not opposed to patented medicines. These are very often
imported and can play an important role. What we are looking for is a fair,
equitable and affordable spectrum of pharmaceuticals that will meet our
health care needs. As many speakers have indicated, and I also wish to
indicate as Minister of Trade and Industry, South Africa's capacity to
develop and produce both patented and generic drugs is increasing, and it
is an objective of Government that we will improve this capacity over time.

We thank the House for supporting the Bill. We think it is an important
step forward for many patent areas, including pharmaceuticals. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND
       TOURISM - AGREEMENT ON CONSERVATION OF ALBATROSSES AND PETRELS

Agreement adopted.

   CONVENTION FOR THE PROTECTION, MANAGEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT OF MARINE AND
    COASTAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE EAST AFRICAN REGION AND RELATED PROTOCOLS
       (NAIROBI CONVENTION) IN TERMS OF SECTION 231(2) OF CONSTITUTION

Convention approved.

  CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF CONVENTION FOR CO-
    OPERATION IN THE PROTECTION AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE MARINE AND COASTAL
  ENVIRONMENT OF THE WEST AND CENTRAL AFRICAN REGION AND RELATED PROTOCOLS
       (ABIDJAN CONVENTION) IN TERMS OF SECTION 231(2) OF CONSTITUTION

Convention approved.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION - VISITS TO
                       INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER LEARNING

Report adopted without debate.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON MINERALS AND ENERGY -
            PETITION OF EAST RAND MINE DUST ERADICATION COMMITTEE

Report adopted without debate.

    CONSIDERATION OF TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
                         ACCOUNTS - PRESIDENT'S FUND

Report adopted without debate.

    CONSIDERATION OF TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
                         ACCOUNTS - GUARDIANS' FUNDS

Report adopted without debate.

The House adjourned at 17:11.
                                 __________
                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           FRIDAY, 1 NOVEMBER 2002

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister of Trade and Industry submitted the
         Wysigingswetsontwerp op Handelswaremerke  [W 63 - 2002] (National
         Assembly - sec 75) to the Speaker and the Chairperson on 1
         November 2002. This is the official translation into Afrikaans of
         the Merchandise Marks Amendment Bill [B 63 - 2002] (National
         Assembly - sec 75).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:
Papers:

1.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs:


     Annual Report and Financial Statements of the National Agricultural
     Marketing Council for 2001-2002, including the Report of the Auditor-
     General on the financial statements for 2001-2002 [RP 5-2002].

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Twenty-Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts,
     dated 23 October 2002:


         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the
         Banking Sector Education and Training Authority [BANKSETA] for the
         year ended 31 March 2002 [RP 95-02], tabled on 21 August 2002 and
         referred to the Committee, reports as follows:


         1. Audit opinion


              The Committee commends the Chief Executive Officer and the
              management of BANKSETA for the unqualified audit opinion
              expressed by the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit
              opinions will be equally unqualified.


         2. General


              The Committee notes:


              (a) That the management is satisfied that BANKSETA has met the
                  targets set out in its business plan;


              (b) That subcommittees meet on a bi-monthly basis to discuss
                  issues pertaining to skills development, quality
                  assurance and learnerships in the sector; and


              (c) That BANKSETA not only operated within its budget, but
                  also succeeded in being cost-effective, effecting a
                  saving of R4,4 million in respect of its administration
                  budget.


         3. Audit Committee, internal and external auditors


              The Committee further notes that, according to the management:


              (a) The Audit Committee effectively carried out its
                  responsibilities and functions in accordance with the
                  statutory requirements and its own Charter;


              (b) BANKSETA engaged Gobodo Corporate Governance Services as
                  its internal service provider;


              (c) The external auditors identified no impediments to
                  conducting their audit of BANKSETA's annual financial
                  statements; and


              (d) Control weaknesses identified by the internal audit and a
                  recommendation for the enhancement of controls  are
                  receiving adequate attention from the management.


              In view of the internal service provider having been appointed
              on a temporary basis only, the Committee requests that the
              management indicate whether a skills transfer has been
              effected.


         4. Decision on hearing


              In addition to noting the unqualified audit opinion of the
              Auditor-General, the Committee notes that the Auditor-General
              has not cited any particular issue of concern which would
              warrant the Committee's consideration.


              The Committee therefore recommends that no hearing be held on
              BANKSETA for the financial year under review.


     Report to be considered.

2.    Twenty-Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts,
     dated 23 October 2002:


         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the
         Financial and Accounting Services Sector Education and Training
         Authority [FASSETA] and its Annual Report for the year ended 31
         March 2002 [RP 138-02], tabled on 23 August 2002 and referred to
         the Committee, reports as follows:


         1. Audit opinion


              The Committee commends the Management Board and the Chief
              Executive Officer of FASSETA for the unqualified audit opinion
              expressed by the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit
              opinions will be equally unqualified.


         2. Internal financial control


              The Committee notes:


              (a) That the Management Board is confident that standards set
                  by the management and the implementation of systems for
                  internal and accounting control are adequate to ensure
                  the integrity and reliability of the financial
                  statements, and of the accountability of the assets of
                  FASSETA;


              (b) That the Management Board is of the opinion that
                  appropriate accounting policies, supported by reasonable
                  and prudent judgements and estimates, are applied on a
                  consistent going concern basis;


              (c) That controls include the proper delegation for
                  responsibilities within a clearly defined framework,
                  effective accounting procedures and adequate segregation
                  of duties; and


              (d) That processes are in place to monitor the effectiveness
                  of internal control, to identify and report material
                  breakdowns and to ensure that timely and appropriate
                  corrective action is taken.


         3. Risk management
              The Committee notes that:


              (a) An independent risk process has been implemented to
                  effectively identify, evaluate and assess all risks so
                  that the management can limit losses;


              (b) FASSETA has the necessary skills and systems to manage
                  risks; and


              (c) The internal auditors, who have the responsibility to
                  monitor the prescribed procedures, have direct access to
                  the Chief Executive Officer and to the Audit Committee.


         4. Audit Committee


              The Committee notes:


              (a) That the Audit Committee held its first meeting on 29
                  March 2001;


              (b) That its Charter was formally adopted by the Management
                  Board on 17 August 2001;


              (c) That the Audit Committee approved the internal auditors'
                  terms of reference;


              (d) That the Audit Committee recommended the compilation of a
                  fraud prevention plan; and


              (e) That, in the opinion of the Committee, the internal
                  auditors are operating objectively and independently.


         5. Decision on hearing


              In addition to noting the unqualified audit opinion of the
              Auditor-General, the Committee notes that he has not cited any
              particular issue of concern which would warrant the
              Committee's consideration.


              The Committee therefore recommends that no hearing be held on
              FASSETA for the financial year under review.


     Report to be considered.

3.    Twenty-Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts,
     dated 23 October 2002:


         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the
         Food and Beverages Manufacturing Sector Education and Training
         Authority [FOODBEVSETA] and the Annual Report for the year ended
         31 March 2002 [RP 99-02], tabled on 30 August 2002 and referred to
         the Committee, reports as follows:


         1. Audit opinion


              The Committee commends the Chairperson, Executive Officer,
              Management and staff of FOODBEVSETA for the unqualified audit
              opinion expressed by the Auditor-General, and trusts that
              future audit opinions will be equally unqualified.


         2. Audit Committee


              The Committee notes that, among others, the Audit Committee
              reviewed the risk management strategy proposed by the internal
              auditors and recommended the re-constitution of the Audit
              Committee so as to include only non-Council members.


              The Committee recommends that FOODBEVSETA submit to it a
              report outlining the outcome of the above review and
              recommendations by 30 November 2002.


         3. Collection of levies
              The Committee notes with concern the delay in the collection
              of levies due to FOODBEVSETA, and recommends that the Auditor-
              General report thereon in his report for the financial year
              ending 31 March 2003.


         4. Financial overview


              The Committee notes:


              (a) That FOODBEVSETA's levy income more than doubled to R67,1
                  million;


              (b) That grant disbursements were processed and distributed
                  timeously and that the disbursement rate rose from 73% in
                  2001-02 to 80% in 2001-02;


              (c) That R42 million has been earmarked for disbursement to
                  300 companies;


              (d) That, for the financial year under review, FOODBEVSETA
                  recorded a surplus of R2,62 million, which, together with
                  R2,28 million in interest, were transferred to the
                  discretionary fund for special projects; and


              (e) That the internal auditors conducted a risk assessment
                  exercise to identify FOODBEVSETA's business risk areas.


         5. Decision on hearing


              In addition to noting the unqualified audit opinion of the
              Auditor-General, the Committee notes that the Auditor-General
              has not cited any particular issue which would warrant the
              Committee's attention and consideration.


              The Committee therefore recommends that no hearing be held on
              FOODBEVSETA for the financial year under review.


     Report to be considered.

4.    Twenty-Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts,
     dated 23 October 2002:


         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the
         Education, Training and Development Practices Sector Education and
         Training Authority [ETDPSETA] for the year ended 31 March 2002 [RP
         134-02], tabled on 30 August 2002 and referred to the Committee,
         reports as follows:


         1. Audit opinion


              The Committee commends the management for the unqualified
              audit opinion expressed by the Auditor-General, and trusts
              that future audit opinions will be equally unqualified.


         2. Audit Committee


              The Committee notes that the Board adopted the Charter of the
              Audit Committee on 24 May 2002.


         3. Internal audit


              The Committee notes with concern that for the year under
              review no internal audit was carried out, resulting in non-
              compliance with section 51 of the Public Finance Management
              Act.


              The Committee recommends:


              (a) That the management take urgent steps to rectify this
                  situation and report to the Committee on progress made by
                  15 January 2003; and


              (b) That the Auditor-General report thereon in his next
                  report.


         4. Decision on hearing


              Having noted the unqualified audit opinion of the Auditor-
              General, and having considered the issue of concern cited by
              the Auditor-General, the Committee recommends that no hearing
              be held on ETDPSETA for the financial year under review.


     Report to be considered.

5.    Thirtieth Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, dated
     23 October 2002:


         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the
         Forest Industries Education and Training Authority [FIETA] for the
         year ended 31 March 2002 [RP 10-02], tabled on 28 August 2002 and
         referred to the Committee, reports as follows:


         1. Audit opinion


              The Committee commends the management and staff of FIETA for
              the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the Auditor-
              General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
              unqualified.


         2. Audit Committee


              The Committee notes that the Audit Committee was established
              in October 2001, that its first meeting was held in October
              2001 and that its Charter was formally adopted in April 2002.


              The Committee recommends that it be furnished with copies of
              minutes of all Audit Committee meetings held during the year
              under review.


         3. Financial matters


              The Committee notes that the finance department was outsourced
              after irregularities were experienced during the previous
              financial year, that the matter of alleged fraud reported in
              the 2000-01 Annual Report has not been finalised, and that
              criminal proceedings should have been concluded by the end of
              August 2002.


              The Committee recommends that it be informed about the outcome
              of the proceedings by 30 November 2002, should the case have
              been concluded by then.


         4. Decision on hearing


              In addition to noting the unqualified audit opinion of the
              Auditor-General, the Committee notes that he has not cited any
              particular issue of concern which would warrant the
              Committee's attention and consideration.


              The Committee therefore recommends that no hearing be held on
              FIETA for the financial year under review.


     Report to be considered.

6.    Thirty-First Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts,
     dated 23 October 2002:


         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
         Annual Report (including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         financial statements) of the Mining Qualifications Authority
         [MQASETA] for the year ended 31 March 2002, tabled on 23 August
         2002 and referred to the Committee, reports as follows:


         1. Audit opinion


              The Committee commends the management of MQASETA for the
              unqualified audit opinion expressed by the Auditor-General,
              and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
              unqualified.


         2. Unutilised funds - R43,6 million


              The Committee notes that funds amounting to R43,6 million were
              saved from allocations made in respect of administrative and
              development costs and from unclaimed skills grants for the
              financial year under review.


              Although the Public Finance Management Act does not allow
              public entities to roll over unutilised funds, the Committee
              notes that the National Treasury, recognising that SETAs are
              at an early stage of development, has  allowed them to do so.


         3. Audit Committee
              The Committee notes that the Audit Committee was constituted
              in November 2000, and that its terms of reference was
              confirmed in May 2001.


              The Committee further notes that, among others, the Audit
              Committee reviewed the effectiveness of the systems of
              internal control and internal auditing. The Committee
              recommends that a report be furnished to it and to the Auditor-
              General on the outcome of the review by 30 November 2002.


         4. PFMA compliance


              The Committee notes that the Management Board serves as the
              accounting authority, which is supposed to delegate powers to
              officials in writing. The Committee notes that the delegation
              of these powers is still in progress. The Committee recommends
              that the Auditor-General report thereon in his next report.


         5. Decision on hearing


              In addition to noting the unqualified audit opinion of the
              Auditor-General, the Committee notes that he has not cited any
              particular issue of concern which would warrant the
              Committee's attention and consideration.


              The Committee therefore recommends that no hearing be held on
              MQASETA for the financial year under review.


     Report to be considered

7.    Thirty-Second Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts,
     dated 23 October 2002:


         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
         Annual Report (including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         financial statements) of the Chemical Industries Education and
         Training Authority [CHIETA] for the year ended 31 March 2002 [RP
         93-02], tabled on 30 August 2002 and referred to the Committee,
         reports as follows:


         1. Audit opinion


              The Committee commends the management of CHIETA for the
              unqualified audit opinion expressed by the Auditor-General,
              and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
              unqualified.


         2. Levies


              The Committee notes with concern that the issue of the
              misallocation of levies with other SETAs has remained
              unresolved, thereby compromising CHIETA's efforts to win the
              confidence of the affected companies in the sector.
              The Committee recommends that the management indicate to it
              and to the Portfolio Committee on Labour by 30 November 2002
              how the situation could be rectified.


         3. Decision on hearing


              In addition to noting the unqualified audit opinion of the
              Auditor-General, the Committee notes that he has not cited any
              particular issue of concern which would warrant the
              Committee's attention and consideration.


              The Committee therefore recommends that no hearing be held on
              CHIETA for the financial year under review.


     Report to be considered.

8.    Thirty-Third Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts,
     dated 23 October 2002:


         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the
         Sector Education and Training Authority for Secondary Agriculture
         [SETASA] for the year ended 31 March 2002 [RP 111-02], tabled on
         30 August 2002 and referred to the Committee, reports as follows:


         1. Audit opinion


              The Committee commends the management of SETASA for the
              unqualified audit opinion expressed by the Auditor-General,
              and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
              unqualified.


         2. Decision on hearing


              In addition to noting the unqualified opinion of the Auditor-
              General, the Committee notes that he has not cited any
              particular issue of concern which would warrant the
              Committee's attention and consideration.


              The Committee therefore recommends that no hearing be held on
              SETASA for the financial year under review.


     Report to be considered.

9.    Thirty-Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts,
     dated 23 October 2002:


         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
         Annual Report (including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         financial statements) of the Wholesale and Retail Sector Education
         Training Authority [WARSETA] for the year ended 31 March 2002 [RP
         115-02], tabled on 30 August 2002 and referred to the Committee,
         reports as follows:


         1. Audit opinion


              The Committee commends the management of WARSETA for the
              unqualified audit opinion expressed by the Auditor-General,
              and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
              unqualified.


         2. Internal financial control


              The Committee notes that there is no material breakdown in the
              functioning of the internal financial control systems during
              the year under review, and that critical risk areas have been
              identified and reviewed by the Audit Committee and accordingly
              evaluated by the internal auditor.


         3. Risk management


              The Committee notes that an independent risk process has been
              implemented to identify, evaluate and assess all risks, and
              that WARSETA has the necessary skills and systems to manage
              those risks.


         4. Decision on hearing


              In addition to noting the unqualified audit opinion of the
              Auditor-General, the Committee also notes that the Auditor-
              General has not cited any particular issue of concern which
              would warrant the Committee's attention and consideration.


              The Committee therefore recommends that no hearing be held on
              WARSETA for the financial year under review.


     Report to be considered.

10.   Thirty-Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts,
     dated 23 October 2002:


         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the
         Manufacturing, Engineering and Related Services Sector Education
         and Training Authority [MERSETA] for the year ended 31 March 2002,
         tabled on 30 August 2002 and referred to the Committee, reports as
         follows:


         1. Audit opinion


              The Committee commends the management of MERSETA for the
              unqualified audit opinion expressed by the Auditor-General,
              and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
              unqualified.


         2. Decision on hearing


              In addition to noting the unqualified audit opinion, the
              Committee also notes that the Auditor-General has not cited
              any issues of concern which would warrant the Committee's
              consideration.


              The Committee therefore recommends that no hearing be held on
              MERSETA for the financial year under review.


     Report to be considered.

11.   Thirty-Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts,
     dated 23 October 2002:


         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the
         Clothing, Textiles, Footwear and Leather Sector Education and
         Training Authority [CTFLSETA] for the year ended 31 March 2002 [RP
         112-02], tabled on 29 August 2002 and referred to the Committee,
         reports as follows:


         1. Audit opinion


              The Committee commends the management of CTFLSETA for the
              unqualified audit opinion expressed by the Auditor-General,
              and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
              unqualified.


              However, the Committee notes that the Auditor-General has
              raised several issues.


         2. Remittances received


              The Committee is concerned that remittances were not received
              within 21 days, as provided for in the relevant legislation,
              and that remittances were at times up to three months overdue,
              causing significant cash-flow problems.


              The Committee recommends that the management indicate to it
              and to the Portfolio Committee on Labour by 30 November 2002
              what steps could be taken to rectify the situation.


         3. Levy debtors


              The Committee is concerned about the outstanding issue of
              collecting levies from companies who did not pay them, and
              about the fact that several companies did not pay the levies
              for the period under review.


              The Committee notes the view that it is not the responsibility
              of CTFLSETA to collect or raise levies from debtors, but the
              function of the South African Revenue Service.


         4. Decision on hearing


              The Committee therefore recommends that the Commissioner of
              the South African Revenue Service indicate to it and to the
              Portfolio Committee on Labour by 30 November 2002 the steps
              taken to rectify the situation.


              Having considered the report and having noted the Auditor-
              General's unqualified audit opinion, the Committee recommends
              that no hearing be held on CTFLSETA for the financial year
              under review.


     Report to be considered.

12.   Thirty-Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts,
     dated 23 October 2002:


         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the
         Transport Education and Training Authority [TETA] for the year
         ended 31 March 2002 [RP 14-02], tabled on 30 August 2002 and
         referred to the Committee, reports as follows:


         1. Audit opinion


              The Committee commends the management of TETA for the
              unqualified audit opinion expressed by the Auditor-General,
              and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
              unqualified.


              The Committee, however, notes that the Auditor-General has
              several issues of concern.


         2. Internal control


              The Committee is concerned that, although an asset register
              was in place, assets could not be physically identified
              because they had not been tagged.


              The Committee recommends that the management as a matter of
              urgency fully attend to this weakness in internal control by
              the end of the current financial year, and that the Auditor-
              General report thereon in his next report.


         3. Internal audit
              The Committee notes that no internal audit function was
              carried out for the year under review, resulting in non-
              compliance with the PFMA.


              However, the Committee notes that the Audit Committee was only
              appointed in February 2002, and consequently was not in a
              position to oversee the effectiveness of the audit function.


              The Committee recommends that the Audit Committee submit a
              report on the establishment, effectiveness and reliability of
              the internal audit function by 15 January 2003.


         4. Disclosure


              The Committee is concerned that not all members have disclosed
              their interests in accordance with the PFMA.


              The Committee recommends that this matter be rectified
              urgently and that the management furnish a report to it by 30
              November 2002.


         5. Decision on hearing


              Having considered the Report of the Auditor-General, and
              having noted the unqualified audit opinion, the Committee
              recommends that no hearing be held on TETA for the financial
              year under review.


     Report to be considered.

13.   Thirty-Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts,
     dated 23 October 2002:


         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
         Annual Report (including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         financial statements) of the Diplomacy, Intelligence, Defence and
         Trade Education and Training Authority [DIDTETA] for the year
         ended 31 March 2002, tabled on 30 August 2002 and referred to the
         Committee, reports as follows:


         1. Audit opinion


              The Committee commends the management of DIDTETA for the
              unqualified audit opinion expressed by the Auditor-General,
              and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
              unqualified.


              However, the Committee notes that the Auditor-General has
              cited several issues of concern, to which attention needs to
              be paid.


         2. Risk assessment


              The Committee notes with concern that DIDTETA failed to
              conduct a full risk assessment for the year under review. This
              is contrary to the provisions of the PFMA and to Treasury
              regulations.


              The Committee further notes that the above non-compliance
              impacted negatively on the completion of the fraud prevention
              plan.


              The Committee therefore recommends that the management conduct
              a full risk assessment as a matter of urgency and that the
              Auditor-General report thereon in his next report.


         3. Audit Committee


              The Committee notes with concern that the Audit Committee was
              not operational for the year under review, as required in
              terms of the PFMA.


              The Committee recommends that the management take urgent steps
              to rectify the situation, and that the Auditor-General report
              thereon in his next report.


         4. Internal audit


              The Committee further notes with concern that there was no
              internal audit during the year under review, as it had not
              been established in terms of various provisions of the PFMA.


              The Committee recommends that the management attend to this
              issue as matter of urgency, and that the Auditor-General
              report thereon in his next report.


         5. Delayed payment


              The Committee notes that delayed or late payments experienced
              by DIDTETA have had an adverse impact on its record of skills
              development delivery within the sector, and that an
              improvement in the manner in which contributions from
              stakeholders is paid to it, is highly desirable.


         6. Decision on hearing


              Having noted the unqualified audit opinion of the Auditor-
              General, as well as having considered the issues raised by
              him, the Committee recommends that no hearing be held on
              DIDTETA for the financial year under review.


     Report to be considered.

14.   Thirty-Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts,
     dated 29 October 2002:


         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
         General Report of the Auditor-General on Audit Outcomes for the
         year ended 31 March 2001 [RP 58-02], reports as follows:


         A. Introduction


              The Committee studied the Report of the Auditor-General, and
              on 19 June 2002 heard evidence from the Auditor-General, the
              Director-General: National Treasury, the Accountant-General:
              National Treasury and the Chief Director of PFMA
              Implementation. The Committee expresses its appreciation to
              them for clarifying aspects of the Report.


              The Report of the Auditor-General sets out a transversal
              overview of the audit outcomes of national and provincial
              departments, and to some extent of local authorities and some
              public entities during the financial year under review. As
              such, the Report provides valuable insight into trends
              regarding compliance with financial and other directives and
              requirements.


              The Committee noted that the financial year in question was
              the first year in which the requirements of the Public Finance
              Management Act, 1999 (Act 1 of 1999) (the PFMA), were
              applicable.


              In so far as the Report under review reflects information
              contained in other Auditor-General reports, the Committee has
              not addressed issues concerning individual entities referred
              to in the Report. Such issues have been or will be addressed
              in the Committee's investigations and reports on the audit
              reports of the respective entities.


         B. Qualified audit reports


              The Committee noted with appreciation that over the past three
              financial years there has been an improvement in the number of
              unqualified audit opinions given by the Auditor-General with
              respect to national government departments and related
              entities.


              However, the Committee is concerned about the number of
              entities that consistently received qualifications with
              respect to both financial and compliance audit opinions. Of
              particular concern is the number of adverse audit opinions and
              the number of cases in which the Auditor-General was unable to
              express an opinion on financial statements due to lack of
              appropriate audit evidence.


         C. Internal control


              According to the synopsis of matters mentioned by the Auditor-
              General in audit reports, a number of entities experienced
              internal control shortcomings, not only in respect of
              financial transactions, but also with regard to matters such
              as human resource management and contingent matters. Linked to
              this is the failure of various entities to establish an
              effective internal audit function or to appoint audit
              committees, as required by the PFMA.


              The Committee noted that National Treasury has recently
              published a framework document that sets out guidelines for
              the establishment of internal audit units and audit
              committees.


              The Committee recommends that the Auditor-General give special
              attention in all audits to the adequacy of internal control
              measures in the respective departments and other entities, as
              well as reasons for the underlying weaknesses identified. In
              cases where the Auditor-General could not place reliance on
              the work of internal audits, the main reasons for non-reliance
              or limited reliance should be indicated.


              The Committee welcomes as very useful the mandatory inclusion
              in all annual reports the report of the chairperson of the
              Audit Committee of the relevant department or entity.


              Together with informative reporting by the Auditor-General on
              internal auditing in future, it will provide the Committee
              with insight into this important function on which Parliament
              has to rely for the improvement of the state of financial
              management in the public sector.


         D. Asset management


              The Committee wishes to express concern at the fact that,
              according to the Auditor-General's Report, many departments
              are not maintaining proper asset registers. The Committee
              welcomes the preparation by the National Treasury of a set of
              guidelines to assist departments in this regard. This poses
              serious challenges, as departments will be migrating from cash
              to accrual accounting systems.


         E. Listing of public entities


              The Report illuminates the difficulties experienced by the
              Auditor-General as a result of incorrect and incomplete
              listing of public entities in Schedules 2 and 3 to the PFMA.
              In this regard, the Committee was informed that the National
              Treasury has initiated various measures to rectify the matter,
              including the establishment of a Registrar of Public Entities.


              The Committee wishes to stress the need for a sound database
              to ensure that all relevant entities are clearly allocated to
              the appropriate accountable executive functionaries.


              The Committee strongly recommends that the National Treasury
              report on progress in this regard as soon as possible after
              the opening of Parliament in 2003.


         F. Mandate of Auditor-General with respect to public entities


              The Auditor-General alerted the Committee to the difficulties
              being experienced with interpreting the mandate of the Auditor-
              General in respect of certain categories of public entities.
              In some cases the Auditor-General is in effect not able to
              provide the assurances and information required by Parliament.


              In so far as this problem is due to inconsistencies in various
              pieces of legislation, the Committee recommends that the
              necessary steps be taken as soon as possible to clarify the
              legal position, if necessary by means of appropriate
              amendments to the relevant laws.


         G. Local government


              The Committee expresses serious concern about the
              deteriorating financial management situation at local
              government level, as reflected in the Auditor-General's
              Report. Of the 806 audit reports issued on municipalities for
              the 1999-2000 financial year, only 106, or 22%, had
              unqualified audit opinions.


              There are high expectations that the position will improve
              considerably once the Local Government: Municipal Finance
              Management Bill has been enacted.


              The Committee calls upon the Department of Provincial and
              Local Government to do everything in its power to provide
              guidance and assistance to municipalities to improve their
              financial management.


         H. General


              The Committee raised the following issues with the Auditor-
              General and other officials during their meeting:


              1.  Personnel, including vacancies, performance contracts and
                  performance audits, and the implementation of the
                  recommendations of the Judge White Commission;


              2.  Management of debtors and creditors;


              3.  Unauthorised and irregular expenditure;
              4.  Information technology control, including computer audits
                  and PERSAL;


              5.  The responsibilities of the Accounting Officer and the
                  Chief Financial Officer, and the relationship between
                  them;


              6.  Lack of timeous payment of audit fees by local
                  authorities;


              7.  Application of the PFMA to Parliament; and


              8.  Progress reports on the implementation of the PFMA.


              The enhanced information provided in the latest General
              Report, compared with previous years, is appreciated by the
              Committee. Nevertheless, the Committee wishes to note the
              following:


              (a) The timing of the report long after the end of the
                  financial year in question (tabled on 24 April 2002, more
                  than 12 months after the end of the financial year)
                  renders it of less value to the Committee than timeous
                  information. Ideally, the report should be available by
                  the time departments start tabling their annual reports
                  in September every year.


              (b) The Committee is very appreciative of the independent
                  assurance role provided by the Auditor-General - the more
                  traditional oversight audit role. Because of citizens'
                  higher expectations of the Public Service, Parliament has
                  an increasing need for more information on the effective,
                  efficient and economic levels of service and the ability
                  of public sector managers to ensure service delivery in
                  the most cost-effective manner. The Auditor-General
                  should provide more of this type of performance
                  information through increased performance auditing.


         I. Closing remarks


              The Committee commends the National Treasury for its efforts
              to facilitate compliance with the PFMA and Treasury
              Regulations and to assist departments in their financial
              management responsibilities.


              The Committee commends the Auditor-General and his Office for
              their hard work in compiling this General Report. It is a most
              valuable contribution to enable Parliament and the Committee
              to perform their constitutional oversight functions.


     Report to be considered.
15.   Report of Portfolio Committee on Transport on Implementation of
     National Land Transport Transitional Act, dated 23 October 2002:


         The Portfolio Committee on Transport, having held public hearings
         on the implementation of the National Land Transport Transitional
         Act, reports as follows:


         1. National Land Transport Transitional Act, 2000


              After several years of refinement, Parliament passed the
              National Land Transport Transitional Act (NLTTA) in 2000, and
              the national Department of Transport (the Department) began to
              operationalise the Act from December 2000. The Act seeks to
              establish a coherent, developmentally oriented approach to
              public road transport, drawing in all three spheres of
              government. A central feature of the Act is that it requires
              municipal and provincial level transport planning to be the
              basis on which any future public transport operating licences
              are awarded.


              The legacy of confusion and relative anarchy in public
              transport in South African towns and cities is partly
              attributable to the fact that, historically, permits to
              operate public transport often had little connection to any
              coherent planning. This resulted in many anomalies.


              Incomplete information available to the Committee strongly
              suggested that many difficulties were being encountered with
              the implementation of the NLTTA. The Committee accordingly
              commissioned a research report and, in August and September
              2002, held a series of public hearings based on the findings
              of this research report.
         2. Research report and public hearings


              The commissioned research report, entitled "Key issues
              emerging from background research on the progressive
              implementation of transport planning in terms of the National
              Land Transport Transitional Act (2000)", was tabled before and
              discussed by the Committee in August 2002. The report was
              based on research conducted in three case-study areas - Cape
              Town, eThekwini and the Amatole District.


              The report was distributed to key stakeholders, and a series
              of parliamentary public hearings was conducted. Those making
              presentations to the Committee included the South African Bus
              Owners Association, the South African Commuters Organisation,
              the South African National Taxi Council, the South African
              Local Government Association, the Director of Traffic and
              Transportation in the eThekwini Municipality and the
              Department.


         3. Proposals and recommendations


              The Committee believes that improvements need to be made with
              regard to a number of areas.


              (a) Registration and operating licences for public transport


                  The implementation of the NLTTA in respect of
                  registration and operating licences is impeded by, among
                  other:


                  *    Incompatible information systems


                  *    Uncertainty regarding procedures and timing of the
                    issuing of permits and operating licences, the role of
                    registrars, and succession rights in respect of
                    operating licences


                  *    A lack of national uniformity regarding route
                    descriptions


                  *    Provisions in the NLTTA for metered taxis and
                    tourism services being inadequate.


                  With regard to these issues, the Committee proposes:


                  *    To review progress, in early 2003, on the
                       development of a single National Transport Register,
                       with all relevant institutions having compatible
                       systems


                  *    That the the Department should provide for forums
                       for operating licence boards, registrars and
                       stakeholders to agree on common policies and
                       procedures


                  *    To review progress in 2003 on the preparation by the
                       Department of guidelines regarding route descriptions


                  *    That legislative amendments should be made to the
                       NLTTA to provide for metered taxis and tourism
                       services.


              (b) Transport planning


                  Transport planning, as envisaged in the NLTTA, is being
                  impeded by:


                  *    Lack of an appropriate financial framework in
                       general and, specifically, insufficient funding to
                       meet statutory planning requirements


                  *    Envisaged planning frequency being too high


                  *    Cases where there is a lack of clarity as to whether
                       B or C municipalities should be the designated
                       planning authority


                  *    Enforcement not being adequately addressed in the
                       NLTTA.


                  With regard to these issues, the Committee proposes:


                  *    That, during the first half of 2003, the Department
                       should report to Parliament on progress made in the
                       development of a comprehensive funding strategy for
                       transport planning, and specifically on the use of
                       funds already transferred to provincial authorities
                       for this purpose


                  *    That a legislative amendment should be made to the
                       NLTTA to extend the planning cycle to a more
                       reasonable length


                  *    That the Department should facilitate workshops and
                       other capacity-building processes to ensure that
                       there is clarity as to whether a B or C municipality
                       should be the designated planning authority, with the
                       understanding that this may vary from case to case


                  *    Legislative amendments to the Administrative
                       Adjudication of Road Traffic Offences Act, 1998,
                       providing for more effective transport law
                       enforcement.
              (c) Transport authorities


                  The Committee received submissions that indicated a
                  number of concerns about the establishment and
                  functioning of Transport Authorities (TAs), as envisaged
                  in the NLTTA. With regard to issues raised, the Committee
                  proposes:


                  *    That the funding of TAs be addressed in the funding
                       strategy proposed above


                  *    That a legislative amendment be effected to the
                       NLTTA to provide for a statutory definition of
                       "municipal public transport", as it appears in
                       Schedule 4B of the Constitution of the RSA.


              (d) Restructuring of bus industry


                  The Committee received submissions, also from the
                  Department, that indicated there has been a shortfall in
                  the bus subsidy budget in the previous financial year,
                  and again in the current financial year.


                  The Committee recommends that the overall approach to
                  subsidies for public transport needs to be reviewed to
                  ensure that three major outcomes are achieved:


                  *    Benefits to the commuter are prioritised


                  *    Subsidies address all modes of public transport


                  *    There are adequate levels of subsidy to meet the
                       requirements of all modes.


                  The Committee also established that while there is
                  comprehensive monitoring of tendered and negotiated bus
                  contracts, interim contracts, representing 55% of the
                  total subsidy budget, are not monitored at present.
                  Capacity-building in this regard needs to be addressed.


                  The Committee also heard that historically disadvantaged
                  individuals remain disadvantaged in the bus industry.
                  Steps must be undertaken to address this problem.


                  The Committee recommends that the Department report to
                  Parliament on progress towards solving these problems by
                  March 2003.


              (e) Regulated taxi industry


                  The Committee received submissions indicating that the
                  proposed taxi re-capitalisation programme, while in an
                  advanced stage of preparation, still has to be
                  implemented. There are many frustrations and
                  uncertainties as a result of delays in the process.


                  The Committee also heard that there is a lack of adequate
                  transport law enforcement, which particularly relates to
                  the regulation of the taxi industry.


                  The South African National Taxi Council expressed concern
                  at limited progress made by the Transport Training and
                  Education Authority (TETA) in regard to capacity-building
                  in the taxi industry.


                  With regard to these issues, the Committee:


                  *    Will closely monitor progress made in the taxi
                       recapitalisation process


                  *    Recommends legislative amendments to the
                       Administrative Adjudication of Road Traffic Offences
                       Act, 1998, to provide more effectively for transport
                       law enforcement


                  *    Will monitor the work of TETA


                  *    Recommends the effective spread to all transport
                       modes of transport subsidies.


              (f) Rural transport


                  The Committee also heard that there are many challenges
                  facing rural public transport, including transport of
                  farm workers. The Committee proposes that the the
                  Department take up this issue with provincial departments
                  through the MinCom structure.


              (g) Rail transport


                  The NLTTA has been explicitly cast as a "transitional"
                  Act, partly because a key component of land transport,
                  namely rail transport, has yet to be included within the
                  framework of national land transport legislation. In this
                  regard, the Committee recommends that the Department
                  tables its Rail Transport Policy and Rail Strategic Plan
                  in Parliament during the first half of 2003, with a view,
                  among others, to taking forward the extension of land
                  transport legislation to embrace rail transport.


         4. General findings and conclusions


              The Committee believes that the NLTTA represents a major
              advance in terms of ensuring a more effective and coherent
              approach to land transport. However, the implementation of
              this landmark legislation presents many challenges. Primary
              amongst these challenges is the need for a coherent and
              effective funding strategy, better integration of different
              transport modes, and a major focus on capacity-building in
              order, among others, to ensure more compatible practices and
              better communication across different spheres of government
              and among other key stakeholders. We believe that the
              Department has a primary responsibility with regard to all of
              these challenges.
     Report to be considered.

                           MONDAY, 4 NOVEMBER 2002

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bills:


          Mental Health Care Bill [B 69D - 2001] - Act No 17 of 2002
          (assented to and signed by President on 28 October 2002);


          Reinstatement of Enrolment of Certain Deceased Legal Practitioners
          Bill [B 6B - 2002] - Act No 32 of 2002 (assented to and signed by
          President on 28 October 2002);
        Insolvency Amendment Bill [B 14B - 2002] - Act No 33 of 2002
        (assented to and signed by President on 28 October 2002);


         Probation Services Amendment Bill [B 18D - 2002] - Act No 35 of
        2002 (assented to and signed by President on 31 October 2002);


        Planning Profession Bill [B 76B - 2001] - Act No 36 of 2002
        (assented to and signed by President on 31 October 2002); and


         State Information Technology Agency Amendment Bill [B 24B - 2002]
        - Act No 38 of 2002 (assented to and signed by President on 31
        October 2002).

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:
     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development. The Report of the Auditor-
         General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration and report:


         Report and Financial Statements of the National Prosecuting
         Authority for 2001-2002, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2001-2002 [RP 197-2002].


     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
         report:


         (a)     Treaties between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Governments of the Arab Republic of Egypt, the
              Democratic People's Republic of Algeria, the Federal Republic
              of Nigeria and the People's Republic of China on Extradition,
              tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (b)     Treaties between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Governments of the Arab Republic of Egypt, the
              Democratic People's Republic of Algeria, the Federal Republic
              of Nigeria and the French Republic on Mutual Legal Assistance,
              tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (c)     Explanatory Memoranda to the Treaties.


     (3)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance for consideration and report:


         (a)     Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, 2002 [RP 222-2002].


         (b)     Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B66-2002].


         (c)     Adjusted Estimates of National Expenditure, 2002 [RP 223-
              2002].


     (4)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry. The Report of the Auditor-General is referred
         to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration and
         report:


         Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Commission for
         2001-2002, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2001-2002 [RP 144-2002].


     (5)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry.


         Report of the Export Credit Insurance Corporation of South Africa
         Limited for 2001-2002.


     (6)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:


         Activity Report of the Auditor-General for 2001-2002 [RP 211-
         2002].

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Transport:


     Bilateral Air Services Agreement between the Government of the Republic
     of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of Mali, tabled in
     terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     Report and Financial Statements of the Support Programme for Industrial
     Innovation for 2001-2002.

3.    The Minister of Labour:


     Report and Financial Statements of the National Economic Development
     and Labour Council (NEDLAC) for 2001-2002.

                          TUESDAY, 5 NOVEMBER 2002

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The President has in terms of section 93(1)(a) of the
         Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of
         1996), appointed Mr Renier Stephanus Schoeman as Deputy Minister
         of Health with effect from 4 November 2002.


     (2)    The President has in terms of section 93(1)(b) of the
         Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of
         1996), appointed Mr David Mickey Malatsi as Deputy Minister of
         Social Development with effect from 4 November 2002.

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     (1)    The following member vacated his seat in the National Assembly
         with effect from 31 October 2002:


         Mahlangu, M J.


     (2)    Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly:


         Bills, subject to proposed amendments, passed by National Council
         of Provinces on 5 November 2002 and transmitted for consideration
         of Council's proposed amendments:


         (i)     Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision
              of Communication-Related Information Bill [B 50B - 2001]
              (National Assembly - sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see
              Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 1 November
              2002, p 1693).


         (ii)    Insolvency Second Amendment Bill [B 53B - 2002] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see
              Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 1 November
              2002, p 1692).


         The Bills have been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
         and Constitutional Development of the National Assembly for a
         report on the amendments proposed by the Council.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology:


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Research
         Foundation for 2001-2002, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2001-2002.


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Foundation for Education,
         Science and Technology for 2001-2002, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2001-2002 [RP 131-
         2002].

