---
title: 'National Assembly - 06 November 2002'
layout: debate
year: 2002
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2002/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2002-11-06
---

WEDNESDAY, 6 NOVEMBER 2002
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:05.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS see col. 0000

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Ms G L MAHLANGU-NKABINDE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -
       (a)  South Africa is celebrating November as Environment Month;


       (b)  during these celebrations, the Government and other stakeholders
           will -


           (i)   be highlighting the importance of protecting the
                  environment and the economic benefits of conserving
                  genetic resources for all communities; and


           (ii)  mobilise communities to sensibly exploit and preserve
                  natural resources in a sustainable manner for future
                  generations and to work towards ensuring that all South
                  African citizens have the privilege of enjoying a clean,
                  healthy and green environment; and


       (c)  that these programmes will be carried out in the proud spirit of
           the extraordinary success of the largest-ever United Nations
           Conference, the World Summit on Sustainable Development, held in
           Johannesburg recently; and


  (2) calls on South Africans to join the planned activities for this month
       and be actively involved in the implementation of the WSSD
       resolutions.

[Applause.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  there was great confusion between the President, the Deputy
           Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Deputy President about peer
           review of political governance in African countries; and
[Interjections.]


       (b)  these mixed messages have damaged the effort to promote Nepad;


  (2) further notes with appreciation that the President of Nigeria gave a
       firm lead, and that 12 African countries signed an agreement
       subjecting their countries to political governance peer review; and


  (3) requests the President to urge all other African countries to sign
       the agreement so that political governance peer review is delivered
       in terms of our undertakings to the G8.

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the City of Johannesburg has launched a massive clampdown
       on inner-city slums and has gone so far as to obtain court orders
       limiting property rights and authorising evictions and the sealing
       off of buildings at the owner's cost in cases where buildings were
       allowed to deteriorate into slums;


  (2) further notes that the owners are required to present a business plan
       to the city authorities before they are allowed to take back their
       buildings; and


  (3) expresses the hope that this initiative will be successful and that
       property owners will take the necessary steps to ensure that
       buildings and other property meet lawful safety and health standards.

Nksk Z A KOTA: Mhlali-ngaphambili, ndazisa okokuba xa iphinda ihlala le
Ndlu, ndiza kundulula egameni le-ANC:


  okokuba le Ndlu -


  (1) iqaphele ukuba uRhulumente wentsebenziswano phakathi kwe-ANC ne-NNP
       eNtshona Koloni uza kufaka isandla, ancedise abafundi abathe
       batshelwa ngamakhaya eWallacedene naseJoe Slovo, eKapa, kule
       mpelaveki idlulileyo;


  (2) ikholelwa ekubeni eli nyathelo libonisa ukuzimisela kukaRhulumente
       wabantu ekwakheni isizwe esinonophelo
       kunye nekamva labantwana bonke eliqaqambileyo;


  (3) iyalamkela eli nyathelo lithatyathwa nguRhulumente we-ANC ne-NNP
       kwiphondo leNtshona Koloni; yaye


     4) ihlaba ikhwelo kubantu bonke baseNtshona Koloni ukuba balandele lo
        mzekelo mhle kangaka.
(Translation of Zulu notice of motion follows.)

[Mrs Z A KOTA: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Government of unity between the ANC and the New NP in
       the Western Cape has agreed to assist the learners whose houses were
       destroyed by the recent fires in Wallacedene and Joe Slovo
       settlements in Cape Town during last weekend;


  (2) believes that this action shows that the Government of the people is
       committed to building a nation that takes care of the future of all
       its children;


  (3) welcomes this action by the ANC-led Government together with the New
       NP in the province of the Western Cape; and


  (4) invites all the people of the Western Cape to follow this nice
       gesture.]
Mr A Z A VAN JAARSVELD: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with disgust that yet another little girl from Gauteng has been
       sexually abused and admitted to hospital - the fourth reported case
       of child rape in the province this week;


  (2) further notes that -


       (a)  police dealing with child abuse cases are hopelessly
           understaffed and underresourced;


       (b)  the Child Protection Unit of the SAPS is fighting a losing
           battle, considering that in Gauteng alone there is a shortage of
           124 officers, and in the Limpopo province, 108 officers, with a
           grand total of 597 officers countrywide; and
       (c)  these shortages have a direct impact on the escalation of
           violence against children; and


  (3) urges the SAPS, as it is expected to make 445 new appointments before
       2003, to speed up this process so that our communities can be
       protected against these atrocities.

Ms N C NKABINDE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with dismay that the estimated average price of medicines sold
       to the public has risen by 12% in the past three months;


  (2) recognises that high medicine inflation, like high food inflation,
       affects the vulnerable and the poor, and is a threat to the health of
       our nation as enshrined in the Constitution;
  (3) takes note of the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers' Association's claim
       that end prices to the consumer are 100% higher than the
       manufacturer's price due to costs added in the distribution chain
       from wholesalers to retail pharmacies and medical schemes or health
       insurers, which makes it one of the most expensive distribution
       chains in the world; and


  (4) resolves to address this situation in consultation with the Ministers
       of Health and Trade and Industry.

Ms C M P RAMOTSAMAI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the ANC Government has donated a grant of R150,9 million to the
           Marine Living Resources Fund (MLRF);


       (b)  the fund received an amount of R151 million from the application
           fees for fishing rights during the 2001-02 financial year; and


       (c)  this fund was established in terms of the Marine Living
           Resources Act, Act 18 of 1998, in order to ensure conservation,
           sustainable utilisation, orderly access and protection of marine
           resources; and


  (2) believes that this reflects the commitment of the ANC Government, in
       partnership with the private sector and fishing communities, to
       preserving our natural resources and facilitating the sustainable use
       of the marine resources; and


  (3) commends the ANC Government and other stakeholders for their
       contribution to the Marine Living Resources Fund.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UCDP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with dismay that some employers of foreign descent tend to
       exploit the goodwill of the Government and the local workforce;


  (2) takes exception to the conduct of the owner of Kingdom Poly, a
       plastic factory in Ga-Rankuwa, in the North West province, whose
       employees work without protective clothing in unhygienic conditions;


  (3) calls to order the employer who has the guts to try to deny the
       inspectors from the Department of Labour access to the filthy
       premises;
  (4) supports the Department in exposing these unscrupulous sharks who are
       in quest of wealth without giving due regard to the welfare of their
       employees; and


  (5) commends the inspectors of the Department of Labour for the job they
       do without fear or favour when the need arises.

Dr M S MOGOBA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the PAC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the call by the Minister of Education for the creation of an
       African University;


  (2) believes this is a novel idea that should be carefully studied, as it
       may be a vehicle of liberation and may enhance the great values and
       attributes of this continent; and


  (3) recommends that the study of Swahili, French and Portuguese should be
       given high priority as our colonial legacy has created wide, almost
       permanent, gulfs between states of Africa, and that the unification
       of Africa may never be fully realised if our people cannot
       communicate easily.

Mr R J B MOHLALA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the theme for the month of November is ``Environment'';


       (b)  the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, in
           collaboration with the Department of Arts, Culture, Science and
           Technology, is embarking on a coelacanth research project, which
           aims to conserve South African coelacanths;


       (c)  the ANC Governemnt gave the National Botanical Institute a grant
           to the tune of R49,9 million;


       (d)  this research project also aims to stimulate marine science
           among students from previously disadvantaged communities in the
           SADC region through focusing its recruitment strategy primarily
           on this sector; and


       (e)  this grant is to be used to maintain eight public gardens in
           South Africa, these gardens having attracted over a million
           tourists and visitors; and


  (2) believes that this reflects the commitment of the ANC Government to
       conserving marine species and the promotion of sustainable use and
       appreciation of the environment in line with the WSSD plan of
       implementation.
Mr N J CLELLAND-STOKES: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the Umsobomvu Youth Fund launched its new voucher programme in
           Durban at the city's luxurious five-star Hilton Hotel;


       (b)  the 150 guests feasted on smoked salmon and seafood and quaffed
           wine and drink in the Hilton's luxurious ballroom; and

[Interjections.]


       (c)  the fund did not disburse a single cent to stimulate job
           creation or develop skills amongst the youth for the first three
           years of its existence; and


  (2) calls on the Minister of Labour, under whose authority the fund
       operates, to explain this appalling extravagance, and to undertake to
       investigate the spending priorities of the fund.

Mr E J LUCAS: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with sadness that three people were killed and four are still
       in hospital with serious injuries after the building they were
       constructing collapsed in Chatsworth, KwaZulu-Natal;


  (2) expresses its sincerest condolences to the families of the deceased
       and prays for the full and speedy recovery of the injured; and


  (3) hopes that the investigation being conducted by the Department of
       Labour gets to the root of the problem and identifies the reasons for
       the collapse of the building in order to prevent similar tragedies
       from occurring in future.

Mr M J G MZONDEKI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  Fred Gamble, who suffers from Down's syndrome, won nine medals
           at the Down's Syndrome International Swimming Championships in
           Berkshire, England, last month;


       (b)  the ANC Government has developed and implemented policies that
           empower, defend and uphold the rights of people with
           disabilities;


  (2) believes that his achievement serves as an inspiration to all young
       people to work hard to overcome obstacles they experience and realise
       their goals; and


  (3) congratulates Fred Gamble for winning these nine medals.

Mnr J W LE ROUX: Mnr die Voorsitter, hiermee gee ek kennis dat ek by die
volgende sitting van die Huis sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) kennis neem van die vernietiging en skending van ons nasionale
       erfenis deurdat -


       (a)  besoekers stukke rots van Tafelberg verwyder en selfs afkap, en
           in die proses skaars plantspesies vernietig;


       (b)  stukke sandsteen vanaf Robbeneiland verwyder word;


       (c)  histories belangrike rotstekeninge geskend word; en


       (d)  graffiti ons geboue ontsier; en


  (2) weer eens 'n beroep op die owerhede doen om drastiese maatreëls in te
       stel sodat bogenoemde praktyke onmiddellik stopgesit kan word.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr J W LE ROUX: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the destruction and desecration of our national heritage by -


       (a)  visitors removing and even chopping off pieces of rock from
           Table Mountain, and in the process destroying rare plant
           species;


       (b)  pieces of sandstone being removed from Robben Island;


       (c)  historically important rock paintings being defaced; and


       (d)  graffiti defacing our buildings; and


  (2) once again appeals to the authorities to establish the necessary
       measures in order to put an end to the above-mentioned practices.]

                   A HAPPY RAMADAN MUBARAK TO ALL MUSLIMS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  today marks the start of the holy month of Ramadan;


       (b)  it is a month of fasting; and


  (2) wishes all Muslims a happy Ramadan Mubarak.

Agreed to.

              ILLEGAL MARRIAGE OF FOREIGNERS TO LOCAL RESIDENTS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the House substitutes the resolution adopted on 31 October 2002
  concerning the illegal marriage of foreigners to local residents by the
  following:


  That the House -
  (1) notes the illegal marriage of foreigners to local residents to gain
       South African citizenship;


  (2) further notes that in a number of cases these ``marriages'' take
       place without the consent of the local residents and involve the use
       of their identity documents without their knowledge; and


  (3) calls on the Minister of Home Affairs to ensure that this illegal
       practice is curtailed immediately to prevent others from unknowingly
       becoming victims.

Agreed to.

                         REVENUE LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                               (Introduction)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Mr Chairperson and hon members, the Bill before
the House today represents a closing chapter of two years of fundamental
structural tax reforms, which included the introduction of Capital Gains
Tax and the residence-based income tax system, with the view to broadening
the tax base.

This Bill ensures that these reforms will work more smoothly and
consistently with each other. It also seeks to remove some anti-avoidance
rules that impose unnecessary hurdles to valid business transactions.

The Bill ensures that the various tax aspects of all the reforms fully tie
together. The adjustments process is a typical natural by-product of any
major legal change. Indeed, in many developed countries, this process can
take years to unravel, a process that we expect to avoid with a clear
intention of lowering tax rates and rendering this economy a more
attractive investment destination.

The Revenue Laws Amendment Bill accordingly makes technical adjustments to
all the base-broadening efforts. The biggest changes came in two areas.
Firstly, sweeping technical changes were made for the tax rules regarding
company reorganisation. Secondly, sweeping technical changes were made for
the taxation of foreign currency. Both levels of changes were instigated by
extensive internal review with the National Treasury and Sars, as well as
by taxpayers' submissions.

Consistent with the international experience, both areas are quite complex,
representing systems on top of systems and systems within systems. Much of
this complexity stems from their objective and transparent nature. Hence,
it needs to be noted that true democracy demands that all rules be fully
stated within the text of the law. Full disclosure of the law also avoids
time-consuming requests for Sars rulings and the exercise of discretionary
powers, all of which could act as barriers against speedy corporate action
and could add considerably to otherwise avoidable transaction costs.

In respect of further developments in the Bill, the Bill also seeks to
resolve some long-standing administrative problems that have emerged over
the last two years. These issues involve business travel and the taxation
of foreign diplomats. Under prior law, taxpayers could disregard advanced
lump-sum domestic and foreign travel allowances for purposes of their tax
calculations if those sums fell within specified monetary thresholds.

These rules allowed taxpayers to disregard any tax on these sums without
the use of tedious receipts, which were difficult for taxpayers to maintain
and wasteful for Sars to review. All that was needed was proof of actual
travel. Problems had arisen as of late with these advances because the
monetary thresholds had become obsolete and wholly insufficient to cover
rising domestic and international costs of travel.

The Revenue Laws Amendment Bill modifies these thresholds by leaving them
to be fixed periodically by Government, stipulated in the Gazette. As
announced in the Portfolio Committee on Finance, these advances are
currently fixed at $190 a day for foreign travel and R173 for domestic
travel to the extent that the advance covers meals and incidental
subsistence, and R53 domestically for advances covering only subsistence.

The taxation of diplomats had also become an issue over the last few years.
As a matter of legal interpretation and administration, Sars correctly
applied the law by asserting that all foreign allowances received by
diplomats were subject to tax. However, full debate on this matter reveals
that the law itself needed change.

No policy reason exists for taxing diplomats on foreign-related allowances.
It is well recognised internationally that diplomats fall within their own
sui generis category of taxation, given the unique demands of their tasks.
The Revenue Laws Amendment Bill accordingly exempts these foreign-related
allowances. Our diplomats can now operate free from tax at their foreign
posts, as originally intended.

In conclusion, I would like to thank everyone involved in the preparation
of this Bill, including members within the SA Revenue Service, the National
Treasury's Tax Policy Unit, Parliamentary members within the Portfolio
Committee on Finance and interested parties commenting constructively on
the Bill. Once again, the open and transparent nature of the deliberation
process only serves to improve the overall quality of tax legislation.

I have pleasure, therefore, in tabling the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill,
2002. [Applause.]

Bill referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration and
report.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON LABOUR - VISIT TO CONSANI
                                 ENGINEERING

Report adopted without debate.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
        CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT - EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS OF TRC STAFF

Report adopted without debate.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
  CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT - SUSPENSION AND REMOVAL FROM OFFICE OF MR R M
                 NONGENA, ADDITIONAL MAGISTRATE, HUMANSDORP

Report adopted without debate.

  CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF UNAFRI STATUTE FOR
  PREVENTION OF CRIME AND TREATMENT OF OFFENDERS IN TERMS OF SECTION 231(2)
                               OF CONSTITUTION

Statute approved.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ENTERPRISES -
         REPORT OF AD HOC COMMITTEE ON REPORT 13 OF PUBLIC PROTECTOR

Report adopted without debate.

    CONSIDERATION OF THIRTY-NINTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
       ACCOUNTS - GENERAL REPORT OF AUDITOR-GENERAL ON AUDIT OUTCOMES

Report adopted without debate.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT -
          IMPLEMENTATION OF NATIONAL LAND TRANSPORT TRANSITION ACT

Report adopted without debate.

The House adjourned at 17:26.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 6 November 2002 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following Bill as a money Bill:
         (i)     Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 66 - 2002] (National
              Assembly - sec 77).


     (2)    The following Bill was introduced by the Minister of Finance in
         the National Assembly on 6 November 2002 and referred to the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule
         160:


         (i)     Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 67 - 2002] (National
              Assembly - sec 77).


         The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance
         of the National Assembly.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bills may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.


National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     The following support has been provided for the Parliamentary
     Millennium Project:


                                FUNDERAMOUNT


     Anglo American Corp200 000.00
     B P Southern Africa100 000.00
     City of Cape Town Arts and Culture Trust10 000.00
     CWCI1 020 000.00
     Denel50 000.00
     Eskom500 000.00
     Ford Foundation1 084 318.61
     Dr Mathilda Krim7 939.40
     MTN SA200 000.00
     Nedcor50 000.00
     Parliament of SA1 000 000.00
     Remgro1 000 000.00
     Safcol20 000.00
     Sasol1 000 000.00
     Shell SA150 000.00
     South African Breweries1 000 000.00
     Transnet1 000 000.00
     Worldwide African Investment100 000.00


     TOTAL8 492 258.01




     Services


EDS South Africa Assistance with the PMP website, CD and multi-media
                                             presentation/display.

      Independent Newspaper Group Media assistance
      MTN   Sponsorship of particular events

      Sentech    IT and communication assistance

      SABC  Electronic media assistance

2.    The Speaker:


     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Works and to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts:
         Letter from the Minister of Public Works, in terms of section
         65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
         1999), setting out reasons for the delay in the tabling of the
         Annual Report and Financial Statements of Public Works.


     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications:


         Letter from the President of the Republic informing Parliament of
         the resignation of Councillor Neël Smuts from the ICASA Council.


     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Agriculture and Land Affairs and to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report:
         Annual Report and Financial Statements of the National
         Agricultural Marketing Council for 2001-2002, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2001-2002
         [RP 5-2002].


     (4)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Transport:


         Bilateral Air Services Agreement between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
         Mali, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (5)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry:


         Report and Financial Statements of the Support Program for
         Industrial Innovation for 2001-2002.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Auditor-General
     for 2001-2002 [RP 221-2002].

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     Report and Financial Statements of the National Gambling Board for 2001-
     2002, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
     Statements for 2001-2002.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Defence on the Anti-Personnel
     Mines Prohibition Bill [B 44 - 2002] (National Assembly - sec 75),
     dated 5 November 2002:


         The Portfolio Committee on Defence, having considered the subject
         of the Anti-Personnel Mines Prohibition Bill [B 44 - 2002]
         (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, presents the Anti-
         Personnel Mines Prohibition Bill [B 44B - 2002] (National Assembly
         - sec 75).

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
     Tourism on the National Environmental Management Amendment Bill [B 62 -
     2002] (National Council of Provinces - sec 76), dated 5 November 2002:


         The Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism,
         having considered the subject of the National Environmental
         Management Amendment Bill  [B 62 - 2002] (National Council of
         Provinces - sec 76), referred to it and classified by the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill, report the Bill without
         amendment.
3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and
     Technology on the Protection of Cultural Property Convention, dated 18
     October 2002:


         The Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and Technology,
         having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
         Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the event of
         Armed Conflict (the Hague Convention) with regulations for the
         execution and the coverence resolutions, 14 May 1954, referred to
         it, recommends that the House, in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, approve the said Convention.


     Request to be considered.

4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and
     Technology on the Cultural Property (Illicit Transfer) Convention,
     dated 18 October 2002:


         The Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and Technology,
         having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
         Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit
         Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, 14
         November 1970, referred to it, recommends that the House, in terms
         of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said
         Convention.


     Request to be considered.

5.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and
     Technology on the ICCROM Statutes , dated 18 October 2002:


         The Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and Technology,
         having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
         Statutes of the International Centre for the Study of the
         Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property (ICCROM),
         referred to it, recommends that the House, in terms of section
         231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Statutes.


     Request to be considered.

6.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on the RSA/Egypt Agreement on Mutual Legal Assistance in
     Criminal Matters, dated 5 November 2002:


         The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
         having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
         Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt on Mutual Legal
         Assistance in Criminal Matters, referred to it, recommends that
         the House, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve
         the said Agreement.


     Request to be considered.

7.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on the RSA/Algeria Agreement on Mutual Legal Assistance in
     Criminal Matters, dated 5 November 2002:


         The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
         having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
         Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Algeria
         on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters, referred to it,
         recommends that the House, in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, approve the said Agreement.


     Request to be considered.

8.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on the RSA/Nigeria Treaty on Mutual Legal Assistance in
     Criminal Matters, dated 5 November 2002:
         The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
         having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
         Treaty between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and
         the Government of the Federal Republic of Nigeria on Mutual Legal
         Assistance in Criminal Matters, referred to it, recommends that
         the House, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve
         the said Treaty.


     Request to be considered.

9.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on the RSA/France Agreement on Mutual Legal Assistance in
     Criminal Matters, dated 5 November 2002:


         The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
         having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
         Agreement on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters between
         the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
         of the French Republic, referred to it, recommends that the House,
         in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said
         Agreement.


     Request to be considered.

10.   Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on the RSA/Egypt Extradition Treaty, dated 5 November 2002:


         The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
         having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
         Extradition Treaty between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt, referred
         to it, recommends that the House, in terms of section 231(2) of
         the Constitution, approve the said Treaty.


     Request to be considered.
11.   Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
    Development on the RSA/Algeria Extradition Agreement, dated 5 November
    2002:


         The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
         having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
         Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Algeria
         on Extradition, referred to it, recommends that the House, in
         terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said
         Agreement.


     Request to be considered.

12.   Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on the RSA/Nigeria Extradition Treaty, dated 5 November
     2002:


         The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
         having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
         Extradition Treaty between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Nigeria,
         referred to it, recommends that the House, in terms of section
         231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Treaty.


     Request to be considered.


13.   Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on the RSA/China Extradition Treaty, dated 5 November 2002:


         The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
         having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
         Treaty between the Republic of South Africa and the People's
         Republic of China on Extradition, referred to it, recommends that
         the House, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve
         the said Treaty.


     Request to be considered.

14.   Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on the Delay in submission to Parliament of signed treaties
     relating to extradition and mutual legal assistance in criminal
     matters, dated 5 November 2002:


         The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development
         wishes to report as follows:


              Recently, the Committee had occasion to agree to various
              extradition and mutual legal assistance treaties. It was noted
              that some of them had been signed as far back as 31 May 2001
              and were only tabled in Parliament on 29 0ctober 2002 (for
              example the Treaty between the Government of South Africa and
              the Government of the French Republic on Mutual Legal
              Assistance). The Committee requested an explanation for this
              inordinately long delay. From the explanation it transpired
              that the delay mainly emanated from the Department of Foreign
              Affairs. However, it is also noted that the Department of
              Justice and Constitutional Development received the said
              treaties during May 2002 and only tabled it on 29 October
              2002. This also appears to be an inordinately long delay.


              In view of the above, the Committee urges both Departments,
              possibly in consultation with The Presidency, to look into the
              matter and to assess the procedures presently being used. A
              report in this regard must be submitted to the Committee not
              later than 31 January 2003. This report must outline the
              assessment of the existing procedures, their shortcomings, if
              any, and also proposals for change, if necessary, to ensure
              the efficient and speedy placement of such matters before
              Parliament.


     Report to be considered.

