---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 08 November 2002'
layout: debate
year: 2002
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2002/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2002-11-08
---

FRIDAY, 8 NOVEMBER 2002
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 09:39.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment  of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, I  have  been  informed  that  the
Whips have agreed that there should be one  debate  on  the  first,  second,
third and fourth Orders of the Day.

                INTELLIGENCE SERVICES CONTROL AMENDMENT BILL

               NATIONAL STRATEGIC INTELLIGENCE AMENDMENT BILL

                         INTELLIGENCE SERVICES BILL

              ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS SECURITY (PTY) LTD BILL

 (Consideration of Bills and of Reports of Select Committee on Security and
                       Constitutional Affairs thereon)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: It is now my pleasure to call upon the hon  the
Minister for Intelligence, Dr Sisulu. I think it is your first time in  this
House.

The MINISTER FOR INTELLIGENCE: Madam Chair, yes, it is, and I come here  and
find that the d√©cor is so much improved. It could only  have  been  you  who
had  a  hand  in   this   and   I   must   congratulate   you.   [Laughter.]
[Interjections.]

Madam Chair, how do I deal with my chair? [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

We have come to an agreement with the ad hoc committee. I  have  been  given
to understand that we will deal with all  four  Bills  at  once.  The  short
titles of the Bills have been read out, and  they  constitute  two  amending
Bills and two new Bills. I will start with  the  Bills  that  seem  to  have
attracted some attention over the past two weeks,  namely  the  Intelligence
Services Control Amendment Bill and the Electronic  Communications  Security
(Pty) Ltd, or Comsec, Bill.

Historically  we  have  found  in  Parliament  that   amending   Bills   are
necessitated by a desire to rectify certain problems that we  experience  in
governance from time to time. The amending  Bills  that  we  bring  to  this
House today are no different.

The first Bill, the Intelligence Services Control Amendment Bill,  seeks  to
bring amendments to legislation which we brought before the House  in  1994.
It is important  from  the  outset  to  contextualise  the  origins  of  the
principal Act. From the security perspective, one of our major  concerns  as
Government  was  to  exercise  effective  control  over   the   intelligence
services. Hon members will note, even from the title of the  Bill,  that  we
still use the good old-fashioned word ``control'' instead of  ``oversight'',
because that is indeed what we intended to do right from  the  outset.  What
we did was to borrow from the best practice  of  governments  that  had  had
democracy and oversight for several decades. We put these together and  came
up with our own version of oversight. This resulted in  the  Joint  Standing
Committee on Intelligence and the Office of the Inspector-General.

Over time we have had the opportunity to test  both  these  institutions  of
oversight. We have found that in the case of the JSCI we  need  to  increase
its powers to allow it to have complete oversight over the  services.  This,
we hope, will include oversight over the budget of  the  services  as  well.
This was deemed necessary because the security clearance  of  the  committee
gives it unlimited powers of scrutiny  over  the  services  -  the  kind  of
powers that, unfortunately, Scopa does  not  have  and  could  not  possibly
have.

In conjunction with the two parliamentary legal advisers, Scopa,  the  Joint
Standing Committee on Intelligence, the Auditor-General and  members  of  my
own office have been in consultation for a period of over six months now,  I
believe, to see how we can resolve this problem and  ensure  that  there  is
maximum scrutiny over the budgets of the intelligence services.

I have been advised that the parliamentary legal adviser  who  sat  on  this
panel has put together an amendment to the Rules  of  Parliament  to  ensure
that this is possible. I am made aware, Madam  Chair,  that  the  amendments
have been brought to your attention since. I have them here and I will  have
the pleasure of passing them on to  you.  However,  the  amendment  that  we
bring forward now is a joint effort of Scopa, the Joint  Standing  Committee
on Intelligence, my  office,  two  legal  advisers  of  Parliament  and  the
Auditor-General's office. I have also been advised that the  chairperson  of
the joint standing committee had extensive discussions  with  Madam  Speaker
over this matter, explaining the need for this amendment. This I put  before
the House as a record  of  what  has  happened  that  has  necessitated  the
amendments to the Bill.

The second aspect that we seek to amend in this Bill is that the  Inspector-
General's office needed to be given the necessary vamping up. The  Bill,  in
its original form, was very vague on the functions of the  Inspector-General
- the reporting and lines of control that the Inspector-General deals  with,
lines of accountability and all other related matters.

Having taken stock over the past six years, we have found that  this  is  an
unworkable situation and, as members know, we have lost quite  a  number  of
inspectors-general because of the vagueness of some of these areas. We  have
sought now to rectify this and give the Inspector-General very  clear  lines
of accountability and guidelines on what his functions are.  We  are  hoping
that after this that we might even invite some of the members here to  apply
for the position of  Inspector-General,  now  that  we  have  rectified  the
problem.

The  second  Bill  that  we  bring  before  this  House  is  the  Electronic
Communications Security (Pty) Ltd Bill, which we refer to as  Comsec.  Those
members who saw The Star on Tuesday would  have  found  a  very  interesting
article on hacking, and I will read just some parts of it. The headline  is:
``South African website hackers tracked to Brazil.'' The article deals  with
the attack on 25 South African websites over two weeks by hackers,  some  of
whom were traced to France and Brazil. The article points out  that,  and  I
quote:


  It is difficult to estimate the  damage  done  by  these  hackers.  Every
  website that was attacked has to  be  redesigned,  and  this  could  cost
  between R5 000 and R20 000  to  do.  This,  however,  doesn't  take  into
  account the damage done to the reputation of  these  companies,  some  of
  which offer e-commerce services.

This could have been directed against  any  organ  of  state.  Imagine  what
would then have been done to the integrity of our systems, had this  hacking
been possible. Imagine how this would have  compromised  national  security.
This possibility presents us with a clear  and  present  danger,  made  more
sinister when one considers the  madness  of  certain  elements  within  our
society bent on destabilisation and terror.
Our responsibility as the intelligence community is to  ensure  that  we  do
not leave any loophole as far as our  national  security  is  concerned.  We
have therefore resolved  that  we  will  secure  all  Government  electronic
communication.

The  Bill  before  us  therefore  seeks  to  do  just  this:  as  Government
communicates, as Government stores its information electronically and  as  I
deliver  my  speech  through  your  computers  here,   Madam   Chair,   that
information is secured. This is what we seek to do with the Bill.

In our deliberations with the ad hoc committee of this  House  and  that  of
the National Assembly, however, we noted the concerns that had  been  raised
over this Bill. The  provision  of  national  security  is  a  pivotal  core
business for Government. This function requires  innovation  and  creativity
and a steady supply of resources, both human and financial.  When  it  comes
to technology, it is  made  even  more  costly,  as  technology  changes  at
breakneck speed. To ensure that we are able to provide national security  at
a cost-effective rate, we have  sought  to  create  this  company  known  as
Comsec.

The  functions  of  Comsec  (Pty)  Ltd  are,  amongst  others,  to   protect
Government's critical electronic communication against  unauthorised  access
or other unrelated technical  threats.  For  purposes  of  these  functions,
Comsec Ltd will  develop,  design,  procure,  install  and  maintain  secure
electronic  communication  systems   for   Government.   It   will   provide
cryptographic services. It will train and support users  of  the  electronic
communication system, its products and related services.

In consultation with the National Intelligence Agency, Comsec  will  provide
verification  services  for  electronic  communication   security   systems,
products and services used by Government and state  organs.  All  Government
departments and organs of state will have to procure and  access  electronic
communication products and systems with the  verification  and  approval  of
this company. However, should any departments of state wish to  be  exempted
from this legislation, they will be required  to  make  application  to  the
Minister.

 The affairs of  Comsec  Ltd  will  be  managed  by  a  board  of  directors
appointed by the Minister. Comsec Ltd will be financed from the  fiscus  and
from moneys received for services provided to organs of state. In  addition,
Comsec will be able to buy shares so that it can raise the  necessary  funds
to fulfil its mandate without burdening the state.

While it is at its developmental stage, it will be subsidised by the  state.
The appropriation of the budget will be in the same manner as  that  of  the
secret  services.  It  should  be  noted  that  Parliament,  including  this
Council, will have  full  scrutiny  over  the  activities  of  this  company
through the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence.

The  third  Bill  is  the  new  Intelligence  Services  Bill.  The  original
Intelligence  Services  Act  was  promulgated  in  1995,  establishing   the
National Intelligence Agency, as we know it now, and the SA  Secret  Service
through  a  process  of  integration  of  the  six  former   statutory   and
nonstatutory intelligence services. However,  since  the  inception  of  the
intelligence dispensation in 1995, there has been no consistent  order  that
governs the intelligence  dispensation.  Whilst  the  intelligence  services
were excluded from the broad Public Service Act,  they  were  also  excluded
from the Labour Relations Act and thus fell outside of the ambit created  to
encompass the public service.

This, in essence, is the purpose of the Bill: to ensure that there is a  way
in which  the  intelligence  services  are  brought  into  line  with  other
structures  that  are  employed  by  Government.  The  Bill  in  this   way,
therefore,  addresses  five  main  issues,  the  first  of  which   is   the
recognition of service by members of the nonstatutory  forces.  Had  it  not
been for the hard work and sacrifice of men and women who were part  of  the
liberation movements of South Africa, we would not be where  we  are  today.
However, the playing field for the nonstatutory forces has not  been  level.
The  Bill  seeks  to  acknowledge  the  services  of   former   members   of
nonstatutory forces by providing pensions that take the  entirety  of  their
years of service into account. The Bill provides for a cut-off  date  of  31
March 2004 for the availability of this benefit.  If  there  is  any  member
here who wishes to make application, please note  the  cut-off  date.  Madam
Chair, I believe you are too young to take advantage of this. [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Don't be too sure!

The MINISTER: The second aspect that we seek to address in this Bill  is  to
provide an Intelligence Services Council on Conditions of Service. The  Bill
provides for the creation of a council whose  job  it  is  to  regulate  and
standardise the conditions of  service  of  the  intelligence  services.  In
short, the council will be, for the intelligence services, what  the  Public
Service Commission is to the Public Service.

The third aspect we seek to regulate by means of the Bill  is  the  creation
of lifelong membership of the intelligence services. This is an  ideal  that
we strive for, and we do this by ensuring  that  we  can  retain  all  those
officers that have been trained and into whose training we have put so  much
effort.  This  will  ensure  cohesion,  continuity  and  mentorship  of  new
members. This has led us to the realisation that the formal  retirement  age
of 60 for the intelligence services is  no  longer  suitable.  We  therefore
seek to extend the retirement age to 65.

The fourth aspect that we seek to  regulate  is  the  creation  of  a  South
African National Academy of Intelligence. The Bill  seeks  to  regulate  the
establishment of the intelligence academy, which will  provide  intelligence
training for the South African intelligence services. The academy will  give
our cadres the skills and expertise that we hope  will  give  them  an  edge
over their international competitors. We also hope to  start  preparing  the
future intelligence cadres and cadets through the intelligence academy.

I need to add that the academy also hopes to train members of the SA  Police
Service criminal investigations arm. We also hope  to  train  SANDF  members
that are going through intelligence training. We  also  hope  to  train  the
Scorpions and other related arms of state that deal with the  collection  of
information.

Finally, the Bill seeks to restrain the  trade  of  former  members  of  the
intelligence services, and it seeks also to regulate how and when  they  may
disclose information. They may not disclose classified information which  is
prohibited without the  approval  of  the  Director-General.  They  will  be
restricted from employment in the security industry for a period  of  up  to
three years after they terminate  service  with  us,  unless  permission  is
granted by the Director-General. They will be prohibited from  communicating
with associates or members of the intelligence services in a manner that  is
likely to undermine national security.

The final Bill is the National Strategic Intelligence  Amendment  Bill.  The
tragic events of 11 September 2001 in the  United  States  of  America  have
brought home to all  intelligence  services  the  danger  of  unco-ordinated
intelligence. Learning from this experience and  our  own  shortcomings,  we
decided  to  take  stock  of  our  own  interagency  co-operation  and   co-
ordination.  We  conducted  a  review  of  Nicoc,  which  is  the   National
Intelligence Co-ordinating Committee established in 1995. The review led  us
to the identification of the following inadequacies: a  lack  of  consistent
co-operation  between  Nicoc  members  and   other   departments   supplying
intelligence to the state; a lack of common understanding by  these  members
of exactly what  we  mean  by  ``intelligence  activity'';  and  a  lack  of
understanding and proper execution  of  the  mandates  of  the  intelligence
services.

The amendment therefore seeks to rectify all these weaknesses  and,  amongst
other things, to strengthen the legal mandate of Nicoc and  to  provide  for
the SAPS to co-ordinate crime intelligence and to supply crime  intelligence
relating to national strategic  intelligence  through  Nicoc.  Further,  the
Bill  seeks  to  ensure,  amongst  other  things,  that  security  clearance
investigations  can  be  conducted  and  provides  for  the  protection   of
information.

In conclusion, I would like to  thank  all  those  members  of  the  ad  hoc
committee that have worked very hard to ensure that we  are  able  to  bring
these Bills here today. I do know that it has  been  a  very  difficult  two
weeks for them to try to understand what it is that we have  been  doing  in
the past eight years and make sure that that which needs to be rectified  is
properly rectified, and to also understand the  nature  of  the  environment
that intelligence services operate in. However,  it  is  quite  clear  today
that this has been done with a speed that is admirable and I would  like  to
thank the members of the ad hoc committee. I would like to  thank  you  too,
Madam Chair, for the interest you have taken in ensuring that, in fact,  our
laws are within the Rules of this House. [Applause.]

Kgo≈°i M L MOKOENA: Mohlomphegi Modulasetulo  le  maloko  ao  a  hlomphegago,
lehono re tlile go bolela ditaba t≈°e  kgolo.  Bjaleka  ge  Tona  a  ≈°et≈°e  a
bolet≈°e, re tlo ahlaahla Melaokakanywa ye mene ka nako ye tee.

Ke tla thoma ka Molaokakanywa wa Intelligence Services Bill,  wo  o  hlomago
seo se bit≈°wago National Intelligence Agency. Efela re  gopoleng  gore  t≈°eo
ka moka di hlongwa ke Mopresidente. T≈°ona di tlo etelwa pele ke  mongwaledi-
pharephare wa kgoro le bathu≈°i ba gagwe. Bona  ba  dumelelwa  go  ka  thwala
ba≈°omedi go ba thusa gore morero wa kgoro o sepele gabotse.

Gape Molaokakanywa wo o hlagi≈°a gore go nyakega  gore  ba≈°omedi  ba  lefapha
le, bao mengwaga ya bona  e  fetago  60,  ba  nt≈°hwe  me≈°omong  ka  gore  ba
t≈°ofet≈°e. Efela, Tona o filwe maatla a gore ge a bona gore  motho  o  na  le
bokgoni bjo bo it≈°ego, e le gore o fihlile mengwaga ye 60, a ka mo  okelet≈°a
ka mengwaga ye mengwe ye mehlano. Go pala kae? Ga go pale!

Gape re hloma seo se bit≈°wago SA National Academy of  Intelligence.  Yona  e
tlo thu ≈°a go hlahla maloko lefapheng  leo,  le  go  bona  gore  a  ≈°oma  ka
bokgoni bjoo mmu≈°o o bo nyakago, gomme e tlo etwa  pele  ke  yo  a  bit≈°wago
gore ke Hlogo ya Ditirelo t≈°a Bohlodi. Le yona e hlongwa ke Mopresidente.

Gape go na le seo  se  bit≈°wago  gore  ke  Komiti-kelet≈°i  ya  Tona  go  t≈°a
tlhatlho. Ke yona e lego maahlo le ditsebe t≈°a mmu≈°o, go thusa gore kgoro  e
tsitsinkele bao ba lekago go re tla ka fase. Batlhankedi ba  lefapha  le  ba
dumelet≈°we go dira t≈°e di latelago: Ba ka no phuruphut≈°a mo motho  a  dulago
gona; ba ka theelet≈°a gore motho o  bolela  le  mang,  neng,  bjang.  Ge  ba
gononwa gore motho e ka ba segataborokgwana, ba ka thopa  phaahlo  ya  gagwe
ge ba rata. Efela seo se ka  dirwa  ka  tumelelo  ya  moahlodi,  e  sego  ka
boithatelo bja batlhankedi bao.

Gape ge ba nyaka go topa ditaba t≈°a motho, ba ka mo theelet≈°a le go mo  ≈°ala
morago tekano ya dikgwedi t≈°e tharo ka go latelelana. Ge  ba  sa  kgotsofale
gore ba humane molaet≈°a, ba ka no oket≈°a nako gore ba  mo  theelet≈°e  gobane
dinokwane di bohlale mat≈°at≈°i a. Efela le  bona  batho  bao  ba  nyaki≈°i≈°ago
motho re a ba tsitsinkela go bona gore a le bona  ba  hlwekile  na  ka  gore
motho a ka se ke a ≈°oma lefapheng leo e le gore le yena diatla t≈°a gagwe  di
nkga madi. Pele ga ge motho a thwalwa lefapheng le, ge re sa tshephe gore  o
bolela nnete, re ≈°omi≈°a se se bit≈°wago polygraphy test.

Malebana le t[s]a kamano ya ba≈°omi, maloko a a tseba gore ba≈°omedi ba  mmu≈°o
ka moka ba dumelet≈°we go gwanta, go gwaba le go ngala me≈°omo. Bao ba  ≈°omago
lefapheng le ga ba dumelelwa go dira t≈°eo gobane ke bona ba swerego  diphiri
t≈°a mmu≈° o. Efela mohlomphegi Tona o logile maano a gore go be le ka  mokgwa
wo bona, ge ba na le dingongorego, ba ka kgonago gore  ba  ba  theelet≈°e  ka
gona.

Ge motho a ka dumela go thwalwa lefapheng le, o swanet≈°e  go  tseba  gore  o
≈°oma go-ya-go-ile - diiri t≈°e  masomepedinne.  Ge  Tona  goba  e  mongwe  wa
bagolwane ba lefapha le a mo nyaka, o swanet≈°e go tseba gore le  ka  masa  a
ka no nyakega gore a tle a thu≈°e mmu≈°o ge o na le seo o se gononwago.

Ba≈°omedi ba lefapha le ga ba dumelelwa gore ba bolele  le  batho  ba  bangwe
bao ba sa swanelago go kwa diphiri t≈°a mmu≈°o. Ge motho a ka  dira  bjalo,  a
tsebe gore ga gabo ke thabeng.

Bjale  ke  tsena  go  Molaokakanywa  wa  National   Strategic   Intelligence
Amendment Bill. Wona o hloma seo se bit≈°wago gore ke  National  Intelligence
Co-ordinating Committee yeo ba bant≈°hi ba e tsebago  ka  la  Nicoc.  Yona  e
leka go kgomaganya le go kopanya t≈°eo di lego mo lefapheng le,  gape  le  go
kgetha motlhatlhi lefapheng le. Mo≈°omo wa batlhankedi  bao  ke  go  lebelela
seo se ka kwi≈°ago mmu≈°o bohloko. Le bona ba na le maatla a  go  nyakolla  le
go tsitsinkela motho.

Ke a bona gore bjale ke ≈°alet≈°we ke metsotso ye mehlano. Bjale ke fetela  go
Electronic Communication Security, yeo mohlomphegi Tona a e beilego  gabotse
ka bokgwari le botswatswadi. Yona e thu≈°a gore go se be le motho yo  a  nago
le maswanedi a go topa ditaba t≈°a mmu≈°o a se a fiwe maswanedi.  Gape  ga  go
na yo a nago le maatla a  go  topa  ditaba  t≈°a  motho  fela  a  se  a  fiwe
tumelelo. Eup≈°a bona ba na  le  maatla  a  gore  ba  tope  seo  motho  a  se
bolelago. Bjaloka ge mohlomphegi Tona a bolet≈°e, Comsec ye ga e dire  kgwebo
eup≈°a e direla mmu≈°o. Ka gona, go ka makat≈°a ge  go  thwe  le  yona  e  lefe
motshelo go swana le mang le mang, goba e nyake dilaesense ka gore  yona  ga
e dire kgwebo e  bile  ga  e  dire  poelo.  Le  yona  e  ka  kgona  go  dira
dinyaki≈°i≈°o ge motho a bolela.

Ke a bona bjale ke ≈°et≈°e ka metsotso ye mene, gomme ke t≈°wela pele. A ke  fe
mohlala ka mohlomphegi Mopresidente wa Naga. Anke le nagane ka ge  le  nyaka
gore Mopresidente a kgopele laesense ge a e t≈°wa a  swere  seboledi-ka-sona,
e ka ba sa go llela-potleng goba se sengwe seo e lego gore ga se ≈°omi≈°we  ke
ba kgoro ye. Ke ka baka leo Mopresidente a swanet≈°ego go lokologa gore ge  a
nyaka go  bolela  le  mafase  a  mangwe,  go  se  be  le  yo  a  kwago  gore
Mopresidente o bolela eng le mang, neng.

Bjale ke rata go tsena go dingongorego t≈°e dingwe t≈°e dinyenyane t≈°eo  batho
ba llago ka t≈°ona. Go bile le kgonono ya gore batho ga ba tshephe gore e  ka
ba baahlodi bao ba tlago be ba ≈°oma ka mo≈°omo wo ba tlo botega na.  [Nako  e
fedile.]

MODULASETLO WA NCOP: T≈°ielala! Metsotso ka Sepedi e metona;  ka  sekgowa  ke
ye menyenyane. [Disego.] [Legofsi.] [Nako e fedile.] (Translation of  Sepedi
paragraphs follows.)

[Kgosi M L MOKOENA: Hon Chairperson and hon members, today we are  going  to
discuss some important matters. As the hon the Minister has said,  we  shall
be discussing four Bills simultaneously.

We  shall  start  with  the  Intelligence  Services  Bill,  which  seeks  to
establish the National Intelligence Agency. We must, however, bear  in  mind
that the establishment of all these structures must  be  authorised  by  the
President and be headed by the Director-General of the  department  and  his
or her deputies, who may be authorised to appoint members  to  help  in  the
attainment of this department's objectives.

Furthermore, the Bill provides that employees of the  intelligence  services
who have attained the age of 60 years should be retired,  because  they  are
old. However, the Minister is allowed to extend the years of service  of  an
employee who has attained the age of 60  years  and  who  has  some  special
skills by a further period of five years, if he or she so wishes.  Is  there
any complaint about that? There is none!

We are also hereby establishing the SA  National  Academy  of  Intelligence,
which must provide training for employees and see to it that they are  in  a
position to perform their duties efficiently. The academy will be headed  by
the  head  of  intelligence  services  and  is  also  appointed   with   the
concurrence of the President.

The Ministerial Advisory Committee on Training,  which  is  ``the  eyes  and
ears'' of the Government, will help in the  detection  of  some  underground
activities that may be harmful to the state. Members of this  committee  are
authorised  to  perform  the  following  duties:  Conduct  searches  on  the
premises of a suspect; intercept the communications of  a  suspect,  and  if
they deem it necessary, they may  seize  the  suspect's  property.  However,
these can only be authorised by a designated judge, and is not  to  be  done
at their own discretion.

If members of this department want to monitor  a  suspect's  communications,
they may do so by applying for an  interception  order  that  is  valid  for
three consecutive months. If they are not satisfied  with  the  intelligence
material they may have gathered about the suspect within that  period,  they
may extend the period of validity of the order to  enable  them  to  further
monitor a suspect, because criminals are too clever these days. It  must  be
emphasised that the  officials  who  are  assigned  the  duty  of  gathering
intelligence about suspects are themselves screened to ensure that they  are
clean, because no one can work for this department with blood on his or  her
hands. Before a member can be employed in this  department,  he  or  she  is
subjected to a polygraph test.

With regard  to  labour  relations,  these  members  know  that  all  public
servants have the  right  to  engage  in  marches,  demonstrations,  protest
action and strikes. However, members of this department may neither  strike,
nor demonstrate, nor engage in any work  stoppages  because  they  hold  key
secrets of the state. The Minister has made provision for internal rules  to
deal with their complaints, grievances and  consultation  on  conditions  of
service and human resources within the intelligence services.

An employee of this department knows that he or  she  is  required  to  work
round the clock - 24 hours a day. When the Minister or a senior official  of
the department needs his or her services - whether or not  this  is  in  the
odd hours of the morning - he or she must  be  ready  to  avail  himself  or
herself of helping the state.

Employees of this department may not divulge any information to  people  who
have no right to know the secrets of the  Government.  Woe  betide  one  who
ever does this!

I now want to focus on the National Strategic Intelligence  Amendment  Bill,
which  provides  for  the  establishment  of  the   National   Co-ordinating
Committee, otherwise known as Nicoc. This committee seeks to  integrate  and
co-ordinate  intelligence  structures  and  to  appoint  a  co-ordinator  of
intelligence. The function of  these  officials  is  to  gather  and  supply
intelligence and to identify threats or potential threats  to  the  security
of the state. They also have powers to investigate and monitor a suspect.

I am aware that I am left with  five  minutes.  Let  me  now  touch  on  the
Electronic Communications  Security  (Pty)  Ltd  Bill,  which  the  hon  the
Minister has so eloquently explained. Comsec prohibits any  person  who  has
no  right  to  intercept  Government's   communications   from   doing   so.
Furthermore,  no  individual  has   the   right   to   intercept   another's
communications without the consent of that  person.  However,  officials  of
this department have the right to monitor a suspect.  As  the  Minister  has
said, Comsec is a nonprofit-making structure  that  serves  the  Government.
Therefore, it would be surprising if it is suggested that it should pay  tax
like any other company or that it should apply for tax exemption as it  does
not engage in business or make any  profit.  Comsec  can  also  intercept  a
communication.

I am aware that I am now left with four minutes, and I am going on.  Let  me
give an example about the hon the President in  this  regard.  Just  imagine
him having to apply for an exemption for a communication device  such  as  a
cellular phone or any other device used by this department when  he  travels
abroad. That is the reason why the President should be exempt so  that  when
he speaks with his counterparts abroad, no one should ever  hear  what  they
are talking about.

Allow me now to focus on some petty concerns  raised  by  some  people  with
regard to these Bills. Doubts have been raised as to whether the  designated
judges appointed to do this job would be trustworthy.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Minutes in Sepedi are many;  in  English
they are few. [Laughter.] [Applause.]]

Mr J L THERON: Chairperson, I hope you are  going  to  be  soft  on  me  and
accommodate me, because I am the only opposition speaker  and  I  have  four
Bills to  deal  with  in  four  minutes.  Please  give  me  a  fair  chance.
[Interjections.]

Agb Voorsitter, Minister en kollegas,  in  die  moderne  w√™reld  waarin  ons
vandag leef, is intelligensie en  teenintelligensie  uiters  noodsaaklik  om
die staat en die bevolking teen veral terrorisme te beskerm.

Voorbeelde van terrorisme is vandag  alombekend,  en  hier  kan  byvoorbeeld
genoem word die aanvalle op  die  W√™reldhandelsentrum  in  New  York  op  11
September 2001, die ontploffing op Bali, die Moskouteatertragedie  en  selfs
hier by ons in ons eie land, die bomontploffings  in  Gauteng  net  'n  kort
rukkie gelede.

Ons van die DP veroordeel alle dade van terrorisme ten sterkste  en  versoek
dus dat  die  magte  van  wet  en  orde  alles  moontlik  sal  doen  om  die
bomplanters voor die howe te bring. Dit wys weer  eens  op  die  belang  van
teenintelligensie  en  dit  is  waaroor  hierdie  vier  wetsontwerpe   gaan.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Chairperson, Minister and colleagues, in the modern world in  which  we
live today, intelligence and counter-intelligence  are  extremely  necessary
to protect the state and the people, especially against terrorism.

Examples of terrorism are common knowledge today, and here I  can  name  for
example the attacks on the World Trade Centre in New York  on  11  September
2001, the explosion in Bali, the Moscow theatre tragedy  and  even  here  in
our own country, the bomb explosions in Gauteng not so long ago.

We from the DP strongly condemn all acts of terrorism and therefore  request
that the powers of law and order will do everything within  their  means  to
bring the bomb-planters to court. It once again points to the importance  of
counter-intelligence and that is what these four Bills are about.]

Regarding the Intelligence Services Control Amendment Bill, the DP  welcomes
the name change from ``control'' to ``oversight''.  The  responsibility  for
the  financial  oversight  of   the   intelligence   services   is   a   big
responsibility  and  may  require  expertise  within  the   Joint   Standing
Committee on Intelligence.

We welcome the appointment of one Inspector-General for  all  the  services.
The functions allocated to this post are very substantial, and the  Minister
and the JSCI must make very sure that the person who is appointed is  a  fit
and proper  person,  has  stature  in  the  country,  undisputed  integrity,
acceptable  academic  qualifications  and  a  vast  amount   of   managerial
experience.

Oor die Wetsontwerp oor Intelligensiedienste wil  die  DP  graag  die  Suid-
Afrikaanse Nasionale Akademie van Intelligensie beklemtoon.  Hierdie  is  'n
baie noodsaaklike positiewe ontwikkeling en die  Akademie  sal  geregistreer
word by die Suid-Afrikaanse  Kwalifikasiesraad  of  SAQA,  soos  alombekend.
Hier moet verseker word dat die regte persoon aangestel  word  as  die  hoof
van di√© Akademie. Die persoon  moet  ervare  wees  in  die  bestuur  van  'n
opleidingsinstansie, die bestuur van opleiding, goeie administrasie  en  die
selektering van die regte personeel. Hierdie moet beslis nie  baantjies  vir
boeties of 'n ``jobs for pals''-aanstelling wees nie.  Die  DP  steun  graag
hierdie wetsontwerp. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Regarding the South African Intelligence Services Bill, the DP  would  like
to really emphasise the South  African  National  Academy  of  Intelligence.
This is a most essential  positive  development  and  the  Academy  will  be
registered by the South African Qualifications Authority, or SAQA, as it  is
commonly known. Here it must be ensured that the right person  is  appointed
as the head of this Academy. The person must be experienced  in  managing  a
training institution, in training management, sound administration,  and  in
the selection of the right personnel. This must certainly  not  be  seen  as
nepotism or as a jobs-for-pals appointment.  The  DP  gladly  supports  this
Bill.]

But then we come to the National Strategic Intelligence Amendment  Bill.  In
this Bill we want  to  make  reference  to  the  National  Intelligence  Co-
ordinating  Committee,  or  Nicoc.  This   committee   has   the   important
responsibility of co-ordinating all intelligence gathered  by  the  National
Intelligence  Agency,  the  SA  Secret  Service,  the  defence  intelligence
division and the crime intelligence division of the police.

Co-operation and co-ordination among these services are essential for  Nicoc
to meet its obligations. Information should be fed  into  the  Nicoc  system
daily which, in turn, must produce a national intelligence estimate  of  the
situation in South Africa and the countries which have an influence on us.

The DP objects to the reference to organs of state as used in  clause  3  of
the  Bill.  ``Organ  of  state'',  as  defined  in  section   239   of   the
Constitution, is not restricted  to  state  departments  and  includes  many
other functionaries such  as  the  Law  Society  of  SA  and  other  private
companies. I do  not  think  this  was  the  intention  of  the  legislator.
Security clearance  of  all  people  in  all  organs  of  state  is  totally
impractical and impossible. The DP will oppose this Bill. [Interjections.]

We now come to the Electronic Communications Security (Pty) Ltd Bill  -  the
``Chocolate Bill'' as it was called in the committee - or the  Comsec  Bill.
I will come to why it was called the ``Chocolate Bill''. The purpose of  the
Bill is to provide for the establishment of  a  private  company  that  will
provide electronic communications security products and services  to  organs
of state, and to provide for matters connected therewith.

Questions that come to mind are the following: Why do  we  have  a  separate
establishment? Why a private (Pty) Ltd company solely owned  by  the  state?
Why  cannot  one  of  the  existing  intelligence  services  be  given   the
responsibility as a separate substructure within its organisation? It  is  a
company subsidised by the state, yet it is mandated to  buy  shares  in  any
other company and may even acquire the majority of shares and control  of  a
company that does not necessarily manufacture  security  products.  This  is
where the chocolate joke comes  in.  It  can  even  take  over  a  chocolate
company. I hope the Minister and the state will not get chocolate  on  their
faces because of this. [Laughter.]

Comsec  is  also  exempt  from  the  broadcasting   and   telecommunications
legislation and, under  certain  conditions,  from  the  Companies  Act.  In
clause  17  we  again  have  reference  to  ``organ  of  state''   and   its
implications. There are too many questions left unanswered.

Parastatals and private companies have repeatedly  expressed  their  concern
that Comsec, which is a state-owned company, will be  encroaching  on  their
functions and  products.  Telkom,  Vodacom,  MTN  and  Cell  C  will  surely
experience problems with this Bill.  The  DP  will  definitely  oppose  this
Bill. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I am glad to note that members  are  now
awake. We can now allow Mr Mkhaliphi to address us.

Mr  B  J  MKHALIPHI:  Chairperson,  hon  members,  the   ongoing   worldwide
revolution  in  electric  communications   technology   is   producing   new
challenges for our Government in its endeavours to  protect  its  electronic
communications systems.

This  necessitates   the   re-examination   of   our   existing   electronic
communications security policies and strategies to  determine  whether  they
are still capable of protecting our nation  against  the  threats  posed  by
hackers and criminals, many of whom are experts in circumventing  electronic
communications systems.

At the moment South Africa does have adequate systems in  place  to  protect
state information. Although  we  have  not  experienced  the  same  kind  of
disruptions which other countries have suffered at the  hands  of  so-called
cyberterrorists, we are not invulnerable to hostile hackers.
We need, therefore, to tighten up  our  electronic  communications  security
systems to make us less  vulnerable,  so  as  to  ensure  that  we  continue
uninterrupted with the task of creating a better life for our people.

The Electronic Communications Security (Pty) Ltd Bill, or the  Comsec  Bill,
is an attempt to ensure that we make ourselves less vulnerable  to  breaches
of our electronic communications security systems. The Bill seeks to set  up
a  company  to  provide  secure   electronic   communications   systems   to
Government.  The  company's  aim  is  to  protect  and  secure  the  state's
electronic  communications  from  unauthorised  access  or   other   related
technical or electronic threats.

The  company  will  also  provide  verification  services   for   electronic
communications security systems, products and services  used  by  organs  of
state. This will prevent organs of state from  procuring  inferior  products
or services which may compromise the security of its communications.

In  addition,  Comsec  will  be  required  to   co-ordinate   research   and
development with  regard  to  electronic  communications  security  systems,
products and services. Many countries cannot afford  the  latest  electronic
communications security products and equipment, which basically forces  them
to use inferior products, with  dire  consequences  for  the  protection  of
valuable state information.

The benefit, therefore, of having a company such as this, is  that  it  will
provide a  one-stop  shop  in  which  all  aspects  relating  to  electronic
communications security can be  dealt  with.  This  will  enable  Comsec  to
specialise only in the security  matters  of  electronics.  [Interjections.]
Cosmec will not threaten well-placed businesses in which my colleague  might
have some personal interests. [Interjections.] [Laughter.]

Together with the State Information Technology Agency,  having  Cosmec  will
ensure that the state not only has a security system, but one  that  is  co-
ordinated, affordable and which specialises in the fields for which  it  was
created. This will also ensure uniformity in terms  of  the  procurement  of
electronic communications security-related products  and  services,  because
all departments and organs of state will  be  compelled  to  consult  Comsec
before purchasing or installing any  electronic  communications  product  or
system.

We  need  not  pay  that  much  attention  to  the  concerns  supposedly  of
stakeholders or service providers, because we held public hearings in  which
we ourselves heard from these stakeholders. This directs a question then  to
the hon member who is now raising this  concern:  on  whose  mandate  is  he
talking? Who are these stakeholders? This debate does not have any  politics
or business principles in  it,  neither  does  it  qualify  as  an  academic
debate. In fact, I am wasting my time by commenting on that. [Applause.]

UMntwana B Z ZULU: Sihlalo, malungu ahloniphekile, mhlonishwa  uNqqongqoshe,
nina beSilo ... [Chairperson, hon members, hon Minister, you of His  Majesty
... ] Minister, there are two  civilian  intelligence  structures  in  South
Africa - the National Intelligence  Agency,  the  NIA,  and  the  SA  Secret
Service, the SASS. The NIA's mission is to proactively,  professionally  and
impartially manage and provide the  Government  with  domestic  intelligence
and counter-intelligence in order to enhance national  security  and  defend
the Constitution, the interests of  the  state  and  the  wellbeing  of  the
people of South Africa.

The Secret Service serves as the  foreign  intelligence  department  of  the
Government. Its mission is to conduct intelligence in relation  to  external
threats, opportunities and other issues that could affect the interests  and
wellbeing of South Africa, with  the  aim  of  promoting  the  national  and
security interests of the country and its citizens.

Section 210 of the Constitution of  the  Republic  of  South  Africa,  1996,
provides for the appointment of an Inspector-General who  will  monitor  the
operational intelligence activities and intelligence services.

The Intelligence  Services  Control  Amendment  Act  of  1999  proposed  the
alignment of the functions and  conditions  of  service  of  the  Inspector-
General  with  those  of  the  public  prosecutor,  as   required   by   the
Constitution. That Act also changed the procedure of appointment of  members
of Parliament to the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence  and  provided
for a security clearance of members based on proportional representation.

The Act has proved  to  be  inadequate  with  regard  to  oversight  of  the
financial activities  of  the  services.  It  was  also  apparent  that  the
functioning of the office of the Inspector-General had no  clear  guidelines
of accountability. The functions of the  Inspector-General  were  vague  and
the appointment of personnel was not clearly regulated.

The Bill before us today seeks to address the inadequacies brought about  by
the Act by,  firstly,  changing  the  name  of  the  Act  to  ``Intelligence
Services Oversight Act, 1994''. The  Bill  also  gives  the  Joint  Standing
Committee on Intelligence sole responsibility for  the  financial  oversight
of the intelligence services.

In addition, this Bill regulates the appointment  of  one  Inspector-General
for all the services, and regulates the termination of service  and  removal
of office of the Inspector-General,  and  the  Inspector-General  will  only
monitor  the  intelligence  and  counter-intelligence   functions   of   the
services. [Applause.]

Ms J L KGOALI: Chairperson,  hon  Minister,  comrades  and  colleagues,  the
transformation of intelligence in our country is  not  merely  a  matter  of
organisational restructuring, but also of defining the  mission,  focus  and
priorities  of  intelligence  so  that  it  can  support  the   Government's
programme of fundamental social transformation.

This is not an easy  transition  for  intelligence,  particularly  in  South
Africa  where  intelligence  was  intrinsically  linked  to   the   minority
government's efforts to contain the struggle  for  liberation.  Intelligence
almost  exclusively  focused  on  securing  the  physical  survival  of  the
apartheid state.

The advent of democracy in South Africa saw the evolving of  a  new  concept
of security. Security has come to be understood in more comprehensive  terms
to correspond with new realities since the end of the apartheid era.

Security is  now  conceived  as  a  holistic  phenomenon,  and  incorporates
political,  social,  economic  and  environmental  issues.  It  goes  beyond
achieving the absence of war  to  encompassing  the  pursuit  of  democracy,
sustainable economic development and social justice. These key  features  of
the new security thinking have also become an integral part of  the  way  in
which intelligence is viewed in our postapartheid society.

This is evident from the words of the hon Minister for Intelligence.  During
a parliamentary briefing session in August this year she said, and I quote:


  The Ministry for Intelligence Services has, as part of the  programme  of
  Government, been involved  in  initiatives  aimed  at  pushing  back  the
  frontiers of poverty and alleviating the plight of  the  most  vulnerable
  members of our society. To this end, we have  reviewed  our  capacity  to
  produce  relevant,  timely,  user-friendly  intelligence   that   informs
  Government decision-making. This is the expression of  the  new  national
  security doctrine of ensuring that our people are free from want and fear
  as is captured in the White Paper on Intelligence.

There is no doubt that our  intelligence  services  play  a  very  important
role. They must help Government to promote regional  and  continental  peace
and  stability;  support  and  promote  national  policies  and  strategies;
contribute to and protect our economic growth and wellbeing; and  strengthen
our efforts against trafficking, terrorism, sabotage and subversion.

I am sure this is going to help my colleague the hon Theron to  really  come
to his senses. When a Minister comes to this House, he or  she  states  very
clearly what the aims and objectives are of a particular Bill, and  this  is
what the hon Minister has said. One hopes that one day the DP will  come  to
its senses. [Interjections.]

The  rapid  advance  of  globalisation  has  also  brought  about  many  new
challenges for our intelligence services, which necessitate the  improvement
of skills and tradecraft of our members. The Intelligence Services  Bill  is
one  of  the  instruments  through  which  we  want  to  ensure   that   our
intelligence services gain an edge over our competitors.

The  Bill  seeks  to  establish  the  South  African  National  Academy   of
Intelligence, which will be a national resource  for  intelligence  research
and training.  The  SA  National  Academy  of  Intelligence  will  have  the
responsibility of ensuring that every member of  the  intelligence  services
is multiskilled and equipped to meet the challenges facing our country.

The Bill also  envisages  the  establishment  of  an  Intelligence  Services
Council on Conditions of Service, which will attend  to  matters  of  equity
and development and the constant  review  of  conditions  of  service  under
which our members work, as they are not  covered  by  the  labour  relations
legislation of our country.

The aim of the council is to ensure that we improve service delivery to  our
clients within the intelligence services  by  retaining  the  most  critical
skills in our quest to ensure that members of the services  remain  lifelong
intelligence officers.

I want to  conclude  by  referring  to  the  White  Paper  on  Intelligence.
According to the White  Paper,  our  country  is  poised  on  the  brink  of
tremendous opportunity in which the human potential of our  country  can  be
harnessed to make South Africa a beacon of hope and success for  the  world.
Intelligence has a critical role to play in this.  Its  transformation  must
be encouraged so  as  to  allow  the  intelligence  community  to  play  its
rightful role in meeting our national development goals. [Applause.]

Mr P D N MALOYI: Thank God it is Friday.

Modulasetulo, ntumelele ke tlhasele jaaka tau, me ke  kokobele  jaaka  duka.
[Chairperson, allow me to attack like a lion.]

Chairperson, I am going to speak on one of the Bills before  us  today,  the
National Strategic  Intelligence  Amendment  Bill.  Before  I  go  into  the
contents of the Bill or say anything about this Bill, it is  imperative  for
all of us to learn a bit about the laws we have in this country.

Clearly, Mr Theron did quote section 239 of  the  Constitution.  I  want  to
proceed from where he ended off. It is important for us to  define  what  an
organ of state is, and, after defining an organ of state, it will be  up  to
all of us, including the public,  to  either  agree  or  disagree  with  the
sentiments expressed by Mr Theron in saying that this term is too broad  and
not easy to understand.
Firstly, the Constitution defines an organ of state as ``any  department  of
state or administration in the  national,  provincial  or  local  sphere  of
government''. I would like to ask Mr Theron if that is clear. [Laughter.]  I
hope he has the  Constitution  with  him.  [Interjections.]  The  definition
continues: ``... or any other functionary or institution exercising a  power
or performing a function in  terms  of  the  Constitution  or  a  provincial
constitution'' if  one  has  one  in  the  province  one  comes  from,  ``or
exercising a public power or performing a public function in  terms  of  any
legislation,  but  does  not  include  a  court  or  a  judicial  officer''.
[Interjections.]

Mr J L THERON: [Inaudible.]

Mr P D N MALOYI: No. What is difficult about the definition of an  organ  of
state? What is it that you do not understand? [Interjections.]

Mr J L THERON: You do not understand. [Interjections.]

Mr P D N MALOYI: But having ... [Interjections.] Mr Theron, I  want  you  to
listen.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Mr Maloyi, I remind you to  address  the
Chair. [Laughter.]

Mr P D N MALOYI: Oh, you are Chair, Chair.

Having defined an organ of state as encapsulated  in  our  Constitution,  is
the DP still of the opinion that the definition of an organ of state is  too
broad and too difficult to understand? Obviously, I suspect they do.

I would like to give  my  learned  friends  from  the  DP,  particularly  Mr
Theron, some simple advice. Firstly, if one does not understand or does  not
have information, one must read. [Interjections.]  But  after  reading,  one
must not be afraid to ask  questions,  because  it  is  not  automatic  that
whatever one reads one will understand immediately. One must ask  questions.
[Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Mr Maloyi, could you take you seat.

Mr J L THERON: Chairperson, I rise on a point of order. Is  it  okay  for  a
member to mislead the House by saying that  I  must  ask  questions  when  I
asked  these  questions  in  the  committee?  [Laughter.]  He  is  obviously
misleading the House.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Mr  Theron,  that  is  not  a  point  of
order. Please continue, Mr Maloyi.

Mr  P  D  N  MALOYI.  Chairperson,  asking  questions  will  broaden   one's
understanding and, believe it or not, one will excel in one's work.

Lastly, if we are asked questions and if we decide, as we have  been  doing,
to provide a free and compulsory education, one must then listen and  listen
attentively, because if one does not, one will fail to do exactly  what  one
has been told. [Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: You do not understand the questions or the answers.

Mr P D N MALOYI: Then, what is easy for the hon member to  do  is  to  read,
ask and listen. That is very important for him. [Interjections.]

I would like to focus on what will be a new insertion in the Act.  This  new
insertion is the security screening investigation which is, in  my  opinion,
one of the key functions  of  the  national  intelligence  structures.  This
clause seeks to empower the national intelligence structures  to  conduct  a
screening investigation to determine the security competence of a person  if
such a person is employed by or is an applicant to an organ of state, or  is
rendering a service or intends to render a service to an organ of state.

The service we are referring to is  a  service  that  might  give  the  said
person access to classified information in the possession of  the  organ  of
state, or which may give such a person access to areas  designated  national
key points in terms of the National Key Points Act.

It would be very foolish for anybody anywhere in the world to  suggest  that
any person can handle classified information of an organ  of  state  because
information, if leaked,  can  threaten  the  security  of  the  country  and
undermine   the   constitutionally   established   system   of   government,
particularly of this Republic.

If the DP should come to power maybe 100 years from now - although  this  is
probably  not  possible  -  are  they  going  to  allow  anybody  to  handle
classified information of the state without screening that  person,  without
knowing who that person is, etc? If that is what they are going to do, I  am
afraid. [Interjections.]

It is therefore the opinion of the ANC that  this  House  should  pass  this
Bill in order to empower the national intelligence structures  to  do  their
work with diligence.

In conclusion, as responsible citizens of this country,  let  us  allow  the
national intelligence structures to use, amongst  other  things,  polygraphy
to  determine  the   reliability   of   information   gathered   during   an
investigation. It  has  been  proven  scientifically  that  this  test  does
provide assistance. More than 50% of the information  we  get  through  this
test is very reliable.

As I said, I will sit down and I will please Mr Theron, but I  hope  he  has
learned something. I hope that when he goes out of this House he will  read;
that after reading he will ask questions; and after asking  those  questions
- when we answer - he will listen attentively. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR INTELLIGENCE: Mr Chairperson, please allow me to tender  my
very late congratulations on your appointment as Deputy Chairperson of  this
Council.

I have requested my office to supply me with a number  of  documents  which,
to me, seemed necessary to allay the fears that  could  be  expressed  about
whether or not some of the Bills we are passing are in line with our  Rules.


I would now like to  give  you,  as  Chairperson,  a  joint  report  of  the
Standing Committee on Public Accounts and the Joint  Standing  Committee  on
Intelligence, a memorandum of understanding between the two  committees  and
a proposed amendment to the National Assembly's Rule 206. This is  for  your
perusal and for deliberations between yourself, as Chairperson of the  NCOP,
and other members who might be interested in the matter.

I would like to thank the hon Kgoshi Mokoena for the sterling work  that  he
has done in leading the ad hoc committee to arrive at  the  point  where  we
are right now. Listening to hon members, it is quite clear  to  me  that  he
has  been  very  instrumental  in  making  sure  that  we  have   a   common
understanding about this.

I want to assure the hon Theron that we will do everything in our  power  to
ensure that the perpetrators of the terrorist acts are brought to  book.  We
thank him for wishing us well. However, regarding the ``chocolate''  clauses
of Comsec, being a Friday, it has become quite clear  to  me  that  the  hon
Theron has  come  to  the  end  of  his  humour  and  has  become  extremely
humourless. Imagine how much sweeter our deliberations would  have  been  if
we could indeed buy shares in a  chocolate  company?  [Laughter.]  I  really
would not mind but, unfortunately, we have no  intentions  at  all  in  that
regard. This has  already  been  very  adequately  dealt  with  by  the  hon
Mkhaliphi.  [Interjections.]  Imagine  if  our  business  was  to  deal   in
chocolates! That would be the level at which the DA  would  want  to  engage
with us. [Interjections.]

However, I would like to indicate, as  the  hon  Mkhaliphi  has  done,  that
there should not be any cause for concern,  because  all  stakeholders  were
consulted in the process of drafting this Bill. I would like to  ensure  the
hon Theron that we are, in fact, not taking over any responsibility that  is
presently in the hands of any organ of state.  The  responsibility  for  the
protection of information in the hands of the state solely  belongs  to  the
intelligence services and nobody else. If  they  have  this  responsibility,
the question would: Why have they taken on this responsibility when it  does
not belong to them?

Those are the matters that I  wanted  to  bring  to  the  attention  of  the
Council. Everything else has been dealt with by the hon members here. We  in
intelligence services are considering asking hon Kgware and  hon  Maloyi  to
draft us an intelligence  umrhabulo  [brief  summary]  for  members  of  the
opposition. They have done such sterling work. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.
Intelligence  Services  Control  Amendment   Bill,   subject   to   proposed
amendments, agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

National  Strategic  Intelligence  Amendment  Bill,  subject   to   proposed
amendments, agreed to in accordance with  section  75  of  the  Constitution
(Democratic Party dissenting).

Intelligence Services Bill, subject to proposed  amendments,  agreed  to  in
accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Electronic Communications Security  (Pty)  Ltd  Bill,  subject  to  proposed
amendments, agreed to in accordance with  section  75  of  the  Constitution
(Democratic Party dissenting).

   PROMOTION OF EQUALITY AND PREVENTION OF UNFAIR DISCRIMINATION AMENDMENT
                                    BILL

             PROMOTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUSTICE AMENDMENT BILL

              PROMOTION OF ACCESS TO INFORMATION AMENDMENT BILL

 (Consideration of Bills and of Reports of Select Committee on Security and
                       Constitutional Affairs thereon)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): Order! Hon members,  I
have been informed that the Whippery have agreed  that  there  will  be  one
speakers' list for the fifth, sixth and seventh Orders of the Day.

Mr P D N MALOYI: Chairperson, ... [Interjections.] The DP must rest  assured
that I am not going to talk about them because I do not have time to waste.

The three Bills, that is the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of  Unfair
Discrimination Amendment  Bill,  the  Promotion  of  Administrative  Justice
Amendment Bill and the Promotion of Access  to  Information  Amendment  Bill
seek to amend three very important Acts which we passed in 2000.

Members will agree with me that these three Acts constituted a watershed  in
our political history. In the  hierarchy  of  important  legislation  passed
since 1994, these three Acts occupied the top position alongside  our  final
Constitution.

Whilst the Constitution provides the basic framework of the values which  we
are trying to instil in our democratic society, these three Acts  put  flesh
onto the constitutional framework.

Since the  enactment  of  the  three  Acts,  the  objection  was  that  some
provisions of these Acts infringed upon the independence of  the  judiciary.
The passage of these amendments, therefore, will  close  this  chapter  once
and for all.

The Bills provide that every High Court is an equality court  for  the  area
of its jurisdiction, and that a judge who has completed a training course  -
it is very important that  they  complete  the  training  course  -  may  be
designated by the Judge President as a presiding  officer  of  the  equality
court. I must assure members that the Justice College has  already  started,
and I know that a number  of  magistrates  have  completed  this  particular
course.

The Bills further empower the head of an administrative region to  designate
any magistrate or additional  magistrate  as  a  presiding  officer  of  the
equality court. This magistrate should also undergo the  training  course  I
spoke about earlier.

The Bills further empower  the  Chief  Justice,  in  consultation  with  the
Judicial Service Commission and the Magistrates Commission, of which I am  a
member, to develop the contents of the training course.  The  implementation
thereof should be done in consultation with the Minister. The Minister  must
then report to Parliament on the contents  and  the  implementation  of  the
course.

All the other amendments are just minor amendments. I thought that  I  would
only highlight the ones I highlighted above. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Promotion of Equality and  Prevention  of  Unfair  Discrimination  Amendment
Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Promotion of Administrative Justice Amendment Bill agreed to  in  accordance
with section 75 of the Constitution.

Promotion of Access to Information Amendment Bill agreed  to  in  accordance
with section 75 of the Constitution.

                       JUDICIAL MATTERS AMENDMENT BILL

  (Consideration of Bill and of Report of Select Committee on Security and
                       Constitutional Affairs thereon)

Mrs E N LUBIDLA: Chairperson and hon members, South African  legislation  is
constantly  revised  to  meet  changing  circumstances  in  a  dynamic   and
developing  society.  This  process  of  transforming  our  laws  has   been
proceeding steadily and systematically in accordance  with  the  overarching
department's responsibilities,  which  include  the  provision  of  adequate
resources for the proper and  efficient  functioning  of  the  criminal  and
civil justice systems.
The Judicial Matters Amendment Bill purports to encompass in a  single  Bill
a variety of amendments which do not require individual amending  bills.  In
essence,  this  Bill  contains  amendments  in  order  to  rectify   certain
provisions in existing legislation  and  to  update  some  legislation  with
regard to developments which have arisen in practice.

Firstly, this Bill seeks to address a concern which has been  noted  by  our
courts to the effect that in the decided case of Venter v Standard  Bank  of
South  Africa,  1999,  the  High  Court  decided  that  Rule  49(5)  of  the
Magistrates' Courts Rules  is  ultra  vires  -  beyond  powers  -  since  it
provides for a rescission not provided for in the  Magistrates'  Courts  Act
of 1944. Rule 49(5) grants the court  the  power  to  rescind  or  vary  any
judgment if the person in whose favour the judgment was granted  has  agreed
in writing that the judgment be rescinded or varied.

This Bill proposes to substitute section 36 of the Magistrates'  Courts  Act
by granting the court the power to rescind  or  vary  any  judgment  if  the
person in whose favour the judgment was granted has agreed in  writing.  The
effect of this amendment is that it will ensure that the  benefits  of  this
rule are still available to the defendants, many of whom are illiterate  and
who are often subjected to exploitation by unscrupulous companies.

Secondly, this Bill amends section 3 of the Stock Theft Act of  1959  so  as
to  bring  its  provisions  into  line  with  the  Constitution,   following
decisions in the case of State v Manamela, 2000.

The Bill also seeks to  address  the  anomaly  brought  about  by  different
interpretations by courts of section 1 of the General Law Further  Amendment
Act, Act 93 of 1962. This section  provides  that  a  person  who  has  sole
custody of his or her minor child in terms of an order  of  court  and  who,
contrary to such order and without reasonable  cause,  refuses  the  child's
other parent access to the child, is guilty of an  offence;  and  must  also
notify the noncustodian parent of any change in  the  address  of  the  sole
custodian parent.

This Bill amends section 1 in order to  rectify  misinterpretations  to  the
effect that section 1 applies to any custodian, whether  sole  custodian  or
not.

In conclusion, the Bill seeks to address the important right  of  not  being
compelled to give self-incriminating evidence, as entrenched in  section  35
of the Constitution. This was put under the spotlight in Parbhoo and  Others
v Getz NO and Another, 1997, in which the Constitutional  Court  found  that
section 415(3) of the Companies Act, Act  61  of  1973,  read  with  section
415(5), violated this right. This Bill amends both these sections  in  order
to bring the provisions thereof into line with the Constitution.

The Bill also seeks to amend sections 77 and 78 of  the  Criminal  Procedure
Act, Act 51 of 1977, which deal with the capacity of an  accused  person  to
understand criminal proceedings, and mental illness  or  mental  defect  and
criminal responsibility, respectively. These  amendments  are  consequential
in nature as they give effect to changes brought about  by  the  new  Mental
Health Care Act of 2002.

I therefore support the passing of this Bill. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Council adjourned at 11:01.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bill was introduced by the Minister for Provincial
         and Local Government in the National Assembly on  8  November  2002
         and  referred  to   the   Joint   Tagging   Mechanism   (JTM)   for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Local Government:  Municipal  Structures  Second  Amendment
              Bill [B 68 - 2002] (National Assembly - sec  75)  [Explanatory
              summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
              in Government Gazette No 23991 of 1 November 2002.]


         The  Bill  has  been  referred  to  the  Portfolio   Committee   on
         Provincial and Local Government of the National Assembly.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the  classification  of
         the Bill may be submitted to  the  Joint  Tagging  Mechanism  (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.
National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     (1)    Bills passed by National Council  of  Provinces  on  8  November
         2002: To be submitted to President of the Republic for assent:


         (i)      Promotion   of   Equality   and   Prevention   of   Unfair
                 Discrimination Amendment Bill  [B  41B  -  2002]  (National
                 Assembly - sec 75).


         (ii)    Promotion of Administrative Justice Amendment Bill  [B  46B
                 - 2002] (National Assembly - sec 75).


         (iii)   Promotion of Access to Information Amendment Bill [B  60  -
                 2002] (National Assembly - sec 75).


         (iv)    Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B 55B  -  2002]  (National
                 Assembly - sec 75).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Housing:


     Report and Financial Statements of LANOK (Proprietary) Limited for 2001-
     2002.

2.    The Minister of Communications:


     (a)    Report and  Group  Annual  Financial  Statements  of  the  South
         African Post Office Limited for 1997-1998.


     (b)    Report and  Group  Annual  Financial  Statements  of  the  South
         African Post Office Limited for 1998-1999.


     (c)    Report and  Group  Annual  Financial  Statements  of  the  South
         African Post Office Limited for 1999-2000.

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     Executive  Summary  of  Report  of  33rd   Commonwealth   Parliamentary
     Association Africa Region  Conference;  Kampala,  Uganda,  3-10  August
     2002:


     EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


     The purpose of the Executive Summary is to highlight the most pertinent
     issues discussed and the resolutions and/or decisions  reached  by  the
     Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (Africa Region).
     A.     Theme of the Conference


     Good governance and development:  The basic crying need of  Africa  for
     an equitable and a democratic world order for the 21st century.


     B.     Topics discussed at the Conference


     1.     WTO: Challenges facing Africa


     2.     How Parliaments in the Africa Region can respond to the  growing
         threat of terrorism


     3.     HIV/Aids: What is the role of a Parliamentarian in combating it?


     4.     The role  of  regional  Parliamentary  groups  in  strengthening
         regional and sub-regional unity


     5.     Good governance as a necessary precondition for development


     6.      Women  and  Development:   How  can  Parliament  contribute  to
         engendering the political decision-making process in Africa?


     C.     Meeting of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians


     The meeting resolved that:


     * A programme of CWP activities should be finalised and adopted for the
         year,


     * Accurate data of women should be submitted and systemised within four
         months from this Conference date,


     * If Senior Representatives are unable to perform their  duties,  other
         members should be elected to take their place,


     * Regional representatives should approach branches for  submission  of
         their topics,


     * Secretariat must give CWP an indication of funds available to  assist
         with programmes and planning,


     * Articles to be submitted by women representatives  for  inclusion  in
         the CPA journal, The Parliamentarian, and


     * Kenya branch to identify a convenor for purposes of continuity,


     D.     Meeting of the CPA (Africa) Regional Representatives


     The meeting resolved that:


     * The issue of non-paying branches to be  addressed  and  their  status
         reviewed,


     * Regional representatives to visit member branches,  monitor  branches
         who fail to pay annual fees and those branches that do  not  attend
         CPA meetings,


     * Secretary-General to visit branches in abeyance,


     *  CPA  branches  to  be  made  aware   of   the   role   of   regional
         representatives,


     * Guidelines to deal with non-participating  members  of  the  Regional
         Representative Committee to be put in place, and


     * The draft guidelines for  the  regional  representatives  and  senior
         women Parliamentarians to be circulated to all branches.


     E.     Meeting of the CPA Africa Region Executive Committee


     The meeting agreed to recommend to the AGM that:


     * The East Africa  Legislative  Assembly  (EALA)  be  granted  observer
         status  pending  the  recommendation  of   the   Sub-committee   on
         Constitutional Affairs,


     * The  mandate  of  the  sub-committee  on  constitutional  affairs  be
         renewed,


     * The  CPA  Africa  Region  Constitution  be  amended  to  address  the
         affiliation of supra-natural bodies,


     * The Regional Secretariat compiles a viable programme of activities,


     *  The  increase  of  Africa  Regional  Representatives  on   the   CPA
         International Executive Committee be raised,
     * The lack of attendance by Executive Members needs to be addressed,


     * The Regional Secretariat be allowed to hand over  to  another  branch
         after a month, and


     * The CPA International Executive Committee to be informed  about  this
         decision.
     F.     33rd CPA Africa Region Annual General Meeting (AGM)


     The AGM adopted the recommendations from the Exco, including


     * The decision to grant the East Africa Legislative  Assembly  observer
         status,


     * To extend the mandate of the Sub-committee on Constitutional  Affairs
         to recommend proposals in terms of dealing with the  suspension  of
         branches,


     * To reaffirm that delegations should  include  women  representatives,
         and


     * That branches should encourage  30%  women  representation  at  their
         respective Parliaments.


     The Annual General Conference (AGM)


     Committees reported to Plenary on the following themes:


     1.     WTO: Challenges facing Africa


         The delegates reached consensus that Africa should become an  equal
         trading partner and not be persuaded by  conditionalities  attached
         to aid.


     2.     How Parliaments in the Africa Region can respond to the  growing
         threat of terrorism


         The delegates reached consensus that terrorism can only  be  curbed
         by being preventative rather than reactive.  They  also  emphasised
         that public participation is important  to  constructively  address
         dissenting political viewpoints.


     3.     HIV/Aids: What is the role of a Parliamentarian in combating it?


         The delegates reached consensus that:
         *  Appropriate legislation  and  structures  be  put  in  place  to
              facilitate a successful fight against the pandemic,


         *  Institutional, national, regional, and  international  framework
              to be put in place with a view to  sharing  knowledge,  skills
              and resources, as well as successes and failures,


         *   Ensuring  the  allocation  of  adequate   resources   for   the
              purchasing of drugs for the infected, and  research  into  the
              development of a cheaper vaccine,
         *  Establishment of programmes that target  specific  groupings  in
              our society, and


         *  To attack the root cause of poverty,


     4.     The role  of  Regional  Parliamentary  Groups  in  strengthening
         Regional and Sub-Regional Unity


         The delegates reached consensus and suggested that:


         *  CPA Africa Region must provide at next year's  conference  facts
              and guidance on the stage of co-operation with various  Africa
              regional and sub-regional groupings of Parliamentarians, and


         *  In that regional set-up to have study groups around the  various
              topics within the theme of the conference  during  the  coming
              year, to provide an ongoing mechanism  for  a  review  of  the
              Association's  activities,   particularly   with   regard   to
              Parliamentarians  playing  a  leading  role  in  strengthening
              regional and sub-regional unity in Africa.


     5.     Good governance as a necessary precondition for development


         The delegates reached consensus that in order  for  development  to
         take place, good governance  principles  have  to  be  adhered  to.
         However,  in  defining  good  governance  principles,  the  context
         within which Africa finds itself should be looked at.


     6.      Women  and  Development:   How  can  Parliament  contribute  to
         engendering the political decision-making process in Africa?


         The delegates reached consensus  that  international  treaties  and
         conventions, as  ratified  by  member  countries,  be  implemented.
         Africa  to  recognise  the  important  role  women  play   in   the
         development of the continent.


