---
title: 'National Assembly - 12 November 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-11-12
---

THURSDAY, 12 NOVEMBER 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

      WELCOME TO DR BARAKAT AND DELEGATION OF THE SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I wish to acknowledge the presence in the gallery
of Dr Ghiath Barakat, minister of higher education in the Syrian Arab
Republic, and his delegation. [Applause.] Welcome to our Parliament, hon
minister and your delegation!

The first item on the Order Paper is Questions addressed to the President.
Let me remind members that they may press the buttons on their desks if
they wish to ask a supplementary question. There will only be four
supplementary questions, and that includes the supplementary question of
the person who raised the question.

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC:

         Measures to strengthen governance at local government level

7.   Ms D G Nhlengethwa (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:

     What (a) are the outcomes of the recent discussions between the
     Presidency, municipal managers, directors-general and representatives
     from all three spheres of government on the state of local government
     on 20 October 2009 and (b) measures will be implemented to strengthen
     governance at local government level?
                    NO2630E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, let me first express my
appreciation to the mayors and municipal managers of all 283 municipalities
for having taken the time to attend the meeting that was held in
Khayelitsha on 20 October 2009. We had fruitful discussions and the meeting
was a success.

One of the recommendations of the meeting was that government should do
everything possible to address the major challenges facing local
government. We also resolved that we needed to capacitate municipalities
and strengthen intergovernmental relations in order to improve delivery of
services to the people. We also resolved that we would improve governance,
financial and administrative capacities in some municipalities, root out
corruption and address the political problems that are causing great delays
in service delivery.

Furthermore, we agreed that there was a need for municipalities to
prioritise skills development as well as the recruitment of accountants and
other skilled personnel to ensure efficiency. It is apparent that at some
municipalities, lack of service delivery and the mismanagement of resources
are the result of poor or unavailable skills.

The local government indaba on the state of local government, which was
held a day after the Khayelitsha meeting, resolved to develop a turnaround
strategy for local government, which will be ready in the next few months.
The strategy is aimed at explaining in detail how government plans to
change the state of local government in a manner that will ensure that
local government functions efficiently and effectively in delivering
services. This strategy is also designed to provide solutions on how the
lack of service delivery in municipalities could be turned around for the
benefit of our people.

We have asked the other two spheres of government to provide all the
necessary support to municipalities in order to make sure that local
government functions better. In addition, provincial and national
departments as well as other state organs that owe money to municipalities
have been encouraged to pay what is owed as soon as possible.

Perhaps, most importantly, we have made a call to all municipalities to
focus on their mandate of serving our people with dedication, humility and
honesty, because we believe that better-functioning municipalities will
play a meaningful role in ensuring that our dream of a better life for all
is achieved.

The Minister for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs will
monitor progress in this regard and report back on a quarterly basis. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Ms D G NHLENGETHWA: Hon Speaker, I thank the hon President for his
comprehensive reply. The assessment of the level of discussion at that
local government indaba – I’m mentioning it, President, because you’ve also
included it in your reply – was designed to find the root causes of the
current state of distress in many of the country’s municipalities, to
inform a national turnaround strategy.

One of the fundamental findings – I agree with you – was weak oversight
supervision, which led to a backlog in service delivery, lack of support
and intervention mechanisms across the three spheres of government. Since
the meeting and the indaba over the two days in question, what has been
done as a short-term solution?

You mentioned the fact that the Minister will carry out monitoring, and we
want you, Mr President, to expand on what the Minister will be doing to
monitor and assist those municipalities. As a long-term solution, what will
be done to address this distress? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, of course, the hon member will
appreciate that the events I described here have just taken place. It’s not
as if we did this some months ago. The Minister is in the process of
putting together a report on the work that was carried out at the indaba,
which will then be presented at the right time.

Of course, the responsibility of local government lies with the Department
of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs. This means that in the
long term, that department is going to be monitoring the situation and
supervising activities in local government.

I don’t think that we could create a new structure to look at the progress
and functioning of local government. I think they will do things the normal
way. The Minister certainly has the responsibility to ensure that local
government functions. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P F SMITH: Speaker, I’m actually somewhat puzzled and also disappointed
by the President’s comment. I heard him say that the turnaround strategy
will be available in a few months. Now, colleagues, I was at the indaba,
and the agreement at the end of it was that the turnaround strategy would
be available in a few weeks, and the reason for that was because this whole
exercise was meant to have a sense of urgency.

The agreement there was that all municipalities in the country would
develop their own local turnaround strategies in conformity with this
national framework, and would do so by March 2010, to introduce the new
municipal cycle in their budgeting.

If this national strategy is only available in a few months’ time, it means
that the municipalities will not be able to develop their strategies in
accordance with it. This means that the whole sense of urgency in the
framework is thrown out of kilter. So, in that regard, I’m rather
disappointed.

I hoped the President would say that Cabinet approved it yesterday and it
is now ready for implementation. Why is that not the case? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, I’m sure the hon member must
have been preoccupied with something else when I was speaking. I didn’t say
that the turnaround strategy would be ready in a few months. He must have
confused the different points that I was making when I mentioned “a few
months”.

All I said is that the Minister is working on it, with the municipalities.
Certainly, he’s going to be able to present a report as to what is
happening.

What I said in relation to “a few months”, in response to the hon member
who previously asked a supplementary question, is that the indaba took
place just recently, and not a few months ago. You must have just
misunderstood the point, unfortunately for you. [Applause.]

Mr W P DOMAN: Mr President, you referred to the acquisition of skills. I am
also going to quote from your speech. You said in Khayelitsha:

   We must find ways of attracting the best technical, managerial and
   financial minds to our municipalities, even the most remote, to effect a
   turnaround.

Mr President, we in the DA need an answer from you. Will you give guidance
as to whether “fit for purpose” will be the sole criterion in the
appointment of officials and that cadre deployment by any party is actually
wrong?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, correctly, the hon member says I
made the statement; yes. In the presence of Ministers, including the
Minister responsible for local government, and mayors and managers, I
didn’t suggest that I needed to take up that task as the President of the
Republic and now take on the details regarding how these skills will be
acquired. I think that is the task of the leaders I was talking to.

I can’t say, look, this is how you are going to do it. I’m sure the hon
member would be the first one to complain that I was actually doing the
work of departments. I was giving them a guideline to follow and according
to which they must operate. Thank you. [Applause.]

Rev H M DANDALA: Mr President, given your commitment to fighting corruption
and the knowledge that many service delivery complaints are related to
corruption, I wish to ask if, during the indaba, you gave any assurances
and/or special measures to assist public servants who strive to resist
corruption.

The premise of my question, Mr President, is the issue relating to the
acting director-general of the Department of Public Works, who has claimed
to have been demoted by his political principal, the Minister, for
resisting what he understood to be an unreasonable instruction to appoint
companies in what in his view would have amounted to an unsolicited bid.

My premise is also the fact that procurement is a big problem that cuts
across political lines. [Time expired.] [Applause.]
The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, at the meeting, we made the
statement, and we have been making statements to the effect that we will
fight corruption. This was not the first time I had made the statement;
I’ve been making the statement all the time. In other words that empowers
everybody - those under political leadership and those in leadership - to
deal with it and to know that they have support, at least from the
Presidency.

Unfortunately, I don’t have the details of the area on which you premise
your question so that I could deal with a matter that, at the moment, has
not even reached my desk for me to deal with.

I think it would be unfair of you to think that I could comment on that
matter. So, that matter will be commented on once the facts have been
established.

            Position regarding proposed revision of certain laws

8.   Rev K R J Meshoe (ACDP) asked the President of the Republic:

     (1)   Whether, during a meeting with religious leaders held in Bishop’s
          Court on 17 October 2009, he stated that some laws on the nation’s
          statute books are not in line with God’s laws and need to be
          revised; if not, what is the position in this regard; if so, which
          laws was he referring to;


     (2)   whether (a) he intends to propose for these laws to be repealed
          or amended and (b) public engagements will be held in this regard;
          if not, what is the position in this regard; if so, when will this
          process start?                NO2628E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, during an address in Cape Town on
17 October 2009, I said that “some Christians sometimes feel that some of
the country’s laws do not accord with Christian principles to the extent
that they should”.

Having expressed this view, I wish to remind the House that South Africa is
a secular state in which the Constitution and the rule of law are supreme.
It is a country of many faiths, denominations and beliefs. The Bill of
Rights stipulates that “everyone has a right to freedom of conscience,
religion, thought, belief and opinion”. It would therefore be incorrect to
give reference in the development of legislation to any one religion or
faith.

As publicly elected representatives of our people from diverse religions,
faiths and beliefs, it is my contention that we should at all times strive
to ensure that our laws neither offend the beliefs of any group nor impose
the beliefs of others. Rather, we should ensure that our laws are
consistent with the values that are common to all South Africans.

As hon members would know, there are channels available for people who
believe that within plausible grounds, certain laws need to be repealed or
amended. I would therefore encourage people to understand the context
within which our laws have been formulated. Any person has the right to
approach any of the relevant institutions should they feel that their
constitutional rights have been infringed upon. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Speaker, Mr President, please accept hon Meshoe’s apology. I
am speaking on his behalf.

At the meeting, you are reported to have warned South Africa about the fate
of Sodom and Gomorrah and that laws on the nation’s Statute Book that are
not in line with God’s laws needed to be revisited. If these statements
were misconstrued, what is your opinion on this issue, and which laws
concern you in this regard, particularly since in 1996, when the abortion
on demand law was passed, 57% of your own party alone was opposed to the
passing of the law? Were you among these people; and if so, does this still
bother you? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, firstly, I’m not sure about this,
because the hon member was not in the meeting. She is certainly quoting me
out of context. I talked about laws and principles. I was raising the
matter with religious people who were there that, given the fact that they
are religious people, are they keeping track of the laws that Parliament
passes - whether they are in line with the beliefs and principles of God.
It was a question to them.

They need to help those of us who are seated here if there are laws that
they believe deviate from the principles. I did not say that these laws
talk about Sodom and Gomorrah. I don’t use such language, and I would not
have used it in front of bishops and pastors. So it’s a wrong quotation – a
totally wrong quotation. I was raising the question with them.

This Parliament passes laws according to the majority. The laws you are
referring to were canvassed, and indeed Members of Parliament voted. The
majority decided that these laws should be laws. So, I don’t think I can
now go back and ask why people voted this way or that way. They were indeed
discussed extensively. I was not saying we should discuss these laws again.
I was merely addressing the leadership of religious people to find out
whether they track the processes of making laws in terms of their own
beliefs. That was the issue.

The SPEAKER: Thank you, hon President. Hon members, there are only four
supplementary questions that will be allowed. The second supplementary
question will be asked by Mr V B Ndlovu, followed by hon F C Bikani and hon
P de Lille. Hon M Smuts, you are number five on the list, and hon Kganare,
you are number six. So, only four questions are allowed.
Mnu V B NDLOVU: Sihlalo, Mongameli wezwe, sekela Mongameni, Nedlu
ehloniphekile, uma sikhuluma ngobuntu Mongameli, ngesikhathi ukhuluma
nabaBishobhi nabefundisi, bakubona kufanele yini ukuthi thina
njengePhalamende sivumele izingane ezineminyaka eyishumi nambili ukuthi
zihushule izisu na? Bakubona kufanele yini njengabantu abangamakholwa
ahlukahlukene ngokwezinkolo - lapha kubalwa nathi basemakhaya esihlaba
izimbuzi sifake iziphandla - okuyinkolo yethu leyo - ukuthi izingane zethu
zingabiki konina nakoyise uma zifuna ukuyohushula izisu na? Ngabe
umhlonishwa uMongameli yena wathini uma ekubona njengobaba wesizwe nobaba
waseNingizimu Afrika - ukuthi sizokwazi yini ukuthi sibuyise ubuntu bethu
njengabantu baseNingizimu Afrika? Ngiyabonga.

UMONGAMELI WERIPHABHULIKHI YASENINGIZIMU AFRIKA: Somlomo, lungu
elihloniphekile Gatsheni. Hhayi, uwubuzile umbuzo wakho Gatsheni impela
wawunonisa. Kodwa okubalulekile ukuthi ngenkathi sihlangene nabaholi
bezenkolo asilukhulumanga lolo daba. Aluzange nje luze luphathwe.
Ngaleyondlela asikho isidingo sokuthi ngiwuphendule umbuzo wakho ngoba
aluzange impela lubikwe lolo daba. Kodwa ngiwuzwile wona impela umbuzo
ukuthi ukhuluphele. Unjengenkomo ekhuluphele kodwa othi uma uyihlabile
kuthiwe ayidliwa. Ngiyabonga. [Uhleko.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Chairperson, President of the country, hon Deputy President
and this august House, if we are speaking of ubuntu hon President, when you
were speaking with the bishops and the ministers of religion, did they feel
that it is correct for us as Parliament to make laws that allow children as
young as 12 years to terminate a pregnancy? Did they feel that it is
appropriate that as people of different religions – this includes us from
the rural areas who are traditionalists who slaughter a goat for a
traditional bracelet – which is our religion of course – that our children
should not consult their mothers and fathers when they need to terminate a
pregnancy? What did you say to them hon President, as the father of the
nation and the father to this country South Africa,  that will enable us to
revive our ubuntu as the people of South Africa? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Mr Speaker and hon member Gatsheni, well,
you have asked your question and you have fattened it. But what is
important is that when we were meeting with the religious leaders we did
not talk about that issue. We did not mention it. Therefore, there is no
need for me to respond to your question, because that issue was really
never mentioned. But I realise that the question is fat. It is like a fat
cow that when you slaughter it, it is said not to be edible. [Laughter.]]

Ms  F C BIKANI: Speaker, President, with regard to the presidential hotline
which is meant to improve service delivery, what monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms are put in place to ensure that public liaison officers keep up
to the expectations of the public in the context of the Batho Pele
principles?
The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Your question is not quite related, hon
member. [Laughter.] So, the President does not have to answer you.

Ms P DE LILLE: Speaker, hon President, are you implying or stating that
when we make laws we need to consider religion so that it does not offend
some people? And are you still of the view that the ANC is going to rule
until Jesus comes? [Laughter.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, no, I don’t necessarily mean that
before we make laws as Parliament we should ask the leadership of religion
to come and make their own comments. I think the procedures are very clear.
Laws are made public, and every citizen, whether from religion or from any
other aspect, is free to come and make comments on the laws. So, this is
there. We can’t do anything else. If they don’t come, they don’t come.

I think the point that was being made was that, as religious leaders,
that’s one of the tasks they have to undertake. This is to ensure that we
don’t make laws here and then find out that they never participated in the
public scrutiny of the laws when they were passed and then have them
complaining. The point was: Where were they at the point when these
processes took place? That was the point. We don’t have to say that we give
them a special dispensation.

On the second question, I made this point some time ago, and I’ve been
making it several times. I know that some people protested, particularly
from the opposition at that time, that I am using the big name wrongly. But
equally, religious leaders were very happy because they appreciated that
the ANC knows Jesus and God and even knows that the Day of Judgment is
coming. [Applause.] So, they were very happy and very much against the
people who were critical, etc.

Of course I was making the point after I made an analysis. I said that ANC
policies are superior. There is no party at the moment that can compete
with them. It is clear that we will then rule until Jesus comes. That was
the point I was making. [Applause.] [Laughter.]

Ms M SMUTS: Hon President, we welcome the fact that you have stated clearly
that the law of the land has to be in line with only one fundamental law,
and that law is the Constitution. We also welcome the fact that you have
indicated by implication that one cannot use religious doctrine as a source
for interpreting the Constitution.

But sir, having heard from you today a very clear statement of your
position, may I point to the difficulty that arises when someone like Rev K
R J Meshoe believes that he has heard one thing at a meeting and you tell
us that in fact that’s not what you said. This is something similar to what
happened with the hon Smith. He believes he heard something and you say
that’s not what you said.
I would like to put it to you, sir, that it must be very difficult for a
warm-hearted President not to tell every audience what they would like to
hear. [Laughter.] But the hon President cannot be a kind of Father
Christmas to every formation in the nation. Therefore, I would like to ask
him whether in future he can perhaps give a clear ... [Interjections.]
[Time expired.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Well, firstly, the first lady who spoke was
not in the meeting. It was not Rev Meshoe who spoke. I’m not even sure
whether Rev Meshoe gave her the background to ask the question. But Rev
Meshoe was not alone. There were other people there. I would not have said
that kind of thing. I have just clarified the issue. So, this is not an
issue.

Clearly you were sitting here as well. The first person did not hear me,
and I was very keen to answer the question. I mean the enthusiasm that
makes people miss the point is not my problem. So, you can’t question me on
that. Absolutely not! Thank you, Speaker. [Applause.]

     Details pertaining to proposed amendment of section 49 of Criminal
                                Procedure Act

9.   Mr J H van der Merwe (IFP) asked the President of the Republic:

     (1)  Whether he has been informed that the police have the requisite
          training to make split second decisions when he informed 1 000
          police station commanders that section 49 of the Criminal
          Procedure Act, Act 51 of 1977, will be amended to give police
          leniency to shoot; if so, what are the relevant details;

     (2)   whether this amendment would be extended to ordinary citizens; if
          not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                        NO2639E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, hon members, no one in this
Parliament can refute the fact that our law enforcement forces are
confronted with perilous situations as they seek to ensure the safety of
the nation. Having said that, at no point in my address to the station
commanders and other leaders of the police force did I give police a
licence to shoot suspects in circumstances other than those provided for by
the law.

It is worth reiterating what I told the station commanders, and I’ll quote
what I said so that there will be no misunderstanding:

   As you are aware, we seek to strengthen the hand of the police in dealing
   with violent criminals. We intend to finalise amendments to section 49 of
   the Criminal Procedure Act, with a view to taking the amendments to
   Parliament soon. This is a measure aimed specifically at dealing with
   serious violent crime and dangerous criminals.


   It is the duty of the police to protect all people against injury or loss
   of life. But when their lives or the lives of innocent civilians are
   threatened, police sometimes have no choice but to use lethal force to
   defend themselves and others. We expect our police officers to observe
   the law and respect the rights of innocent citizens, at all times.

The Criminal Procedure Act deals with the use of force in effecting arrest.
In our view, where the law still exhibits gaps that impact negatively on
the ability of the police to perform their work effectively, then such gaps
in the law must be addressed without delay. This includes the use of deadly
force, as provided for and defined in our legislation.

As the Minister of Police has already said in this House, the technical
amendments to section 49 will take cognisance of the founding principles of
our Constitution. The exact detail of the wording of this amendment is
being finalised and still has to be submitted to Cabinet for ratification.

Police recruits undertake general training, part of which includes
equipping them with the skills and knowledge required for them to use
deadly force under the circumstances stipulated by law. But that training
needs to be improved.

Therefore, the proposed amendments that seek to provide more clarity need
to be complemented by the training of all police officers on the relevant
sections of the legislation. Section 49 of the Criminal Procedure Act of
1977 refers to “an arrestor”, who can be any person who is authorised in
terms of the Act to effect an arrest, including a citizen’s arrest.

In light of the work still being undertaken, it is not possible to say what
effect, if any, the proposed amendment would have on this provision. I
thank you, hon Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Mr Speaker, Mr President, I think that was a good
answer. I asked you about the training of police in order for them to make
split-second decisions, and you made it clear that attention will be given
to the training. You also answered the second question; that section 49 is
applicable to citizens. So, you have answered the question, with respect.

However, the impression that has been created has caused us now to expedite
the amendments that you have in mind, because some people think - there is
a perception - that they can shoot outside the ambit of section 49.

Finally, we in the IFP support this idea and all methods to fight crime and
we will support you. I just urge you, with respect, Mr President, to
expedite the amendments to this Act. Thank you. [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, certainly, we will expedite the
process of the Bill. Thank you.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Hon Speaker, Mr President, certainly in the past
month, we have seen the police shoot to kill an unarmed hairdresser, an
unarmed food vendor and unarmed man cleaning his shoes, shot in the back of
the head as he ran away, and a three-year-old baby in a car because the
police said they thought he was armed.

The Constitutional Court has already, very carefully, reworked section 49,
taking it from the odious apartheid era section to one that clearly gives
police the right to shoot and kill armed criminals aiming a firearm at them
or at others.

We’ve seen unprecedented police murders in the now-national Police
Commissioner’s province of KwaZulu-Natal, and he too was saying that
section 49 would be a mandate to give police increased leniency to shoot.
As the police already have this right to shoot armed criminals, obviously
the fear in this country is that you - and this is still a great secret; we
don’t know what amendments you are proposing – are looking at going back to
the days of allowing the police to shoot unarmed citizens in the back.
That’s what we are seeing today. Please, clarify that.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, I think it is very clear that
the hon member is basing her question on speculation. On the basis of what
is being said and what we see, we, therefore, think this is what is
happening, because we don’t know what the contents of the amendments are.
She is speculating, therefore, that maybe this is what the commissioner
means, or that maybe from what you say, this is what you mean. That is how
I understood the question.

I think we are very clear on this matter: We are dealing with crime. The
crime in South Africa is different from that of other countries, although
it may be the same in terms of quantity. It is different from the point of
view that crime in South Africa is more violent than in any other parts of
the world. Criminals here act differently; if they break into somebody’s
house, they wait for the person to arrive and demand the keys to your safe,
etc. In other countries they steal and run away.

Here, criminals have been killing people. That is why crime here is
characterised as violent. We are, therefore, dealing with that situation.
In addition, South Africa is heavily armed as a country. There are lots of
guns all over and they are being used to commit crime.
We are saying that we need to fight crime. We have made the point that when
criminals are cornered, they take out guns and they don’t fire warning
shots; they shoot to kill. There are many police who have died as a result
of that, while observing what ought to be standard practice.

After I addressed the police officers, a policeman in Pretoria who did not
have his bulletproof vest on was killed. The policeman shouted at a
criminal three times, “Put your gun down!”, and the criminal shot and
killed the policeman.

The point that I have been making at least is that when criminals take out
their guns, their intention is not to warn; they take them out with the
intention to kill.

On the spur of the moment, what do you do as a policeman? Should you say,
“I’m a very good policeman and I’ve got a gun, but I’m not going to shoot
you. Please, put the gun down!” How do you deal with the issue of violent
crime? How do you limit the numbers of police that are killed by criminals?
That’s the point we are dealing with, within the law, not outside of the
law; hence the amendment to the Act.

Some of the police officers who have made such mistakes as shooting
innocent people are now in prison; they have been arrested. There is no
open-ended policy that gives the police the right to shoot randomly. That
is why the emphasis has been on the amendment of the law. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mrs L S CHIKUNGA: Speaker, hon President, I think you have partly covered
my question, but I will still ask the question. We agree, Mr President,
that crime in South Africa is in the main violent and that criminals do not
hesitate to murder innocent citizens and even our police officers.

It is also true that as they respond to crime, a few amongst our police
officers sometimes act in a manner that makes them seem to be trigger-
happy. Statistics reveal an upward trend of complaints received over the
past five years, from 5 996 in 2004-05 to
6 119 in 2008-09 - an increase of 2%.

Mr President, what is the position of government towards such alleged
trigger-happy officers? I thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, as the hon member has said, we
have already answered the question. I’m sure she will be happy to note that
the reply to the question she is asking is part of the reply that we have
just given. [Applause.]

Ms S P RWEXANA: Mongameli ohloniphekileyo [Hon President], if you agree
that section 49 gives the police the power to use force, then it violates
the Constitution and the Bill of Rights of the people of South Africa.
[Interjections.] No, she did not. Please! Please!

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members!

Ms S P RWEXANA: What I’m trying to say, Mr President, is how can you make
an inflammatory statement that violates the Constitutional Court’s judgment
regarding the rights of South African citizens and the Bill of Rights?
[Laughter.] [Time expired.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, I regret that the hon member’s
time has expired. I did not get the question clearly, because I don’t know
what statement she is talking about that I made, that is inflammatory and
anti-Constitution.

Mrs J D KILIAN: Speaker, on a point of order: Could I just please request
you to allow my colleague to reformulate the question? [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon member, that is not a point of order. There are procedures
here, and no procedure has been violated. Please take your seat, hon
member.

                 Obstacles and challenges facing AU and PAP

 10. Mrs F Hajaig (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:
     What are the (a) obstacles and (b) challenges facing the African Union
     and the Pan-African Parliament in promoting (i) peace, (ii)
     development, (iii) democracy and (iv) economic growth on the African
     continent?                                       NO2631E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, the African Union has, since its
inception in 2002, made important strides towards the goal of establishing
an African Economic Community as outlined in the Abuja Treaty. However, as
the African Union continues to grow as a continental entity, a number of
challenges remain, particularly with respect to peace and security,
regional integration, development and economic growth. Some of these relate
to the African Union’s institutional architecture and capacity constraints.
Decisions of the African Union Assembly are often not implemented
timeously. It often takes a long time for treaties to be ratified by member
states.

There are also challenges around the mandate of the African Union
Commission, especially the implications of transforming the African Union
Commission into the African Union Authority. The financing of African Union
activities and nonpayment of contributions by some member states limit its
capacity to undertake its work. Peace missions in Africa often face
challenges relating to funding and capacity.

During its tenure in the UN Security Council, South Africa advocated the
need to strengthen and enhance the relationship between the United Nations
and regional organisations such as the African Union. Despite a UN Security
Council resolution, the African Union continues to struggle for funding
from its own resources to intervene in the continent’s conflicts.

The attainment of democracy in all parts of Africa is an important African
Union goal. In this regard, the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and
Governance marks the culmination of commitments that have been collectively
taken by African member states over the last two decades. It provides a
consolidated point of reference for all African Union efforts to enhance
the overall state of democracy, elections and governance across Africa.

The pace of regional integration on the continent is uneven. Within the
eight regional economic communities, protocols and programmes are often not
harmonised. Some countries are members of more than one regional economic
community. There is also a disjuncture between the integration processes
underway in the regional economic communities and the accelerated momentum
given to the union government process. In other words, the political
integration process is not sufficiently aligned to the economic process.

Development is hampered by the low levels of intra-Africa trade and the
lack of cross-border infrastructure. Poverty and unemployment, exacerbated
by the global economic downturn, continue to undermine development. This is
compounded by food and energy insecurity, the impact of HIV and Aids,
malaria and tuberculosis and low levels of education.

The Pan-African Parliament similarly faces challenges around its
institutional and financial architecture. These challenges are not unique
to a structure of this magnitude that is still in its infancy. There is a
need to improve the working relationship between the African Union and the
Pan-African Parliament. Since the election of the new Bureau of the
Parliament, the relations are on the mend.

Another challenge is the absence of terms of reference to guide the review
of the protocol establishing the Parliament. These are important for
guiding the transformation of the institution from an advisory body to a
legislative structure elected by universal adult suffrage. Since the
African Union is yet to make a final determination on this matter, it is
difficult for the Parliament to chart its way forward. The Parliament’s
lack of enforcement powers, its inability to ensure that its
recommendations and resolutions are binding, reduces its capacity to
contribute to peace, development, democracy and economic growth.

Despite these challenges, the organs of the African Union continue to play
a critical role in advancing the renewal of the African continent. Much
progress has been made since their establishment in forging African unity
and developing a common vision for a peaceful, stable and prosperous
continent.

As South Africa, we must undertake to work with our fellow Africans to
overcome these challenges and ensure that the African Union and Pan-African
Parliament realise the expectations of the people of this continent. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs F HAJAIG: Speaker, Comrade President, thank you for a comprehensive
reply. In keeping with our policy to promote the African Renaissance and
the African Agenda, we need to take into account the devastating and
debilitating effect of conflict in Africa, as you have pointed out. There
cannot be development, economic growth and the eradication of poverty
without peace, security, stability and justice in a human rights culture.

The organs of the African Union are still at fledgling level. Some have not
as yet been established, for example, the full operation of the continental
early warning system in order to avert possible conflict situations.
Another example is the fact that we haven’t as yet managed to get the
African Court of Justice functioning.

For the rule of law, good governance, promotion of democracy ...
[Interjections.] The question is: Can we as South Africa ...
[Interjections.] [Time expired.]

The SPEAKER: Hon President, if you want to you can answer that unasked
question. [Laughter.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, it would be difficult to answer an
unasked question because I can just give any answer. I think there will be
difficulties. Thank you.

Mr S MOKGALAPA: Speaker, Mr President, if we are committed to strengthening
peace, security and promoting democracy in Africa, then why is it that we
sold more than R64 million worth of category A conventional weapons, which
are described as major conventional implements of war, to Sudan in the 2008-
09 financial year? I thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, well, firstly, this was in the 2008-
09 financial year. I’m sure the hon member knows that I was not part of
that decision. How do I then answer the question? [Interjections.] No, I am
starting at a point that the hon member should appreciate.

Secondly, there are relations between countries with regard to the sale of
weapons. The only thing that can stop the sale of weapons and that can be
criticised is when the sale violates international law or the United
Nation’s rules about the selling of arms. Part of the reason why I started
where I did start is that I do not know what the conditions and the details
of that sale were. But I never heard that South Africa was debarred from
selling arms in Sudan. There may be other issues which I might not be aware
of. The question would be more legitimate if South Africa had violated
rules or laws by so doing. Thank you.

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Somlomo, Mongameli, Sekela Mongameli, neNdlu ehloniphekile,
uMongameli ukhulume ngokuthi nePhalamende laseAfrika alinawo amandla.
Wakhuluma nokuthi Umkhandlu Wezokuphepha nawo usuzame konke ukuthi lamazwe
alapha e-Afrika akwazi ukuthobela umthetho.

Imibuzo yami mibili Mongameli: Okokuqala, kufuneka kwenziwe njani uma
kunjalo; okwesibili, kwenziwa yini ngoba kwavunyelwana kuqalwa i-AU ukuthi
kube khona ibutho elizokwazi ukuhlanganisa la mazwe ase-Afrika wonke;
okwesithathu, kwahamba kwagcinaphi lokho Mongameli? Uma ungakwazi ukubuze
kulo okululekayo khona ezokululeka kahle. [Uhleko.] (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Speaker, President, Deputy President, and this august
House, the President spoke about the fact that even the Pan-African
Parliament does not have power. He also said that the UN Security Council
has also tried everything so that these countries in Africa should abide by
the law.

I have two questions, President: Firstly, how can it be done, if it is like
that? Secondly, what is the cause, because it was agreed at the inception
of the AU that there should be a peacekeeping force that would cover all
these countries in Africa?  Thirdly, how far did that go, President? If you
don’t know, ask your adviser to advise you. [Laughter.]]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, this is just to remind you that we are
asking supplementary questions and not questions. There should be only one
question per person.

UMONGAMELI WERIPHABHULIKHI YASENINGIZIMU AFRIKA: Somlomo, lungu
elihloniphekile leNdlu yeSishayamthetho Kazwelonke, Gatsheni, sonke
njengamalungu akule Ndlu siyingxenye yaleNdlu yeSishayamthetho sezwekazi
lase-Afrika. Nathi sinelungelo lokuba sibe neqhaza esilibambayo
ekwenzeleleni ukuthi lokho okwathathwa njengesinqumo kwenzeke njengoba
wazi. Ngiyethemba ukuthi amalungu aleNdlu angamalungu aleliya phalamende
ayazi ukuthi izinto zihamba kancane kangakanani maqondana nezindaba ezifana
naleyo.

Luyaxoxwa udaba njengoba ngishilo, le Ndlu yeSishayamthetho kade
kungeyokuthi iyacebisa nje kuphela, kodwa iyashintsha manje ukuthi ibe
yiSishayamthetho, isizokwazi ukushaya imithetho. Kusho ukuthi amandla
iyawathola manje ngoba sekufikiwe kuleso sinqumo, isizokwazi ukuthi ibe
namandla aphelele okukwazi ukushaya umthetho ngendlela okufanele ngayo,
ngokuhambisana nokuthi isishayamthetho sezwekazi lase-Afrika akusona
isishayamthetho esinjengesishayamthetho sezwe, uyoba khona lowo mehluko.
Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, hon member of the National
Assembly, Gatsheni, all of us as members of this House, we are part of this
Pan-African Parliament. We also have a right to lend a hand in making sure
that the decisions taken are implemented, as you know. I hope that the
Members of this House, who are members of that parliament, know how slow
things are, concerning matters like that one.

This matter is being discussed as I have already said - this Pan-African
Parliament was established to give advice only, but now it is changing from
being an advisory Parliament, to one which will be able to pass
legislation. This means that it is gaining power because that decision has
been reached. It will be able to have complete power in order to pass
legislation in the most befitting manner, which will be that of the Pan-
African Parliament and not that of the National Assembly; that will be the
difference. Thank you.]

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Speaker, hon President, can you assure this House that
government is still fully committed to using instruments like the Peer
Review Mechanism, Nepad and other relevant instruments that the government
of the Republic of South Africa adopted in the past as instruments that can
deal with some of the challenges that are referred to in the question, such
as matters relating to peace, development and growth within the continent?
I thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, I assure the House of that.
[Applause.]

   Government policy towards political and economic stability in Zimbabwe

11.  The Leader of the Opposition (DA) asked the President of the Republic:

     (1)   Whether the Government has a different policy towards the
         political and economic stability in Zimbabwe as compared to the
         quiet diplomacy of the previous government; if not, what is the
         position in this regard; if so, what are the relevant details;


       2) whether he has been informed of a certain document (details
          furnished) that was submitted to his office on 23 October 2009;
          if not, what is the position in this regard; if so,


       3) whether the Government will consider implementing the proposals
          contained therein; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
          details?                               N02638E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, South Africa’s approach to the
political and economic challenges facing Zimbabwe is premised on the
sovereign right of the people of Zimbabwe to determine their own future.
Its approach is guided by the common values and objectives of the Southern
African Development Community, to which both countries belong.

Our response needs to be located within the positions adopted by
multilateral institutions such as SADC and the African Union. As is
commonly known, SADC has been engaged with the parties in Zimbabwe in
pursuit of a solution. Under the auspices of SADC, the main political
parties to the political dialogue concluded and signed the Global Political
Agreement which in turn formed the basis for the formation of the inclusive
government in Zimbabwe. As part of SADC, we have consistently worked
towards ensuring that all of the terms and conditions of the Global
Political Agreement, GPA, are implemented by all parties.

As the chairperson of SADC, from August 2008 to September 2009, South
Africa played a central role in facilitating the current agreement. There
have been some notable achievements since the inception of the agreement,
including the establishment of an inclusive government, an improved
political environment and progress towards economic recovery. Where
obstacles have been identified, we have wasted no time in interacting with
all role-players, particularly the Zimbabwean protagonists, to impress upon
them, both publicly and in private discussions, to remain true to the
commitments contained in the GPA.

To this end, South Africa participated in the Summit of the Troika of the
Organ on Politics, Defence and Security Co-operation, which met in
Mozambique on 5 November 2009. The summit decided that the three political
parties, signatories to the GPA, should engage in dialogue with immediate
effect, within 15 days and not beyond 30 days. This dialogue should include
all the outstanding issues emanating from the implementation of the GPA and
SADC communiqué of 27 January 2009.

The summit confirmed South Africa as the facilitator on behalf of SADC and
charged it to remain seized with the developments on the implementation of
the GPA. We are required to evaluate progress and to report back to the
chairperson of the Organ on Politics, Defence and Security Co-operation.
South Africa will, therefore, be engaging with the parties in Zimbabwe, in
the coming days and weeks, to assist them to resolve all outstanding
matters within the deadlines to which they have all agreed.

The difficulties experienced in fully implementing the GPA should not cause
us to abandon this agreement, as some have proposed. The progress that has
been made should, instead, encourage us to work harder to resolve the few
outstanding issues. The contents of the document referred to in paragraph
two of the question are being studied and will be accorded the necessary
consideration.

It is, nevertheless, important to reiterate the point of principle, that
the people of Zimbabwe have a sovereign right to determine their own
future. Our role, as South Africa and the broader international community,
is to provide whatever assistance we can to ensure the resolution of the
challenges they face. South Africa is fully supportive of the Global
Political Agreement and is committed to the decisions that SADC has taken
on this matter. I thank you.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Speaker, hon President, thank you very much
for your response, and noting that Zimbabwe, in exercising their sovereign
rights, established a Global Political Agreement and that South Africa
respects that, and that Robert Mugabe seems to respect it in the breach,
and that there has been an undertaking that they will revisit the GPA
within 15 days and not longer than 30 days; if, when you visit Zimbabwe in
15 days’ time, you find that there’s ongoing disregard of the GPA and
ongoing persecution of MDC, Movement for Democratic Change, members and
ongoing land grabs under Zanu PF, will you ask SADC to take punitive action
against Zimbabwe or will you ask that fresh elections be held, having
considered that the MDC actually won the elections and they have the
majority support in Zimbabwe?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, I’m sure that the hon member is
aware that we cannot go to a country and dictate - tell them what to do and
what not to do. Our function, as decided by the SADC organ, is to help and
indeed evaluate. And if, in the evaluation, we think that the parties have
not done what was asked, we’ll certainly engage the parties and encourage
them to do so.

Of course, our function is to report back to SADC whatever we have found
out and SADC will probably then take whatever decision. We cannot go there
and tell them what to do and what not to do. I don’t think that would be
facilitating. Our function is to help evaluate if there are difficulties,
and, if there are any, help them overcome those difficulties. If it does
not work, then we report back to those who had sent us to Zimbabwe, and I’m
sure SADC will then take the appropriate steps. [Applause.]

Mr T W NXESI: Hon Speaker, the President has indeed responded to the
question by making reference to the meeting of the troika held in Maputo
and the mechanisms that have been put in place in dealing with that.

What I just want to check with the President is whether or not South
Africa, and even SADC, has the right to undermine the sovereignty of
Zimbabwe, as suggested by the opposition? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, no, South Africa has no such
right. There’s no country that has a right to undermine the sovereignty of
any other country. It’s unheard of; it shouldn’t happen.

Mr T BOTHA: Speaker, hon President, given that the solving of the
Zimbabwean question is critical to the growth and stability of the South
African economy, is the hon President optimistic about the future of the
Government of National Unity in Zimbabwe? If so, what does he base that
optimism on? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, I believe that the agreement
will be implemented. Firstly, you know that there was no agreement before;
the situation was very serious in Zimbabwe after the elections. In fact, no
one thought that these two parties could have an agreement. They engaged in
interaction and negotiations and finally emerged with an agreement.

Initially, the agreement was very difficult to implement. Then there was a
SADC summit which had agreed to specific matters, which then called for
them to implement the agreement; and they have implemented it.

A number of issues have been covered in the agreement, but there are others
that have not. Some agreements have already been reached and some decisions
are in the process of being implemented. However, that is not a reason for
me not to believe that the agreement will succeed.

The other point is that there is no alternative, for now. That agreement is
the only route, so far, that the Zimbabweans have to solve their problems,
and I think our function is to help them. They work together and respect
one another in their operations. Even when the MDC said that they were
disengaging from the government of national unity, they did not say “We are
pulling out”. I think that indicates the commitment of that party, which
they have stated. I think the fact that it’s now six months later, shows
that they are trying their level best.

They were part of the summit in Maputo and again they committed themselves
to the agreement. I think there is no reason for one to believe that they
cannot succeed. Thank you.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Mr Speaker, the President said that there is notable
improvement in Zimbabwe; I don’t see that. What I see in Zimbabwe is hunger
and a person who lost an election and rules as a dictator, whose people are
leaving that country in their millions and coming to South Africa to live
here, causing huge problems for us.

I think all the negotiations are a waste of time and the person who laughs
last is Mugabe. I think the time has come for the President of this country
to protect South Africa from the influence of that dictator and take steps
for a general election to be held there, so that the true representatives
of Zimbabwe can rule and so that Zimbabweans can go back to Zimbabwe, so
that we can have peace here. Mugabe must go! [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, the hon member says that he
does not see progress in Zimbabwe. Certainly, he has never been to
Zimbabwe, so he can’t have seen it. I have been to Bulawayo and I have been
to Harare in Zimbabwe, invited to an agricultural show there, and there is
certainly a marked difference. Even the delegation that came from the EU,
which travelled to Zimbabwe from South Africa, admitted that there is
progress in that country, because they went to Zimbabwe and they saw it.
The hon member has never been to Zimbabwe; that’s why he hasn’t seen it. So
I don’t blame him. Thank you.

  Position regarding publication of records of complaints received through
                            Presidential Hotline

12.  Rev H M Dandala (Cope) asked the President of the Republic:

     (1)   Whether he will publish the records of complaints received
         through the Presidential Hotline; if not, why not; if so, what are
         the relevant details;


     (2)   whether any person has been investigated as a result of the
         Presidential Hotline; if not, why not; if so, what are the
         relevant details?                                          NO2640E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, the Presidential Hotline was
established as part of an enhanced public liaison capacity within the
Presidency. Its objective is to provide redress for members of the public
who have not been adequately assisted by the structures and processes of
government, as well as for those who are too far from where government
centres or offices are found.

The hotline is an important part of our effort to improve the
accessibility, responsiveness and transparency of government. We will
therefore be publishing, on a regular basis, reports on the complaints
received through the hotline. We will also indicate what responses or
actions have been taken to address the matters raised.

I have requested the public liaison unit in the Presidency to develop a
standard reporting format that will enable us to make public a detailed
report on the matters handled by the Presidential Hotline. This will assist
us in understanding the nature and extent of the challenges our people face
and, importantly, also in monitoring how these issues are being attended to
by government departments. We will then be able to check progress over
time.

We are committed to making available as much relevant information as
possible, without compromising confidentiality and the privacy of any
callers or other individuals. The hotline has received a number of
corruption-related allegations. These have been forwarded to the relevant
departments or entities affected.

However, owing to the sensitive nature of the information and the fact that
these are still at the stage of being allegations, divulging details could
compromise any subsequent investigation that may follow. It could also
prejudice the rights of those against whom allegations have been made. I
thank you.

Rev H M DANDALA: Hon Speaker, I’d like to commend the President on the
establishment of the Presidential Hotline and also just indicate that Cope
does support the money that has been voted to strengthen the Presidency’s
initiative on this matter.

I also appreciate the fact that you are not only publishing the complaints,
but also the action taken. I think that is the most critical part, as we
saw in the case of Home Affairs recently, when they published the action
that was taken in the Pinetown case. I’d like to commend you on that, sir.
[Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, I really appreciate the
comments by the hon member. I think that is what we need as we deal with
matters in the country; that even if people are in opposition, their
appreciation of what is right is noted. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr N SINGH: Hon Speaker, I think hon C T Msimang’s button was pressed in
error, so we can take one more question.

Hon President, thank you very much for your response. Given the fact that
so many complaints were lodged with your Office, and were received, does it
not indicate that the departments against which many of these complaints
were lodged are not living up to the adage of “government for the people by
the people”? Does it not indicate that they, themselves, should set up
hotlines to deal with some of these problems that have been brought to the
attention of the President?

I say this, Mr President, because, while the Presidency has the role of
monitoring and evaluation, it shouldn’t become the switchboard of
government, because government departments themselves need to ensure that
they attend to complaints that people lodge. Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, yes, departments do have their
own liaison units. However, we believed that it was important to set up
this hotline in addition to those that were already there. This was partly
to put together those kinds of concerns and complaints.

One of the realities is that if departments are at fault and people
complain about them, at times you might not get everything fixed. I was
very interested to know in greater detail what is happening. Other people
might not have an opportunity to get through to departments. I’m not
certain, for example, the extent to which departments have publicised the
kind of numbers that people must call.

Furthermore, departments also deal with different aspects. I think having a
number that is known nationally adds value to what the departments are
doing. It is also worth noting that if you phone the Presidency, you can
reach any department. You are not subjected to one specific line, so much
so that if you don’t get through, you have a problem.

I think the concerns and complaints that have been coming through indicate
the importance of this hotline. I’m sure you will recall that on the first
day, a lady from the Eastern Cape raised the issue that she could not get
money due to her following the death of her husband and the fact that she
was being sent from pillar to post by people who wanted the money for
themselves. Once the issue was raised, we were able, as the Presidency, to
trace the money to the Eastern Cape, and now she has received her money. If
she had called any department – in fact, she had done so and she was
frustrated.

There are many such cases. For example, in one province there is a report
that will be coming out soon indicating that, following the complaints and
concerns raised, further investigations were carried out and it was
discovered that things were even worse than was suggested in the
complaints. Government had to take action.

So, I think that these measures complement each other. They are neither a
waste of time nor are they something unnecessary. I think the hotline adds
value to what departments are doing. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J J MCGLUWA: Mr President, the ID remains concerned that the hotline, in
its current form, offers no hope to the rural, poor communities that bear
the brunt of government’s poor service delivery record.

The hotline only benefits those in urban areas because it is only toll-free
from a landline. Are we waiting for the hon Patricia de Lille to bring down
cellphone rates first, or can you immediately give our rural people the
same rights to contact your Office? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, the hon member, unfortunately,
is not informed: People from the rural areas are connecting. The lady that
I just mentioned as an example comes from the area of Flagstaff, which is a
rural area. They are, in fact, calling in and they are connecting.

I’m sure that the liaison people could give you some information in this
regard. So, that statement is not accurate; they are connecting. Thank you.

Ms A MDA: Hon speaker, hon President, whilst Cope eagerly welcomed the
hotline initiative, can we at least get an assurance that when the people
of South Africa help the Office of the Presidency in rooting out corruption
and any act that sullies the work of government, their safety will be
guaranteed so that this good work of the government can continue? Thank
you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, certainly, the liaison unit is
handling that; we do not breach confidentiality when it comes to
information that implicates other people. We are very careful that we do
not do that, so we protect the confidentiality of information supplied and
deal with the issues. The reason people have the confidence to call this
line is because they know that it is handled with great care. So, I agree
with you, that concern is appreciated and we do guarantee confidentiality.
Thank you. [Applause.]

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                       PRECEDENCE TO ORDER OF THE DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, this session of Parliament is not over yet! There
is a precedence motion. I now recognise the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, hon President, I move:

   That precedence be given to Order No 1 on the Order Paper.

Agreed to.

  CONSIDERATION OF CANDIDATE NOMINATED FOR APPOINTMENT AS INSPECTOR-GENERAL
                          OF INTELLIGENCE SERVICES

Mr C V BURGESS: Mr Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President, hon
members, the term of the present Inspector-General of Intelligence comes to
an end on 31 December 2009. Section 210 of the Constitution, read with
section 71 of the Intelligence Oversight Act, Act 40 of 1994, provides for
the appointment of an Inspector-General of Intelligence to allow for the
civilian monitoring of the activities of the intelligence services,
including the intelligence division of the SA National Defence Force and
the Police Service.
The Inspector-General of Intelligence is appointed by the President, on
approval of a resolution adopted by the National Assembly. Some of the
functions of the Inspector-General are: To monitor compliance by the
intelligence community with the Constitution of the country, applicable
laws, and relevant policies on intelligence and counter-intelligence; and
to review the intelligence and counter-intelligence activities of the
intelligence services.

The Inspector-General can also be designated functions by the President and
the various Ministers concerned. The Inspector-General can also receive and
investigate complaints from members of the public and members of the
intelligence services on any alleged maladministration, abuse of power, or
transgressions of the Constitution, laws and policies. The Inspector-
General also reports to the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence on the
work that he does.

The oversight Act specifically provides that the Inspector-General must be
a fit and proper person with the necessary knowledge in intelligence, and
he or she must serve impartially and independently, and perform his or her
functions in good faith and without fear or favour, bias or prejudice.

The vacancy was extensively advertised and the Joint Standing Committee on
Intelligence received 74 applications. Five candidates were eventually
shortlisted, to be interviewed by the committee. On Tuesday, 10 November
2009, the committee interviewed five candidates in an open session.
Finally, after a short deliberation, the committee unanimously agreed to
recommend to this House Her Excellency Adv Faith Doreen Radebe for
appointment to the position of Inspector-General of Intelligence.

Adv Faith Doreen Radebe was born in February 1952. She is married and has
two children. She was admitted as an advocate of the High Court of South
Africa in 1996. She has an LLB degree, and also holds a Masters degree in
law, which she obtained in 1994 from Bond University in Australia. She has
also obtained several certificates in various fields of training, including
project management and leadership.

For the period 1995 to 1996 she worked as a legal adviser in the SA Secret
Services. From 1999 to 2005 she worked within the intelligence community,
inter alia for the Intelligence Services Council, for the National
Intelligence Co-ordinating Committee, Nicoc, and the National Intelligence
Agency, NIA. In 2005 Adv Radebe was appointed High Commissioner to the
Caribbean Community, a position which she currently still holds.

The committee has found Her Excellency Adv Faith Doreen Radebe to be a fit
and proper person to fill the vacancy and accordingly recommends her to be
considered by the House for appointment by the President as Inspector-
General of Intelligence.
I wish to pass on a special word of thanks to the outgoing Inspector-
General, Mr Zolile Ngcakani, for the work he has done. The Joint Standing
Committee on Intelligence and I wish him well in his future endeavours. I
also wish to thank all the staff who assisted in the process, and address a
special word of thanks to all those hon members who serve on the Joint
Standing Committee on Intelligence for their dedication and support
throughout this process. I thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

Question put: That the nomination of Adv F D Radebe for appointment as
Inspector-General of Intelligence Services be approved.

AYES - 234: Abram, S; Adams, P E; Ainslie, A R; Baloyi, M R; Bam-Mugwanya,
V; Bapela, K O; Bhengu, P; Bikani, F C; Blaai, B C; Bogopane-Zulu, H I;
Bonhomme, T J; Borman, G M; Boshigo, D F; Bosman, L L; Botha, Y R; Burgess,
C V; Carrim, Y I; Cebekhulu, R N; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan, F I;
Coetzee, T W; Coleman, E M; Cronin, J P; Davidson, I O; Diale, L N;
Ditshetelo, I C; Dlamini, B O; Dlamini-Zuma, N C; Dlulane, B N; Doidge, G Q
M; Doman, W P; Dubazana, Z S; Dube, M C; Dudley, C; Dunjwa, M L; Farisani,
T S; Figlan, A M; Fihla, N B; Fransman, M L; Fubbs, J L; Gasebonwe, T M A;
Gcwabaza, N E; Gelderblom, J P; George, D T; George, M E; Gigaba, K M N;
Gina, N; Godongwana, E; Gololo, C L; Gona, M F; Greyling, L W; Gumede, D M;
Gungubele, M; Hanekom, D A; Hangana, N E; Hogan, B A; Huang, S-B; Jeffery,
J H; Johnson, M; Kalyan, S V; Kekane, C D; Kenye, T E; Kholwane, S E;
Khumalo, F E; Kilian, J D; Kloppers-Lourens, J C; Kohler-Barnard, D;
Komphela, B M; Kopane, S P; Krumbock, G R; Kubayi, M T; Landers, L T;
Lebenya-Ntanzi, S P; Lekgetho, G; Lishivha, T E; Lorimer, J R B; Luthuli, A
N; Luyenge, Z; Maake, J J; Mabasa, X; MacKenzie, G P D; Madasa, Z L;
Mafolo, M V; Magama, H T; Magazi, M N; Magwanishe, G ; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G
L; Makasi, X C; Makhubela-Mashele, L S; Makhubele, Z S; Malgas, H H;
Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, J M; Manana, M C; Mandela, Z M D; Manganye, J;
Mangena, M S; Manuel, T A; Marais, S J F; Martins, B A D; Mashishi, A C;
Masutha, T M; Mathebe, D H; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matladi, M N ;
Matshoba, J M; Maunye, M M; Mavunda, D W; Mayende-Sibiya, N A; Maynier, D
J; Mazibuko, L D; Mbalula, F A; Mbili, M E; Mdaka, M N; Mdakane, M R;
Mdladlana, M M S; Mentor, M P; Mjobo, L N; Mkhize, H B; Mkhize, L N; Mmusi,
S G; Mnguni, P B; Mnisi, N A; Mnqasela, M; Mocumi, P A; Mohale, M C;
Molebatsi, M A; Moloi-Moropa, J C; Morgan, G R; Morutoa, M R; Motlanthe, K
P; Motshekga, M S; Mpontshane, A M; Msimang, C T; Mthethwa, E M; Mtshali,
E; Mufamadi, T A; Mushwana, F F; Nchabeleng, M E; Ndabandaba, L B G;
Ndabeni, S T; Ndebele, J S; Ndlovu, V B; Nene, N M; Ngcengwane, N D;
Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S J;
Njobe, M A A; Nkwinti, G E; November, N T; Ntapane, S Z; Ntuli, Z C; Nxesi,
T W; Nxumalo, M D; Nyama, M M A; Nyanda, M F; Nyanda, S; Nyekemba, E;
Nzimande, B E; Oliphant, G G; Oliphant, M N; Oosthuizen, G C; Pandor, G N
M; Petersen-Maduna, P; Poho, P D; Pretorius, P J C; Pule, D D; Rabie, P J;
Rabotapi, M W; Radebe, B A; Radebe, J T; Rantsolase, M A; Robinson, D;
Rwexana, S P; Schafer, D A; Schmidt, J; Schneemann, G D; Sefularo, M;
Segale-Diswai, M J; Selau, G J; Selfe, J; Shabangu, S; Shiceka, S; Shinn, M
R; Sibanyoni, J B; Sisulu, M V; Sithole, S C N; Sizani, P S; Skosana, J J;
Smith, P F; Smith, V G; Smuts, M; Snell, G T; Sogoni, E M; Sosibo, J E;
Sotyu, M M; Steele, M H; Stofile, M A; Suka, L; Sulliman, E M; Sunduza, T
B; Surty, M E; Swart, M; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tlake, M F; Tobias, T V;
Trollip, R A P; Tsebe, S R; Tseke, G K; Tsenoli, S L; Tshivhase, T J;
Tshwete, P; Tsotetsi, D R; Turok, B ; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van Dalen, P;
Van der Merwe, J H; Van der Merwe, S C; Van der Walt, D; Van der
Westhuizen, A P; Van Dyk, S M; Van Wyk, A; Vukuza-Linda, N Y; Wenger, M;
Williams, A J; Xaba, P P; Yengeni, L E.

The two-thirds majority required in terms of section 7(1) of the
Intelligence Services Oversight Act, 1994 (Act No 40 of 1994), not being
obtained, decision of question postponed.

   DRAFT NOTICES AND SCHEDULES REGARDING DETERMINATION OF REMUNERATION OF
                           JUDGES AND MAGISTRATES

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, on notices of motion I have to announce
that I have received a draft notice and schedule from the President of the
Republic, regarding the determination of remuneration of Constitutional
Court judges and judges, as well as a draft notice and schedule regarding
the determination of remuneration of magistrates. The draft notices and
schedules have been sent to parties. I now recognise the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party.

    TOTAL REMUNERATION PACKAGE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL COURT JUDGES AND JUDGES

                             (Draft Resolution)

   The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move without
   notice:


   That the House, in terms of section 2 of the Judges’ Remuneration and
   Conditions of Employment Act, 2001 (Act No 47 of 2001), approves the
   draft notice and schedule received from the President of the Republic on
   12 November 2009, determining the total remuneration of Constitutional
   Court Judges and Judges with effect from 1 April 2009.

Agreed to.

                 TOTAL REMUNERATION PACKAGE FOR MAGISTRATES

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF  THE  MAJORITY  PARTY:  Deputy  Speaker,  I  move  without
notice:
   That the House, in terms of section 12 of the Magistrates Act, 1993  (Act
   No 90 of 1993), approves the draft notice and schedule received from  the
   President of the Republic on 12  November  2009,  determining  the  total
   remuneration of Magistrates with effect from 1 April 2009.

Agreed to.

  TOTAL REMUNERATION PACKAGE FOR PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF  THE  MAJORITY  PARTY:  Deputy  Speaker,  I  move  without
notice:

   That the House –

     1) in terms of section 2(1)  of  the  Remuneration  of  Public  Office
        Bearers Act, 1998 (Act No 20 of 1998), and having due regard to the
        criteria listed in that  subsection,  determines  the  remuneration
        payable to the President of the Republic of  South  Africa  at  two
        million two hundred and  fifty  four  thousand  seven  hundred  and
        thirty rand (R2 254 730,00) per annum, with  effect  from  1  April
        2009; and

     2) resolves that the total remuneration package mentioned above  shall
        include the following elements:

        (a)    a basic salary component equal to 60 per cent of  the  total
              package, which constitutes the pensionable salary;


        (b)    an amount of one hundred  and  twenty  thousand  rand  (R120
              000,00) per annum,  which  is  an  amount  to  which  section
              8(1)(d) of the Income Tax Act, 1962, applies; and


        (c)    a flexible portion for the remaining  amount  of  the  total
              remuneration.


Agreed to.

     APPOINTMENT OF CANDIDATES TO SOUTH AFRICAN HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF  THE  MAJORITY  PARTY:  Deputy  Speaker,  I  move  without
notice:

   That the House –


      1) notes that the President has appointed five of the six  candidates
         recommended by the National Assembly for the South  African  Human
         Rights Commission, namely: Adv B J Malatji, Ms L Mokate, Adv  L  M
         Mushwana, Ms J Love and Dr T Titus;


      2) further notes that the President has  not  appointed  Adv  L  K  B
         Mpumlwana in order to allow the National Assembly  an  opportunity
         to reconsider his nomination;

      3) amends its resolution  of  22  September  2009,  by  omitting  the
         nomination of Adv Mpumlwana pending its reconsideration; and

      4) refers the matter of the nomination to the Portfolio Committee  on
         Justice and Constitutional Development for  further  consideration
         and report.


Agreed to.

                   COMMEMORATION OF DEATH OF YASSER ARAFAT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF  THE  MAJORITY  PARTY:  Deputy  Speaker,  I  move  without
notice:

   That the House –


     1)  notes  that  yesterday,  11  November  2009,  marked   the   fifth
        anniversary of the passing away of the  great  Palestinian  leader,
        the late chairman Yasser Arafat;


     2) further notes that 29 November was declared by the  United  Nations
        General Assembly  as  the  International  Day  of  Solidarity  with
        Palestinian People in 1977;


     3) believes that only a just solution that  takes  into  consideration
        the strengthening of a sovereign, independent Palestinian state, co-
        existing alongside Israel will help to bring peace  to  the  region
        and put an  end  to  the  conflict  between  the  Palestinians  and
        Israelis;

     4) acknowledges the government’s resolve  to  encourage  an  inclusive
        peaceful process leading to a  negotiated  settlement  between  the
        parties concerned; and

     5) welcomes the efforts aimed at engaging all parties  in  Israel  and
        Palestine to find an amicable resolution  to  the  solving  of  the
        Palestinian question and peace in the Middle  East,  and  therefore
        the fulfilment of the aspirations and dreams of the late leader  of
        the  Palestinian  people,  Yasser  Arafat:  A  dream  to  which  he
        dedicated his entire life.

Agreed to.

                   INTERNATIONAL DAY FOR DISABLED PERSONS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –


     1) notes that  3  December  is  the  International  Day  for  Disabled
        Persons;


     2) further notes that  the  annual  observance  of  the  day  aims  to
        increase understanding  and  awareness  of  disability  issues  and
        trends, and to mobilise support for practical action at all  levels
        by, with and for persons with disabilities;


     3) recognises the  oftentimes  unnecessarily  difficult  circumstances
        these citizens are faced with due  to  a  lack  of  compassion  and
        willingness to accommodate their needs in our country; and


     4) calls on all South Africans, and especially those in  positions  of
        power, to do more to assist persons with disabilities and to ensure
        that whatever actions  they  undertake  do  not  add  to  create  a
        disabling environment for anyone.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: If there are no objections, I put the motion ...

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Deputy Speaker, I don’t think we
can accept the motion with that clause or section that says we apologise to
disabled people. I think, given that it is a motion that the House is being
asked to adopt, it perhaps should be in a more positive vein in saying that
we undertake to do more to respond to the needs of persons with
disabilities, rather than apologising, because I am not sure what the basis
of the apology is; and given that there isn’t an agreement on a basis
without detracting from the need to act, I do think given the House
adopting such an important resolution, it should say that we undertake to
strengthen our actions in this regard rather than apologising.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Alright, with that ...

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Can I help you, Madam Deputy Speaker?
Madam Deputy Speaker, I am happy to excise clause 3, which will help the
hon Minister.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we then agree to the motion as amended? Are there
any further motions without notice?

Motion, as amended agreed to.

                            DAY OF RECONCILIATION

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF  THE  MAJORITY  PARTY:  Deputy  Speaker,  I  move  without
notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes that 16 December is the Day of Reconciliation,  a  day  which
        celebrates the common determination of all our people  to  overcome
        the forces of prejudice, conflict and division;

     2) remembers that on this day many South Africans  lost  their  lives,
        suffered and sacrificed for a  non-racial,  non-sexist,  democratic
        and prosperous South Africa in which the value of every citizen  is
        measured by their common humanity;

     3) congratulates the nation’s people for working hard over  the  years
        in strengthening democracy, deepening and entrenching values  of  a
        caring society, such as human and social solidarity, without regard
        to race, class and gender; and

     4)  calls  on  all  South  Africans  to  celebrate   the   outstanding
        achievements of our young democracy, as we commit ourselves to work
        with renewed vigour and determination to  improve  the  quality  of
        life of all the people of the nation, both black and white.


Agreed to.

                               WORLD AIDS DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF  THE  MAJORITY  PARTY:  Deputy  Speaker,  I  move  without
notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes that 1 December is regarded as World Aids Day and that World
        Aids Day is an important reminder to people that HIV/Aids has not
        gone away;


     2) further notes that the theme for World Aids Day 2009 is “Universal
        Access and Human Rights”, meaning that the recognition of universal
        access to HIV/Aids prevention, treatment and care, are fundamental
        human rights;

     3) believes that World Aids Day provides an opportunity for all of us
        to take action and ensure that human rights are protected and
        global targets for HIV/Aids prevention, treatment and care are met;

     4) commits itself to the reduction of the rate of new infections by 50
        percent, and the extension of the antiretroviral programme to 80
        percent of those who need it, both by 2011; and

     5) urges people to work harder with renewed focus and move with
        urgency and purpose to confront this enormous challenge as we
        approach 1 December 2009.

Agreed to.

                     TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF RULE 253(1)

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move:

   That the House suspends Rule 253(1), which provides inter alia  that  the
   debate on the Second Reading of a Bill may not commence before  at  least
   three working days have elapsed since the committee’s report was  tabled,
   for the purposes of conducting the Second Reading  debate  today  on  the
   Repeal  of  Black  Administration  Act  and  Amendment  of  Certain  Laws
   Amendment Bill [B 15 – 2009].

Mr W P DOMAN: Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: On the Order Paper,
Orders two and three are also two Bills that we are going to discuss later
this afternoon, and we need the same motion for those two Bills. If my
point of order is correct - because we only completed those two Bills on
traditional leaders yesterday - we can just add this to the resolution,
since we don’t want to come back tomorrow because we think that things were
not done properly. If it is not correct or there is a motion at a later
stage, of course then we can accept it.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, I am told that the Rule does not necessary
apply, because on those orders - two and three - we are only dealing with
the amendments from the NCOP. So, that Rule doesn’t apply.

Mr W P DOMAN: Deputy Speaker, with all due respect, I disagree. Those Bills
lapsed last year, and they were introduced anew, first in the NCOP and now
they have come to us, so we dealt with them as two totally new Bills.
Perhaps that is the interpretation that was given, but I beg to differ with
that.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, the advice that I am getting from the Table
is that the Second Reading was completed. The Rule definitely does not
apply. Can you maybe check your facts with them so that we don’t delay the
House?

Mr W P DOMAN: I accept it. If that is a ruling, we want order and that
things go through, but in the new Parliament we haven’t yet dealt with
these Bills, so I disagree, but I respect the ruling.

Agreed to.

   EXTENSION OF DEADLINE BY WHICH AD HOC COMMITTEE TO CONDUCT CO-ORDINATED
                 OVERSIGHT ON SERVICE DELIVERY HAS TO REPORT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move:

   That the House, notwithstanding its resolution adopted  on  22  September
   2009, extends the deadline by which the Ad Hoc Committee to  conduct  co-
   ordinated  Oversight  on  Service  Delivery  under  the  Theme:  “Working
   together to ensure the delivery of quality service to  communities’’  has
   to report, to 26 February 2010.


Agreed to.

                        RECENT DEVELOPMENTS AT ESKOM

                (Statement by Minister of Public Enterprise)

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to
thank the House for the opportunity to account to it as a shareholder of
Eskom.

Regrettably, the past 14 days have been a turbulent time for Eskom and the
economy, due, unfortunately, to a breakdown in the relationship between the
board and its former chief executive officer. Unfortunately, this dispute
did not remain an internal matter for the company to resolve in terms of
its own corporate governance framework, as it should have but,
disturbingly, it entered the public domain through groups with their own
political and vociferous campaign in support of one party against another.
They provided undue pressure through a never-ending stream of public
commentary that sometimes had no basis in fact or law, and only served to
inflame and exaggerate an already complex and difficult boardroom matter.
This is indeed lamentable.

As my colleague Minister Naledi Pandor commented yesterday, the boardroom
of Eskom was politicised. This has wrongly painted an exaggerated image of
a company in crisis. Yes, there was a breakdown in the critical
relationship between the board and the chief executive officer and this is
indeed a serious matter. But the fact of the matter was that Eskom and its
operations continued. Lights went on, mines were mined, factories
manufactured, the wheels of commerce and industry continued to turn, our
homes were lit and our food was cooked.
The timing of this debate was potentially damaging, as it happened at a
time when the Minister of Finance was abroad, raising funds from investors
in our parastatal. Fortunately, the damage done to Eskom’s reputation was
minimal, as investors are well-acquainted with Eskom’s performance, but
those who want to make a political crusade out of boardroom politics need
to reflect on the potentially damaging consequences for a company such as
Eskom and for the economy of South Africa. As one frustrated board person
said to me in this process, “Minister, how can it be that one person can be
so important and override completely the interests of this country and its
economy?” [Interjections.]

It is very disturbing to note that this matter also became a racial
football, targeting certain individuals who I believe have integrity and
only the best interests of the country at heart. Such a racial slur,
particularly directed at Mr Bobby Godsell, the former chair of the board,
goes against what we fought for and codified in Kliptown and is also
against the core values of our society and our Constitution, especially the
value and importance of nonracialism and building a united, nonracial and
nonsexist South Africa. I want to thank Mr Godsell for his exemplary
leadership in this moment and for his leadership in the last 15 months.

In the midst of all of this, I am grateful for the sanity and sobriety that
prevailed in important sectors of our country. Madam Deputy Speaker, let me
say thank you to Cosatu, to the ANC and to the National Union of
Mineworkers, NUM, and those people and forces in our country who chose not
to enter publicly into this fray, but to maintain their discretion in the
interests of Eskom and the country in these trying two weeks. They have
served this country well. They have also served this country well in
speaking out on principles that we all love and adhere to. I also look
forward to further constructive engagement with the trade unions,
especially NUM and the National Union of Metal Workers of South Africa,
Numsa, and Solidarity on matters relating to Eskom.

Eskom is probably the most important company and parastatal in our country.
We do not deny that Eskom has problems, but we cannot allow Eskom to be
fundamentally upset by forces trying to push a political agenda that has no
relation to the actual issues that Eskom is trying to address. [Applause.]

In this highly charged and volatile environment, I felt it wise to maintain
a prudent silence and to refrain from making public commentary, which would
only serve to heighten tensions and embroil government itself in that
debate. Instead, the Deputy Minister and I, together with the board, busied
ourselves, tirelessly trying to reach an amicable settlement. Days of long
hours and complex negotiations ensued. Our aim was to try and reach an
amicable settlement that would resolve the matter in the best interests of
Eskom and the country.

Madam Deputy Speaker, I wish to acknowledge my colleague in the House here,
the Deputy Minister, Enoch Godongwana, for his unflagging support, energy
and effort in this matter. I also wish to thank the staff at the Department
of Public Enterprises and in particular the directors-general for their
unstinting and invaluable support.

We tried to pursue options of facilitation, mediation and arbitration, even
a negotiated settlement. During this difficult period, a demand arose that
the Minister must provide “leadership”. As we were to discover, the subtext
of this demand was much more sinister. It was in actual fact a demand that
I, as Minister, override the board and confirm a person in his position as
chief executive officer, against the wishes of that board and against all
corporate governance principles. As Minister, I refused to override the
principles of corporate governance by using my political authority to
impose a person in the position of chief executive officer without the
authority of the law. The type of leadership I preferred to exercise was
rather to work indefatigably behind the scenes to resolve the matter within
the confines of good corporate governance.

At a certain stage, the President’s Office offered its assistance to break
the deadlock, and the board was approached to delay its processes in a
final attempt to resolve the matter. This intervention, I must stress, was
not taken lightly and was not done to undermine the board but rather to
lend it support to resolve the dispute. Government’s overriding concern was
the strategic importance of Eskom to the economy and to the country, and
addressing the highly charged political environment that was infusing this
debate and dispute and that was, indeed, creating the false notion that
Eskom’s operations were being compromised.

Let me say upfront, that this government is completely committed to abiding
by the principles of proper corporate governance in all of our
relationships with our state-owned enterprises, SOEs. As a shareholder, the
Articles of Association of Eskom allow me to appoint a chief executive
officer, after consultation with the board. The chief executive officer
then enters into a contract of employment with the board, which is governed
by company and labour law. Included in that contract are the terms for
termination of that employment relationship. It would have been
inappropriate and entirely illegal for a Minister to interfere in that
contractual relationship and, might I add, I am not a signatory to that
contract. The right of either party to that contract can be asserted in a
court of law, a right that this progressive government entrenched.

Madam Deputy Speaker, I am constitutionally obligated to operate within
this legal framework, one which has due regard for our country’s labour
laws and the Companies Act. As a shareholder, I am already attending to
ensuring that we align our state-owned enterprises with the King III report
and the new Companies Act, which is due to be implemented in mid-2010.

Let me stress that the integrity of a board is paramount. Boards are
appointed by government and, by law, are obligated to govern the company
with the support of senior management. The shareholder oversees the
functioning of the board, to ensure that the board and the company give
effect to the strategic intent and objectives of government.

I am now pleased to inform this House that the board has moved decisively
in the last few days, and in the interests of the company and the country,
to finally resolve this matter in the following manner: A press conference
was held earlier this afternoon, in which the board announced the measures
that are being taken. The following facts are relevant: Mr Maroga is no
longer the chief executive officer of Eskom. The search for a new chief
executive officer will now commence. [Applause.]

Mpho Makwana – you know, the very thing that I have been speaking about of
people using political agendas to drive comment on the chief executive
officers of boards is just unacceptable. [Interjections.] Mr Makwana will
act as the executive chair of Eskom until a permanent chief executive
officer is appointed, and he will be appointed by two senior managers ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, what is the point of order?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: I don’t understand the point that the hon
Minister just made. [Interjections.] All that we were doing was expressing
our opinion that corporate governance has been upheld. That is the very
point that she made.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: I find it difficult, Madam Deputy
Speaker, that you didn’t applaud when I spoke about commitment to corporate
governance. You only applauded when I said that Mr Maroga is no longer the
chief executive officer. It is required that a certain amount of dignity be
maintained in this House. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Please allow the Minister to
finish.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Furthermore, a search for a new chief
executive officer will now commence. Mr Mpho Makwana, a longstanding member
of the board and a seasoned and experienced director and manager will act
as executive chairperson of Eskom until a permanent chief executive officer
is appointed, and he will be supported by two senior managers in the
execution of the chief executive officer’s functions. He will also act as
an interim chair. In addition, the board is attending to the realignment of
board committees and their composition, as well as the necessary delegation
of executive functions.

I would like to firmly assure this House that we are on track to ensure
that Eskom and all state-owned enterprises have the capacity and support to
carry out government’s strategic intent, and that I, as shareholder,
together with the SOE management and boards, will always act within the law
and sound corporate governance principles.

Yes, Eskom is on track. The lights are on, and its most urgent priority –
the revised multi year price determination application, the electricity
tariff application, due to be submitted to the Regulator on 30 November
2009 – has and is feverishly being attended to.

Madam Deputy Speaker, if there are any concerns about governance of
parastatals in the country, let me assure everyone in the House that this
Ministry and the boards of state-owned enterprises have full authority to
govern their companies without unlawful or inappropriate interference and,
might I add, without feeling the pressures of people who make political
crusades out of board appointments or board matters. We say to the boards
of these companies, hell yes, you must govern. So let us get back to the
business of building our economy and back to the business of Eskom doing
the work that it has to do, providing energy to this country. Thank you
very much.
Dr S M VAN DYK: Adjunkspeaker, ek wil graag die Minister bedank en
gelukwens dat sy die Eskom-raad ondersteun dat mnr Maroga nie meer die hoof
uitvoerende beampte is nie.

Die belangrike rol van Eskom as die suurstof van ekonomiese ontwikkeling is
sedert die negentigs oor die hoof gesien. Die ANC-regering het die
waarskuwing van die komende krisis van die destydse Departement van
Mineraal- en Energiesake reeds in 1998 geïgnoreer. Asof dit nie genoeg was
nie, het die voormalige Minister, minister Alec Erwin, hierdie Parlement in
2006 die versekering gegee dat daar nie ’n krisis op hande is nie.

Dit is opgevolg met versekerings van mnr Maroga met sy aanstelling in 2007
dat die raad in beheer is, maar hy het vinnig sy mening verander toe Suid-
Afrika in 2008 in donkerte verval het, en toe is die skuld gepak op
steenkool wat te nat is, te lae elektrisiteitstariewe en dat onafhanklike
kragvoorsieners nie na vore tree nie. Die daaropvolgende beurtkrag en
energiebesparings in Suid-Afrika het die ekonomiese groeikoers help afdruk
na ’n verwagte 1,5% per jaar.

Benewens die agterstand in die onderhoud van kragsentrales en die feit dat
die bou van nuwe sentrales agterweë gelaat is, het die steenkoolkrisis met
betrekking tot laegehaltesteenkool en die leemte van voortgesette
verskaffing daarvan Eskom se steenkoolreserwes afgedwing en ook die
energiereserwes tot ’n laagtepunt beperk.
Wat kommerwekkend is, is dat mnr Maroga sedert 2007 oor die steenkoolkrisis
ingelig was deur die Olson-verslag, maar dat hy dit blykbaar nie met sy
raad gedeel het nie. Daarbenewens het mnr Godsell op 23 Oktober vanjaar –
’n paar dae terug – ’n memorandum geskryf aan Eskom se raad oor 41
aangeleenthede soos deur die Mail & Guardian geopenbaar is.

Hier het ek ’n afskrif van mnr Godsell se dokument in my hande; die
sogenaamde “41 points of unfinished business” waaraan onvoldoende aandag
geskenk is ten opsigte van raadsbesluite die afgelope twee jaar. Dit het ’n
vertrouensbreuk gebring tussen die hoof van die bestuur en die raad.
Hierdie 41 punte kom basies daarop neer dat daar groot ontevredenheid by
Eskom is oor die werksomstandighede van die werkers.

Die hele kwessie van gehaltesteenkool teen haalbare pryse en die
voortgesette verskaffing daarvan aan Eskom word ook in die dokument vervat.
Ook die herbesinning van langtermynkontrakte met elektrisiteitsverbruikers,
die behoorlike bestuur en invordering van agterstallige skuld, die
voorsiening van langtermynsteenkoolkontrakte ... (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK: Deputy Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister and
congratulate her for supporting the decision by the Eskom board that Mr
Maroga would no longer be the chief executive officer.
The vital role that Eskom plays as the oxygen of economic development has
been overlooked since the nineties. The ANC government ignored the warnings
given by the then Department of Minerals and Energy, as far back as 1998
already, of looming crisis. As if this was not sufficient, in 2006 the
former minister, Minister Alec Erwin, gave this Parliament the assurance
that there was no crisis.

This was followed by assurances from Mr Maroga, on his appointment in 2007,
that the board had things under control, but he soon changed his tune when
South Africa was plunged into darkness in 2008, and then coal that was too
wet, electricity tariffs that were too low and the fact that independent
power suppliers were not coming forward were blamed. The subsequent load
shedding and energy-saving in South Africa helped to push down the economic
growth rate to an expected 1,5% per year.

Apart from the backlog in the maintenance of the power-stations and the
fact that the construction of new stations fell by the wayside, the coal
crisis, related to low grade coal and lack of continuity in its supply,
impacted negatively on Eskom’s coal reserves and also brought down the
energy reserves to an all time low.

What is a cause for concern is that Mr Maroga had been aware of the coal
crisis since 2007 through the Olson report, but that he apparently did not
share this information with his board. Besides this, on 23 October this
year - a few days ago - Mr Godsell, according to a report in the Mail &
Guardian, wrote a memorandum to Eskom’s board regarding 41 areas of
concern.

Here in my hands I have a copy of Mr Godsell’s document; the so-called “41
points of unfinished business” which had been given insufficient attention
in decisions by the board in the past two years. This brought about a
breach of confidence between the CEO and the board. These 41 points
basically amount to the fact that there is general dissatisfaction at Eskom
regarding the working conditions of the employees.

The whole matter regarding quality coal at a reasonable price and its
continued supply to Eskom is also mentioned in the document, as is the
reconsideration of long-term contracts with electricity consumers, the
proper management and collection of arrears, the provision of long-term
coal supply contracts ...]

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Madam Deputy
Speaker, on a point of order: The document that the hon Van Dyk has, is it
a public document or is it a document that was stolen from the boardroom of
Eskom? That is my question, because if it is, then there is a fundamental
breach of confidence that should be dealt with in terms of the Rules of
Parliament. Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr S M VAN DYK: Deputy Speaker, I don’t know whether he has accused me of
being a thief, but I will give you a copy of the document after the
meeting, Mr Manuel.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: He didn’t
answer the question.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, the question is whether it is a public
document: Yes or no?

Dr S M VAN DYK: Agb Adjunkspeaker, ek dink nie ek hoef daarop te reageer
nie. Ek sit met ’n dokument in my hande. Hoe dit in my hande beland het,
dink ek nie is ter sprake vir minister Manuel nie.

Mag ek voortgaan? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK: Hon Deputy Speaker, I don’t think I have to respond to
that. I have a document in my possession. I do not think how it came to be
in my possession is of any concern to Mr Manuel.

May I continue?]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Continue, hon member.

Dr S M VAN DYK: Dankie, Adjunkspeaker. Verder verwys hierdie dokument ook
na ’n langtermynenergie-aanbodprogram wat benodig word en ’n
langtermynenergiefinansieringsprogram waaraan die Departement van Finansies
in die verlede nie genoeg aandag geskenk het nie, mnr Manuel.

Feit is dat die raad mnr Godsell se benadering om Eskom reg te ruk aanvaar
het en mnr Maroga bereid was om te bedank. Die res is geskiedenis, maar ek
dink dit dien vermeld te word dat die Swart Bestuursforum se opmerking in
die media dat openbare ondernemings ’n slagpale vir swart bestuurders
geword het nie waar is nie, en dat die ANC Jeugliga se kommentaar dat mnr
Godsell rassistiese motiewe gehad het met mnr Maroga se vertrek ook van
alle waarheid ontbloot is.

Dit blyk tog of dit ’n invloed gehad het op die politieke burokrasie van
die ANC in Luthuli-huis, wat die aankondiging van mnr Maroga se bedanking
vertraag het omdat die regering nie die raad van Eskom se besluit wou
aanvaar nie. Die ANC het dus ingemeng sonder ’n mandaat van die staat as
aandeelhouer ten spyte daarvan dat dit die raad se verantwoordelikheid is
om die bestuur se prestasie te evalueer.

Die aankondiging deur die waarnemende voorsitter van Eskom, mnr Makwana,
vandag, dat mnr Maroga se bedanking van 28  Oktober aanvaar is en dat hy
nie meer die hoof uitvoerende beampte is nie, word deur die DA verwelkom.
Die vertrouensbreuk tussen mnr Maroga en die raad sou Eskom se
geloofwaardigheid net verder in gedrang bring en dit moeiliker maak om die
R400 miljard te bekom wat nodig is vir uitbreiding.(Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr S M VAN WYK: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Furthermore, this document
refers to a long-term energy supply programme that is required and a long-
term energy funding programme to which the Department of Finance did not
pay enough attention in the past, Mr Manuel.

The fact is that the board accepted Mr Godsell’s approach to straightening
out Eskom and that Mr Maroga was willing to resign. The rest is history,
but I do think that it should be mentioned that the statement by the Black
Management Forum, BMF, in the media that public enterprises have become
slaughterhouses for black managers does not hold true, and that the
statement by the ANC Youth League, ANCYL, that Mr Godsell was motivated by
racism with regard to Mr Maroga’s departure is also completely devoid of
any truth.

Nevertheless, it appears that this had some influence on the political
bureaucracy of the ANC in Luthuli House, who delayed the announcement of Mr
Maroga’s resignation, because the government did not want to accept the
decision by the Eskom board. The ANC, therefore, interfered without a
mandate from the state as a shareholder, despite its being the
responsibility of the board to assess the performance of the management.

The DA welcomes the announcement today by the acting chairperson of Eskom,
Mr Makwana, that Mr Maroga’s resignation on 28 October has been accepted
and that he is no longer the CEO. The loss of confidence between Mr Maroga
and the board would have led to Eskom’s credibility being even more in
jeopardy and would have made it more difficult to acquire the R400 billion
that is needed for expansion.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, your time has expired.

Dr S M VAN DYK: You wasted my time, Mr Manuel. [Applause.]

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: Deputy Speaker, let me say from the onset, from Cope,
that we wish the Minister well in a difficult portfolio. However, we agree
with the Minister about the statement that has been made in the House that
the problem of Eskom cannot only be placed on one individual. What the
Minister did not say, however, is that government must take responsibility
for the collective failures of Eskom, because government had been warned
long ago about it, but did not heed that warning. The Minister was
therefore sure to say that, as government, we take a collective
responsibility for the failure of Eskom, and that it will not all be placed
on an individual only.

Minister, we do agree with you on the issue of corperate governance, but we
worry when a corperate governance is taken to the extent that it seems as
if the Minister is a lame duck. We are worried about that and we worry when
the Minister does not say a word when other Ministers are making policy
decisions for that Minister in parastatal management. We worry about where
that corperate governance is that you are speaking of.

We wonder whether this is in fact a wake-up call. Regarding the problem we
have in parastatal management, including the issue around the call that
pressure has been put on you, but we have not seen anything so far. We
wonder whether it is going to be only when Malema is speaking about
something that the Minister does something else.

I want to say that we must see the independence of the executive in action
in order for us to give support in resolving the problems in South Africa.
Thank you.

Mr N SINGH: Deputy Speaker, now you see me, now you don’t. Is the chief
executive officer gone, or is he still around? We don’t know, but thank
you, hon Minister, for clearing that up.

The dismal state of affairs at Eskom has impacted negatively on the image
of our country, while it has deterred international investment in our
economy. The latest Eskom crisis proves that Eskom’s problems cannot be
dealt with by Eskom alone. Eskom’s problems have to become the country’s
problems and all of us who have been forced to pay up to solve them have
not had a say in the matter. What we need from government is a clear
commitment to turn around Eskom’s ongoing management crisis and we rely on
you, Minister, with your bold and courageous leadership to see that that
happens.

The IFP calls on government to present to this House a detailed Eskom
turnaround plan. We also repeat our calls that public hearings must be held
in Parliament to receive both public and expert inputs to determine whether
there is an alternative way to fund Eskom’s huge expansion programme. I
thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr L W GREYLING: Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, the public did not deserve
this. Our most important public enterprise has been treated like a
children’s playground, with each spin of the merry-go-round revealing a
different person in charge. We simply cannot afford this kind of power
vacuum at Eskom at a time when it is asking the public for exponential
tariff increases and the government is having to guarantee loans of up to
R300 billion for it.

Government should have come out in support of the board at the very outset
of this debacle and not allowed the chief executive officer and
organisations like the ANC Youth League to turn this tragedy into a farce.
The worst aspect of this though is how the public and indeed Parliament
were kept in the dark about these developments with no one in government
providing the much-needed political leadership. Whoever ends up running
Eskom, it is clear that a major overhaul of the governance of this
institution is required if the public is to regain trust in Eskom and its
ability to provide energy security for our nation. I thank you.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Adjunkspeaker, ek wil vir die Minister sê, u moet nie
hier kom staan soos ’n Pontius Pilatus en u handjies in onskuld was nie.
[Gelag.] U is net so skuldig. U kom vertel vir ons in die opposisie ons
moet nie verpolitiseer nie. Wat het u met u eie lid, Julius Malema, gemaak?
Het u hom aangespreek? [Applous.] Het u hom weggejaag? Nee, u moet nie vir
ons kom preek nie. Ek wil vandag vir u sê, u het te lank getalm. Hierdie
verleentheid van Eskom is nie net ’n verleentheid vir Eskom en vir die agb
Minister nie, dit is ’n verleentheid vir Suid-Afrika en die verbruiker moet
opdok daarvoor – dit is total onaanvaarbaar.

Die VF Plus verwelkom die afdanking, of dan die bedanking, van mnr Jacob
Maroga en ek wil vir die agb Minister vra om te verseker dat die nuwe hoof
uitvoerende beampte ’n bevoegde persoon is wat in belang van Suid-Afrika en
die verbruiker sal optree, want Jacob Maroga het bewys dat hy onbevoeg is
vir die pos, ongeag politieke inmenging. Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation
of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Deputy Speaker, I want to tell the hon Minister, you
should not come and stand here like a Pontius Pilate, washing your hands in
innocence.[Laughter.] You are just as guilty. You come and tell us in the
opposition that we should not politicise issues. What did you do about your
own party member, Julius Malema? Did you take him to task? [Applause.] Did
you chase him away? No, you should not come and preach to us. I want to
tell you today that you waited too long. This embarrassment caused by Eskom
is not only an embarrassment to Eskom and the hon Minister, it is an
embarrassment to South Africa and the consumer has to foot the bill for
this – it is totally unacceptable.

The FF Plus welcomes the dismissal, or rather the resignation, of Mr Jacob
Maroga, and I want to ask the hon Minister to ensure that the new chief
executive officer is a competent person acting in the interests of South
Africa and the consumer, because Jacob Maroga has proved that he is unfit
for the post, notwithstanding political intervention. I thank you.
[Applause.]]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Deputy Speaker, thank you hon Minister for your frank
explanation which has brought clarity around the Eskom saga. This debacle
has undermined confidence in South Africa, negatively impacting on South
Africans and the world in general.

Minister Hogan, it was our understanding that you had said that government
did not see it as their role to interfere and of course the ACDP is
encouraged by your explanation and we are relieved that decisions have been
taken to put in place leadership that can inspire confidence. We
congratulate you on your decisive and rational leadership in this matter,
which is critical to the economy of South Africa and our future
development. The demand for power is of course rising faster and faster and
a capable captain is required at the helm. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Deputy Speaker, government’s programme is based on
infrastructure development and if one of the key institutions, Eskom,
doesn’t have its house in order, and with all the infighting, it is
basically holding the country to ransom. What do you say about our strategy
of economic and social development?

It is important that we bear in mind the consequences of this type of
conflict in institutions for delivery and for the workers. We don’t want
this behaviour to spread to other parastatals. South Africa is now getting
a dismal record on parastatals. It is very important that our country does
not lose outstanding personalities because of race. Furthermore, there
should be no political meddling.

Eskom is in a critical period as regards tariff increases and some sound
decisions have to be taken. We have demolished power stations and there
were bad decisions and government can’t keep on bailing out Eskom. The
sooner things stabilise, the better it will be for our country. Thank you.

Ms M P MENTOR: Deputy Speaker, the ANC welcomes the statement by the
Minister of Public Enterprises, Ms Barbara Hogan, which finally sets the
record straight on Eskom and underlines and explains to the House the
managerial and board conflicts that have beleaguered Eskom in the last few
weeks.

The Minister has acknowledged that there were problems at Eskom and we hope
that they have finally been resolved. Although there were problems at
Eskom, as the Minister emphasised, the lights kept on burning, and there
were no major shutdowns. We have learnt this afternoon from the Minister
that not only are an acting chief executive officer and a chairperson in
place but processes are underway to appoint a fulltime chairperson to find
a new chief executive officer for Eskom.

There was squabbling in Eskom’s board, as is normally the case in a lot of
boardrooms, but I think there are also lessons that we need to learn from
this squabbling. As the chairperson of the portfolio committee, I submit
that one of these lessons would be to tighten oversight mechanisms, because
little did we suspect, three weeks ago when Eskom put their annual report
before us, that the relational problems between the board and the chief
executive officer had deteriorated to that extent. We submit that we will
have to improve as Parliament in terms of oversight of state-owned
enterprises, SOEs; and we agree with the Minister, in terms of corporate
governance issues.

We also remind the House that yesterday the Minister of Finance submitted
to this House that he and Minister Barbara Hogan and, I assume, the cluster
of Ministers in the economic sector, are reviewing SOEs. When that process
of reviewing SOEs is underway, it must be matched in checking whether the
oversight of those mechanisms is in place and is able to ensure that boards
do what they are supposed to do, management does what it is supposed to do
and the Department of Public Enterprises also does what it is supposed to
do.

Accusations have been heaped on government by the media that there is
political interference of some sort and micromanagement of state-owned
enterprises. We submit that these accusations are unfounded. Just this
morning, it was announced that government has granted a guarantee for Eskom
to borrow an amount of R350 billion from the markets. It would be grossly
irresponsible on the part of government, either in the person of the
representative member of the shareholder, as Minister of Public
Enterprises, or as Cabinet itself, just to give these guarantees for loans
or to provide equity injections or to give loans to SOEs, without ensuring
that things are being done right in those SOEs. When things go wrong, it is
not political meddling when the shareholder gives directions and gets
involved; otherwise one will continue to throw money into a bottomless pit,
and other SOEs will continue to claim bailouts.

The projects of Eskom are well underway. Cabinet has also expressed
concerns about the impact that the 45% tariff increase might have, not only
on the poor but on all South Africans, and is looking for ways and means to
mitigate the impact of such tariff hikes. We do, however, know that the
National Energy Regulator of South Africa, Nersa, has the last word on
this.

I submit that transformation cannot be the sole monopoly of blacks or
Africans, for that reason. All South Africans, black and white, should
participate in the process of transformation and we cannot, just because of
the colour of a person’s skin, level accusations of racism. We will
continue, as Parliament, to demand transformation across all sectors of
South Africa and we will not claim racism only where there are people of a
certain race group. In fact, you do find racists and tribalists in all
ethnic groups and in all groups. As a result, you cannot just claim racism.
[Interjections.]

I also submit that it is not correct that government has not collectively
taken the responsibility for failure to heed the call of Eskom over many
years to build power stations and to get ready for economic growth. When
one administration goes into office, it inherits all the good and bad
things and liabilities of the administration before it. [Interjections.]
The previous ANC government has collectively apologised to South Africa
through former President Thabo Mbeki.

I want to conclude by thanking the Minister for finally clarifying matters
for South Africans, as to where we stand in terms of Eskom, and we hope
that we have learnt the lesson that we cannot afford to move from one
problem to the next in state-owned enterprises, and we think that the
review of these SOEs, including parastatals, that lie across all government
departments, should be accelerated. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.




                          MOBILE TERMINATION RATES


                  (Statement by Minister of Communications)

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, good
afternoon. South Africa’s high telephone rates have been of much concern to
all in this House, and rightfully so. Telephones, particularly cellular
telephones, are the main tools of communication available to our people.
Telephones keep us, as South Africans, connected. Our telephones enable us
to communicate with people in other parts of the world. Without telephones
and Internet, business cannot be conducted. Communication costs in this
country are resulting in a potential loss of investment in the economy.
High mobile termination rates are impeding any possibility of new entrants
into the market.

The intervention I implemented, as the Minister of Communications, has
yielded some positive results and it was with the support of my Deputy
Minister, the Portfolio Committee on Communications, the staff of the
Department of Communications, under the leadership of the director-general,
the mobile operators and the South African public at large. This is yet
another example that working together we can do more.

I am pleased to announce that the initial reduction of mobile termination
rates by Cell C, Vodacom and MTN are as follows. Currently, the situation
pertaining to termination rates is the following: At peak hours the rate is
R1,25 and off-peak it is R0,77. There is what is then called a blended
rate, which is R1,03. What we know of, as consumers, is R1,25 and R0,77.
The agreed reduced mobile termination rates are the following: Peak R0,89
and off-peak R0,77. The blended rate has, therefore, been reduced from
R1,03 to R0,77. The overall total cost reduction on peak rates is from
R1,25 to R0,89, totalling an amount of R0,36. This, hon members is putting
money back in the pockets of ordinary South Africans, who need it now more
than ever.

With regard to the issue of the effective date of implementation, we have
noted that there are various small, medium and micro enterprises, SMMEs,
that are reliant on the value chain of interconnection fees. We have,
therefore, agreed with Vodacom and Cell C that the effective date for the
reduction for them would be February 2010 - this excludes MTN that wants to
implement on 1 March 2010. This will allow the mobile operators and the
SMMEs to realign their business operations accordingly.

Furthermore, I am glad to report to the House that mobile operators have
committed to introduce new and affordable retail products, based on their
reduced rates, from 1 December 2009. I have been assured that these
developments will also introduce more competition on the retail market.
That on its own, hon members, is the big early Christmas and Easter present
that we can give to the nation. [Applause.] In the same breath, it is
important to emphasise that the commitment we have received is within the
parameters of the business imperatives of these operators and that it was
voluntary.

In implementing the tariff change, operators are requesting a glide path
period that is aimed at facilitating adjustments to their business models,
renegotiation of contracts with service providers and, in some instances,
changing their billing systems. I will facilitate the process further, by
withdrawing the Ministerial Policy Directive on Mobile Termination Rates. A
glide path intervention process will, however, be considered for
implementation by the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa,
Icasa, as it is of a regulatory nature.

My intervention should be viewed as an initial intervention, taking into
account the fact that the reduction of the costs to communicate should not
necessarily address the wholesale market, but should also make an impact on
the retail sector, as this affects end users. Therefore, further
consultations between operators and Icasa will still be constituted to
conclude the interconnect agreements.
It must be recorded that due regard to the principles of nondiscrimination
will be applied; therefore, the reduction in rates will be concluded within
appropriate interconnection agreements. I will then present the mobile
termination rate offers to Icasa for review, consideration and
implementation.

In addition to this process, I will be reviewing all other aspects that
relate to the cost to communicate; this includes fixed and mobile
termination rates for public phones and community service telephones. This
is in line with my programme of action on the reduction of the cost to
communicate that was recently submitted for approval and approved by
Cabinet.

Madam Deputy Speaker, as I promised during my Budget Vote earlier this
session, reducing communication costs remains a key priority of mine and
the Department of Communications. For this reason, I have elevated it to
our Medium-Term Strategic Framework.

Last, but not least, it is important that we should not just celebrate
great leaps, but also small steps that make a significant and great
difference. I present this report not to sound triumphant, but to
acknowledge that small steps can move us forward as a nation and that
together we can do more. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr N J VAN DEN BERG: Mevrou die Adjunkspeaker, dis die eerste aankondiging
wat ek vandag hoor van die planne van die Minister. Ek gaan Afrikaans praat
omdat dit my moedertaal is, so as u wil luister, is u baie welkom.

In die eerste plek moet ek vir u sê, van die DA se kant af, deel ons
absoluut die sentiment van die Minister dat kommunikasie so ’n belangrike
item in ons land is, want dit bring mense in verbinding met mekaar; dit
veroorsaak dat daar nie probleme of misverstande en dies meer ontstaan nie,
en dis ’n wonderlike ding wat gebeur. Ons is baie dankbaar dat hierdie
sogenaamde interkonneksietariewe verlaag gaan word.

So ’n maand of twee gelede in die Portefeuljekomitee oor Kommunikasie het
ons openbare verhore gehad, soos die Minister self weet, en daar het ’n
mens agtergekom hoeveel probleme daar is in die entiteite wat onder die
Departement van Kommunikasie ressorteer. Die Minister en ons voorsitter,
mnr Ismail Vadi, is ook bewus van die feit dat die Onafhanklike
Kommunikasie-owerheid van Suid-Afrika, Okosa, nou reeds baie, baie jare
lank die voete sleep. Dis my eerste termyn in die Parlement, maar ek wens
hierdie dinge was al ’n paar jaar gelede opgelos.

Ons almal het gedink, toe Cell C in 2002 na vore gekom het, dat hierdie
interkonneksietariewe gaan daal omdat daar toe ’n mate van kompetisie in
die mark was, maar wat het toe gebeur? Daar was ’ n styging van 500% tot by
R1,25 op die ou einde, en dit is ’n onaanvaarbare situasie. ’n Mens wonder
of die Mededingingskommissie nie vroeër moes ingegryp het nie.

Daar is net een ding wat ek net graag hier in die Parlement wil sê: dit is
die rol van die Onafhanklike Kommunikasie-owerheid van Suid-Afrika om te
kyk na die strukture, die uitdeel van frekwensies en dies meer. Dis hoekom
hulle die Onafhanklike Kommunikasie-owerheid genoem word.

Ek is net bekommerd dat ... Laat ek myself in die rede val: dit ís so dat
die Minister wel direktiewe aan Okosa kan gee, maar, soos hulle in Engels
sê, “ they’re not bound by this directive”. Ek hoop dus dit was, soos hulle
in Engels sê, “that due process was followed,” dat alles volgens die wet
verloop het en dat dit nie ’n onaanvaarbare ingryping deur die Minister was
nie, want Okosa is nie verantwoordelik aan die Minister van Kommunikasie
nie. Die raad van Okosa word deur die Parlement aangestel en dan moet hulle
onafhanklik optree.

Ons hoop daar gebeur binne Okosa ’n klomp dinge, want dis nie net die
telefoonkoste wat ’n probleem is nie; daar is geweldig baie ander probleme
ook in Okosa wat die toekenning van frekwensies en dies meer betref. Ons
het netnou gehoor van al die probleme in Eskom, en ek wil vir u sê met ons
oorsigbesoeke wat ons aan Okosa gebring het, kon ons sien daar is baie
probleme; daar is gevegte tussen die raad en die uitvoerende bestuur van
Okosa, en die personeel is nie baie gelukkig nie.

Daar is dus ’n hele klomp dinge wat in hierdie stadium opgelos moet word,
maar namens die verbruiker is ons gelukkig met die verlaging van hierdie
koste. Dit was ’n sterk besprekingspunt in die Portefeuljekomitee oor
Kommunikasie.

Daar is net een ding, en u het dit self ook genoem. Ek hoop net nie dat
hierdie ingryping die markte gaan beïnvloed nie, want daar kan
geargumenteer word dat, as die Minister die mag het om in te gryp en pryse
te manipuleer, as ek die woord mag gebruik, van die internasionale ouens
sal kan besluit om eerder ’n bietjie versigtig te wees, want hulle kan dalk
in die moeilikheid beland. Baie dankie vir die geleentheid, agbare Mevrou
die Adjunkspeaker. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Mr N J VAN DEN BERG: Madam Deputy Speaker, this is the first announcement
I have heard today about the Minister’s plans. I will be speaking in
Afrikaans because it is my mother tongue, so if you want to listen, you are
very welcome.

Firstly, I must tell you that we in the DA absolutely share the Minister’s
sentiment that communication is such a big issue in our country, as it
brings people into contact with each other; it prevents problems and
misunderstandings from developing, which is a wonderful thing to take
place. We are very grateful that these so-called interconnection rates will
be reduced.

About a month or two ago we had public hearings in the Portfolio Committee
on Communications, as the Minister himself knows, where we realised how
many problems there are in the entities that fall under the Department of
Communications. The Minister and our chairperson, Mr Ismail Vadi, are also
aware of the fact that the Independent Communications Authority, Icasa, has
for many, many years now been dragging its feet. This is my first term in
Parliament, but I wish these things had already been solved a few years
ago.

We all thought that when Cell C stepped up in 2002, the interconnection
rates would drop because there was a degree of competition in the market,
but what happened then? In the end there was an increase of 500% up to
R1,25, and this is an unacceptable situation. One wonders whether the
Competition Commission should not have intervened sooner.

There is just one matter I would like to mention here in Parliament, namely
the role of the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa in
looking at the structures, the allocation of frequencies and so on. That is
why they are called the Independent Communications Authority.

I am just concerned that ... Let me interrupt myself; it is true that the
Minister may issue directives to Icasa, but, they are not bound by these
directives. So I hope, that due process was followed and that everything
was done in accordance with the law and that it was not an unacceptable
intervention by the Minister, because Icasa does not answer to the Minister
of Communications. The board of Icasa is appointed by Parliament and then
they must act independently.

We hope that a number of things will take place within Icasa, because it is
not only the telephone costs that constitute a problem; there are a great
number of other problems in Icasa, also as regards the allocation of
frequencies and so on. We have just heard about all the problems in Eskom
and I can tell you that during our oversight visits to Icasa we could see
that there were many problems; there are altercations between the board and
the executive of Icasa, and the staff members are not very happy.

So there are a lot of things that need to be sorted out at this stage, but
on behalf of the consumer we are happy about the reduction in these
charges. This was a major point of debate in the Portfolio Committee on
Communications.

There is just one issue, which you yourself have also mentioned. I just
hope that this intervention will not influence the markets, because it
could be argued that if the Minister has the power to intervene and
manipulate prices, if I may use that word, some of the international firms
may decide to be a little careful, because they could get into trouble.
Thank you for this opportunity, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Time expired.]]

Mrs J D KILIAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, on behalf of Cope we would like to
thank the Minister. We welcome this, and I am sure the South African
consumers will cope with this early Christmas box. [Applause.] Cope wants
to ensure that Chapter 9 institutions, such as Icasa, are supported to
effectively fulfil their mandates. Cope believes that it is the role of the
independent regulator, Icasa, not the Minister or the director-general or
Parliament, to regulate tariffs and rates. Minister, we welcome the fact
that you have intervened in the negotiations.

We just want to caution that we don’t want political interference into the
role and responsibilities of Chapter 9 institutions. Icasa councillors
should execute their legislative responsibilities. If they fail to do that,
it is our role to hold them accountable. The law stipulates that they can
be dismissed and we should do that. But for that to happen, we need the
Minister and the department to forthwith pass the necessary performance
agreement with those Icasa councillors. If that is done, which should have
been done some four years ago, then we can hold them accountable and get
them to carry out their responsibilities.

It is a misnomer to believe that interconnection rates will necessarily
result in cheaper cellphone costs. For that to happen, we must open up the
market. Therefore, other long overdue regulations, such as fixed number
portability regulations, local loop unbundling and all those issues, should
be introduced. Only then will the cellphone industry really become
liberalised and there will be proper competition within the cellphone and
the communication industry as such.

In conclusion, government must not try to be the bride at every wedding
ceremony or the corpse at every funeral. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Sekela Somlomo, neNdlu ehloniphekile, Mhlonishwa okokuqala
sicela ukubonga kakhulu kuCell-C ngokuthi athathe iqhaza eliphambili ahole
kulomsebenzi wokwehliswa kwemali yokuxhumana kwabantu.

Okwesibili sithanda ukubonga kakhulu kuwena Mhlonishwa ukuthi ugqugquzele
noTelkom ukuthi uma sishaya izingcingo zizokwehla njengoba benzile nalaba
abanye ngoba uma beme bodwa ngale eceleni nabanye benza lokho kuzoba
sengathithi sikhetha izingane zabantu bandawonye.

Okokugcina-ke siyacabanga ukuthi i-Icasa izowenza umsebenzi wayo. Kanti uma
ingawenzi umsebenzi wayo, kubonakala sengathi kulukhuni ukuthi yenze
umsebenzi wayo, uyilethe lapha eNdlini, sibagudlule sifake abanye.
Ngiyathokoza kakhulu. (Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Deputy Speaker, this august House and hon Minister, firstly
I want to sincerely thank Cell C for taking the initiative in taking the
lead to reduce interconnection rates across all networks.

Secondly, I would like to sincerely thank you, hon Minister, for
encouraging Telkom to bring call rates down as the others have done,
because if they are standing to one side all by themselves and others are
doing the same thing on the other side it would be as if we are dividing
members of the same family.

Lastly, I hope that Icasa will perform its duties. But if it does not
perform its duties, and it looks like it is difficult for it to perform its
duties, you should bring them to this House, and we will put them aside and
put others in their place. Thank you very much.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, I want to assure you
that you have not interfered with the independence of Icasa. In terms of
the Electronic Communications Act, you have the right to get involved.
Therefore, forget about those who said you have interfered. [Applause.] I
would like to give special thanks to your director-general. She has worked
very hard.
Hon Minister, I have been vindicated. In this country we have been paying
exorbitant fees to cellphone companies. The Competition Commission that I
have laid a complaint with is also going to benefit from this, because they
have now voluntarily reduced their costs due to your intervention, and not
interference.

I want to tell all South Africans that this is a sign that we as consumers
should not just accept these high prices, but should speak up for our
rights and take on these operators and companies that have made obscene
profits for many years. I thank you. [Applause.]

Adv A DE W ALBERTS: Mevrou die Adjunkspeaker, die VF Plus wil die Minister
van Kommunikasie gelukwens met die ferm besluit om teen gulsige
selfoonmaatskappye op te tree by wyse van die verpligte verlaging van
interkonneksietariewe.

Die selfoonbedryf het ’n gulde geleentheid verspeel om tot ’n sinvolle
vergelyk te kom in die verband en dis jammer dat hulle nou deur middel van
wetlike instrumente gedwing moet word om hul maatskaplike plig teenoor die
vuisvoos verbruiker in Suid-Afrika na te kom.

Eintlik moes hierdie proses al baie vroeër begin het, maar ongelukkig neem
dit ’n krisis om ’n geleentheid te skep, en hier verwys ek na die
sokkerwêreldbekertoernooi in 2010 wat deur die breë publiek in Suid-Afrika
net op tradisionele televisie of selfoon-TV besigtig sal kan word. Die
regering het egter ’n verdere belangrike taak om ’n omgewing vir kompetisie
in die selfoonbedryf te skep.

Die beste wyse om pryse op ’n volhoubare wyse te bepaal is deur die
daarstelling van intense kompetisie tussen besighede. Die verlaging van die
interkonneksiefooi kan verseker self ’n bydrae in dié verband lewer.

In die algemeen is dit kommerwekkend dat daar steeds maatskappye in Suid-
Afrika bestaan wat ongewoon hoë winste maak uit ’n brandarm burgery en wat
spandabelrig te werk gaan asof daar geen einde in sig is vir hierdie
finansiële golf waarop hulle ry nie.(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Adv A DE W ALBERTS: Madam Deputy Speaker, the FF Plus wishes to
congratulate the Minister of Communications on the firm decision to act
against greedy cellphone companies by means of the obligatory reduction in
interconnection rates.

The cellphone industry missed a golden opportunity to come to a meaningful
agreement in this regard and it is a pity that they are now compelled by
means of legal mechanisms to fulfil their social responsibility towards the
punch-drunk South African consumer.

In fact, this process should have started much earlier, but unfortunately
it takes a crisis to create an opportunity, and here I am referring to the
2010 Soccer World Cup tournament which w the broader South African public
will only be able to view on traditional television or cellphone TV. The
government, however, has another important task of creating a competitive
environment in the cellphone industry.

The best way to fix prices in a sustainable manner is through the creation
of intense competition between businesses. The reduction in the
interconnection rates could in itself certainly make a contribution in this
regard.

In general it is worrying that there are still companies in South Africa
that are profiting from the unusual high prices they are charging
impoverished citizens and are operating in a thriftless manner as if there
is no end in sight while they are riding on the crest of this financial
wave.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon member, your time has expired.

Adv A DE W ALBERTS: Dis ’n onvolhoubare situasie, maar ons wil vir die
Minister dankie sê vir sy harde werk in hierdie verband. [This is an
untenable situation, but we want to thank the Minister for his hard work in
this regard.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Deputy Speaker, the ACDP would like to congratulate the hon
Minister on successfully facilitating the agreement to reduce mobile
termination rates. The cellphone industry leaders appeared unlikely to
reduce rates unless there was significant regulatory or political pressure.
So, we are impressed.

The Department of Communications studied the benchmark South African
communication costs against our peer countries, comparing us to Brazil,
Chile, Korea, India and Malaysia, and found that our country had
exceptionally high telecommunication prices, relative to our peer group
countries, and that we had the least competitive market.

Interconnection rates were designed to help the mobile operators bill their
networks when they launched; and these are not necessary now. Industry
commentators said the evidence was overwhelming that there was little
justification for pushing the fee up in the first place. They have
estimated that a fee of R0,10 to R0,25 would now be more than adequate to
cover the costs.

We are looking forward to your ongoing success in the interest of the
people of South Africa and future development. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Hon Deputy Speaker, the MF welcomes the Minister’s
intervention in addressing the high telephone rates and Parliament has to
implement this immediately. Vodacom and MTN plough millions of rand into
marketing programmes, which come from the unusually high tariffs that the
citizens have to pay. Most people are using mobile phones. Operators must
not only be user-friendly, but price-friendly. We urge the Minister not to
delay in the implementation of the lower costs. I thank you.

Mr I VADI: Deputy Speaker, the ANC and the Portfolio Committee on
Communications welcome the statement by the Minister of Communications that
a voluntary agreement on reducing mobile termination or interconnection
rates has been reached among all the mobile and telecoms operators in the
country.

The Minister has achieved in four months what the Independent
Communications Authority of South Africa, Icasa, failed to do in four
years. This interim measure is an encouraging and positive development.
Parliament must appreciate the significance of this voluntary step by the
mobile and telecoms industry and it must recognise the leadership offered
by the Ministry of Communications.

We are also heartened by the news that some mobile operators have indicated
that they are going to introduce specific relief measures through
promotional offers to cash-strapped consumers in December. This, together
with the reduction in interconnection rates by March 2010, will ultimately
benefit virtually every citizen in our country, as it will become cheaper
next year to communicate using cellphones and home telephones. We must
acknowledge that these voluntary initiatives by mobile and fixed line
operators have placed the interest of the public before profits.
This is precisely what the committee had championed in September this year,
when it adopted a resolution calling on the mobile operators to drop the
interconnection rates with effect from 1 November 2005 to R0,60 per minute
during peak times. The committee further called for interconnection rates
to be reduced by R0,15 annually for each successive year until 2012. We
were absolutely clear that interconnection rates are excessive and not in
the best interest of the public. This high cost of mobile and fixed
telecommunications has impacted adversely on the South African economy and
negatively on our citizens, particularly the poor and marginalised.

Today, some might legitimately ask the question: Has the committee achieved
all that it had set out to do in its resolution? That is not the real
issue; the fact is that ours is a proposal for consideration by mobile and
telecoms industries and other stakeholders in civil society. It was meant
to stimulate a robust and hearty debate and it was aimed at educating
consumers and galvanising them to support the call for a reduction in
telecommunication costs in our country. In fact, during our public hearings
in October, almost all the written and oral submissions made supported the
call for reductions in interconnection and retail rates. The only question
up for debate was the extent of the reduction and the speed with which it
was to be effected.

We are more than satisfied that for the first time in almost a decade,
there is now a tangible and positive reaction from the industry to
government’s call for a reduction in telecommunication costs. The demand
for reductions of mobile and telecommunication costs has been on the agenda
for a number of years. For example, former President Thabo Mbeki said in
his 2007 state of the nation address:

   With regard to communications, I’m pleased to announce that the
   Department of Communications together with the mobile telephone companies
   and Telkom are finalising plans to address call termination rates this
   year for the benefit of the consumers.

It is now a matter of history that no agreement was concluded in that year.
This issue was again raised by President Zuma in his state of the nation
address on 3 June 2009, when he said, “overall we will ensure that the cost
of telecommunications is reduced through the projects underway to expand
broadband capacity”.
There can be no doubt that progress has now been made.

There is an outstanding issue that I wish to touch on briefly. The
committee supports the idea of a glide path to progressively reduce
interconnection rates over a period of time. Such an approach will help to
balance the competing objectives of the affordability of mobile and
telecommunication services to the public with the principle of fair
profitability of private companies.
On this question, our view is that the glide path should perhaps be
determined by Icasa and not the industry itself. Any final decision on the
glide path by the industry alone might convey a negative perception that
the industry is again acting in its own interest. The actual decreases in
interconnection rates and the timeframes of the glide path should
rightfully be determined through an Icasa-led process based on empirical
data rather than through an arbitrary process managed by the industry
itself.

I must point out that a major responsibility now rests on the shoulders of
Icasa. In the past it had not succeeded in reducing interconnection rates.
It lacked clarity of purpose and confidence to act decisively. Icasa now
needs to act with courage, efficiency and professionalism. It must duly
follow the steps set out in chapter 10 of the Electronic Communications Act
and issue final regulations on interconnection rates.

All outstanding issues, the question of a flat rate; asymmetrical rates;
the timeframe for a glide path and the rate by which interconnection rates
are to be reduced over the next few years must be determined by Icasa based
on its research. We are aware that it is not the responsibility of
Parliament to intervene on these issues. It is strictly the remit of Icasa.
It must do its job and its actions must inspire confidence in the sector.

Finally, I‘d like to thank all political parties for the nonpartisan
approach they adopted on this issue. In dealing with Icasa and the approach
to the mobile operators, I think it was quite clear that we worked as a
united front and on a nonpartisan basis because that was in the public
interest. It is a very important step to co-operate to advance the interest
of our citizens. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                 NATIONAL HOUSE OF TRADITIONAL LEADERS BILL

       TRADITIONAL LEADERSHIP AND GOVERNANCE FRAMEWORK AMENDMENT BILL

               (Consideration of Bills and of Reports thereon)

Mnr W P DOMAN: Voorsitter, die proses wat gevolg is om eergister en gister
dié wetgewing in die komitee te behandel, het veel te wense oorgelaat. Ons
het by tye nie eens die korrekte bewoording van al die klousules voor ons
gehad nie, maar desnieteenstaande het ons ’n moedige poging aangewend en
almal saamgewerk, en die DA sal hierdie twee stukke wetgewing steun.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr W P DOMAN: Chairperson, the process which was followed the day before
yesterday and yesterday to deal with this legislation in the committee left
much to be desired. At times we did not even have the correct wording for
all the clauses in front of us, but despite this we all made a valiant
effort and worked together, and the DA will support these two pieces of
legislation.]

These Bills went through a thorough process of consultation in the
provinces. The Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Amendment
Bill in particular deals with complicated matters about which traditional
communities feel very strongly, and it will require Solomon’s wisdom to
resolve all the matters.

With the National House of Traditional Leaders in operation for three
years, and the Commission on Traditional Leadership Disputes and Claims
also in operation for some time, shortcomings in the present legislation
and problem areas clearly came to the fore, and a good effort was made in
this legislation to deal with these. Whether these Bills will be able to
resolve all these challenges in practice, remains to be seen.

For example, the creation of a new layer in the traditional leadership
landscape of “principal traditional leader”, “principal traditional
communities” and “principal traditional councils” is very interesting. But
it will also be very costly. The cost to the fiscus of the whole system of
royal houses and traditional leaders is something that is worrying.

In this regard, I must point out that the Commission on Traditional
Leadership Disputes and Claims has up to now cost about R50 million, and
this commission has not performed very well. Hundreds of claims have not
been resolved, and decisions are still outstanding.

It was argued before our committee that the work of this commission is
necessary, and we agree. Its processes have to be speeded up and therefore
we are approving a new structure today of five commissioners heading
committees in the different provinces to deal with claims and issues in a
decentralised way. They will also only be making recommendations.

Dis nogal goed dat die ANC so ’n bietjie iets leer teen sentralisasie, want
dis heeltyd net “sentralisasie, sentralisasie”. Hier is ’n goeie ding wat
hulle gerus op ander terreine van die openbare lewe ook kan toepas.
(Translation of the Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[It is quite good that the ANC is learning something negative about
centralisation, because throughout it is all about “centralisation,
centralisation”. This is a good thing, which it is worth their while to
apply in other areas of public life as well.]

Why we are concerned about cost is also that each and every claimant who is
successful will mean that the salaries and allowances bill for divisional
leaders rises, not to mention the full operational costs of the National
House of Traditional Leaders and its counterparts in the different
provinces.

We have just received the Sereti Commission’s proposals that members of the
different houses should come onto the Political Office Bearers Pension Fund
and also that funeral benefits should be provided for traditional leaders.
In this Bill, for the first time, a sitting allowance is also provided for
nontraditional-leader members in the different houses and committees. It is
estimated that this alone will amount to R36,7 million per annum. And we
have all read the reports in the newspapers about the royal house in
KwaZulu-Natal exceeding its budgets.

Yesterday the Minister of Finance warned us all that we are living in
difficult times and that we all have to apply financial constraint. The
principle for us in the DA is that the country must receive value for
money. Of course, accountability for all budgets is non-negotiable.

The institution of traditional affairs must always be instituted and
operate within the ambit of the Constitution. We are therefore grateful
that gender issues are given the necessary attention in these two Bills –
not only that the terminology is gender-sensitive, but also that they
provide for the protection of women, from queenships to the gender
composition of the different houses.

Within the ambit of the Constitution and the laws that govern
municipalities, the relationship between traditional leaders and
authorities, on the one hand, and councillors and municipal councils, on
the other hand, is quite often contentious. Section 81 of the Municipal
Structures Act stipulates that traditional authorities must participate in
councils, and this is not actually happening.

On the other hand, the Bill that we are changing today also provides for a
code of conduct for traditional leaders. If you look at that code of
conduct, they must not be gatekeepers but must allow for local development
in the communities. I thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr T BOTHA: Chairperson, the institution of traditional leaders is an
integral part of our society. If appropriately utilised, it may bring value
to our people, because it is a link between formal institutions of state
and our rural informal communities. Our Constitution requires that
governance structures give cognisance to the principles of nonsexism, co-
operative governance between the legislatures and the houses, nation-
building, unity and peace among the houses and traditional communities.

There is no question about enhancing traditions and culture. The Bill also
satisfies another long-standing vacuum, namely giving serious attention to
the lot of the rural people of our country. The establishment of the House
allows for it to participate in international and national programmes
geared towards the development of rural communities. It also has the power
to participate in national initiatives meant to monitor, review and
evaluate government programmes in rural communities.

The code of conduct in Schedule C compels members of the House to perform
the functions of their office in good faith and in an honest,
nondiscriminatory and transparent manner, and to act at all times in the
best interests of the House in such a way that the credibility and
integrity of the House are not compromised.

The fact that traditional leaders have always exercised authority in their
areas in a traditional manner does not mean that our constitutional
dispensation must not be allowed to hold sway. Thank you very much. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mr P F SMITH: Chair, members of the House, the IFP will not be supporting
these Bills today. We have problems not only with the content, but largely
with the process. These Bills were presented to us on Tuesday and voted on
on Thursday, and to be honest with you, it is quite astonishing that one is
expected to look at a Bill comprising 50 pages of amendments – here is page
1 and here is page 50, if you think that I am exaggerating – in five
seconds and vote on it.

I have been here for 15 years and I have never yet been in a committee
where pages of amendments are placed before a committee without even being
read. They simply said: “What do members think? Is it OK? Ja, fine. OK, any
questions? Move on.” As if everybody is an Einstein or everybody has
studied the amendments before. There was such a rush to get this thing
through that there was not enough time given to deliberating on the
content, and we find this highly problematic.

In fact, the whole process, to be honest, Chair, was a charade. And the
reason for that is that this is a Bill that has been returned from the
NCOP. And because the NCOP only voted on it on Tuesday, and we were voting
on Wednesday, had we effected any amendments, it would have had to go back
to the NCOP or for mediation, and the ANC didn’t want mediation; they
wanted it approved. So why bother scrutinising it? We are going to
rubberstamp it anyway! Which is what we did, at the behest of the
executive, anyway.

So that is a hell of a problem, Chair, and we really think this is
unacceptable, because it makes a complete mockery of the principle of the
separation of powers. The executive comes along to us and says: “Hey,
please pass this thing quickly.” And the little committee sits there and
says, “Ja, baas.” Rubberstamped! That is not the way Parliament is meant to
operate. So we are very unhappy.

And let me add to that: The problem is that there has been no consultation
whatsoever in the NA. Now, it is quite true that in the NCOP they consulted
everybody. I don’t care what they did in the NCOP. It’s got nothing to do
with the National Assembly. We have a duty in the National Assembly to say,
“Is the content of these amendments correct or not?” Nobody came to us, no
inputs were received from civil society, nothing came from the House of
Traditional Leaders, and we were expected to say, “Fine. No problem.” That
is not the way it should be done either, Chair.

So we think this Bill should have been prioritised for next year and we
could have given it due consideration. It is really sad for the legislature
to be a lapdog of the executive. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr L B GAEHLER: Hon Chairperson, the UDM supports the Bills before us.
Allow us, however, to raise a few concerns regarding the state of
traditional leadership in the country. It is true that traditional leaders
are in control of the lives of millions of South Africans. However, for
traditional leaders to find their rightful place in the new dispensation,
it is vital that certain disparities are addressed.

Uya kufumanisa ukuba ookumkani abarhunyiswa ngokufanayo. Yingxaki enkulu ke
leyo. Kananjalo noncedo abalufumana kurhulumente alulingani. Urhulumente
kufuneka ayiqwalasele into yokuba ikumkani yikumkani nokuba ivela phi na,
kwaye kufuneka ihlonitshwe.

Uye ufumanise ukuba ezinye iinkosi zenza umsebenzi wooceba abangawenziyo
umsebenzi wabo. Enkosi. [Laphela ixesha.] (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[You will find that kings are not given the same amount of money. That is a
big problem.  Even the government subsidy is not the same. The government
must take into consideration that a king is a king irrespective of where he
comes from, and that he must be respected.

You will find that councillors are incompetent and as such chiefs end up
doing their jobs. Thank you. [Time expired.]]

Mrs I C DITSHETELO: Chairperson, governance needs to be taken seriously and
both traditional and municipal structures need to coexist and govern in
unison and harmony.

These “principal traditional leaders”, a new creation in the traditional
leadership, will definitely cause confusion. The tribes may drift away from
the authority of kings and queens and form their own traditional
authorities, hence it needs to be thoroughly explained to our traditional
leaders and authorities.

The plight of the poor will remain with us and it is our responsibility to
provide much-needed support and align powers and functions.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the choice of who is to be in the principal
traditional council and kingship and queenship councils remains a big
question, because a traditional leader is born, not elected. That is our
African culture.

The UCDP supports the Bill, though. [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Hon Chairperson, the Traditional Leadership and Governance
Framework Amendment Bill deals with the recognition of kingship and
queenship. It also deals with the relationship with local government
regulations relating to the establishment of local traditional councils.

These Bills represent an improvement which was long desired. There are
people who are going to express different views but it is very important
that, although political arms are given responsibility over traditional
matters, they should be guided by the long-established traditions and
customs of the people. We cannot do away with traditions and customs.

Throughout the world traditional structures remain. In India they remain
very strong at local level. They are called the Panchayat raj and they play
a pivotal role. So traditionalism and traditional leaders are going to
remain in the country for a very long time.

The MF will support the Bills. Thank you.

Mr S L TSENOLI: House Chairperson and hon members, the ANC will support
this legislation. We do so because we understand that in the process of
lawmaking there will be no sterile environment that is vacuum cleaned
completely, having no relationship with the executive and Parliament.

These are Members of Parliament who also happen to come from our ranks and
we appreciate that in the process of doing their work, they will come
across instances and issues that require, in hindsight, a request to
introduce things they may not have had in mind at the beginning of the
process. That is life; and experience. Therefore, we appreciate that
they’ve done as they requested, on the understanding that legislation is
coming to us for further debate and more time to interrogate these issues
as well; and where the need arises we will not hesitate to introduce
changes that will satisfy both the process and the content.

Hon Smith says that they will reject the Bill; it’s their right to do so.
But he exaggerates, naturally, he dramatises what happened in the
committee. He spoke the most; contributed - in my opinion - the most useful
questions and comments in the committee; and he intimidates with the size
of the documents. However, consequential amendments often appear huge but
are technical and not much time needs to be spent on them. We’ve done this
before, Peter. You are surprising, today; but I suppose you have to meet
the mandate to act dramatic. That’s politics, we understand it.

There are two things that I would like to say. Of course, in the initial
stages, pieces of legislation do often cause confusion as they require
explanation. We are not naïve; we appreciate and understand that this is
why there are Members of Parliament who have to explain this legislation.
This is why the structures in the provinces that interacted with this
legislation gave them permission.

You cannot say that you don’t care about what is happening in the
provinces, including yours, when, in their wisdom, they agreed with the
legislation. Its a bit strange to say that, especially if they represent
the majority of the people in KwaZulu-Natal. It is strange to dismiss them
as insignificant.

The concerns raised about disparities in remuneration and support are
matters of substance and content, of transformation of the institution of
traditional leadership. We understand that the work underway is intended to
provide a thorough systematic look at all of these issues so that the
department that is going to be set up will be in consultation with
traditional leaders across the country, and find sustainable solutions to
these problems that speak to all the concerns we have in our country to
provide equitable support across all institutions of governance.

We also appreciate that some of this legislation seeks to provide coherence
in the relationships across the three areas of national, provincial and
local Houses. This is one of the tasks of the new legislation that is being
introduced. This is very useful, because without that coherence we cannot
deal with this problem in a manner that makes sense, because of the
fragmentation that exists currently. In that sense, they constitute a very
important piece of work that needs to be done.

We are appreciative of the necessity to fast-track the Commission on
Traditional Leadership Disputes and Claims because of the outstanding work
that still needs to be done; the agitation on the ground - in most of the
areas of our country - where people are concerned about those who, in the
opinion of their communities, are not really traditional leaders.

They need to be told in a manner that explains the negative consequences
that may arise from this. Consenquently, this commission and how it will
work, its modus operandi – learning from the previous commission – it must
be changed to make it more effective in providing for more provincial input
so that the solutions raised reflect the peculiarities of each province.
On this matter, hon Doman, ideologically, the problem with the old-
fashioned ideologists like you is that you don’t recognise the value of
managing polarities. Decentralisation and centralisation - the two go
together. Some things are best done at a national level and some at a local
level. You have to always look at situations; you can’t ... as if ... o
fana ka makgona tsohle ... [you are giving a solution to all problems] ...
a solution to all problems, every time, and say “decentralise”. It is
ridiculous; it doesn’t work in that way. [Applause.] You have to study,
look at the circumstances and look at what is best done and work on the
basis of circumstances - decentralise or centralise if appropriate. Yes,
you do that. This is what we agreed on with the Planning Commission, how it
is going to do it.

There is no doubt about accountability, since every institution of
government, elected or traditional, must be accountable to the people of
this country. We have required that governance must be people-centred and
people-driven. Communities in areas under the jurisdiction of traditional
leaders need to see them being responsive to their needs, especially if
they are using the state’s resources.

We are appreciative of the gender language of the legislation. This is the
responsibility we have as MPs. When the executive does it, it’s correct as
the hon member said appreciatively. It is not only in the language, in
other words, in the form, but the content of the work of this institution
must express its value to men and women, young and old people in their
work. It is for that reason that this important work needs to be followed
up.

The objection is that this happened at the behest of the executive. We
have, as Parliament, delegated that the executive will initiate legislation
and present it to us to look at it. In these instances, we negotiated and
agreed that in future we need to have a process that will allow a lot more
qualitative input and debate and discussion in different circumstances.
These are special circumstances. It is one of those species dealing with
the transition that we must treat exceptional without, thereby, giving up
our responsibility to engage in intense debate and discussions.

But we have been promised that legislation a this will be tabled and we’ll
deal with it appropriately and will continue to be in consultation with
traditional leaders. We are aware that a summit of traditional leaders will
be taking place, possibly in December, at which these issues on traditional
leaders will be addressed.

The civil society organisations and we ourselves should familiarise
ourselves with the legislation without being intimidated by the size that
Peter Smith is talking about. We have to read, Peter. It is the
responsibility that we undertook in our constituencies, that we will do
work in their name and interest. There is no doubt that the question of
costs is an issue that needs to be attended to.

Finally, the capacity of Parliament needs to improve dramatically around
technical mistakes that occurred. We need to get work done to minimise the
number of mistakes made in the legislation to be tabled before the House.
There is no question about the need for this capacity of work. Thank you
very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Bills be passed.

Question put: That the National House of Traditional Leaders Bill be
passed.

Division demanded.

The House divided:

   AYES - 201: Abram, S; Adams, L H; Adams, P E; Ainslie, A R; Bam-Mugwanya,
   V; Bapela, K O; Bhengu, P; Bhoola, R B; Bikani, F C; Bonhomme, T J;
   Borman, G M; Boshigo, D F; Botha, T; Botha, Y R; Burgess, C V; Carrim, Y
   I; Carter, D; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan, F I; Coetzee, T W;
   Coleman, E M; Dandala, H M; Davidson, I O; Davies, R H; Diale, L N;
   Dikgacwi, M M; Ditshetelo, I C; Dlamini, B O; Doman, W P; Dubazana, Z S;
   Dube, M C; Dudley, C; Dunjwa, M L; Ellis, M J; Farisani, T S; Figlan, A
   M; Fihla, N B; Fransman, M L; Fubbs, J L; Gaehler, L B; Gasebonwe, T M A;
   Gcume, N P; Gcwabaza, N E; Gelderblom, J P; George, D T; George, M E;
   Gina, N; Gololo, C L; Gona, M F; Greyling, L W; Gumede, D M; Gungubele,
   M; Hajaig, F; Johnson, M; Kalyan, S V; Kekane, C D; Kenye, T E; Khoarai,
   L P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, F E; Kilian, J D; Kohler-Barnard, D;
   Komphela, B M; Koornhof, N J J v R; Krumbock, G R; Kubayi, M T; Lekgetho,
   G; Lotriet, A; Luthuli, A N; Luyenge, Z; Maake, J J; Mabasa, X; Mabedla,
   N R; Madasa, Z L; Mafolo, M V; Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magwanishe, G;
   Makasi, X C; Makhubela-Mashele, L S; Makhubele, Z S; Malale, M I; Malgas,
   H H; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, J M; Manamela, K B; Manana, M C; Manganye,
   J; Mangena, M S; Manuel, T A; Mashishi, A C; Masutha, T M; Mataboge, D K;
   Mathebe, D H; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matladi, M N; Matshoba, J M;
   Maunye, M M; Mavunda, D W; Mazibuko, L D; Mbalula, F A; Mbhele, PD;
   Mbili, M E; Mdakane, M R; Mdladlana, M M S; Mfeketo, N C; Mjobo, L N;
   Mkhize, L N; Mnguni, P B; Mnisi, N A; Mnqasela, M; Mocumi, P A; Mohale, M
   C; Molao, S K; Molebatsi, M A; Morutoa, M R; Motshekga, M S; Mthethwa, E
   M; Mufamadi, T A; Nchabeleng, M E; Ndabandaba, L B G; Ndabeni, S T;
   Ndude, H N; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo,
   E N N; Ngele, N J; Ngonyama, L S; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S J;
   Njobe, M A A; Nkwinti, G E; November, N T; Ntapane, S Z; Ntshiqela, P;
   Ntuli, Z C; Nxesi, T W; Nxumalo, M D; Nyama, M M A; Nyekemba, E;
   Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C; Petersen-Maduna, P; Pretorius, P J C;
   Radebe, B A; Ramatlakane, L; Rantsolase, M A; Rwexana, S P; Schneemann, G
   D; Sefularo, M; Segale-Diswai, M J; Selau, G J; Selfe, J; Shinn, M R;
   Sibanyoni, J B; Sibhidla, N N; Sithole, S C N; Sizani, P S; Skosana, J J;
   Smith, V G; Smuts, M; Snell, G T; Sogoni, E M; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M;
   Steele, M H; Stofile, M A; Suka, L; Sulliman, E M; Sunduza, T B; Surty, M
   E; Thabethe, E; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tlake, M F; Tolo, L J; Trollip, R A
   P; Tsebe, S R; Tsenoli, S L; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Tsotetsi, D R;
   Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van Dalen, P; Van den Berg, N J; Van der Linde, J J;
   Van der Merwe, S C; Van der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Van Rooyen, D D; Van
   Schalkwyk, H C; Van Wyk, A; Vukuza-Linda, N Y; Wenger, M; Williams, A J;
   Xaba, P P; Yengeni, L E.


   NOES - 11: Cebekhulu, R N; Lebenya-Ntanzi, S P; Lovemore, A T; Magama, H
   T; Mpontshane, A M; Msimang, C T; Msweli, H S; Ndlovu, V B; Oriani-
   Ambrosini, M G; Singh, N; Smith, P F.

Question agreed to.

National House of Traditional Leaders Bill accordingly passed.

Question put: That the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework
Amendment Bill be passed.

Division demanded.

The House divided:

   AYES - 212: Abram, S; Adams, L H; Adams, P E; Ainslie, A R; Bam-Mugwanya,
   V; Bapela, K O; Bhengu, P; Bhoola, R B; Bikani, F C; Bonhomme, T J;
   Borman, G M; Boshigo, D F; Botha, T; Botha, Y R; Burgess, C V; Carrim, Y
   I; Carter, D; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan, F I; Coetzee, T W;
   Coleman, E M; Dandala, H M; Davidson, I O; Davies, R H; De Freitas, M S
   F; Diale, L N; Ditshetelo, I C; Dlamini, B O; Doman, W P; Dubazana, Z S;
   Dube, M C; Dudley, C; Duncan, P C; Dunjwa, M L; Ellis, M J; Farisani, T
   S; Figlan, A M; Fihla, N B; Fransman, M L; Fritz, A T; Fubbs, J L;
   Gaehler, L B; Gasebonwe, T M A; Gcwabaza, N E; Gelderblom, J P; George, D
   T; George, M E; Gina, N; Gololo, C L; Gona, M F; Greyling, L W; Gumede, D
   M; Gungubele, M; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Johnson, M; Kalyan, S V; Kenye,
   T E; Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, F E; Kilian, J D; Kloppers-
   Lourens, J C; Kohler-Barnard, D; Komphela, B M; Koornhof, N J J v R;
   Kopane, S P; Krumbock, G R; Kubayi, M T; Lekgetho, G; Lotriet, A;
   Luthuli, A N; Luyenge, Z; Maake, J J; Mabasa, X; Mabedla, N R; Madasa, Z
   L; Madisha, W M; Mafolo, M V; Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magwanishe, G ;
   Makasi, X C; Makhubela-Mashele, L S; Makhubele, Z S; Malale, M I; Malgas,
   H H; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, J M; Manamela, K B; Manana, M C; Manganye,
   J; Mangena, M S; Manuel, T A; Marais, E J; Masango, S J; Mashishi, A C;
   Masutha, T M; Mataboge, D K; Mathebe, D H; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F;
   Matladi, M N; Matshoba, J M; Maunye, M M; Mavunda, D W; Maynier, D J;
   Mazibuko, L D; Mbalula, F A; Mbhele, P D; Mbili, M E; Mdakane, M R;
   Mdladlana, M M S; Mfeketo, N C; Mjobo, L N; Mkhize, H B; Mkhize, L N;
   Mnisi, N A; Mnqasela, M; Mocumi, P A; Mohale, M C; Mokgalapa, S; Molao, S
   K; Molebatsi, M A; Morutoa, M R; Motshekga, M S; Mtshali, E; Mufamadi, T
   A; Nchabeleng, M E; Ndabandaba, L B G; Ndabeni, S T; Ndude, H N; Newhoudt-
   Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J;
   Ngonyama, L S; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S J; Njobe, M A A; Nkwinti, G
   E; November, N T; Ntapane, S Z; Ntshiqela, P; Ntuli, Z C; Nxesi, T W;
   Nxumalo, M D; Nyama, M M A; Nyekemba, E; Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C;
   Petersen-Maduna, P; Pretorius, P J C; Radebe, B A; Ramatlakane, L;
   Rantsolase, M A; Rwexana, S P; Schafer, DA; Schmidt, J; Schneemann, G D;
   Sefularo, M; Segale-Diswai, M J; Selau, G J; Selfe, J; Shinn, M R;
   Sibanyoni, J B; Sibhidla, N N; Sithole, S C N; Sizani, P S; Skosana, J J;
   Smith, V G; Smuts, M; Snell, G T; Sogoni, E M; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M;
   Steele, M H; Steyn, A; Stofile, M A; Suka, L; Sulliman, E M; Sunduza, T
   B; Swart, M; Swathe, M M; Terblanche, J F; Thabethe, E; Thomson, B;
   Tinto, B; Tlake, M F; Tolo, L J; Tsebe, S R; Tsenoli, S L; Tshivhase, T
   J; Tshwete, P; Tsotetsi, D R; Twala, N M; Van Dalen, P; Van den Berg, N
   J; Van der Linde, J J; Van der Merwe, S C; Van der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M;
   Van Rooyen, D D; Van Schalkwyk, H C; Van Wyk, A; Waters, M; Wenger, M;
   Williams, A J; Xaba, P P; Yengeni, L E.

   NOES - 10: Cebekhulu, R N; Lebenya-Ntanzi, S P; Motau, S C; Mpontshane, A
   M; Msimang, C T; Msweli, H S; Ndlovu, V B; Oriani-Ambrosini, M G; Singh,
   N; Smith, P F.

Question agreed to.

Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Amendment Bill accordingly
passed.

 REPEAL OF BLACK ADMINISTRATION ACT AND AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN LAWS AMENDMENT
                                    BILL

                          (Consideration of Report)

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Are there any objections? Hon
Mpontshane?

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Chair, the IFP won’t call for a division or object this
time. [Laughter.]

Motion agreed to.

Report adopted.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF AD HOC COMMITTEE TO CONSIDER AND REPORT ON GREEN
            PAPER ON NATIONAL STRATEGIC PLANNING, SEPTEMBER 2009

Mr T A MUFAMADI: Chairperson, hon members and Ministers present here ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon members ... sicela ukuthi noma
ngabe siyahleka, sihlekele phansi, uma singakwazi ukuhleba kungcono sithule
noma siphumele ngaphandle. [... my request to you is that even if you are
laughing, keep it down, and if you cannot keep your voices down, you better
keep quiet or leave the House.]

You may continue, hon member.

Mr T A MUFAMADI: ... the immense socioeconomic challenges facing the
leadership of this country, irrespective of political affiliation or
differences, demand of all of us that everything we say and everything we
seek to do as a people must be guided and underpinned by our common desire
to achieve our long-term strategic objectives. That is the creation of a
prosperous, nonracial, nonsexist and democratic South Africa.

To achieve this national project, there is a need to forge a national
consensus, translated into a national long-term plan, which will be clearly
defined in terms of short-term interventions in the form of a developmental
state. Secondly, our discussions must be guided by the work we have done in
the last 15 years. We need to take stock of our successes and failures, and
identify the areas that need serious attention, to improve the quality of
life of the ordinary masses of our people. Therefore, the Green Paper
should be seen as the beginning and not the end of a process that seeks to
enhance or improve the work of government that is undergoing serious
structural changes.

Let me take this opportunity to congratulate the executive on taking this
bold and courageous step, in particular the Minister in the Presidency
responsible for the National Planning Commission, by engaging Parliament in
the consultative processes that seek to generate public discussions on how
government can best improve its work. Judging by the number of written
submissions and public debates on this topic, there is no doubt that it is,
indeed, a matter of national importance. It is an important proposal that
will have a far-reaching, really positive impact on the successes of a
developmental state.

I must mention and commend the high interest that the opposition parties
have shown in the processing of this matter. Not only did they participate
in the committees, but they also did so at the highest level of their
leadership.

What is the Green Paper all about? The Green Paper is a platform to test
ideas, to consult with the public, to broaden the debate and build
consensus around a national vision. Through the ad hoc committee,
Parliament, as a vehicle to realise the abovementioned objectives, has
succeeded in discharging its mandate.

After going through this process, the committee also agreed that not all
the issues raised in the Green Paper would be resolved overnight. Some of
the issues should be treated as work in progress that the executive must,
and will, continue to pay attention to. Equally, Parliament will also have
to continue on an ongoing basis to perfect its oversight role in line with
the challenges that are arising at the level of government.

Some of the concerns raised with the committee during the public hearings
or through written submissions included the following: the leadership and
location of the National Planning Commission; over-concentration of power
at the centre and probably with one or so individuals, to the exclusion of
the executive; inclusivity of the National Planning Commission in terms of
appointing national commissioners, but also independent institutes that
tend to take on a life of their own and become unaccountable; and the
status of the National Planning Commission, as an advisory body or a
statutory body.

The other concern that was raised was that there might be a tendency from
the centre to undermine the constitutional provisions, in terms of other
spheres of government, such as municipalities, in terms of planning, and
concerns that strategic plans of other spheres will be undermined by the
centre. Centralisation of planning equals state planning, to the exclusion
of market objectivity, and it might inhibit creativity in the line
departments and other spheres of government.

I must say that after processing more than 56 written submissions and eight
oral submissions, there were more areas of agreement than disagreement,
that South Africa needs a long-term plan to guide shorter term trade-offs.
It needs to improve planning and co-ordination at the level of government,
but interrelationships between policy planning, monitoring and evaluation
are intertwined.

We need international experience in appointing the national planning
commissioners, but not to the exclusion of local experience and local
competence. There is a need for the National Planning Commission to be
located within the Presidency, and the Minister responsible for the
National Planning Commission should supervise the activities of this
commission. The national plan is the domain of the executive committee,
meaning Cabinet.

An area that needs further clarification is the status of the National
Planning Commission: if it is considered as an advisory body, whether the
process is going to culminate in a White Paper, and constitutional
provisions to protect the autonomy or plans from other spheres.

In conclusion, it is our considered view that, as the ad hoc committee, we
have discharged our mandate as expected by this House. We have provided the
public with the platform for South Africans to engage with the consultative
document, and their concerns and advice are of great value that has shaped
the overall thrust of this document or report. We appreciate the
consultation sought by government from Parliament to process this important
debate.

As regards our recommendations, I will not go through all of them. They are
there in the report, but I think it is important that, as Parliament, we
should support that the Green Paper on National Strategic Planning should
be allowed to proceed and that the National Planning Commission should be a
body that should be supervised by the Minister in the Presidency
responsible for the National Planning Commission. Lastly, the primacy of
Cabinet should not be debatable. I, therefore, recommend that the House
accepts and supports the report as tabled before this House. Thank you.
[Applause.]

 REPEAL OF BLACK ADMINISTRATION ACT AND AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN LAWS AMENDMENT
                                    BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon members, can we please go back
to the Fifth Order? The question that was put was put as the report that
should be adopted. However, the question was supposed to enquire whether
there were any objections to the Bill being read a second time. Are there
any objections? No objections. Agreed to. The secretary will read the Bill
a second time.

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

Mr P F SMITH: Sorry, Chair, may I ask which Bill you are referring to?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): The Fifth Order is on the Repeal
of Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws Amendment Bill.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, the DA firmly supports the
establishment of a national vision and long-term planning. However,
consider the words of Alexis de Tocqueville when he described what kind of
despotism democratic nations have to fear, and I quote:

   Over these men stands an immense tutelary power, which assumes sole
   responsibility for securing their pleasure and watching over their fate.
   It is absolute, meticulous, regular, provident, and mild. It would
   resemble paternal authority if only its purpose were the same, namely, to
   prepare men for manhood. But on the contrary, it seeks only to keep them
   in childhood irrevocably. It likes citizens to rejoice, provided they
   think only of rejoicing. It works willingly for their happiness but wants
   to be the sole agent and only arbiter of that happiness. It provides for
   their security, foresees and takes care of their needs, facilitates their
   pleasures, manages their most important affairs, directs their industry,
   regulates their successions, and divides their inheritances. Why not
   relieve them entirely of the trouble of thinking and the difficulty of
   living?

In the extract De Tocqueville describes the particular guise that despotism
might take in future democratic states. His fear was that democracy would
become a proxy for control and that the centralisation of power could
produce a government the purpose of which was to manage, not merely the
organs of state, but the private affairs of individuals.

De Tocqueville does not suggest this process is violent, but mild; and its
realisation not sudden, but gradual. Little by little it robs each citizen
of the use of his own faculties. The danger, then, lies in the fact that
this threat is not immediately apparent. The primary challenge facing the
citizens of any democratic state begins in recognising how it manifests
itself contemporarily, and then in acting to counter its influence.

His warning is prescient and relevant still today. Central to this threat
is the agenda of the ANC, its understanding of the role it plays in society
and the manner in which its pursuit of power manifests itself in government
thinking. Ideologically incapable of properly separating party and state
and, through a policy of cadre deployment and a culture of nepotism,
practically concerned with bending all key levers of power to its own will.


The ANC has overseen a decade-long destructive drive to centralise power.
The result of this has been that those institutions designed both to
deliver basic services, hon Stofile, and to act as a bulwark against an
encroaching majority have seen their integrity systematically denuded.
Against this background the ANC has proposed the establishment of a
National Planning Commission.

The Green Paper, which sets out the vision that would underpin such an
institution, has all the characteristics of the veiled intent that belies
cadre deployment. It uses phrases like national interest and ideas such as
a single national vision to detract from the way in which it would
centralise control. It uses universal problems like poverty and HIV and
Aids as the excuse to justify a series of possible interventions for it
proposes no checks or balances.

Most disturbingly, and clearly underlying the entire Green Paper, is the
assumption that the ANC would have been elected to power at every level. We
know that that is not the case. Co-ordination and planning is not merely a
matter of encouraging best democratic practice but of ensuring that ANC
policy is adhered to and properly implemented.

Any proper and objective analysis of a National Planning Commission must
interrogate the institution itself; in other words, the structure and
powers of the mechanism as opposed to the intent of those individuals in
charge of managing it. This distinction has not been properly made to date.
In much the same fashion, one needs to draw a distinction between the
National Planning Commission’s ability to generate a co-ordinated plan and
the power it may or may not have to implement that plan.

The Green Paper does not sufficiently address these latter two concerns. It
talks in generics and uses imperatives such as poverty eradication to mask
a less well-defined and possibly far more powerful set of political
objectives, which are only ever hinted at. For example, the paper says
things like:

   The state has a leading role to play in reshaping the economy; our
   society needs more than coherent plans to shape our programmes,
   priorities and budgets; the commission needs to strengthen the
   relationship between state and society; the planning process will allow
   the state to identify the self-interest of various sectors and, where
   practicable, synthesise these into a common national interest;
   operational plans must take account of the broader national plan.

It says:

   We need an agreed vision about the country’s direction; an agency that
   can authoritatively and forcefully drive planning, monitoring and
   evaluation and institutional improvements; the commission will have the
   power to investigate under the supervision of the Minister for National
   Planning specific areas of policy the results of which would be presented
   to Parliament and prepared for decisions where appropriate; the Minister
   in the Presidency for National Planning will be politically accountable
   for delivering certain outputs; and that, in order to achieve that, he
   will have to be backed by a well-organised and technically capable
   institutional machinery infused with a high degree of authority and
   leverage.


There has also been a tendency to measure this proposal against the public
record of the Minister responsible for its formulation. This is a mistake.
I must tell this House that the Minister himself will be the first to admit
that this proposal is a consequence of the ANC’s policy. It was conceived
with the ANC’s approval and it was designed to oversee, first and foremost,
the implementation of the ANC’s programme of action.

The real test of this proposal, as it is with any institution, is the
answer to the following question: Will the structural integrity of this
institution prevent its abuse in the wrong hands of a particular
individual, or in the hands of an organisation concerned with the
centralisation and abuse of power at the expense of our democratic state?
[Interjections.] If it was in your hands, hon member, it would be opposed
more vigorously, but in the hands of Trevor Manuel, we are not too
concerned, but if it is in your hands ...

... siya kuba nengxaki enkulu. [... we are going to have a big problem.]

Against this background, a political culture, which has created and
continues to promote a policy of cadre deployment, deliberately blurring
the line between party and state and a political programme, which is
focused on centralising power, the proposal that a National Planning
Commission be established cannot be supported. It is a proxy for control.
In the hands of the ANC NEC, its ostensible purpose and power masks a more
dangerous reality. It is a focal point for power, which, as part of the
ANC’s political agenda, stands in stark contrast to the federal nature of
our constitutional democracy.

An important point that must be made is that the DA agrees that every
government needs to plan. We welcome and fully support any government
initiative in this regard; the purpose of which is to better co-ordinate
and more effectively map the country’s future. Identifying norms and
standards and articulating strategic objectives are a critical component of
effective governing, without which any administration will flounder.
However, the Constitution provides certain conditions to which such
planning must adhere. It clearly and expressly identifies the boundaries
that define the influence of the national administration and any plan
generated on its part must, in turn, adhere to those boundaries.

The proposal contained in the Green Paper fails to adequately satisfy these
conditions. It fails properly to account for the ANC’s policy of cadre
deployment and does not attempt to describe how such an institution would
not be protected from the ANC’s inability to properly separate party and
state, or its party political agenda.

Furthermore, there is the assumption that a single party governs all
spheres of the South African state. This is not true. And while it is a
constitutional imperative that all provinces “maintain essential national
standards and meet established minimum standards” in rendering services,
outside of that requirement, a province’s plans and strategies for
achieving those objectives cannot be dictated by the national
administration.

Chapter 3 of the South African Constitution describes the nature of co-
operative governance in South Africa in sections 41(1)(e), (f) and (g).
That chapter states, among other things, that all spheres of government and
all organs of state within each sphere must -

   (e)    respect the constitutional status, institutions, powers and
        functions of government in the other spheres;


   (f)    not assume any power or function except those conferred on them in
        terms of the Constitution;
   (g)    exercise their powers and perform their functions in a manner that
        does not encroach on the geographical, functional or institutional
        integrity of government in another sphere.

As this Green Paper stands, the DA is not satisfied that these provisions
will be adhered to. As such, we propose the following recommendations: That
the ANC’s policy of cadre deployment be abandoned. It has done irreparable
harm to our democracy and if its imposition is facilitated by a National
Planning Commission, the damage it has caused will become far more acute;
that the Planning Commission’s mandate be limited simply to the production
and co-ordination of policy and not to include any powers or authority to
impose that plan on any organ of state or sphere of government; that the
Planning Commission’s plans and strategies adhere to the constitutional
requirement that no one single course of action be imposed on every sphere
of government; and that under no circumstances should the process of
formulating a White Paper on the National Planning Commission be by-passed
or expedited.

The White Paper will set out the precise powers and the particular nature
of the commission and, if those vague suggestions in the Green Paper are
any indication as to the nature of these powers, they are inappropriate
and, possibly, unconstitutional. Their precise nature needs to be properly
defined before any considered position on this proposal can be adopted.
When we pass this legislation in this House today, we must consider what
its impact would be in different hands and at different times.

In conclusion, it’s worth turning one last time to De Tocqueville, who
makes the following observation, and I quote:

   There are many people nowadays who adjust quite easily to a compromise of
   this kind between administrative despotism and popular sovereignty and
   who believe they have done enough to guarantee the liberty of individuals
   when in fact they have surrendered that liberty to the national
   government.

And so the ANC government is facing two challenges - a pragmatic and an
ideological problem. What this Green Paper fails to understand, is that the
pragmatic problem, a huge skills deficit and a failure to deliver, is born
out of the very ideological problem it now posits as a solution -
centralisation and a drive to control every aspect of the South African
democratic state.

If one is to properly address those practical challenges facing our country
one must first reverse the ideological drive that underpins their creation.
This Green Paper achieves the very opposite. It reinforces centralisation
with little or no reference to any appropriate checks and balances. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Chairperson, for weeks, the matter of the commission has
been hanging in the air. Thankfully, we are here at last to talk about the
Green Paper on National Strategic Planning.

The one thing almost all of us can agree on is the need for proper long-
term and clear-sighted planning to effect cohesive and durable government
programmes and a buy-in from all role-players.

Of plans, Robert Burns wrote:


   The best-laid schemes o’ mice an’ men
   Gang aft agley,
   An’lea’e us nought but grief an’ pain,
   For promis’d joy!

Since we, as Cope, agree with that, we need to place a few issues on the
table. First of all, we support the report of the ad hoc committee.
Therefore, we need to make a clear differentiation between a long-term
strategic plan and plans for integrated government. Long-term plans take a
long-term view; they are discussed by the people as a whole, and are not
fundamentally altered by mandates that governments obtain in elections.
Mandates are meant to deliver the long-term plans in an effective and
efficient manner. The distinction between the two must remain clear.

The fact that the National Planning Commission, NPC, and the Minister in
the Presidency: Performance Monitoring and Evaluation as well as
Administration are located in the Presidency ought to signify to the nation
that government is very serious about the three critical Ds - democracy,
development and direction.

As Cope, we would have implemented an activist state so that people could
start tasting the fruit of democracy rather that waiting for the
developmental state to come about some time in the future.

People are losing confidence in the government. State enterprises are at
sixes and sevens. Will these enterprises ever conform to any master plan?
In our view, in these parastatals, self-interests will not allow the public
interest to flourish.

It is common knowledge, as the Minister of Finance indicated yesterday,
that corruption, like cancer, has spread throughout the government. Under
these circumstances, will the NPC not just become another Reconstruction
and Development Programme, RDP, document where we have turf wars that will
prevent the National Strategic Plan, NSP, from remaining intact?

I understand a few things about “iindlovu” [elephants.] and I, therefore,
am asking if this will not just be a white elephant. Let’s be very clear.
Cope recognises that we need co-ordinated planning in South Africa so that
we can have a clear vision of what we want to achieve as a nation. Our
question is whether or not Ministries and government entities and agencies
will sing from a common hymnbook. It is not with the theory that we are
concerned, but the praxis.

For the government, this is indeed the last throw of the dice. The very
credibility of the government hangs in the balance. It has to get this
right.

When all the fundamentals are altering to such an extent and in such a
manner, we have to be fundamentally certain that we have a plan that is
credible, clear with a vision, relevant and practical. There are totally
new imperatives in the new changed economic and natural landscape, and we
must have a brilliant master plan.

The essence of this Green Paper is that we are pushing for what we can term
OBG – that is an outcomes-based government. We hope that the obsession in
government will not be with recordkeeping to the exclusion of
implementation and delivery, because outcomes-based education, OBE, failed
in schools, and OBG will fail in government if not properly executed.

I now come to the commissioners. The idea of using experts outside of
government is a sterling idea until one considers what happened to Bobby
Godsell.

Our concern in Cope as we look ahead is whether or not the national vision
will cohere, given the manner in which contestations within the ruling
party are currently taking place. Minister, let the challenges that you
have in government be as complex as you can handle, but Cope is asking that
the structure you are proposing as a solution be made lean and simple.

Cope is in favour of setting clear national goals, but, as with OBE, we do
not want this government to become obsessive about administration and
monitoring. Our support for the Green Paper is conditional on Parliament
retaining its full mandate and power in respect of monitoring government.
[Time expired.]

Mr N SINGH: Chairperson and hon members, in processing the Green Paper, we,
in the IFP, did not try and look for a snake behind every bush, but
participated, being mindful of the fact that since 1994 our country’s
development has been contradictory and that there has been progress,
stagnation and regression.

Whilst we should be proud of what we have collectively achieved over the
past 15 years, poverty especially remains as critical as ever with the
numbers of the poor increasing every year. Inequality is growing, and the
income gap between the rich and the poor is widening. Obscene wealth lives
alongside obscene poverty.

In the past 15 years, many promises have been made, many of which have just
been empty promises. As the recent service delivery protests highlighted,
many South Africans still lack access to basic services, sustainable jobs,
quality education and healthcare and security.

Fifteen years since the dawn of democracy, South Africa stands at a
crossroads. Ordinary citizens are demanding that the promise of a better
life for all be fulfilled.

The IFP’s vision of a prosperous society is one in which mass poverty is
eradicated and in which our people are able to pursue a better life. The
IFP believes that addressing our societal ills is not just a matter of
changing policies, but how one deals with them. For too long, policies have
remained mere pieces of paper. One thing has been said, and another done.

We, therefore, welcome government’s frank admission in the Green Paper on
National Strategic Planning that their lack of coherent long-term planning
has limited their capacity to mobilise all of society in pursuit of its
development objectives.

Furthermore, we welcome the admission that a weakness in the co-ordination
of government has led to policy inconsistencies and, in several cases, to
poor service delivery outcomes and also that government faces serious
challenges in intergovernmental co-ordination.

We would like to reiterate our support for a co-ordinated service delivery
plan, which must ensure that policies do not remain mere pieces of paper,
but can be implemented on the ground.

The IFP, however, warns against the potential danger of using this National
Planning Commission, NPC, to centralise too much power in the hands of
government. We see the role of this new NPC merely as a co-ordinator
between the three spheres of government in line with the Constitution of
our country.

We have a few concerns, and I will just highlight one or two matters. One
of them is: what role will Parliament play? In this respect, hon members,
the IFP suggests that there should be a standing committee on the NPC to
ensure that Parliament has checks and balances against political influence
and to ensure that the voices of those we represent are taken into
consideration.

We also want to emphasise that, as the National Planning Commission goes
about its work and focuses on specific areas of research, such as the
eradication of poverty, unemployment or meeting the Millennium Development
Goals, MDG, etc, there must be maximum consultation with all stakeholders.
All voices must be heard on the issues that this commission will be dealing
with. Broad consensus from all sectors of our society is needed if the
commission wants to reach its goal of building a truly nonracial,
nonsexist, prosperous and democratic society.

The IFP supports the recommendations in the Green Paper and we would like
to thank the chairperson and other hon members for the collegiality that
exists in the ad hoc committee. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms M F TLAKE: Hon House Chairperson, South Africa as a democratic state is
founded on the provisions of the Freedom Charter, the national democratic
revolution, the Constitution and the ANC manifesto. These provisions uphold
the values of human rights, human dignity and human freedoms.

I want to reassure the hon Trollip and the hon Ngonyama that the ANC-led
government will indeed improve the lives of the people through this Green
Paper and this strategic national plan.

In the situation that we are in now, we find that South Africa is grounded
on the national strategic objectives as entrenched in Chapter 2 of the
Constitution - the Bill of Rights – to render this country nonracial,
nonsexist, united and democratic in order to redress the atrocities of the
past.

In the past 15 years significant progress has been made by the ANC-led
government through the establishment of a stable economic platform that has
enabled investment and the provision of basic quality services to our
communities to improve their lives. However, through massive public
participation processes, research has shown that, in order for South Africa
to realise its strategic objectives and its vision, we need a coherent, co-
ordinated, long-term plan that will provide clear and consistent policies,
and for there to be sustainable monitoring and evaluation tools which will
enhance quality implementation of our co-ordinated programmes that are
envisaged to provide quality service delivery to communities.

In order to overcome this challenge, the Presidency, led by the Minister in
the Presidency: National Planning Commission, tabled a Green Paper on
National Strategic Planning in Parliament on 8 September 2009. The Green
Paper calls for a vast public participation process in which different
stakeholders will take part.

This led to the ad hoc committee processing 56 written submissions to
ensure a democratic, open and consultative process. The ad hoc committee
found that most submissions agreed on the need for the establishment of a
national planning body, as captured in the report, known as the National
Planning Commission, for the development of a strategic, national,
coherent, long-term plan for South Africa.
A national, strategic, long-term plan is critical, as it will clearly
define the measurable objectives a country such as South Africa has set for
itself. It assesses at a micro level where a country is in relation to its
strategic objectives, and describes the policies, programme options and
trade-offs required to achieve those measurable objectives in terms of the
desired outcome for the country.

As the ad hoc committee, we therefore call on Parliament to support the
Green Paper on National Strategic Planning as well as the National Planning
Commission in order to promote intergovernmental work, interrelatedness, as
opposed to working in silos by the different spheres of government, a co-
ordinated approach to matters of national interest, sustainable monitoring
and evaluation tools for quality service delivery to our communities. As we
all know, working together we can do more. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L W GREYLING: Hon Chair, unlike the DA, the ID certainly supports the
formation of the National Planning Commission. It was our sincere hope that
this Planning Commission would be able to build consensus in our country
around a national vision and the kind of plans that are needed to achieve
it.

This is supposed to represent a new era in governance, one in which
different views are engaged with in a constructive manner so as to produce
outcomes that all of us can buy into. Unfortunately, though, even before we
had processed the Green Paper, differences within the Cabinet emerged and
this issue become a divisive rather than a unifying one.

The ID, therefore, urges the President to pronounce on the parameters of
each of the new Ministries, which is something I tried to get the Minister
to do to no avail.

It is hoped that the White Paper process will also clarify issues such as a
greater role for Parliament in the planning process and an oversight
mechanism that covers the appointment of commissioners.

The ID, however, supports the adoption of this report. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, as economist James Galbraith stated:

   Planning, properly conceived, deals with the use of today’s resources to
   meet tomorrow’s needs. It specifically tackles issues markets cannot
   solve.


And -


   In a properly designed system, planning and markets do not contradict one
   another.

There can be no doubt that challenges such as climate change, energy
supply, food and water security, and structural inequalities such as
systemic poverty, require longer-term planning. It will, of course, be
necessary to involve independent experts and strategic thinkers in
determining these long-term planning priorities and to draw up a national
strategic plan.

For the ACDP, the fact that planning internationally has been used by
dictators to impose a specific agenda only highlights the absolute
necessity for Parliament to play a far greater role in oversight over the
National Planning Commission, and a standing committee should be
established for this purpose. Any tendency to centralise or abuse power
would then be held in check.

The ACDP agrees that this process can only benefit by developing a White
Paper first. We will support the report on this basis. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mrs L S MAKHUBELA-MASHELE: Chairperson and hon colleagues, I greet you all.

A review of the past 15 years and an analysis of the challenges for the
next decade clearly indicate that unemployment, inequality, HIV/Aids and
poverty stand out as the foremost challenges of our time. We cannot talk of
a better future without decisively tackling these types of challenges.
Secondly, transforming a state and building its capacity to act as a co-
ordinated, cohesive and effective instrument of change is another important
challenge.

The mobilisation of all sectors of society, including their resources,
behind a shared vision is required. Such a vision should be a concrete
expression of how the National Planning Commission intends to mobilise the
different sectors of our society around a shared vision.

In order to effectively tackle these challenges, there is a need for both a
transformed and a developmental state that works effectively with the
different sectors of our society behind a clearly articulated shared
vision. There is a need to establish a unifying agency for the overarching
shared vision around which the state, civil society, communities and the
private sector will work together to build a better future for all of us.
This overarching shared vision will go some way towards answering the
economic, social and political questions around the kind of society that we
are seeking to build.

Some countries, such as Brazil, India, Malaysia and Tunisia, have already
adopted a firm and unshakeable position to establish and implement long-
term strategic planning in order to set a coherent vision backed by clear
and measurable objectives.

The aim of the long-term planning was not to sacrifice the medium- and
short-term needs of societies, but to ensure that there was a long-term
horizon, of about 10 to 30 years, which caters for both medium- and short-
term planning.

From international best practices it becomes clear that, for this long-term
planning to succeed and ensure sustained growth and development, is largely
dependent on the mobilisation of the public service and all other members
of society at large.

Parliament is a constitutionally mandated forum for public participation on
matters of national interest. The Green Paper, as a consultative and a
discussion paper, was considered in a manner that accommodated public
interest and allowed for national consultation. Parliament has also
provided the platform for matters of national interests to be debated and
considered. It has played its role as a representative of the people.

During the public participation process it became clear that there was
general consensus on the need for the establishment of this unifying
planning body, which will co-ordinate and advance the policy direction and
priorities of government in the long term.

There is, therefore, an urgent need to act swiftly and expedite our actions
so that, as a country, we are able to address the challenges of economic
growth with equitably shared benefits; decent jobs and sustainable
livelihoods; accessible quality education and skills development; reduction
of poverty and inequality; rural development; improved health care for all;
community safety; and social cohesion in a united nation, in a way that is
structured from the short to the long term. Thank you.

Mr M GUNGUBELE: House Chairperson, hon members of this House, what is
crucial is that we are in the process of nation-building. As proposed in
the Green Paper, there are implications in accepting walking on that path.

In the Green Paper it is proposed that since we are a nation, we need to
agree on a national vision. We need to have a short-, medium- and long-term
national plan. The major implication for that kind of a situation is that
there is a need for a planning mechanism; a planning system according to J
K Galbraith, as quoted in the document.

In this situation a national buy-in is critical. What are the determinants
of a national buy-in? The importance of those determinants is informed by a
system that is aware of the fact that, for any nation to succeed, it needs
a policy that releases the capacity of its own people. What are the
determinants to release that capacity? It is a short-, medium- and long-
term predictability, especially in a globalised village, involving an open
economy like ours, with limited substitutes against foreign imports.
Another determinant is a minimum certainty that society must begin to plan
its life in the long term, based on the assertion and existence of that
certainty. Other determinants are consistency, which is a hallmark of
integrity; coherence, which provides for dependability in the environment
within which one operates; and continuity, because there are instances
where the success of the project of various stakeholders lies in long-term
continuity. Thus, a national planning mechanism must seek to host and
affect the above elements.

It seems, in principle, that there is an agreement on all the issues I have
just articulated. However, there are challenges that lie in the fear of
centrality - at times an attempt to cast aspersions on the role of the
state as stated in the Constitution. For instance, I have tried to find the
basis of this fear, but I could not find it. Is it sometimes ignorance or
negation of our Constitution, or is it ideology for ideology’s sake? By the
way, there is a difference between adhering to an ideology for change and
being a fanatic for an ideology for ideology’s sake.

If you read the Constitution, I would not have accused you as a fanatic of
your ideology. If you read the following words - in the very same section -
that say:

   All spheres should and must secure the wellbeing of the people and they
   must preserve the peace, national unity and the indivisibility of the
   Republic.

I think if you are not that fanatic, this part is very important. The very
same section you read deals with the people of the Republic, not the people
of the Western Cape or Eastern Cape. Also, the very same section you have
read speaks about areas of common interest throughout the country, as well
as the need for effective co-operation.

What does the Green Paper say? There is a distinction between planning and
policy-making. Planning, as articulated in the Green Paper, details an
account of how to implement policy, thus translating policy into short-,
medium- and long-term objectives. It ensures prioritising objectives and
sequencing implementation.

Of course, the Green Paper does accept that this distinction is less clear.
But it will be argued that the very act of developing a vision and setting
long-term objectives, as articulated in the Green Paper, is part of the
essence of policy-making. Implementing a strategic plan could be a tool to
expose policy gaps.

In other words, a debate on who should plan or implement policy amongst a
collective could unintentionally create a cumbersome relationship or
interaction. It could border on superfluity. The simple dictionary view of
policy states that it is a mere course of action, thus you can plan to
develop or devise policy to implement a plan.

How does the Green Paper attempt to address this predicament? It argues
that governance consists of a continuum of related activities which feed
into one another. These activities are as follows: policy development;
strategic and operational planning; resolution; resource allocation;
implementation; and performance, monitoring and evaluation. Page 13 of the
document states that, “all departments and spheres of government undertake
elements of each of these activities”.

What determines the depth of these undertakings are the functions and
responsibilities as defined by the Constitution. And I repeat, hon Trollip,
“as defined by the Constitution”. Therefore, I would have been comfortable
if you had done a critique of the inadequacy of our Constitution to deal
with this phenomenon before speaking about the checks and balances ...
[Interjections.]

In other words, one of the key things that we must actually take care of is
that, in a country that comes from a divided history, positive leadership
exploits every initiative as a means of interaction to continue, through
trial and error, to find one another. You don’t object to a policy upfront
or before it is implemented and declare it a sin.
In that context, we have no hesitation, as the ANC, in agreeing with the
IFP on the fact that there is a need to begin to look at the extent to
which Parliament corresponds with the new initiatives in the executive.
This will ensure that we move together for mutual accountability, using a
language that ensures we understand one another.

In that context ... sithi uMzantsi Afrika mawucathule kuhle kunye.
Ungaphazanyiswa nto, ube yimbumba yamanyama ngoba ngaphandle koko
uyakungenelelwa zintshaba. Bakufika oogqoloma inkungu isemnyama. Khululeka
Mzantsi Afrika, ziphathe uzakhe ngokutsha. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[... we say that South Africa must tread carefully as one. It must not be
derailed by anything and it must be a united front, otherwise it will be
easy for enemies to penetrate our borders. Enemies will catch us unawares.
South Africa be free, administer and rebuild yourself. [Applause.]]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, one of the finest decisions the President could
have taken was to appoint the National Planning Commission. When India
established its planning commission it was going through a very bad period.


The success of the National Planning Commission is dependent on the
appointment of the people who are going to serve on it. We should not be
too race-conscious. The country must get the best economic planning brains
onto the National Planning Commission. If it is going to be political
favours that determine appointment, this wonderful structure will fail. In
my previous speech I referred to Prof Allahwala, a genius who performed an
economic miracle.

Of course, it is very important that the function of this commission and
what flows from it when accepted by the Cabinet and government must result
in implementation.

If we are all united in working together to ensure that there is delivery
and a reduction in unemployment and poverty, then we can say, 10 to 15
years later, that the National Planning Commission was worthwhile.

The MF supports the National Planning Commission.

Nkul X MABASA: Manana Mutshamaxitulu, hina va ANC hi vona Mpfapfarhuto wo
Sungula lowu vitaniwaka Pulani ya Rixaka wu ri wona wu nga ta endla leswaku
hi humelela ku ya emahlweni.

Afrika Dzonga ri le ku tsutsumeni hi rivilo lerikulu, rivilo ro fana na ra
xitimela xa gezi. Ri kongomile ku antswisa vutomi bya vanhu va Afrika
Dzonga. ANC yi vula leswaku yi fanele yi engetela rivilo leri Afrika Dzonga
ri tsutsumaka hi rona ku lunghisa leswi swi faneleke ku lunghisiwa. A ku
nga ha vi rivilo ra xitimela, ri ya va rivilo ra xihahampfhuka. Hi ndlela
leyi, Pulani ya Rixaka yi engetela mafurha ya rivilo ra ku tsutsuma ka ANC
hi ku lunghisa swilo leswi.

Yi lunghisa ku pfumaleka ka mitirho, swa rihanyu, swa dyondzo, nhluvukiso
wa swa le makaya, ku lwisana na vugevenga na makwanga. Freedom Charter yi
vurile leswaku, “Vanhu va ta fuma; ku ta va na rihanyu leri fikeleleka
vanhu hinkwavo, hambi u ri xisiwana kumbe xifumi.” Dr Aaron Motsoaledi u
vurile leswaku hi ya eku akeni Ndzindzakhombo wa Rihanyu wa Rixaka lowu nga
ta tiyisisa leswaku na munhu loyi a pfumalaka na tiki a kota ku nghena
exibedhlele a tshunguriwa tanihi mhunhu wa nkoka. [Mavoko.]

Hikwalaho ndzi vulaka leswaku ku ta va na rihanyu ra vanhu hinkwavo.
Swibedhlele, titliliniki, na tin’anga ta xintima va ta khomisana na Holobye
wa Rihanyu ku tiyisisa leswaku hambi byi ri vuvabyi bya HIV/Aids ha byi
hlula.

Loko ANC yi rhangele emahlweni a hi hluli hi nchumu. Yi endlile mihlolo hi
ku rahela xihlawuhlawu etlhelo. Na yona HIV/Aids hi yi kombetela hi rintiho
hi ku, ”Siku rin’wana hi ta ku hlula.”

Eka dyondzo, loko ANC yi vulavula hi dyondzo a yi swi vuli ntsena, yi vula
hi ku tiva leswaku matiko hinkwawo ya misava lawa ya humelelaka hi swa
ikhonomi na nhluvukiso wa vanhu ya endla sweswo hikwalaho ka ku veka
dyondzo emahlweni. Tinhlayo, Thekinoloji na Sayense, Xitsonga na Xinghezi
leswi Dr Vewoerd a nga hi tsona swona, hi swin’wana swa tidyondzo leti ti
faneleke ku dyondziwa swinene hi vuenti.

Vana va kona naswona va dyondza. Vana va hina va fanele va etlela dyondzo,
va lorha dyondzo no dya dyondzo. Vantshwa va fanele ku lemuka leswaku hi
1976 va hlurile ndzingo wa byalwa va wisa na mavhengele ya byalwa.
Namuntlha ndza hlamala leswaku swi endla hi yini leswaku byalwa lebyo bava
byo fana na ti ‘gin’ na burandi, hi ku va byi cheriwile swichukelana, vana
va hina va nghena eka byona va pela. Leswi ndzi swi vula hi ku kombisa
leswaku dyondzo i xilo lexikulu xo pfuna tiko.

Etindhawini ta le makaya hi tlhelo ra swa nhluvukiso wa le makaya na swa
misava xikan’we na swa vurimi, Freedom Charter yi ri, “Tiko na misava swi
ta nyikiwa na ku phemeriwa vanhu lava va yi tirhika.” ANC yi ta hatlisisa
ku averiwa ka misava. Vanhu va ta pfuniwa hi ku rimeriwa, ku nyikiwa
titeretere, na ku nyikiwa mbewu leswaku va byala swibyariwa leswi faneleke.

Ha swi tiva leswaku vanhu va hina va vekiwile eka tindhawu leti kayivelaka
mpfula. Mi nga ehleketi leswaku ANC a yi swi voni sweswo. Ha swi vona
leswaku laha hi nga lahleriwa kona hina vanhu va ntima hi 1913, hi laha
mpfula yi nga neki. Eka swona hi ri eka lava nga khoma tiko na misava va
nga vi na makolo na makwanga. Tiko i ra hinkwavo lava tshamaka eka rona.
Misava yaleyo a hi avelaneni yona, hi avelana tanihiloko hi ku vana va
munhu va xekelana nhloko ya njiya.

Loko mi nga endli sweswo swi ta endla leswaku vanhu van’wana va ntima va ta
twa ku vava no helela hi timbilu. Holobye wa Nhluvukiso wa le Makaya na
Mpfuxeto wa Misava u ri, “Titeretere, mapuluhu na swikomu hi ta swi nyika
vanhu loko va rima va hlanganile, ngopfungopfu loko va vumba mihlangano
leswaku va ta kota ku vuyeriwa hi ku tirhisana swin’we”.

Sweswi hi vulavula hi mitirho ... [Nkarhi wu herile.] (Translation of
Xitsonga speech follows.)

[Mr X MABASA: Madam Chairperson, we, as the ANC, see the Green Paper which
is referred to as the national strategy as the one that will ensure
progress.

South Africa is moving at a very high speed like the speed of an electric
train. It is heading for the betterment of the lives of the people of South
Africa. The ANC says that it is supposed to accelerate the speed at which
South Africa moves to fix what is supposed to be fixed. It will no longer
be the speed of a train, but it is going to be the speed of an aeroplane.
In this way, the National Planning Commission will accelerate the speed of
the ANC in regard to fixing things.

It addresses issues ranging from a lack of jobs to issues of health,
education and rural development as well as fighting crime and selfishness.
The Freedom Charter says, “The people shall govern; there shall be
accessible health for all, whether poor or rich”. Dr Aaron Motsoaledi said
that we are going to set up a National Health Insurance that will ensure
that every person who does not even have a half cent can enter a hospital
and be treated as a person with dignity. [Applause.]

That is the reason I am saying there will be better health for all.
Hospitals, clinics, and traditional doctors will work together with the
Minister of Health to ensure that we defeat even HIV/Aids diseases.

When the ANC is leading, nothing shall fail us. It has done wonders by
pushing apartheid aside. We are also pointing a finger at HIV/Aids and
saying, “One day we will defeat you.”

With regard to education, when the ANC talks about education, it is not
just talking; instead it is saying that on the basis that every country in
the whole world which is making progress economically and in the
development of people does so because of making education a priority.
Mathematics, Technology and Science, Xitsonga and English, of which
Verwoerd deprived us, are some of the subjects that have to be studied in
great depth.

There are children and they are learning. Our children should sleep
education, dream education and eat education. The youth should be made
aware that in 1976 they defeated the temptation of alcohol and destroyed
bottle stores. Today I am surprised as to what makes alcohol beverages such
as gin and brandy much sought after by our children, and it is because they
have added a little sugar. I am saying this to indicate that education is
key to helping the nation.

When it comes to the development of the rural areas, land and agriculture,
the Freedom Charter says, “The land shall be given to and shared among
those who work it.” The ANC will speed up the process of land restitution.
The people will need assistance with the cultivation of the land, and
should be provided with tractors and seeds so that they plants the right
crops.

We know that our people have been placed in areas which have a shortage of
rain. You must not think that the ANC does not see that. We know that where
we were thrown as black people in 1913, is where it does not rain.
Concerning this we say to those who have land that they must not be greedy
and selfish. The land is for those who live on it. We must share the land;
we must share the little we have as brothers.

If you do not do that, it will make some of the black people feel hurt and
they will become impatient. The Minister of Rural Development and Land
Reform says, “Tractors, ploughs and hoes will be given to those who plough
communally, particularly those who form organisations so that they benefit
by working together”.

Now we are talking about jobs ... [Time expired.]]

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: House
Chairperson, hon members, let me start by expressing appreciation to those
who participated in the work of the ad hoc committee. We understand that it
was akin to working in a “pressure-cooker”, but we are very appreciative of
the quality of the report prepared.

And, of course, we were there to witness the detail of the debate as it
proceeded. In saying that, we clearly want to express our appreciation to
the hon Mufamadi who chaired the committee, amongst other responsibilities
he had in the context of Parliament. We also want to express our
appreciation to all the parties that supported this.

Now it does appear that between all of that which happened in the committee
and the report here, something happened. Something happened. I’m trying to
understand, hon Trollip. “Ndisoyikiswa nguGodongwana.” [I’m threatened by
Godongwana.] Why have you created this straw man? That is what we have to
deal with.

That brings us to the scope of this discussion: Why the straw man? What is
the origin? You see, yesterday I sat in my seat and I listened to the hon
Trollip. He was exceedingly erudite on the successes of the Constitutional
Court in terms of its history and certainly under the tenure of former
Chief Justice Pius Langa.

What he was articulating yesterday is that South Africa’s Constitution and
the rights of people are protected by the strength of the Constitutional
Court. Today, he says “abandon hope”. We don’t have a Constitution. We
don’t have a Constitutional Court. We are as unprotected as the United
States was in 1835 when De Tocqueville wrote that piece – in trying to
understand what had happened between the French Revolution and the time
that he wrote that piece.

If you treat history in that way, sir, you will be trying to create what
the hon Narend Singh said - pretending that there is a snake that isn’t
actually there. [Applause.] That is part of the difficulty about the way in
which the DA has constructed the debate to argue against the importance of
planning.

Firstly, we must go back to the Constitution. The Green Paper starts with
the Constitution. It starts with the preamble to the Constitution. Part of
what the preamble to the Constitution entreats us to do is to deal with the
ravages of the past. It requires of us to build a South Africa that is
different from that which apartheid created. It asks of us, it compels us,
the preamble creates a mandatory circumstance that requires of us to deal
with the inequality and poverty that arose from apartheid.
The question that we therefore have to answer in the context of planning
is: How do you discharge that? That is the mandate. That mandate is in the
preamble. Chapter 3 talks about co-operative governance and asks of us to
recognise the distinctiveness, the interdependence and the interrelatedness
of the spheres of government. That is a check and balance. But it doesn’t
in any way detract from the mandate given to those of us who make laws in
this House, to advance a South Africa that is premised on the recognition
of the wrongs of the past.

So, as we deal with those issues, I think we then need to look at how
government needs to operate. Apart from the Constitutional Court, there’s
Parliament. One of the things I’ve said - I said it in the committee and
I’ll say it again – is that the way in which we can get planning to work is
to take out narrow sectional interests. The way in which the National
Planning Commission is constructed is a web of narrow sectional interests.
Also, it is necessary to plan beyond the term of a single government.

By planning beyond the term of a single government, we are saying to
opposition parties, “for heaven’s sake, have some ambition”. Have some
ambition. You are not going to remain in opposition unless you think
yourselves in opposition for life, and then we must wait until Jesus comes.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

But if you are going to change these issues, then it is important that you
understand that the planning deals with the shadow of history. Now, you
see, there is this wonderful quote from Galbraith. He says, “In the
discourse inherited from the age of Reagan, syphilis, leprosy and planning
more or less rank together: they are all no longer frightening, slightly
ridiculous, curable afflictions from another time.”

What Joseph Schumpeter thought drearily inevitable, what Friedrich von
Hayek denounces as the greatest threat to freedom, a later generation has
reduced to a sound bite. He says then that, after all, “the Soviet economy
was planned” and it has collapsed. “Does anything more need to be said?”
Instinctively, the epithet “central” is affixed to the word “planning” in
order to discredit it.

No economic topic except price control is more easily pushed off the table.
No declaration comes more easily than one that favours the market and
opposes planning – that needs to change.

If there is anybody in this House who believes that right now the market
will resolve the problems of inequality, of the absence of jobs, of the
absence of adequate health care, of the absence of access to adequate
public services, raise your hand because you are in the wrong place. But if
you understand that you are here because you have taken an oath that
ensures that we treasure the Constitution, then to suggest that the market
will resolve these problems places you outside of the oath that you took
right here before this podium. That is the issue we have to take forward.
It’s nothing else; it is that.

The issue is about understanding that we have to then deal with the shadow
of history, and, in dealing with the shadow of history, we must understand
that the state has to be an activist one. It has to be developmental. It
has to do that especially right now in the world. In fact, the two walls
are very important. On 9 November 1989 the Berlin Wall collapsed; on 15
October 2008 there was the almost collapse of Wall Street – the two walls.

But the collapse of Wall Street put to bed the notion of market
fundamentalism. It brings us back to what the Constitution requires of us,
and that is the discussion that we need in the context of planning.

This then brings us to the issue of the developmental state. This is what
Buck Gee suggests. Let us see what the developmental state means in the era
of the global spread of capitalism. It is a state that puts economic
development as a top priority of government policy and is able to design
effective instruments to promote such a goal.

The instruments would include the forging of new formal institutions – the
National Planning Commission – the weaving of formal and informal networks
of collaboration among the citizens and the officials, and the utilisation
of new opportunities for trade and profitable production. Whether the state
governs the market or exploits new opportunities thrown up by the market
depends on particular historic conjunctures.

That is what we have to take account of. Our mandate is to improve the
quality of life of all South Africans with a focus on the poorest. Our
mandate is to deal with the shadow of history that has denied access to so
many people in our country. Our mandate, therefore, must understand that
poverty is passed on from one generation to the next. And, if we want to
deal with it, then we have to do a lot better than what we have done in the
past 15 years.

I commend the Green Paper to this House, and ask for your support. We will
deal with the issues in the manner we committed ourselves to in the ad hoc
committee: that we would take up all of the issues. We have the report.
There are many formulations that are rather awkward in the document. We
will deal with those issues. But we ask that this House supports us as we
proceed. The object is to be measured in the lives of the poorest South
Africans. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:
  That the Report be noted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly noted.

  CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF AGREEMENT BETWEEN
  THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
  HONG KONG SPECIAL ADMINISTRATIVE REGION OF THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
   CONCERNING MUTUAL LEGAL ASSISTANCE IN CRIMINAL MATTERS AND SURRENDER OF
                             FUGITIVE OFFENDERS

Mr M GUNGUBELE: Madam Deputy Speaker, we are here to table a report that
deals with the following regarding the report by the Magistrates’
commission to our committee. But there are proposals and recommendations
that have been made to us. Firstly, there was a proposal to suspend a
particular magistrate called Ndamase ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, are we on the same order? The chairperson
of that particular portfolio committee is not here. [Interjections.] I can
see you are tired, hon members. [Interjections.] You can’t say no before
you know what I am going to say.

There was no debate.

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People’s
Republic of China concerning Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters
approved.

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People’s
Republic of China concerning Surrender of Fugitive Offenders approved.

   CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF ACCESSION TO THE
  REVISED COTONOU PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT: AGREEMENT AMENDING THE PARTNERSHIP
  AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE MEMBERS OF THE AFRICAN, CARIBBEAN AND PACIFIC GROUP
    OF STATES, OF THE ONE PART, AND THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY AND ITS MEMBER
                          STATES, OF THE OTHER PART

Mr T W NXESI: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, this is a report on the
revised Cotonou Partnership Agreement. The African-Caribbean-Pacific Group
and European Community, Partnership Agreement is a covenant between the
members of the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States, of the one
part, and the European Community and its member states of the European
Union, of the other part. It was signed in Cotonou, Benin, on 23 June 2000.

The Cotonou Agreement encompasses various aspects, including trade,
development and political co-operation. The underlying objective of this
partnership is embodied in Article 1 of the agreement, which provides that
it is meant to eradicate poverty and create an environment for sustainable
development to take place and eventually facilitate the integration of the
African, Caribbean and Pacific countries into the world economy.

The origin of the ACP group of states dates back to the Treaty of Rome,
which established the European Economic Community in 1957. The ACP
countries formalised their relationship with the European Community in
1975, when parties engaged in the preferential trade arrangement as part of
the Lomé Convention. The external parties only enjoyed preferential trade
as part of the general system of the preferences. Due to the fact that
external parties could not enjoy the same benefits as the ACP countries,
this arrangement put the Lomé trade regime at odds with the rules of the
World Trade Organisation. Hence, it had to be amended.

The 2005 revision of the agreement focuses on strengthening the political
dimension, by placing emphasis on the effective dialogue end results. In
addition, it also introduces new dimensions to the co-operative
arrangements, so as to include the new issues, such as co-operation in
countering the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, co-operation
in the fight against terrorism as well as against mercenary activities.

The revised agreement marks an important break with the past. It was
designed to promote economic, social and cultural development of the ACP
states, contribute to peace and security, and promote a stable and
democratic political environment.

South Africa participates in three joint political organs of the ACP-EU,
namely the Council of Ministers, the Joint Parliamentary Assembly, and the
Committee of Ambassadors. The ACP-EU also provides South Africa with the
opportunity to promote its policy objectives of strengthening South-South
co-operation, advancing the consolidation of the African agenda, and
advancing economic regional integration.

South Africa has to accede to the agreement, as the stipulated time for the
ratification of the agreement lapsed in June 2005. The Portfolio Committee
on International Relations has engaged intensively with this subject and
adopted it unanimously. The committee moves that the House adopts the
report in order for this agreement to satisfy the constitutional
arrangement. I thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

Accession to the revised Cotonou Partnership Agreement: Agreement Amending
the Partnership Agreement between the Members of the African, Caribbean and
Pacific Group of States, of the one part, and the European Community and
its Member States, of the other part approved.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will now take Orders ten to fourteen together. These
are reports of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
Development concerning magistrates.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: We object
to taking four together. We want them to be taken separately.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Uthini mhlonipheki? [What are you saying, hon member?]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, may I help you out? I suspect that what
we too would like, when it comes to voting, is for voting to be taken
separately. If the chairman wants to speak on all four as a whole, that’s
one thing, but when it comes to voting, we would like it to be done
separately.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is acceptable, but as long as the speaker is going
to speak about all four of them. Is that what you meant? Thank you.

[Interjections.]

     PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION OF MAGISTRATE MRS N E NDAMASE, AN ADDITIONAL
                           MAGISTRATE AT PRETORIA

 PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION OF MAGISTRATE MR C M DUMANI, A MAGISTRATE AT GRAAFF
                                   REINET

               REMOVAL FROM OFFICE OF MAGISTRATE T C OLIPHANT

  UPLIFTMENT OF PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION FROM OFFICE OF MAGISTRATE A BACHARAM

            (Consideration of request for approval by Parliament)

Mr M GUNGUBELE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I just quickly want to take the House
through the background of the reports.

In the general disciplinary process of magistrates, the Portfolio Committee
- thus Parliament - constitutes one of the stages in the process. It is on
that stage of the process that I am reporting here today.

We had to deal with the disciplinary cases of four magistrates.

The first case concerned Mrs N E Ndamase. The committee deliberated on this
matter and reached a decision that the suspension should not be confirmed
due to the fact that the committee felt that there were a lot of
unsatisfactory elements presented by the commission.

The next case concerned Mr C M Dumani, in whose case we proposed that the
provisional suspension be confirmed.

The third case concerned Ms T C Oliphant, in whose case we proposed that
the removal from office not be confirmed.

The last case concerned the upliftment of the provisional suspension from
office of Magistrate A Bacharam. We proposed that it be confirmed. Thank
you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

Question put: That the recommendation of the committee be adopted, namely
that the provisional suspension of additional magistrate N E Ndamase not be
confirmed.

Agreed to (Democratic Alliance and Congress of the People abstaining, and
Inkatha Freedom Party dissenting).

Provisional suspension of Magistrate N E Ndamase accordingly not confirmed.

Question put: That the recommendation of the committee be adopted, namely
that the provisional suspension of Magistrate C M Dumani be confirmed.

Agreed to.

Provisional suspension of Magistrate C M Dumani accordingly confirmed.

Question put: That the recommendation of the committee be adopted, namely
that the removal from office of Magistrate T C Oliphant not be confirmed.

Agreed to (Inkatha Freedom Party dissenting).

Removal from office of Magistrate T C Oliphant accordingly not confirmed.

Question put: That the recommendation of the committee be adopted, namely
that the upliftment of the provisional suspension from office of Magistrate
A Bacharam be confirmed.

Agreed to.

Upliftment of provisional suspension from office of Magistrate A Bacharam
accordingly confirmed.

Mr N SINGH: Deputy Speaker, in the case of Magistrate A Bacharam, we do not
have an objection to the committee’s recommendation, but we would like to
point out that, in the ATCs (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports
of 11 November 2009, page 1609) in item 6 of the report, it is said that Ms
Bacharam was acquitted by the Regional Magistrate’s Court in Port
Elizabeth. It was, in fact, Port Shepstone. I trust that that will be
corrected.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HUMAN SETTLEMENTS ON
  OVERSIGHT VISIT TO THE EASTERN CAPE PROVINCE TO OVERSEE THE STATE OF THE
             PROVINCE ON HUMAN SETTLEMENT DELIVERY ACCELERATION

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

                              FAREWELL SPEECHES

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I want
to assure this House that there has been no coup. I am not the Chief Whip,
I am the Deputy Chief Whip.

We have come to the end of the third and final term of 2009. It has been an
extremely busy term, and we have been called upon to perform our public
representative duties to the best of our abilities.

Our disagreements over the correct and strategic way forward are natural.
In fact, they enrich our young democracy and give it the sharp perspective
that it needs if we are to respond to the many, and often contradictory,
challenges facing us.

Upon reflection, we have been able to raise the level of debate in this
House, but the challenge must be to keep raising this level through the
articulation of our policy perspectives, conceptual analysis, wisdom and
knowledge.

We have all been through challenging times this term against the backdrop
of huge global and local economic challenges. We have debated these matters
publicly and I am sure the nation has witnessed our seriousness in seeking
to make Parliament part of the solution in the fight against job losses,
hunger and poverty. We have spoken to the programmes of action that need to
be implemented and how Parliament can play a role in this.

We are the makers of history when it comes to this House. Therefore we
carry a huge responsibility and the onus to ensure that we do what our
people have called upon us to do.

We would like to thank all members of the House for their dedication and
hard work. We would like to take this opportunity to also thank the members
of the opposition for their support, especially members of the Chief Whips’
Forum. They have really assisted us in the smooth running of this House.

We would like to thank the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker for their
exemplary leadership. Sometimes it is not a good idea to deal with the
Speaker if your case is not well prepared. We really would like to thank
him for his firmness.

We would also like to thank the Secretary to Parliament, the Table staff,
and the staff of political parties for their hard work and dedication.

We hope next term will be better than this term. We commit ourselves to
continuously improving the services to our people.

It is my privilege to recognise the contribution of all South Africans who
have made it possible for this House to function the way it does. We wish
to thank our families and friends for their support.

Finally, I wish all members well and urge them to enjoy themselves, so that
their constituencies are well-served by their rejuvenated efforts. Thank
you.
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, we are entering a
season of peace and goodwill, and so this is the occasion for kind words,
for thanks and for holiday good wishes. But, before I get to the good
wishes, perhaps you would, on this last day, indulge me a little mischief.

Last year, in my farewell speech, I told a Christmas allegory. You will
recall that Parliament was going into recess with elections in the offing.
I said that the Christmas season is about giving and receiving — giving and
receiving presents. As I looked around the Chamber it reminded me of a
family around a Christmas tree on Christmas morning — eagerly awaiting
their presents, full of anticipation and excitement. I warned, however,
that not everyone’s anticipation would be met — some would be disappointed
and there could even be tears. We know that Christmas has come and gone, as
have the elections, and some of my prognostications were, unfortunately,
correct.

I decided to write to Father Christmas and ask him why, for instance, the
ANC had not received as many presents as it had anticipated. “Well”, he
said, “there was too much infighting and they really hadn’t performed.”
[Laughter.]

He had been really pleased with the DA, hence the extra presents — he was
even going to make its leader sit on top of a Christmas tree as a little
angel!
He said he had rewarded Cope generously, but that there was still too much
sibling rivalry. He did promise, however, that if they co-operated with the
DA, they would in future receive an abundance of presents. [Laughter.]

The IFP, he said, received fewer presents, but that was because they did
not do their homework.

As for the Freedom Front Plus ... well ... yes, they did not receive more
presents simply because they still believed there could be a white
Christmas in Africa. [Laughter.]

I did say to Father Christmas that I was disappointed that he had sent some
early presents this year — BMWs and Mercedes Benzes. One Minister was even
able to choose the colour of his Mercedes Benz. One went to a Minister, a
committed communist, who, I doubt, even celebrates Christmas.

I asked why the poor Minister of Finance only got a suped-up Volkswagen.
“Well”, said Father Christmas, quoting the Bible, “the poor shall inherit
the earth”, and with a budget deficit that size, I think the Minister of
Finance is waiting for that inheritance to come very quickly!

Well, perhaps once again, this allegory is a bit too complicated for the
end of this session, so I will leave it there.
So let me just move on and thank, first of all, the House for its full co-
operation; the Chief Whips and the Chief Whips’ Forum for working so well
together; and the Speaker, for being who he is, and for presiding over this
House with his customary elegance.

Allow me also to thank the Whippery of my own party, more specifically, my
Deputy Chief Whip, Mike Ellis, and all other Whips who help me and make the
functioning of my office efficient; likewise my staff, my personal
assistant and my various assistants. Indeed, I would like to thank all the
Whips of all the parties who co-operate so well in the interest of
Parliament.

Allow me also to thank all the presiding officers and all the staff of
Parliament from the most senior to the most junior for doing their best to
treat us with courtesy and consideration and for giving their best.

Finally, may I take the opportunity to wish the Speaker, the presiding
officers and all hon members and staff a happy, blessed Christmas and a
very good New Year.

Rev H M DANDALA: Deputy Speaker and hon members, even though the year may
have felt long, it is appropriate that, at this point, we appreciate and
acknowledge the hard work of many.

Election years are difficult at the best of times, especially with the
economic meltdown and all the other challenges that faced us during this
year. We have to appreciate the efforts of this House to co-operate and
work well together during this period.

I am inclined to believe that, while the summer recess will be most
welcome, we are likely to miss one another. Personally, I must say that I
loved the spirit of camaraderie that marked relationships in this House.

Some senior members of the ruling party benches warned me quite early on
that Cope would have to brace itself for a rough ride in the House. They
also said that, beyond the heckles in the House, we would still be
wayfarers together in the spirit of the privilege afforded to us
collectively by the people of South Africa to represent their best hopes,
even when disagreements were sharp and robust. So, I have chuckled merrily
under my breath at the parliamentary “hallelujahs” and “amen, mfundisi”.
[Laughter.]

As I attend Christmas services during this break, I will look forward to
the real hallelujahs that will be sung harmoniously and in tune. I trust
that the hon members on the other side, who consistently sang hallelujahs,
even if out of tune, will also take the time to go and retune their
hallelujahs in the true places of worship.

Cope joins the other parties in saluting the Speaker for the even-
handedness that sustained the dignity of the House and the focus of the
exchanges among its members. Except for the times hon Khompela did so, I
can recall only one other time a member mistakenly called the Speaker
“Madam Speaker”! [Laughter.] We salute you, Speaker, and wish you a restful
summer and Christmas.

Cope wishes our President, the Deputy President, and hon members of the
House a happy and restful recess, a blessed Christmas, and, till we meet
again, may we be preserved into the new year in 2010.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mhlekazi uTrollip, umnumzana uyakwazi kanene ukuthetha
ethwele umnqwazi endlini? Nam andikholwa. [Mr Trollip, can a man speak in
this House while wearing a hat? I don’t think so.]

Monghadi J H VAN DER MERWE: Bomme le bontate kajeno ke batla ho bua
Sesotho. Kgotsong! Le tsohile? Le nna ke tsohile hantle. Ha ke tsebe ho bua
Sesotho hantle empa ke a leka. Ho bohlokwa hore bohle re leke ho bua dipuo
tsa Maafrika. Puo ya ka, Afrikaans, le yona ke puo ya Afrika. E ile ya
tswalwa hona mona naheng ya rona e ntle.

Bomme le bontate kajeno ke letsatsi la bohlokwa. Ke letsatsi la hore re a
leboha ho bohle ba ileng ba etsa hore Palamente ya rona e atlehe. Re leboha
haholo ho lona bohle. Hape kajeno ke letsatsi la hore tsamayang hantle. Le
kganne ka hloko ha le ya hae hle, le itlhokomele, le phomole hantle.

Kaofela ha rona re kgutle re na le matla a ho ema mmoho re rarolle mathata
a naha ya rona. Jwale, rona re le IFP re le lakaletsa Keresemese e nang le
thabo le selemo se setjha se nang le katleho. [Mahofi.] Eka Modimo a ka ba
le lona, tsamayang hantle ho fihlela re bonana ka 2010. Ke a leboha,
kgotsong! [Mahofi.] (Translation of Sesotho speech follows.)

[Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Ladies and gentlemen, today I would like to speak in
Sesotho. Hello! How are you? I am also well. I can’t speak Sesotho properly
but I will try. It is important that we all try to speak African languages.
My language, Afrikaans, is also an African language. It was born in this
very country of ours.

Ladies and gentlemen, today is a very important day. It is a day that we
thank all those who made our Parliament a success. We thank you all very
much. Today is also a day to bid each other farewell. Drive safely on your
way home, look after yourselves and get a good rest.

All of us should come back strong enough to be able to tackle our country’s
problems. Therefore we, as the IFP, wish you a merry Christmas and a happy
New Year that is full of success. [Applause.] We hope that the Lord will be
with you. Go well until we meet again in 2010. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Deputy Speaker and hon members, since this Parliament was
sworn in, time has flown by. Despite a truncated year, we have managed to
attend to the most urgent business before the House. During this short
time, we have welcomed numerous new members to the House, including myself.
We have seen the inauguration of a new President and several new Ministers.
We have bid farewell to the Chief Justice and welcomed a new incumbent.
Unfortunately, membership of this institution doesn’t make us immune to the
demands of old age or the whims of misfortune, and so we have also lost
colleagues to mortality.

At a time such as this, it is prudent to thank one another, because, even
in our differences, we are participants in the science of democracy. Whilst
we are expressing gratitude, we need to thank the parliamentary and party
officials who work behind the scenes to ensure that this institution
functions as it should.

At this time of year, we are in the midst of the 16 Days of Activism for No
Violence Against Women and Children Campaign, which we should all promote,
as we return to our constituencies. The school holidays and the festive
season are nearly upon us. We hope that every member and all staff will
spend this time relaxing with friends and family, in order to recuperate
for the year that lies ahead. It is also a time when we need to be vigilant
about travelling on the roads of our country. Every year the festive season
is marred by the deaths of thousands, due to road accidents.

In conclusion, to our Christian colleagues and supporters, we wish a
blessed Christmas. May your faith be renewed in celebration of the birth of
Christ. To all our non-Christian colleagues and supporters, we wish the
gift of peace, and to our Speaker, a merry Christmas and a happy New Year.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Deputy Speaker and Speaker, we have come to the end of a
rather tumultuous year, a year in which we had an election and, if I am not
mistaken, of the 400 members in this House, 198 joined us for the first
time in April this year. Basically, we have constituted a completely new
Parliament for the first time after the election.

We have come to the end of this specific year, a year in which we
experienced very interesting things. It is also appropriate, at this stage,
to say thank you to all the relevant institutions and divisions of
Parliament, be it the catering staff or the financial sector. To all the
different divisions, the security people, from the FF Plus’ point of view,
thank you very much for everything you have done. We appreciate that, and
we look forward to a very positive year when we return next year.

To all our colleagues in the different parties, thank you for your co-
operation and for your friendship. We are all South Africans in the end,
serving the people of our country, albeit from different communities. It
makes no difference. We are all South Africans; we are trying to find a
solution and a better future for our children.

Deputy Speaker, I would like to conclude with two specific issues, one
positive and one not so positive – I would rather say, perhaps even
negative, and I want to put them on the table. The first one, the positive
thing, that I would like to conclude with is I think that for the last
couple of years, the role of Parliament, in the way that I experienced it,
was diminished in certain respects, but it has changed.

I want to thank the government in the sense that we are bringing back the
relevance of Parliament. The fact that Ministers are coming to this podium
to make statements on a regular basis and to inform Parliament first is a
positive step to bring Parliament back to where it belongs. It should be
done here, not outside to the press. You report to Parliament and the
representatives of the people in the first instance, and I think that is
very positive.

The second point, Deputy Speaker, is more negative, and I want to address
the Speaker himself. Mr Speaker, you will know what it is all about. It is
the question that remains outstanding, as far as we are concerned, of
seating in this very House. [Interjections.] Mr Speaker, I am addressing
you, not that hon member who thinks it is a joke.

Mr Speaker, we have been very patient. I am speaking on behalf of nine
political parties who have been pushed to the back of this Chamber, parties
that have been very patient in putting our case on the table and saying
please address this issue. I am asking you, since it has not been
addressed, to please do so. We do not want to come back next year with that
matter still unresolved. I am asking you; let’s sort it out once and for
all.

I want to say to Members of Parliament have a beautiful Christmas, have a
wonderful rest out there, and let’s all come back refreshed next year. And,
Mr Van der Merwe, even you are welcome here. In any case, we will still
tolerate you next year. Thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Deputy Speaker, on behalf of my colleagues, the hon Kenneth
Meshoe and hon Steve Swart, I thank you Speaker, Deputy Speaker, Ministers,
and fellow Members of Parliament. Thank you for your dedication and hard
work, and for being you. We have been challenged and inspired, and we do
appreciate you.

Thank you, Lord, for the awesome privilege of serving the people of South
Africa through the institution of Parliament. Thank you for the institution
of Parliament and for the amazing people we cross paths with every day who
make it work, the officials, researchers, legal advisers, administrative
clerks, Chamber staff, catering staff, security staff, cleaners, etc. You
are a blessing.

Thank you, Lord, for a South African people who have grown to appreciate
more and more the benefits of a democratic process of governance. You are
our cause, our mission and our inspiration because you are God’s cause,
mission and inspiration.

Yesterday I was just thinking how amazing the early days of this Fourth
Parliament have been as we gathered in a Joint Sitting of both Houses of
Parliament, at the bidding of the President, to say farewell to former
Chief Justice Langa, and to welcome Chief Justice Ngcobo. It felt like a
family function, so natural. How weird is that? We are a peculiar people
from such diverse backgrounds and walks of life, with different world
views, personalities, gifts and abilities. And yet whether we like it or
not, wanted it or not; we are a people.

It is difficult not to feel respect, appreciation and empathy for such a
people. We have a common cause, and that is the people of South Africa. We
also have a shared responsibility, a responsibility which is not carried
lightly.

I will conclude with the words of Frederick Buechner:

   You can kiss your family and friends goodbye and put miles between you,
   but, at the same time, you carry them with you in your heart, your mind,
   and your stomach, because you do not just live in a world but a world
   lives in you.
We pray you’ll have a happy Christmas and that the new year will bring many
blessings. Thank you.

Mrs M N MATLADI: Deputy Speaker, mid-May 2009 was a time of uncertainties
as we were coming to the national Parliament for the first time; not
knowing where to stay, whom we would meet, and with whom we would work. But
one found a family of friendly, reliable and kind-hearted colleagues in
this House. [Applause.] Thank you for the warmth of togetherness.

I would like to thank the hon President for his transparent, consultative,
fatherly, effective leadership, and enthusiasm about people. [Applause.]
Indeed, the hon President is the people’s President, he must keep up the
good work. [Applause.]

To the hon Deputy President, I would like to say thanks for the listening
ear you always had for us, and also for the unison you have shown in
working co-operatively with the hon President. Unity is power. Another word
of thanks goes to the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and the House
Chairpersons for the evenhandedness with which they direct the proceedings
of the House. Our robust engagements with one another sometimes put them in
a difficult situation to handle.

We in the Chief Whips Forum heaved and puffed for a great chunk of the year
with hon Motshekga, the Chief Whip of the Majority Party. I want to thank
him very much for the good work he has done in the interest of all parties,
and above all in the interest of South Africa.

Let me thank the administration of Parliament, the Secretary to the
National Assembly and the entire staff who always assist, update and remind
us about our business in the House. We thank the affable service officers
for the delivery of documents and the upkeep of our offices.

To the hon Ministers, the leaders of political parties, Chairpersons of all
portfolio committees and standing committees, especially hon Godi the
Chairperson of Scopa, and the committee members, my colleagues; I say
“Aluta Continua”! [The struggle continues!] Let the good work continue for
future generations of our country. [Applause.]

May God be with you ‘till we meet again. When life’s perils thick confound
you, may He put His arms unfailing round you. God be with you ‘till we meet
again. Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Bhoola ... [Interjections.] Order! Before you
speak, hon Bhoola, let me address that crowd of “ayobas” there.
[Interjections.] Hon members, I understand the spirit of the festive season
has started, but you are still hon members until you go out of this House.
So, please tone down that spirit.
Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, maybe only time will allow them to tone down
those spirits. Maybe they had lots of spirits and therefore it’s got to
wear through their system. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I didn’t say that.

Mr R B BHOOLA: Madam Deputy Speaker, it is indeed unbelievable how fast the
year passed, and that we have once again concluded our final term. The MF,
however, pays respect to 2009 as a constructive, progressive and eventful
year for Parliament and for South Africa as a country. The President has
indeed set the stage. He has given direction. Let us hope that in the next
12 months those that are placed in positions will follow his directions.

The MF would like to applaud the three spheres of government for their
great effort to fulfil their mandate. Mahatma Gandhi once said that as long
as there are tears and suffering, our work as leaders is not over.
Remember, hon members, the best way to find yourself is to lose yourself in
the service of others. We are here to make sure that we represent the poor
and long-suffering masses, and to remove tears from everyone’s eyes.

As long as there is poverty, suffering, illiteracy, and unhealthy
conditions, our work will not be over. That is why on important issues you
must forget party political divides and look at the flag. As we march
forward to receive 2010 with the greatest spirit of togetherness and
brotherhood, let’s fly under one flag as we approach the greatest sporting
spectacle of Africa in the world, the World Cup.

We applaud both the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces
for a good year’s work. Thanks and appreciation go to the Speaker and
Deputy Speaker for their impeccable leadership. Applause is rendered to the
Chairs of both Houses and the administration just below the bench for its
auspicious management of House affairs. To our hon members, I look only to
the good qualities of man. Not being faultless myself, I won’t presume to
probe into the faults of others. It has been a productive and a progressive
year.

We have an impeccable team of staff and support at Parliament that has been
by our side. As we return to our constituencies, let us never forget that
to give service to a single heart by a single act is better than a thousand
heads bowing in prayer.

The MF thanks all our supporters and members in our constituency for their
support and trust in our leadership and ability to best represent your
interests. We wish all matric students the best of success and great
opportunities. With beautiful thoughts and wonderful wishes, we wish you a
merry Christmas and Eid Mubarak.

Finally, there is nothing that wastes the body like worry. One who has any
faith in God should be ashamed to worry about anything whatsoever in 2010.
Have a prosperous New Year, and may God bless you all.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise on a point of order: Is it
appropriate for the hon Bhoola to wear his pyjamas to Parliament?
[Laughter.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Madam Speaker, this was not unexpected of Mike Ellis but,
nevertheless, we can bear with him because he will be blessed in 2010.
[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon Deputy Speaker, as the year draws to a close, it is time
for us, as is the custom, to review the progress made, thus far, and bid
farewell to hon members as we come to the end of this year’s session. This
has been a very busy year for all of us, particularly for new members who
have had much to learn and adapt to; they have certainly had to hit the
ground running and keep on running.

The new government has effected several changes to the structure of
ministries and government departments; and therefore we have to align some
of the committees accordingly. This has been no minor task, so we
acknowledge with thanks the work of the National Assembly Table staff and
the committee section in this regard.

I would like to touch briefly on some of the highlights of the Fourth
Parliament and to report on the progress made on certain issues. Members
would have noticed that the policy imperative document setting out the
strategic framework, including the vision and the strategic objective, has
been tabled.

The strategic framework was developed and based on the provision set out in
the Constitution and the numerous planning sessions that were conducted in
both the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces. These
planning sessions included active participation and direction by the
presiding officers, office bearers, political parties and members.

Of course, the strategic framework highlights the vision of the Fourth
Parliament, which is to build an effective peoples’ Parliament that is
responsive to the needs of the people and driven by the ideal of realising
a better quality of life for all the people of South Africa.

Under the leadership and stewardship of the Deputy Secretary, Mr Coetzee,
and the House Chairperson, hon Bapela, the implementation of the oversight
and accountability model adopted by the National Assembly earlier this
year, is progressing well; and we thank them.

The Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act of 2009 will
extend the scope of our oversight framework. However, its implementation is
a complex and intricate matter that will involve a range of institutional
reforms. A political task team has been established and is led by the House
Chairpersons and the committees on finance and appropriations.

Not without controversy, Parliament has also facilitated appointments to
the SA Human Rights Commission, the Board of the SA Broadcasting
Corporation and oversaw the appointment of a new Public Protector. We wish
them all well and success in their endeavours within their respective
institutions. Our thanks must go to the Ministers, chairs of committees and
all the members who participated in ensuring that this and other business
was dealt with properly.

We have successfully concluded important business of Parliament, for
example, the state of the nation address of 2009 and the mid-term Budget.
We’ve also had three sittings of the National Assembly and the National
Council of Provinces. Firstly, we celebrated Mandela Day; secondly,
yesterday, we welcomed new Chief Justice Ngcobo and bid a fond farewell to
Chief Justice Langa; and lastly, on Tuesday, we discussed the preparations
for the Fédération Internationale deFootball Association, Fifa, 2010 Soccer
World Cup. This is testimony to the fact that Parliament is a national
forum for public consideration of issues of importance to our people.

We will also remember that during the answers to the President’s state of
the nation address Fifa presented the Confederations Cup trophy to
President Zuma. This was a highly symbolic gesture designed to illustrate
the connection between the people’s game, soccer, and the peoples’
Parliament. At that time, President Zuma wondered aloud whether we
shouldn’t keep the Cup; and he was politely advised that we could, indeed,
but only after winning on the ground; we nearly did. We hope that in the
World Cup we will do even better.

Parliament has hosted a number of incoming delegations from strategic
partners in the international community, this includes, amongst others,
high level delegations from the People’s Republic of China and the Speaker
from Nigeria. These and other delegations have interacted with
parliamentarians as a component of the expanding role which the national
Parliament is playing in pursuit of our strategic objectives in bilateral
and multilateral forums.

At domestic level, we hosted a delegation from the Royal Bafokeng nation
led by Kgosi Leruo Molotlegi. This visit was the first of its kind and they
expressed appreciation for the opportunity to interact with our national
Parliament.

The World Cup will focus considerable attention on South Africa next year.
The programme of Parliament for 2010 had to take into account the World Cup
tournament and this means that our work in the first and the second terms
has to be programmed to ensure that Parliament adjourns in time for members
to be a part of this important event.
We anticipate a huge influx of visitors as well as many international
television crews whose platform will beam images of our country to
television screens across the world. I suspect that here, in Parliament,
our hands will be full. I encourage you all to rest well over this holiday
period in anticipation of a full programme in the next session.

The excitement of the Fifa 2010 World Cup cannot destract from the very
important business we still have to do. In the next session, we will
continue to give in-depth consideration to the legacy issues from the third
Parliament. These include the report of the Independent Panel Assessment of
Parliament as well as the recommendation of the Ad Hoc Committee on the
Review of Chapter 9 and Associated Institutions.

The Third Parliament adopted a resolution that required the Speaker to
establish a unit to support the National Assembly in co-ordinating its work
with institutions supporting democracy. The Office of the Speaker is in the
process of establishing the unit, which we envisage will be up and running
by April 2010 as the budget requested is being approved for 2010-11.

The Space Utilisation Project addresses the acute shortage of office space
for parliamentarians; the presiding officers of Parliament have agreed to
prioritise the need for an office block for members.

On the issue of unanswered questions, we have raised this matter with the
Leader of Government Business and this House. He gave the undertaking that
this would be attended to. And, certainly, we will – together with him –
ensure that this receives priority. [Applause.]

We also lost some Members of Parliament during the course of the year. This
included Ms Shoba, who died on 9 May 2009 at the inauguration of President
Zuma, and Mr F G Masango, who died on 18 October 2009. We also recognise
the passing of former Members of Parliament, which include Prof Du Toit; Mr
M J Monaphala; Mr J P (Past Four) Phungula; Mr Ginyizembe Mpehle; Mr P O
Moloto; and Imam Hassan Solomon on 28 October 2009. We’ll remember these
individuals and their contributions with affection and a sense of profound
sadness and loss.

Finally, I wish to thank the Deputy Speaker, Ms Nomaindiya Mfeketo, for her
support and dedication; and the House Chairpersons, Mr Obed Bapela, Mr Ben
Skosana and Ms Mildred Oliphant for their contribution to the work of the
Office of the Speaker. My thanks also go to the Secretary to Parliament, Mr
Zingile Dingani and the Deputy Secretary, Mr Mike Coetzee, who lead this
administration of hardworking and dedicated officials. Our best wishes go
to all of them during this festive season.

Although this is the last plenary of the National Assembly, committee work
continues next week. Members will have the opportunity to reconnect with
their constituencies before breaking for annual leave on 11 December. Hon
members, please drive safely and take care and relax with family members
and friends.

I hope you return refreshed and ready to continue the sterling oversight
work which started this session. I also, on your behalf, wish to convey our
best wishes to Deputy Minister Zoliswa Kota-Fredericks and her driver who
are both in a serious condition in hospital. We wish them a speedy
recovery. I wish you all safe trips home. Let me finally apologise that we
won’t have an official farewell dinner due to budget constraints. I hope
you understand. Thank you.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Deputy Speaker, I wish to make a correction to a
mistake made by the IFP by objecting to the Twelfth Order of the day. Could
it kindly be recorded in Hansard that we support it?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, that brings us to the end of the business
of the House. Let me take this opportunity to thank all members for their
good wishes. In particular I wish to thank the Speaker for his leadership –
I’m one of those people who are fortunate to have a leader that gives you
scope to work on and not be threatened. Under his leadership this
Parliament will grow and do what is expected of it.
We will resume on 25 January 2010. We won’t wait for 11 February 2010 for
the state of the nation address. I wish you a wonderful time with your
families. I also want to join those who wished you a lovely Christmas and
rest period, because the year 2010 is not a holiday to rest, but rather to
prepare for the elections of 2011. This is the only December in which we
can all recharge and come back refreshed.

The House adjourned at 20:13.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.   Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)   Bills passed by National Assembly on 12 November 2009:


          a) National House of Traditional Leaders Bill [B 56D – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).
          b) Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Amendment Bill
             [B 57D – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).

National Assembly

The Speaker

 1. Referral to Committees of papers tabled

     1) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Women, Children and Persons with Disabilities:

        a) Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD) for July
           2008 to December 2008, tabled in terms of section 18(5)(c) of
           the Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act No 116 of 1998).

     2) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information is referred to the Committee
        on Public Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the President’s Fund for 2008-
           09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP254-2009].


        b) Report for 2008-09 on the Government’s Progress with the
           Implementation of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission
           Recommendations.

     3) The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Finance and to the Portfolio Committee on Economic Development:

        a) Reply from the Minister of Finance to recommendations in Joint
           Report of Standing Committee on Finance and Portfolio Committee
           on Economic Development on Budget Vote No 7: National Treasury,
           and the 2009-12 Strategic Plan (Update) of National Treasury and
           the 2009-12 Strategic Plan of the South African Revenue Services
           (Sars), as adopted by the House on 25 August 2009.

     4) The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
        Finance:

        a) Government Notice No R. 975, published in Government Gazette No
           32630, dated 9 October 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
           1/1/1386) in terms of section 48 of the Customs and Excise Act,
           1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        b) Government Notice No R. 950, published in Government Gazette No
           32616, dated 9 October 2009: Amendment of Rules (DAR/62) in
           terms of section 120 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
           91 of 1964).

        c) Government Notice No R. 951, published in Government Gazette No
           32616, dated 9 October 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
           2/320) in terms of section 56 of the Customs and Excise Act,
           1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).
        d) Government Notice No R. 952, published in Government Gazette No
           32616, dated 9 October 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
           4/321) in terms of section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act,
           1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        e) Government Notice No R. 953, published in Government Gazette No
           32616, dated 9 October 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
           3/649) in terms of section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act,
           1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

        f) Government Notice No R. 941, published in Government Gazette No
           32601 dated 2 October 2009: Amendment of Rules (DAR/60) in terms
           of sections 46A, 59A and 120 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964
           (Act No 91 of 1964).


        g) Government Notice No R. 943, published in Government Gazette No
           32609, dated 29 September 2009: Amendment of Rules (DAR/61) in
           terms of sections 18, 18A and 120 of the Customs and Excise Act,
           1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        h) Government Notice No R. 932, published in Government Gazette No
           32593, dated 23 September 2009: Amendment of Rules (DAR/59) in
           terms of section 120 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
           91 of 1964).

     5) The following paper is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts
        for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on Human
        Settlements:

        a) Letter from the Minister of Human Settlements dated 30 October
           2009 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, explaining the
           delay in the submission of the annual report of the National
           Home Builders Registration Council for 2008-09.

     6) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Social Development for consideration and report:

     a) Report of the Central Drug Authority (CDA) for 2008-09 [RP252-
        2009].

     7) The following paper is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts
        for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on Social
        Development:

        a) Letter from the Minister of Social Development dated 5 November
           2009 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, explaining the
           delay in the submission of the annual report of the Central Drug
           Authority for 2008-09.

TABLINGS

National Assembly

1.   The Speaker

      (a)  Draft notice and schedule in terms of section 2(4) of the Judges’
        Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Act, 2001 (Act No 47 of
        2001), determining the rate at which salaries are payable to
        Constitutional Court Judges and Judges annually, with effect from 1
        April 2009, for approval by Parliament.

      (b)  Draft notice and schedule in terms of section 12(3) of the
        Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993), determining the rate at
        which salaries are payable to magistrates annually, with effect
        from 1 April 2009, for approval by Parliament.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.   Report of the Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform
on the 2008/09 Annual Report of the Commission on Restitution of Land
Rights, dated 4 November 2009

The Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform, having
considered the 2008/09 Annual Report of the Commission on Restitution of
Land Rights, reports as follows:

 1. Introduction


    The briefing  on  the  2008/09  annual  report  of  the  Commission  on
    Restitution of Land Rights (CRLR) took place on 28 October 2009.


    The following people appeared before the committee for the briefing  on
    the annual report:  The Chief  Land  Claims  Commissioner  (CLCC),  Mr.
    Andrew Mphela and Deputy Director General – Land Tenure Reform, Mr. Mdu
    Shabane. They were accompanied by the following  Regional  Land  Claims
    Commissioners (RLCCs): Ms. Beverly Jansen (Western  Cape),  Mr.  Sidney
    Hlongwane (Free State and Northern Cape), Ms. Tumi Seboka (Gauteng  and
    North-West; also acting for Mpumalanga); Ms Linda Faleni (Eastern Cape)
    and  Mr.  Tete  Maphoto  (Limpopo).  At  the  time  of  the   briefing,
    Commissioner Mr. Mphela was also an acting RLCC for Kwazulu-Natal.


    The CRLR is established in terms of the Restitution of Land Rights Act,
    No. 22 of 1994 with powers to provide restoration of  land  rights  and
    equitable redress in line with provisions of  section  25  (7)  of  the
    Constitution,1996 (Act 108 of 1996). The aim  of  the  CRLR  is  to  be
    “leaders in the restitution of land rights to victims  of  racial  land
    dispossession in  a  manner  that  ensures  sustainable  socio-economic
    development”. Its mission is “to  promote  reconciliation  by  ensuring
    equity  for  victims  of  land  dispossession  by  the  state,  through
    sustainable development initiatives  and  equitable  redistribution  of
    land’.


    This report is  presented  against  the  background  of  the  following
    strategic objectives that the CRLR set for itself:
  ← To provide equitable redress to victims of  racial  land  dispossession
    in terms of the Restitution of Land Rights Act, 1994 (No.22 of 1994);
  ← To provide access to rights  in  land,  including  land  ownership  and
    sustainable development;
  ← To foster national reconciliation and stability; and
  ←  To  improve   household   welfare,   underpinning   economic   growth,
    contributing to poverty alleviation.


    Various targets for settlement of all land restitution claims were  set
    since 2005. The CRLR currently intends to finalize the land restitution
    process by the year 2014. Over the years  public  expectation  for  the
    resolution of the question of land restitution was high.  This  report,
    therefore, should also be understood in the context  of  a  program  of
    land restitution that began 15 years ago and  is  still  struggling  to
    finalize claims irrespective of the various  readjustments  of  targets
    and increase in budget allocation  over  the  years  until  a  drop  in
    allocation in the financial year 2008/09.


    The Committee’s main concern is with regards to the performance of  the
    CRLR in relation to redressing the  land  dispossession  injustices  by
    restoring original land or a just and  equitable  compensation  in  the
    form of alternative land, monetary compensation or development package.
    The committee notes that the escalating land prices are a hindrance  to
    the speedy resolution of land claims. The CRLR has maintained its track
    record of spending almost 100% of their budget allocation  but  without
    making significant progress in meeting the targets set.  The  committee
    is further concerned  about  the  number  of  failed  land  restitution
    projects.


    This report shall first provide a summary of the  presentation  by  the
    CLCC, Mr. Andrew Mphela,  then  offer  the  committee’s  findings  with
    regards to the 2008/09 annual  report  of  the  CRLR  and  conclude  by
    presenting the Portfolio Committee’s recommendations regarding the land
    restitution process, the role of the CRLR and the Department  of  Rural
    Development and Land Reform.


 2. Presentation of the Annual Report of the CRLR by Mr. Andrew Mphela, the
    CLCC


 1. Overview of the performance of the CRLR
    Restitution of  land  rights  involves  a  process  of  redressing  the
    racially based land dispossession of the past, and further building the
    nation guided by the principles of the Constitution. The Bill of Rights
    provides for right to gain access to land. It  specifically  also  puts
    the state under  obligation  to  ensure  that  a  person  or  community
    disposed of property after 19 June 1913 as a result  of  past  racially
    discriminatory laws or practices is entitled to either  restitution  of
    that property or to equitable redress.


    Access to land, particularly by the rural  poor,  has  a  potential  to
    impact positively on their food security needs and their basic means of
    livelihoods. A successful land  restitution  process  therefore,  is  a
    significant and crucial factor in rural development especially with the
    current trends around escalation of food  prices  and  global  economic
    meltdown. Achieving a successful land restitution process that empowers
    beneficiaries and help fight against hunger and  poverty  is  dependant
    upon effective post settlement support  within  the  context  of  rural
    development.  It  further  requires  sufficient   resources,   capacity
    building programmes and cooperative governance.


    The CRLR’s endeavours to fast track the settlement of land claims  have
    been affected by a variety of factors, namely;
  ← Complexity of rural claims affects the  pace  at  which  the  CRLR  can
    settle land claims. Rural claims are characterised by large numbers  of
    beneficiary  households  and  large  number  of   hectares   of   land,
    overlapping  of  rights  by  claimant  communities  often  leading   to
    community disputes based on boundaries and who  the  rightful  claimant
    is, and the kind of production and enterprises poses challenges to post
    settlement arrangements.
  ← Land claims  on  forestry  and  mining  land  also  present  a  greater
    challenge to the CRLR and even more  risk  because  of  the  nature  of
    business operations. The CRLR has had to find innovative ways to ensure
    that the successful restoration of forestry and mining land.
  ← The cost of land is a critical matter that affects the  CRLR’s  efforts
    to fast track the restitution process. With  the  limits  in  terms  of
    budget allocation, the CRLR  can  only  restore  a  certain  number  of
    hectares. During the year under review the CRLR estimated  the  average
    cost of land at R12 949.00 per hectare and has found  that  they  spent
    more money to buy less hectares of land.


    During the 2008/09 financial year, the CRLR had planned to settle  2585
    land claims, revised to 389 in line with the CRLR’s extended tenure. By
    the end of the financial year 2008/09, the CRLR  managed  to  settle  a
    total of 653 land claims (545 settled  and  108  dismissed),  involving
    about 30 112 households comprising approximately 136  000  individuals.
    Since 1995, the CRLR has cumulatively settled a total of 75 400  claims
    benefiting total number of 315 433 households. The total claims settled
    represent 95.5% of claims lodged by the cut off  date  of  31  December
    1998. By the 31st March 2009, the CRLR was yet to  settle  4296  claims
    detailed as follows:  Eastern Cape (552),  Free  State  (28),  Northern
    Cape (189),  Gauteng  (3),  North  West  (195),  Kwazulu-Natal  (1652),
    Limpopo (422), Mpumalanga (712), and Western Cape (573).


    Cumulative statistics on settled land claims (1995 – 31 March 2009)
|           |Restoratio|Financial           |Alternative      |
|           |n         |compensation        |Remedy           |
|Urban      |15439     |47726               |2477             |
|claims     |          |                    |                 |
|Rural      |4652      |4562                |436              |
|claims     |          |                    |                 |
|Total      |20091     |52288               |2913             |


    2.2.  Performance Perspectives of the CRLR


    The CLCC presented  the  following  perspectives  in  relation  to  the
    performance  of  the  CRLR:  finances,   business   process   and   the
    finalization of the outstanding land claims.


  ← Financial matters


    The CLCC provided an overview of financial matters of the  CRLR’s  with
    specific reference to 2008/09 budget allocation and its  spending.  The
    Commission spent almost 100% of their total budget allocation  of  R3.1
    billion. A total amount of R2, 8 billion was spent on land purchase and
    financial compensation to land claimants,  whereas  approximately  R338
    million was spent on recurrent costs  including  salaries  and  service
    providers. A total of R803 million was committed as development  grants
    to assist beneficiaries with the development of  their  newly  acquired
    land.


  ← Business Process Perspective


    The CRLR set 2005 as a deadline to complete all land restitution claims
    lodged by the 31st December 1998. Subsequently, the end of 2008/09  was
    also set as a deadline after a realization that it was impossible  meet
    the deadline for restitution.  During  the  reporting  year,  the  CRLR
    further readjusted targets to completing the restitution process by the
    end of the year 2013/2014 subject to availability of sufficient  budget
    allocation. The extension was motivated  for  on  the  basis  that  the
    majority of outstanding claims are rural and  complex  in  nature.  The
    completion of such claims would require sufficient resources  for  land
    acquisition and provision of development support to beneficiaries.


    The CRLR also experienced  challenges  with  regards  to  some  of  the
    strategic partnership arrangements  entered  into  between  government,
    beneficiaries and private sector agricultural  companies.  These  joint
    ventures are commonly referred to strategic partnerships.  One  of  the
    large strategic partners  called  the  South  African  Farm  Management
    (SAFM) collapsed and  faced  liquidation  together  with  some  of  its
    subsidiary companies. The collapse of SAFM affected certain projects in
    Limpopo (Levubu, Mamahlola, and Zebediela) and Mpumalanga  (Giba).  The
    CLCC also pointed out that not all such  relationships  did  result  in
    desired skills transfer and economic  beneficiation  of  beneficiaries.
    The CRLR has started with the review of all partnerships  in  order  to
    ensure that the state as well as beneficiaries obtains value for  money
    for the financial investment that goes into such partnerships.


    The provision of strategic support for  restitution  beneficiaries  has
    been identified as a critical and priority issue by the CRLR. The CRLR,
    therefore, concluded agreements with the  First  National  Bank  (FNB),
    Development Bank of South Africa (DBSA), Amahlathi Forestry  Group  and
    Anglo regarding provision of such support.   Additional  agreement  was
    entered into  with  AgriSETA  for  the  provision  of  critical  skills
    training for the new land owners.


    Following a review of land restitution projects,  the  CRLR  identified
    some 200 struggling projects which they intend to recapitalize with the
    support from the Department of Agriculture as  part  of  the  Land  and
    Agrarian Reform Project (LARP).


  ← Strategic Plan for finalization of outstanding claims


    By the 31st March 2009 the CRLR was yet  to  settle  4296  land  claims
    across all Regional Land Claims Commissioner’s (RLCC) offices. The CLCC
    further pointed out that four RLCC offices are  preparing  to  finalize
    all land claims at the end of 2009/10 financial  year;  namely  Gauteng
    (3), Free State (28),  Northern  Cape  (189)  and  Western  Cape  (573)
    depending on availability of resources.  The  remaining  offices  would
    complete their claims over the next four years, i.e. Mpumalanga (2012),
    Limpopo (2013), and  Kwazulu-Natal  (2014).   The  CRLR  would  further
    require a total amount of R65, 3  billion  to  settle  all  outstanding
    claims by the 2014.


    Total projected cost for restitution
|                                              |Cost (billion)                 |
|MTEF requirement                              |R10,4                          |
|Committed projects                            |R21,5                          |
|Betterment claims                             |R10,0                          |
|Kruger National Park                          |R20,0                          |
|2009/10 Budget                                |R3,4                           |
|Total                                         |R65,3                          |


    2.3.  Corporate Services


    The unit  is  located  under  the  Chief  Directorate  Restitution  and
    Management Support and assists the CLCC and RLCC offices in  developing
    internal policies that are consistent  with  the  Restitution  of  Land
    Rights Act and the Public Funds Management Act (PFMA).  It  also  deals
    with compilation and monitoring of  policy,  post  settlement  support,
    quality assurance to set standards, risk management ,  legal  services,
    communication and human resources  management  and  administration  and
    information management  services.  The  annual  report  highlights  the
    following achievements under this unit:


  ← During the year 2008/09, vacancy rate of the CRLR  decreased  from  30%
    to 20%. The CRLR experiences high rate of staff  turnover  due  to  the
    high pressure and workload for project officers. It is  also  difficult
    to fill vacancies because in the market there are fewer people who have
    an understanding of Restitution process.
  ← The unit is implementing a training  program  to  ensure  that  project
    officers involved in negotiation of sales do understand  the  field  of
    property valuation. This program  intends  to  curb  the  challenge  of
    paying for unnecessary high land prices.
  ← The  unit  has  also  developed  settlement  models  that  will  ensure
    sustainability.
  ← By the end of the financial year 2008/09, there  were  174  matters  in
    the Land Claims  Court.  The  Commission  also  took  two  matters  for
    expropriation, i.e. Sandford community in Mpumalanga  and  Moeketsi  Ga
    Chathleka Community in Limpopo.


 3. The Portfolio Committee’s findings on the 2008/09 Annual Report of  the
    Commission on Restitution of Land Rights
The Committee commended the CRLR for the report presented and the
commitment to land restitution. However, the Committee is concerned about
failure to meet the targets, the cost of land restitution, impact of land
restitution, and lack of detail in the published report.

The following are specific findings with regards to the land restitution
and the performance of the CRLR:

 ▪ Failure by the CRLR to fill in strategic vacancies and the  vacancy  rate
   of 20% is among the factors that lead to failure to achieve  targets  and
   to poor and unsustainable projects.  Strategic  positions  include  those
   ones for people with understanding of the property market  to  assist  in
   negotiating good purchase prices, those responsible for quality assurance
   and risk management.

 ▪ There is a high number of dysfunctional  Communal  Property  Associations
   (CPAs) owning land restored in terms of the Restitution  of  Land  Rights
   Act, 1994. The committee could not establish if  there  were  systems  in
   place to support these Communal Property Institutes (CPIs).  Majority  of
   the CPAs do not report to the Director-General as per provisions  of  the
   Communal Property Associations Act, 1996 (Act 28 of  1996).    Many  CPAs
   are crippled by infighting, conflicts between  the  traditional  councils
   and the elected CPA committee members. Such often hampers development and
   are a threat to sustainable development on restored land.

 ▪ It takes a long time between the publication of a  gazette  notice  about
   a claim on a piece of land and the actual transfer of land. It is in this
   interim period that many farms get run down due to lack of investment  on
   production or the property itself which in most cases can  be  linked  to
   the feeling of uncertainty by the land owners.  The  committee  has  also
   received  many  concerns  from  both  the  property  owners   and   their
   organizations and well as the land claimants on questions related to lack
   of information from the CRLR on  status  of  specific  claims  and  farms
   associated with those claims.

 ▪ The  committee  noted  that  the  annual  report  lacked  detail  on  the
   outstanding claims. Whilst the report mentions the numbers of outstanding
   claims, it does not say what hectares are to be restored per province; it
   also does not provide  status  of  projects  in  order  to  determine  an
   estimate of the amount required for settlement of such claims and  target
   dates for settlement.  The  committee  acknowledged  the  specific  dates
   targeted for various RLCCs and the projection of costs. However, based on
   the detail provided it is not possible to ascertain  if  the  projections
   and targets are realistic or not.

 ▪ Weaker institutional  arrangements  within  beneficiary  communities  are
   some of the reasons for the failure of  projects  and  a  threat  to  the
   realization  of  the  livelihoods  benefits  of  land  restitution.   The
   Committee is again concerned  about  absence  of  support  the  CPAs  and
   Trusts.

 ▪ The committee found that an  existing  decision  taken  by  the  previous
   cabinet on how the CRLR should  deal  with  land  claims  in  the  Kruger
   National Park (KNP) and other  national  strategic  assets  is  the  main
   reason why claims on the KNP  land  have  not  been  finalized  yet.  The
   decision is that the CRLR should not restore original land  to  the  land
   claimants as part of the settlement agreement.  However,  the  CRLR  must
   seek alternatives  such  as  alternative  land,  development  package  or
   financial compensation.

 ▪ A number of specific restitution projects were  referred  to  during  the
   discussion  to  highlighting   challenges   and   frustrations   of   the
   beneficiaries. Those include the Babanango claim in  the  Kwazulu  Natal,
   Koega in the Northern Cape, Ten bush  and Inala projects  in  Mpumalanga,
   Levubu communities, Makgoba and Seshego in Limpopo, and Duiseldorp in the
   Western  Cape.  These  examples  reflected  on  the  challenge  of   post
   settlement, community disputes, the challenge of  strategic  partnership,
   failure by the CRLR to pay amounts due because they have exhausted  their
   budget allocation.

 ▪ There are commitments made by the CRLR in  respect  of  the  payments  of
   development grants to communities but because  of  exhaustion  of  budget
   allocation,  the  CRLR  has  not  been  able  to  honour  some  of  those
   agreements. This raises concern whether the CRLC will be able to meet its
   targets in the following financial year as it has to pay commitments  for
   the previous financial year.

 ▪ The committee found it regrettable that  the  Department  sometimes  pays
   the landowners three times higher than the market value of  the  property
   and therefore the review of  mechanisms  for  land  acquisition  is  long
   overdue. The practice confirms the call for a review of the willing buyer
   willing seller approach to land redistribution in South Africa.

4.   Recommendations

Having received a briefing from the Chief Land Claims Commissioner, further
having engaged with the CRLR on its 2008/09 Annual Report,  the Portfolio
Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform makes the following
recommendations:

   i) The CRLR to identify and fill key strategic positions  to  assist  the
      CRLR to perform on its mandate expeditiously and achieve its  targets.
      The CRLR should also report to Parliament by the end of November  2009
      on its time framed plans to reducing the 20% vacancy rate.

  ii) The CRLR to submit  a  report  to  parliament  about  details  of  all
      outstanding claims according to provinces by the end of November 2009.
      The report should detail the number of claims per province,  how  many
      beneficiaries are involved, the type, extent and  estimated  costs  of
      the land under claim. It should finally state what  settlement  option
      has been agreed upon and what the target date for settlement  of  each
      claim is.

 iii) The CRLR and the Department of Rural Development and  Land  Reform  to
      review all the Communal Property Associations  and  identify  possible
      measures  to  ensure  that  the  CPAs  and  Trusts  (Common   Property
      Institutions)  function  properly.  They  should  further  report   to
      Parliament on the findings of the review and what they  are  doing  to
      support the dysfunctional CPAs.

  iv) That provision of post settlement support should support the different
      targets of land reform beneficiaries  as  set  out  in  the  2009-2011
      strategic plan of the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform.
      In  the  context  of  the  comprehensive  rural  development  program,
      targeted attention should be placed on the needs of the landless  poor
      people whose access to productive land will assist them to meet  their
      daily household food needs.

   v) The CRLR to submit a report to Parliament about the review of all land
      restitution projects in South Africa, and strategies for dealing  with
      200 struggling projects by the end of  the  second  week  of  November
      2009.

(vi) The Department puts in place mechanisms that would ensure that
      different state departments dispose state land for restitution
      purposes.

(vii)     There should be a review of the cabinet decision not to restore
      land claims on the Kruger National Park and other national strategic
      assets, ensuring public dialogue involving the land claimants and
      interested parties.

(viii)    There should be an increase in baseline budget allocation for
      Restitution in order to enable the CRLR to finalize all land claims.


    Report considered.

