---
title: 'National Assembly - 13 February 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-02-13
---

FRIDAY, 13 FEBRUARY 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 09:05.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members  to  observe  a  moment  of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                          DIVISION OF REVENUE BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, hon members, section 214 of
the Constitution requires that government ensure a transparent and
equitable system to divide nationally raised revenue between the spheres of
government. It further enjoins our three spheres of government to co-
operate. The Division of Revenue Bill we tabled in this House on Budget Day
is a concrete expression of the co-operative relations between the three
spheres of government.

By setting out three-year allocations for the equitable shares and most
conditional grants for provinces and local government, the Division of
Revenue Bill further entrenches the transparency and accountability in our
intergovernmental fiscal system. It allows all spheres of government to
plan ahead and to get down to the business of delivering services to our
people.

The 2009 Bill contains details on each grant. It outlines its purpose,
criteria for allocating the grant and an account of the performance of each
grant. Such information should contribute towards deepening our
parliamentary oversight of the executive.

The priorities of and additions to baseline allocations are as follows. The
Division of Revenue set out in this year’s Bill gives effect to the
priorities articulated by our President in his state of the nation address
on 6 February. Over the period ahead, government’s spending plans are
focused on enhancing the quality of education; improving the provision of
health care, particularly for the poor; reducing infant, child and maternal
mortality rates; reducing the level of crime and enhancing citizen safety;
expanding the built environment to improve public transportation and meet
universal access targets in housing, water, electricity and sanitation; and
decreasing rural poverty by taking steps to raise rural incomes and improve
livelihoods by extending access to land and support for emerging farmers.

The budget framework allows us to provide an additional R158,1 billion in
additional spending over the next three years in comparison with our
spending plans from last year. Of the additional resources, national
departments will receive R99 billion, and this includes R50 billion for
Eskom, R47,8 billion for provinces and R11,3 billion for municipalities.

Schedule 1 of the Bill provides a summary of the allocation of funds to the
three spheres of government. Of the R738,6 billion budget in 2009-10,
national department functions amount to R483,7 billion. This includes debt
service costs amounting to R55,3 billion and a contingency reserve of
R6 billion. Provinces receive R231,1 billion, and R23,8 billion is
allocated to local government.

Schedule 2 presents provincial equitable shares. Schedule 3 allocates
equitable shares of municipalities. Schedules 4 to 6 allocate conditional
grants and other grants to provinces and local government. Schedule 7
allocates in-kind transfers to municipalities. Schedule 8, which is a new
schedule, allocates incentives for provinces and municipalities to meet
targets with regard to priority government programmes.

The state of the nation address highlighted that, as part of our
contribution to the income of the poor, the target for 1 million work
opportunities through the Expanded Public Works Programme was attained in
2008, which was a year earlier than envisaged in our 2004 electoral
mandate. This has created the possibility of expanding this programme and
improving its quality. An amount of R1,4 billion is allocated to provinces
and R1,9 billion is allocated to municipalities under the newly created
expanded Public Works Programme incentive grant to boost job creation in
development projects and community services. This grant will only be
allocated to provinces and municipalities that meet the prescribed
threshold targets of such programmes.

Members of the House will know that the Division of Revenue Act provides
for a substantial share of nationally collected revenue to go to provinces
to strengthen social services programmes that have a high impact on human
development, quality of life and social transformation. The increase over
baseline for the next three years amounts to R47,8 billion, as I have
already indicated, to sustain the social progress made in recent years, to
meet government’s broader developmental objectives and to mitigate the
effect of the current economic downturn on the poor. Including these
revisions, allocations to provinces will amount to R284,5 billion in 2009-
10.

The equitable share and provincial grants cater not only for improvements
in education, health, welfare and housing, but also for investment in
roads, agriculture, economic affairs and tourism, including allocations for
labour-intensive programmes falling under the Expanded Public Works
Programme.

On matters related to personnel, government has successfully increased the
number of professionals in public health. In September 2008, 3 760 doctors,
16 478 nurses, 12 753 other health professionals and 16 610 support
personnel had been recruited into the public health service since 2003. To
help retain skilled personnel, the occupation-specific dispensation in the
health sector, already introduced for nurses in 2007, will be extended to
doctors, pharmacists and other health professionals in 2009-10, and
R3 billion has been set aside over the MTEF for this purpose.

As in previous years, further investments in education are made to ensure
that access and quality are improved. The 2009 Budget extends the no-fee
schools policy from the poorest 40% of schools to the poorest 60%, and
reduces the teacher-learner ratio in the poorest 20% of schools. Facilities
that cater for learners with disabilities are to be modified and built.

The national school nutrition programme receives a further R4,0 billion
over the MTEF to extend coverage to ensure that the poorest learners can be
fed on all school days and to expand the programme to secondary schools and
cushion the programme from food inflation.

The infrastructure grant to provinces is increased by R4,1 billion over the
period, including R500 million to ensure that classroom space is available
for Grade R learners entering the system. A further R1 billion is made
available for schools to upgrade infrastructure, secure facilities and
install libraries and laboratories. A technical secondary school
recapitalisation grant, amounting to R280 million, is also introduced over
the MTEF for equipment and facilities at these schools in keeping with our
commitment to our manifesto for 2009.

A general adjustment is made to health budgets to reinforce the entire
public health system and ensure that it can meet the needs of poor
communities in particular. Allocations are set aside to expand the range of
vaccines provided to children in order to reduce maternal and child
mortality, and to combat HIV and Aids and extreme and multidrug-resistant
TB.

The hospital revitalisation programme receives an additional R728 million
to ensure that hospitals are appropriately equipped and modernised. An
amount of R233 million is also added to the national tertiary services
programme to protect real spending on goods and services in tertiary
hospitals. In addition, provinces are expected to keep up their own
hospital maintenance budgets.

The HIV and Aids programme receives an additional R932 million to meet
greater demand arising from the faster take-up of antiretroviral
medication, and to speed up the implementation of the comprehensive HIV and
Aids plan. Spending on the programme grows to R12,4 billion over the next
three years. By 2011-12 spending on the programme will be over R4,6 billion
per year.

The budget also provides for provincial social development departments to
meet their mandate to provide welfare services to the needy and vulnerable.
Provision is made in the outer year to expand social welfare services to
meet growing community needs, with a focus on strengthening early childhood
development programmes.

Regarding other provincial functions, the land and agrarian reform support
programme gives people from previously disadvantaged backgrounds access to
land and support to make better productive use of such land. Over
R1 billion is added to various agriculture programmes, including the
Ilima/Letsema project. Transport-related adjustments include the creation
of a new conditional grant: the public transport operations grant of
R11,5 billion over the period for bus subsidies. The payment of bus
subsidies to operators was previously funded through an agency agreement
between the national and provincial governments.

Once again the housing programme is stepped up. The R3,7 billion added to
the programme results in R44,7 billion being set aside for building houses
over the next three years. By 2011-12 this government will be spending in
excess of R17,2 billion per year on housing. Allocations for water,
sanitation, electrification and municipal roads all rise in a complementary
fashion. These investments, together with the rising allocations for public
transport infrastructure, roads, schools, clinics, sport and recreational
facilities and police stations, should provide for a built environment that
will contribute significantly to sustainable community development and
social cohesion.

As far as local government is concerned, the state of the nation address
highlighted the progress made with regard to household access to basic
services: access to potable water improved from 62% to 88%, electricity
from 58% to 72%, and sanitation from 52% to 73%.

Over the next three years municipalities will receive R181,7 billion,
including R9,3 billion in allocations in-kind. This also includes
R22,9 billion for the sharing of the general fuel levy with metropolitan
municipalities that will be introduced from 2009 as the primary replacement
for the former Regional Services Council levies. The local government
equitable share receives a further R2,5 billion for the delivery of free
basic services.

Municipal infrastructure-related spending is allocated an additional
R8 billion over the next three years. This results in total infrastructure
transfers to municipalities amounting to just under R58 billion over the
next three years.

The municipal infrastructure grant receives a further R4,3 billion and
R525 million, which is added to the integrated national electrification
programme to support municipalities. From the 2009 Budget, the reporting
requirements on the municipal infrastructure grant will be refined to more
appropriately capture varying service delivery levels.

A further allocation of R460 million is added to the 2010 Fifa World Cup
stadiums development grant. Funds are also added to the 2010 Fifa World Cup
host city operating grant. These contributions will support host cities in
their preparations for the Confederations Cup in 2009 and the 2010 Fifa
World Cup.

The electricity demand-side management grant, made available to Eskom in
2008-09, will also be extended to municipalities in the 2009 Budget to
promote more efficient use of energy.

Finally, allocations for capacity-building totalling R1,7 billion over the
2009 MTEF are further complemented by the Siyenza Manje programme via the
DBSA to develop skills in engineering, planning and financial management
within municipalities.

It is clear that the allocations contained in this year’s Division of
Revenue Bill should put government in a better position to accelerate
delivery and improve the efficacy of public services. I commend this Bill
to the House. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr K A MOLOTO: Madam Speaker, hon members, the Division of Revenue Bill
provides for the equitable sharing of revenue raised nationally among the
national, provincial and local spheres of government. The national sphere
of government receives 50,7% of the revenue, provinces receive 42% of the
revenue, while the local sphere of government receives 7,3% of nationally
raised revenue. It should be borne in mind that local government has powers
to raise its own revenue within its jurisdiction. The provincial sphere of
government receives R284,5 billion while the local government receives
R49,6 billion.

There is greater focus on redirecting resources to both the provincial and
local spheres of government. Provinces are at the forefront of delivery in
housing, education, social welfare and health care. These are areas that
have a direct impact on the lives of the poor. The challenges we face in
the health system are to reduce the maternal and child mortality rates, and
to intensify the fight against HIV and Aids and tuberculosis.

South Africa, as a signatory to the Millennium Development Goals, has
pledged to reduce the mortality of children below five years by two thirds.
This goal has to be achieved by 2015. The increased allocation to provinces
will strengthen our efforts to prevent mother-to-child transmission,
introduce vaccines, raise immunisation coverage above 90% and eliminate
measles. We will win the fight against these communicable diseases.
This increased allocation will assist provinces in extending the occupation-
specific dispensation to doctors, pharmacists and other health
professionals. We need to retain these skills in public health care and
even increase the number of these professionals in our public health care
system.

No child should stay away from school because of hunger. The increased
allocation to the national school nutrition programme grant will ensure
that 60% of the poorest primary school learners will be fed on all school
days. This programme ensures improved school attendance and increased
learner enrolment. The right of children to basic food has to be defended.
Learners in the targeted Quintiles 1 to 3 primary schools and Quintile 1
secondary schools are fed on all school days in all provinces. This
programme has already reached 6 million learners in 17 899 schools. Working
together, we can do more.

Every child has a right to education. The Freedom Charter has stated the
people’s views unambiguously. We have to honour that pledge in our
manifesto. This year’s Budget extends the no-fee schools policy to the
poorest 40% of schools and ensures that public schools cater for those with
disabilities. The teacher-learner ratio will be reduced in the poorest 20%
of schools.

We have to ensure that our children have the necessary life skills to face
societal challenges. Drug abuse, substance abuse and HIV and Aids are
worrying phenomena. They have to be addressed by our education system. The
life skills education grant aims to provide educators with the ability to
provide such skills to our learners.

Five new conditional grants to provinces are introduced in the 2009 Budget.
The public transport grant is meant for the subsidisation of service
contracts entered into by provincial departments of transport and bus
operators for the provision of subsidised services. Provinces receive
R11,5 billion over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework period for the
subsidisation of commuter bus services.

The technical secondary school recapitalisation grant has been allocated
R280 million for equipment and facilities at these schools. Available
technical skills play a critical role in increasing productivity levels in
manufacturing and in the service sector of our economy.

Over and above the R2,5 billion added to the local government equitable
share, the 2009 Budget earmarks R8 billion for infrastructure-related
spending by municipalities. Through the municipal infrastructure grant,
835 000 household connections for water and 399 000 for sanitation have
been made since 2004. Working together, we can do more. The ANC supports
the Bill. [Applause.]

Mr S J F MARAIS: Madam Speaker, the Division of Revenue Bill has far-
reaching implications with the aim to improve service delivery and the
quality of life of all our citizens, particularly those at the local
government level. The Bill empowers not just the national government but,
importantly, also the provincial and local governments – the two levels of
government closest to the citizens for service delivery and economic
development, through, amongst other things, the equitable division of
revenue.

The Bill provides for the medium-term projected divisions in support of
planning objectives, once-off disaster funds, as well as much-needed funds
for infrastructure development in support of the hosting of the 2010 Fifa
World Cup.

Speaker, hierdie wetsontwerp bevestig die steun aan owerhede regdeur Suid-
Afrika vir nie net die verbetering van dienslewering en lewensgehalte nie,
maar ook vir die nodige stimulering van ekonomiese groei, infrastruktuur en
werkskepping, behuising, gesondheidsdienste en kapasiteitsbou, wat
opvoeding insluit.

Substandaard dienslewering kan nie toegeskryf word aan die tekort aan geld
bewillig nie. ’n Groot bekommernis by die DA is egter die finansiële en
bestuursvaardighede; dat dit nie by veral die meeste plaaslike owerhede
bestaan om uitkomsgerigte en effektiewe bestuur van geld en die verwante
prosesse te verseker nie.

Hoewel programme ingestel moet word om dit aan te spreek, is dit baie
belangrik dat die Parlement sy oorsigrol behoorlik nakom en nie eers wag
vir SKOOR om die tekorte en die probleme uit te wys nie. Daar is eenvoudig
te veel voorbeelde waar veral plaaslike regerings misluk in hul rol as
katalisator vir ekonomiese groei, werkskepping en dienslewering.

Mnr W P DOMAN: ANC-plaaslike regerings! (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Speaker, this Bill confirms the support for authorities right through
South Africa, not only for the improvement of service delivery and quality
of life, but also for the necessary stimulation of economic growth,
infrastructure and job creation, housing, health services and capacity-
building, which includes education.

Substandard service delivery cannot be attributed to the shortfall of
allocated funds. The DA is extremely concerned about the absence of
financial and management skills at most of the local authorities – skills
which are needed to ensure outcomes-based and effective management of money
and related processes.

Although programmes must be instituted to deal with this, it is very
important that Parliament properly complies with its oversight function,
instead of waiting for SCOPA to identify shortfalls and problems. There are
just too many examples where especially local governments are not
successful in their role as a catalyst for economic growth, job creation
and service delivery.

Mr W P DOMAN: ANC local governments!]

Mr S J F MARAIS: A concern we have identified is the difference in the 2009-
10 equitable share amounts indicated in the 2008-09 medium-term provision
and what was actually allocated this year, which can undermine effective
planning and service delivery. The Cape Town Metropole, for instance, has
been allocated R21 million less than in the 2008-09 budget and only 60% of
the allocations to other comparable metropoles. Queries will, most
certainly, be directed to National Treasury about this, but we hope this is
not because Cape Town is a well-run, DA local government. Our suggestion to
provinces and local governments is to involve public-private partnerships
to assure project efficiency and to use the Expanded Public Works
Programmes to upskill the unemployed.

Hoewel die DA realisties is oor die belemmeringselemente, het ons empatie
met die bepalings en die oogmerke van hierdie wetsontwerp. Ek dank u.
[Applous.] [Although the DA is realistic about the hindrances, we have
empathy with the provisions and the objectives of this Bill. I thank you.
[Applause.]]

Mr N SINGH: Madam Speaker, colleagues, let me start off by indicating that
a delegation from KwaZulu-Natal has been visiting the Democratic Republic
of Congo over the past few days. Yesterday, unfortunately, they were
involved in a car accident. An official from the office of the premier, Mr
Arno Hibbers, whom I have known for the past 15 years or so, passed on, as
well as another official from Trade and Investment KwaZulu-Natal. Our
heartfelt condolences go out to their families and to the department of the
premier in KwaZulu-Natal.

I did indicate yesterday, when the presentations were made to us by the
officials on the Division of Revenue Bill, that we were hamstrung by
limited time in the portfolio committee. I made a suggestion that the new
finance committee should really interrogate the principles that underpin
and inform the division of revenue amongst municipalities and provinces. I
think it is important that this happens so that we can all sing from the
same hymn page.

As we have heard, this Bill provides for the equitable division of revenue
raised nationally among national, provincial and local spheres of
government. The hon Deputy Minister indicated that the allocation should
speed up delivery, but the million-dollar question or, in this case, if I
add provinces and municipalities, the $50-billion question is: does it
actually speed up service delivery and does it lead to effective service
delivery on the ground?

The Division of Revenue Bill allows for planning and accountability, but
does this happen effectively on the ground? A case in point is clause 38 of
this Bill, which makes provision for emergency funding during disasters.
But, in many instances some of these disasters can be prevented if there is
proper planning: spatial development planning in respective municipalities.
You find houses built on flood plains; you find houses allowed to be built
where the roofs are not properly put on and then if there is wind and these
houses are subject to the elements, you find the roofs blowing off; you
find houses flooded; and this is because of poor planning. If planning
takes place initially, then we’ll find that these people are not subject to
these kinds of inconvenience that they are put through.

Coming to municipalities, I read the speech of the Premier of the Northern
Cape, and yesterday she said:

  However, general and financial management at local government level
  remains a cause for concern and needs our ongoing engagement. It is an
  indictment on all of us that 27 municipalities received disclaimers of
  opinion from the Auditor-General and that the general financial state of
  municipalities remains extremely weak.

This is not only applicable in the Northern Cape but throughout the
country. We can dole out money from here; we can approve it as we would,
and we have to, but the main thing is, is it being spent properly? Is there
value for money for the people out on the ground? Thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, as usual the hon Minister of Finance outdid
himself with a lavish record of the economics of South Africa and his great
superman-to-the-rescue treats.

The MF is most pleased with the attention government is paying to education
with the realisation that education is an investment. We are pleased with
the expansion of the nutrition programmes and no-fee schools, but sincerely
hope that these may extend to secondary school level as hunger in poverty-
stricken communities knows no age and studying on an empty stomach is not
easy.

Secondly, the attention paid to health care is welcome as poverty tackles
the wellbeing of our nation. More local job creation must be the highest
priority. The stark reality of crime in the country has South Africans
eagerly listening to how government hopes to reduce it and, while the MF
applauds the allocation made in this regard, we believe that crime needs to
be deterred through punishment. In the almost crime-free Malaysia, a person
may be given the death penalty for kidnapping.

While we are certain that motorists are not smiling at the hike in the
petrol price, the MF is pleased with the funding offered for the
improvement of transport and public works. It is a clear realisation that
rural communities will only progress if we focus funding on their
development and enhancement, for which hon Manuel has made great
accommodation.

The MF takes this opportunity, however, to insist that old age pensions be
greatly adjusted to R1 200 per month with the realisation that many
households are dependent on that single income. The MF holds tight the hon
Manuel’s words that it’s about “what money can buy”, as this certainly will
ensure greater delivery and accomplishment of our goals. The MF supports
the Division of Revenue Bill. I thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Thank you, hon member. Before I
call the next speaker, who is the hon A I Van Niekerk? I am informed that
this is also his farewell speech.

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, it is not easy to stand here after 28
years in Parliament and to say goodbye. [Applause.] I will miss this, but I
now think you will miss me too. And, I think, the Minister will also miss
me, to some extent. [Laughter.]

On the Division of Revenue Bill, I have the following to say: South Africa
has become a net importer of food. It worries me, and I hope it worries the
Minister and everybody who deals with funds.

Droughts and floods plague agriculture. Our farmers are decreasing in
numbers. Seven hundred farmers produce 60% of our total production. In my
opinion, the Division of Revenue Bill does not reflect the remedy for this.
More money is needed for agriculture and, as far as I’m concerned, the
R1,6 billion which was given to bail out the airline problems could have
been given to agriculture to produce food. I hope that the Ministers will
attend to this, because I think this is a very important point.

Dit is my laaste toespraak na 28 jaar in die Parlement. Ek het baie beleef
en ervaar. Ek het mense, beleide en Ministers sien kom en gaan. President
Motlanthe is die vyfde President onder wie ek dien. Ek was deel van die
verandering wat deur President de Klerk moontlik gemaak is en was bevoorreg
gewees om deel uit te kon maak van die nuwe begin vir Suid-Afrika in
President Mandela se Kabinet.

Ek het op my manier my beste probeer. Ek het nie altyd daarin geslaag om te
kan doen wat ek wou doen nie, maar ek het my bes probeer om altyd te doen
wat goed en reg is.

Ek sê dankie aan die kollegas in hierdie Raad wat my verdra het, en vir
hulle vriendskap en kollegialiteit. Ek sê dankie aan die Departement van
Landbou en Grondsake, met wie ek oor die jare te doen gehad het en met wie
ek wonderlike tye ervaar het. Ek bedank die personeel van die Parlement vir
hul professionaliteit. En dan, ’n besondere dankie aan my vrou en kinders
in die galery, wat my ondersteun het en dit vir my moontlik gemaak het om
my vaderland te kan dien. [Applous.]

Professor Bothma, die Rektor van Stellenbosch Universiteit, het in ’n
kerkrede gesê dat niks ooit dieselfde bly nie; alles gaan verby met tyd en
dan kom daar ’n nuwe situasie wat ook weer verbygaan.

Dit is waar. Niks bly ooit dieselfde nie. Wat nou is, gaan ook verby. Iets
anders kom, en dit gaan ook verby. Die toekoms lê voor. Lotsgebonde is ons
as burgers van Suid-Afrika aan mekaar toegewys om ’n sukses daarvan te
maak.

My wens vir u en vir ons land is dat die vloek oor gister, en die euforie
oor die nuwe, verby moet gaan sodat ons almal, as patriotiese Suid-
Afrikaners, elk ons eie bydrae volgens ons vermoë kan doen om Suid-Afrika
se probleme suksesvol op te los en die uitdagings te kan takel en van
hierdie mooi land ’n sukses te maak. Ek dank u. Ek groet u almal.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[After 28 years in Parliament, this is my final speech. I have witnessed
and experienced many things. I have seen people, policies, and Ministers
come and go. President Motlanthe is the fifth President under whom I have
served. I was part of the change, made possible by President de Klerk, and
I was privileged to form part of South Africa’s new beginning in President
Mandela’s Cabinet.
In my own way, I tried my best. I did not always succeed in doing what I
set out to do, but I tried my utmost always to do what was good and right.

I would like to thank the colleagues in this House who tolerated me, and I
express my gratitude for their friendship and collegiality. I give thanks
to the Department of Agriculture and Land Affairs, whom I have dealt with
over the years and experienced wonderful times with. I thank the
parliamentary staff for their professionalism. And then, a special word of
thanks to my wife and children up in the gallery, who supported me and made
it possible for me to serve my home country. [Applause.]

Once, when delivering an address in church, Professor Bothma, the Rector of
Stellenbosch University, said that nothing ever stays the same; everything
passes with time and then a new situation arises which will also pass
again.

This is true. Nothing ever stays the same. The here and now will pass.
Something else takes its place, but that too will pass. The future lies
ahead. We, the citizens of South Africa, were assigned to each other by
fate to make a success of it.

My wish for you and for our country is that the curse on yesterday and the
euphoria over the new must pass, so that all of us, as patriotic South
Africans, can make our own contribution, according to our own capabilities,
to solve South Africa’ s problems successfully and tackle the challenges to
make a success of this beautiful country. I thank you. I bid you farewell.
[Applause.]]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, I rise on a point of order.

Ek wil net vir Kraai sê: Jy’t baie groot spore getrap; jy was ’n voorbeeld
vir ons almal. Gaan rus nou lekker. [Applous.] [I just want to say to
Kraai: You have left a lasting impression; you were an example to us all.
Enjoy your rest. [Applause.]]

Ms R J MASHIGO: Chairperson, hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers and members,
the cycle of poverty has to be broken and that is what the ANC-led
government is doing.

Looking back to 1994, it can be noted that great differences are recorded.
Reconstruction and development is a process. The people have seen the
changes and appreciate the difference the ANC has made in their lives. The
Minister of Finance expressed this in his presentation of the Budget
Speech, in which he generously allocated funds to the poorest of the poor.

The Division of Revenue Bill, as already explained, will focus on policy
priorities. It refers to all the monies transferred from the National
Treasury to the different spheres of government: national government, the
nine provincial governments and the 283 municipalities. This enables the
money to reach the people for whom it is intended and to address the
programmes identified.

There are, however, implementation challenges, like the nonalignment of
programmes and the noncompliance of provinces with the national objectives,
which, consequently, compromise service delivery to the poorest people. One
of the areas that has received more money is the provinces. This is meant
to improve education, health, roads and rural development.

My colleague has already covered education. School learner transport is a
cause for concern, something that is also a provincial competence. We have
children travelling long distances that cannot access the schools and, as a
result, miss getting an education and miss receiving the meals at schools.
This is because there is no transport to take them from these rural and
farming areas to their schools.

The Department of Transport and the Department of Education should attend
to this issue. The parents blame the Department of Education, because they
know that children need to go to school to get their education and they
think the transport must be provided by the Department of Education. Let’s
address this and see how the Department of Transport comes to terms with
the fact that these children need to go to school. In the urban areas it is
easier, but in the rural areas it causes a problem and, as a result, the
cycle of poverty will never be broken.

With regard to health care, we know there is some improvement in access to
health facilities and in the roll-out of the antiretroviral programme, but
there is still a lot to be done. To achieve Millennium Development goal
number 4 on the reduction of infant and child mortality, and goal number 5
on the health of pregnant women, we have to have proper facilities at a
primary level that are well equipped and give quality care.

There are programmes in place to address these goals, like the programme on
the prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV, antenatal clinics
and many others. There is even a beautiful programme on saving mothers.
However, the question is whether we are using all these available resources
to achieve the best outcomes. This has been addressed by the National
Treasury, which has allocated a large amount for the establishment of a
national office for standards of compliance. This office will assist in
setting norms and standards to address the problems in the health system.

The ANC strives for equality in the health service and to achieve this we
will have to go through the process of setting up a national health
insurance fund, an issue already being addressed. This will really bring
about equality for those people who have never received proper health
services. We are all aware of the fact that a large sum of money is going
to private care services.

In the state of the nation address, the President stated that, “Rural
development and agrarian reform is integral to the struggle to create a
better life for all.” This will increase food production and encourage
agricultural farming. Not everybody wants to migrate to the urban areas.
The land claim issues and the issue of people evicted from their land need
to be addressed in order to ensure the expansion of agricultural
production. People should know that they can produce where they live
permanently without the fear of being moved.

The issue of roads is one of the objectives that I have mentioned. Our
roads are in a bad state. All spheres of government have a responsibility
towards the maintenance of roads, but it becomes difficult to know which
government sphere starts where, because up to this point this has involved
national, provincial and local government. As a result, our roads are full
of potholes, the number of which is increasing every day. Soon labour-
intensive maintenance will not be able to address the problem of potholes
and it will deprive our people of jobs.

The Expanded Public Works Programme, as outlined in schedule 8, has special
performance-based incentives. Provinces and municipalities must take up
this issue because this is where our people can get jobs. There is an
eligibility requirement to address this. We hope that all spheres of
government will attend to it.

We have a problem with the fuel levy. The problem is that the fuel levy is
earmarked for metropolitan areas and will be phased out in four years. We
must remember this with regard to the Regional Services Councils. In this
regard, let me mention Thabazimbi, which is a mining area. All the levies
were taken and the revenue used by all the neighbouring towns. This fuel
levy will address the metropolitan areas, but the areas around the mines
and other poor municipalities will not be able to benefit from the fuel
levy during this time. This is really discriminatory. I think this needs to
be addressed.

The Constitution empowers us, as Members of Parliament, to exercise
oversight over the departments. This Division of Revenue Bill talks about
transfers to provinces and local government. It is our duty to call on
accounting officers to tell us where there is noncompliance, because we do
not vote for this money to be underspent or to be rolled over.

The voters out there have sent us here to represent them. The ANC has
responded positively to their needs. I will limit myself in this
presentation by only mentioning that there have been increases in social
grants, no-fee schools, school nutrition programmes and labour-intensive
programmes. As a result, we are aware of the fact that our members know
where their services come from and we hope that they continue knowing until
22 April so that they know where to put their crosses. The ANC supports the
Bill. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr W P DOMAN: Chair, I rise on a point of order: Is it in order that, apart
from the DA and the IFP, all the other opposition parties are absent here
today? Is this in order, or is this an indication of who should be trusted
in the upcoming elections?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): That is not a point of order, hon
member.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, I say thank you to all the
members who have spoken, particularly for supporting the Division of
Revenue Bill that we have tabled here today. A number of issues were
raised, some of which also came up in the committee yesterday, which I want
to clarify again.

Mr Marais raised the issue of capacity to spend funds, but also
acknowledged that there were various initiatives under way to address this.
The municipal financial management grant that is made available is also one
of the initiatives to modernise financial management, linking into greater
development plans to budget, producing quality and timely in-year annual
reports.

The other initiatives that also support this are the recently released
draft regulations on budget formats and reporting, which will allow for a
better account by municipalities of how funds are spent. The Siyenza Manje
project, which I spoke about and which the Minister spoke about via the
Department of Public Service and Administration, focuses on developing
skills in engineering, planning and financial management in municipalities.
And, of course, he also stressed the importance of oversight of the
legislatures on this matter.

Mr Marais also spoke about the drop in the equitable share allocation,
particularly in the Cape Town Metro. I would like to ask his party to
deploy him in local government, because we have 284 municipalities and, as
a Member of Parliament, I would have expected him to talk about all the
municipalities. The drop in the allocation to the City of Cape Town is
actually as a result of the Regional Services Council levies - which formed
part of the equitable share, and we explained this in the committee
yesterday - being replaced with the sharing of the general fuel levy from
2009. I trust that his arithmetic will then be better enhanced by factoring
in this explanation.

We know that with the Regional Services Council levies there were a number
of administrative problems, where they were collected at head office and
not necessarily where the persons worked with regard to the former Regional
Services Council levies. And, in order to mitigate the impact, the general
fuel levy is going to be phased in over four years.

I can imagine why Mr Van Niekerk, in his retirement and farewell speech,
is, after 28 years, able to overlook some of the things, because in our
speech I did indicate — and I want to repeat this — that the land and
agrarian reform support programme gives people from previously
disadvantaged backgrounds access to land and support to make better
productive use of such land.

Over one billion is added — not just this allocation — to various
agriculture programmes, including the Letsema project. Also, if you go to
your chapter on agriculture you will find that this is in addition to that.

With regard to the issue of the fuel levy that Ms Mashigo raised, we did
try to explain that this goes to the metro municipalities, but we have,
currently, an interim measure for the other local municipalities. This is
only during the phasing-in period over the four years, and this does not
say that the other municipalities will not be benefiting. We also indicated
that we are in the process ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Ngqongqoshe usuphelelwe yisikhathi.
[Hon Minister, your time has expired.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: We are also looking at making sure that
other funding mechanisms are found for the other local municipalities,
because this is only in the interim. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

    EASTERN CAPE RUGBY TEAM TO BE INCLUDED IN SUPER 14 RUGBY COMPETITION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M M DIKGACWI (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC’s study group on sport and
recreation welcomes the decision taken last month by the SA Rugby Union,
Saru, to include a team from the Eastern Cape to participate in the Super
14 rugby competition from next year. This decision is long overdue and
vindicates the calls made by the ANC in Parliament since 2004 for such a
decision to be taken.

The decision is a just reward for the thousands of black rugby players,
their coaches and referees who persevered in their quest to achieve this
goal. For too long, the Eastern Cape has been marginalised by Saru in its
decision-making, and, as a result, valuable talent either left the area or
simply stopped playing rugby.
The ANC study group further calls on Saru to intervene in the ongoing
dispute in border rugby and not to use the current instability in the
region to penalise and banish the entire province from participating in the
Super 14 competition. Saru must now implement its decision, even if this
means that the Eastern Province will be used initially as the base of the
new franchise. Port Elizabeth now boasts a new 50 000-seater world-class
stadium, a sports science institute at the university and all other
facilities required to sustain professional rugby.

We believe that this move will ultimately result in equity in professional
sport and will go a long way in addressing the legacy of racial
discrimination in rugby. I thank you. [Applause.]

                           RESTRICTIVE LABOUR LAWS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms A M DREYER (DA): My Chairperson, in his Budget Speech the Minister of
Finance quite correctly identified protecting the poor and sustaining
employment growth as enduring principles. He further emphasised that job
creation and broadening economic participation are still the goals of
economic policy. But what is the experience of employers and millions of
unemployed South Africans?

A lodge owner near White River in Mpumalanga tells me that she is inundated
with requests for jobs from desperate local people and that she needs to
employ more workers during the busy tourist months. But she turns away
those people and, instead, looks to family and friends for help. Because of
restrictive labour laws, she will not hire extra workers when she only
needs them during peak hours, as she can’t afford to keep them on her books
during the quiet periods.

While there is a large pool of desperate people looking for jobs, and there
are companies who need to employ more people, they don’t, because
government has put barriers between these two sides. If government were to
stop interfering in other people’s business, more jobs would become
available and more people would have the opportunity to escape poverty.

Therefore, a DA government will remove the barriers between the two sides
and make it easier to hire people by relaxing labour laws ...
[Interjections.] ... and giving wage subsidies to companies that are
prepared to employ first-time jobseekers. [Applause.]

                        TEARFUL NIEHAUS ADMITS FRAUD

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE (IFP): Chairperson, there are serious allegations of
dishonesty in today’s Mail & Guardian about the ANC’s national
spokesperson, Mr Carl Niehaus. I am very sad to bring this to your
attention: “Tearful Niehaus admits fraud”. The ANC’s spin doctor forged
signatures of top politicians, booked holidays on government accounts, and
was pushed out of top jobs for financial misconduct.

What is very significant is that Mr Niehaus admits “most of what you’ve
confronted me with is true ... I’ve made massive mistakes”. This is a sad
moment, but the question is: What is the ANC going to do about this?
[Interjections.]

                           THE FIGHT AGAINST CRIME

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nksz N M MDAKA (ANC): Sihlalo, urhulumente oxhuzula imikhala okhokelwa
ngumbutho wesizwe, i-ANC, ukholelwa ekubeni ubomi obungcono buquka
ukhuseleko lwabemi beli lizwe, kungajongwe bala lamntu. Ukuqinisekisa ukuba
asithethi nje - kuba kumnandi ukuthetha – siyenza, ukuzalisekisa
izithembiso zethu.

NgoLwesithathu odlulileyo, uMphathiswa wezeziMali uye wathi thaca uHlahlo
lwabiwo-mali lwalo nyaka-mali wama-2009-10. Kwenye yezinto
azikhankanyileyo, uye wachazela isizwe ukuba iphulo lokulwa ulwaphulo-
mthetho lifumene isabelo esithe kratya kunesiqhelo. Olu Hlahlo lwabiwo-mali
lungqina esikuthethileyo, ukuba ulwaphulo-mthetho sokuze silunyamezele
nakancinci.

Kule minyaka mihlanu izayo, umbutho wesizwe i-ANC uya kubulwa
ngokungenalusini ubugewu, sibonise ubungqwabalala kubenzi bobubi. Xa
simanyene, sincedisana, singenza lukhulu. Ndiyabulela, Mhlalingaphambili.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Ms N M MDAKA (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC-led government believes that a
better life includes the safety of the citizens of this country, without
considering the colour of one’s skin. To make sure that we don’t just talk
the talk, but also walk the talk – talk is cheap – we keep our promises.

Last Wednesday, the Minister of Finance tabled the Budget for the 2009-10
financial year. Amongst other things, he mentioned to the nation that more
money had been allocated to the crime-fighting campaign this financial year
compared to previous years. This Budget confirms what we have promised the
people, that we will never tolerate crime, ever.

In the next five years, the ANC will wage a total onslaught against crime
and be tough on those who commit crime. Working together, we can do more.
Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]]
Ms T V TOBIAS: Chair, I rise on a point of order. Is it parliamentary for
Mr Singh to read a newspaper in the House?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon Singh, will you put the
newspaper down please.

                 RURAL SANITATION AND JOB CREATION PROJECTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M M NTULI (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC-led government will step up a
massive Expanded Public Works Programme linked to infrastructure and
meeting social needs, which involves home-based care, crèches, school
cleaning and renovation, community gardens, the removal of alien
vegetation, tree planting and school feeding.

Eighty-seven people located in Mount Ayliff, Mount Frere and Matatiel are
working on the Ventilated Improved Pit – VIP - latrine sanitation project
in Pitseng, Eastern Cape. The project focuses on the manufacturing of
materials to be used in the construction of the VIPs in villages, including
bricks, floor and roof slabs. The target group for employment includes
women, youth and community members in the villages.

Miss Mamkayi, an orphan, is one of the 87 community members employed by the
project. Before the opportunity arose to work on the project, she used to
go to bed at night on an empty stomach, but that is no longer the case.

In the period ahead the ANC-led government will further accelerate and
expand its investment in public infrastructure. Together, we can do more.
Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

       RELEASE OF WAITING LISTS FOR OPERATIONS BY DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M WATERS (DA): Chairperson, the DA’s vision for quality health care in
the public sector includes, amongst other priorities, the release of
accurate waiting lists for all operations. In an open-opportunity society,
the public must be empowered by being informed of how long people have to
wait for operations at public hospitals.

Currently, there seem to be little or no comprehensive waiting lists in
each of the provinces, rendering the public powerless and unable to demand
a reduction in waiting time. The attempts by the DA in asking questions
here, in Parliament, as to the length of all waiting lists in each of the
provinces proved pointless as the department itself had no idea how many
people were waiting for operations, or how long it would take before the
operations would be conducted.

A DA government would conduct an audit of all provinces and determine the
length of waiting lists for all operations, and we would make these lists
public. We would set targets with regards to the reduction of waiting
times, and we would utilise the skills in the private sector to reduce
waiting lists by, amongst other things, accepting the offer by the private
sector that doctors and nurses do a certain number of community hours per
year.

The DA believes that quality health care in the public sector is achievable
through innovative and bold initiatives, joint ventures between the public
and the private sectors and the empowerment of the public. I thank you very
much. [Applause.]

                         INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M J J MATSOMELA (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC believes that the
infrastructural programme roll-out must ensure an integrated approach to
the provision of various services so that we upgrade our infrastructure in
a manner that meets both basic needs and enhances new and effective
economic activity. Building our capacity to grow is the third thrust of our
spending plans. It is reflected in the government’s R787 billion
infrastructure investment plans and is a cornerstone of our development
contract with business, organised labour and other social partners.
In this budget a further R6,4 billion is added for public transport, road
and rail networks. In the period ahead, together with our people, the ANC-
led government will accelerate and expand its investment in public
infrastructure. This will include expanding and improving the rail
networks, public transport and port operations, dams, housing construction,
information and communications technology and energy-generation capacity,
as well as education and health infrastructure. In the process this will
also create additional decent work opportunities whilst meeting the basic
needs of society. Yes, indeed, together we can do more. I thank you.
[Applause.]

       OFFICIALS AT MUNICIPALITY ALLEGEDLY DELIBERATELY CLAIM OVERTIME

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N SINGH (IFP): Chairperson, it has been reported in the newspaper which
I was using as a reference document that some officials in the ANC-run
Msunduzi Municipality in KwaZulu-Natal are allegedly deliberately not
completing tasks during normal working hours so that they can claim
overtime. This matter was raised by a councillor from within the
municipality.

An urgent investigation needs to be conducted so that other officials
and/or public servants who engage in these types of shenanigans are brought
to book. These kinds of actions or inactions become doubly serious as we,
in this House today, appropriate considerable additional allocations to
municipalities. Thank you.

                              HOUSING DELIVERY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D C MABENA (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC-led government has made
significant progress towards housing delivery by building more than 2,6
million houses for more than 14 million needy households since 1994.

To build on the successes of our housing programme, the ANC-led government
has once again committed a further R45 billion to the Breaking New Ground
housing programme. Therefore the ANC, in partnership with our people, will
work continually to increase access to secure and decent housing for all
through government’s adopted housing programme, including the continued
conversion of hostels into family housing units. Together, we can do more.
Ngiyathokoza. [I thank you.] [Applause.]

                 MINING DEVELOPMENT IMPACTING ON ENVIRONMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G R MORGAN (DA): Chairperson, notwithstanding the important contribution
that mining makes to the South African economy, the impact that mining has
on our environment and affected communities adjacent to mines is often very
severe and usually irreversible.

In the past few weeks, a company announced plans to establish an opencast
coal mine adjacent to the Mapungubwe National Park, a protected area which
forms part of the broader Limpopo/Shashe transfrontier conservation area.
The opencast Vele Colliery will have a massively negative impact on this
area, which has also been proclaimed a World Heritage Site. The mine
expects to open in 2009, which means that the recently released scoping
report is merely a cynical attempt to ensure procedural compliance.

Just because a particular mineral deposit exists in the earth does not mean
that is has to be mined. It is the DA’s position that extractive industries
must take place where the impact on the environment and people is minimal.

Government is not yet learning from the mistakes of the past. Other areas
of South Africa are under threat from the cumulative impact of mining,
including the Mpumalanga highveld, Wakkerstroom and the Wild Coast.

We cannot wait three years for the environmental authorisation of mines to
become the competence of the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
before the standards associated with mine approvals are improved. I call on
the Minister of Minerals and Energy to reject the applications by companies
that wish to mine in or adjacent to environmentally sensitive areas; and,
in association with the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, to
begin mapping effectively those areas of South Africa in which the number
of mines should be strictly limited to ensure the lessening of a cumulative
impact. I thank you. [Applause.]

                     ANC INITIATIVE: WAR ROOM ON POVERTY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B J MNYANDU (ANC): Chairperson, despite significant progress made over
the past 15 years, people living in rural areas continue to face the
harshest conditions of poverty, lack of access to land and basic services.

The ANC is committed to a comprehensive and clear rural development
strategy - linked to land and agrarian reform - towards improving the
conditions of farmworkers and farm dwellers, and building the potential for
sustainable rural livelihoods.

The antipoverty war room is an ANC-led government initiative, launched
countrywide, with the objective of providing a cushion for families living
in hardship and having no gainful means of improvement and employment.

This programme entails families from poor communities receiving food
parcels and school uniforms and being registered for social grants.
Together with our people, the ANC will step up programmes linked to
infrastructure development and meeting social needs with home-based care,
crèches, school cleaning and renovation, committee gardens, the removal of
alien vegetation, tree planting and school feeding schemes. There is no
doubt that together we can do more. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

                      ANC PROGRESS IN HEALTH PROVISION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs B TINTO (ANC): Chair, the ANC-led government has made significant
strides in health provision over the past 15 years. There have been
improvements with regard to access to primary health facilities. Currently,
95% of South Africans live within five kilometres of a health facility, and
all clinics now have access to potable water.

On the other hand, there are still many health care facilities that do not
always have the required medicines, appropriate staffing levels and a
constant supply of basic services, such as clean running water and
electricity, hence the largest adjustment of ANC budget-spending plans is
going towards poverty reduction. An amount of R25 billion is added to the
provinces, mainly for education and health care.

Together with our people the ANC government will continue to work at
reducing inequalities in our health system, improving the quality of care
and public facilities, boosting our human resources and stepping up the
fight against HIV and Aids and other diseases. Health reforms will involve
the mobilisation of available resources in both the private and public
health sector to ensure improved health outcomes for all South Africans.
Together we will do more. Thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

     CALL ON MEC IN NORTH WEST TO PUT MUNICIPALITY UNDER ADMINISTRATION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr W P DOMAN (DA): Chair, last week the DA called on the MEC for local
government in the North West to put the Ngaka Modiri Molema Municipality
under administration. This municipality is among the poorest in the North
West. It is currently plagued by chronic water shortages and contamination.
Yet the mayor of the municipality, Mr Themba Gwabeni, who is also a
provincial executive committee member of the ANC in North West, recently
channelled more than R4 million of the water budget and portions of budgets
for other essential long-term projects to finance a group of under 15
youngsters on a 14-month-long soccer training camp in Brazil. I wonder what
the Minister of Education would have to say about the schooling of these
youngsters.

It is mind boggling to note how a municipality that needs more than R1,2
billion to meet its needs can still cut budgets for water to finance a
soccer trip. The municipality’s skewed priorities are clearly illustrated
by its decision to fire its municipal manager for his apparent refusal to
approve the payment of the trip. The prioritisation of extramural
activities at the expense of basic services is a direct consequence of the
inept leadership of the municipality. This must not be left unpunished in
order to send a strong message that municipalities must not compromise
service delivery. The R8,7 million spent on the soccer trip would have gone
a long way towards helping meet the water needs in that municipality. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

                     DEVASTATING WILDFIRES IN AUSTRALIA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S C VOS (IFP): Chairperson, I would like to state that this honourable
House expresses its condolences to and profound sympathy with the
government and people of Australia following the recent devastating
wildfires in that country which have caused such terrible loss of life and
property. Thank you.

            MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS LETTING SOUTH AFRICANS DOWN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms H WEBER (DA): Hon Chair, once more the Minister of Home Affairs has let
South Africans down. Countries with suspect passports were given 10 months
to get their house in order. South Africa failed to do so. We are now
compared to Lesotho, Venezuela and Swaziland. We should be proud of our
passports, but as South Africans we are looked at with suspicion at
airports as if we all have fake passports.

This is once more a reflection on a Minister who does not care and seems to
look forward to her retirement. Minister, there is only 68 days to go. The
Minister of Finance has allocated funds for improved information
technology. What has happened to the R2,6 billion given to the “Who am I
online” project? Obviously, we are sitting with a department that has a
problem - 60% of employees unfit for employment, as was given by the
director-general in the Auditor-General’s report. The director-general
admitted that he could not replace the people, once more proving that open
opportunity would be advantageous to all South Africans.

       RELEASE OF WAITING LISTS FOR OPERATIONS BY DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, this is just a short reply to the hon
Mike Waters. I thank him very much for his advice on how to go ahead with
the hospital waiting lists. It is a serious issue; we do need those kinds
of information systems to know how many people are on waiting lists. This
does point out the absolute necessity for information systems of absolute
integrity.

As the hon Waters might be aware, we have initiated the first stage of an e-
health information system. This would be the first phase of a programme of
looking at health information for each patient so that the final outcome is
that any patient who is in any part of the country can move to another
province or region and will be followed electronically instead of with
paper. It is still a long way ahead, but the department is committed to
getting a proper health information system going. Thank you.

                           RESTRICTIVE LABOUR LAWS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, this
is in response to the statement about labour. For the first time in recent
years the government has been able to create more job opportunities than
entrants to the labour market. Over the past four years, more than 2
million people have been absorbed into the marketplace, so positive steps
have been taken. The Expanded Public Works Programme is a clear
illustration of the intention and ability of government to generate and
create the appropriate opportunities for labour and skills development and,
indeed, it is going to be expanded.

The hon member from the ANC made reference to the R787 billion for
infrastructure over the next three years. A consequence and spin-off of
this would be a huge opportunity to create employment. We have to place a
particular responsibility on the shoulders of the private sector by saying
- having due regard to the fact that these are the positive steps that are
being taken by government - what are you as private entities doing to
ensure that you create opportunity?

I ask the hon member who spoke about the appointment of people in a
temporary capacity to look at the Labour Relations Act. There is no
prohibition whatsoever on employing a person for a fixed period, for a
particular time - so the tenure can be determined, as long as the
remuneration and the salary are not below the minimum standards set out in
legislation.

When you do not know what the Labour Relations Act entails, you tend to
make these uninformed statements which tend to be misleading. So, I would
certainly invite the hon member to have a discussion with me so that we can
go through the details of the Labour Relations Act and perhaps she will be
more enlightened in her statements to this House. Thank you very much,
Chairperson.

                     DEVASTATING WILDFIRES IN AUSTRALIA

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Ms F Hajaig): Chair, this is just
to assure the hon Suzanne Vos – I see she has left the Chamber - that our
condolences have been sent to the Australian government for the loss of
life of its citizens in the raging fires in Australia. Thank you.

                     ANC INITIATIVE: WAR ROOM ON POVERTY
                 RURAL SANITATION AND JOB CREATION PROJECTS
                           RESTRICTIVE LABOUR LAWS

                           (Minister’s Responses)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms E Thabethe): Chairperson, I’d
like to respond to the statement on the war against poverty raised by the
hon member Mnyandu. As we indicated two weeks ago on 30 January 2009, we
rolled out this war room further to Mpumalanga and the premier of the
province, Mr Makwetla, and his executive were present.

We hope that this then will conclude as we move on to finishing the two
provinces so that people can really see that the ANC-led government is keen
to make sure that they get out of poverty and truly show that “Working
together, we can do more.”

The second statement was given by the hon M M Ntuli with regard to rural
sanitation job-creation projects. This also answers directly the hon Dreyer
in that she must do a little bit of research and checking first, because
today 87 people in Mount Ayliff can put food on the table because they are
employed in this project to deal with the VIPs in the villages. So, rural
development is part of the priorities that this government has.

Also, government cannot stop intervening. Government must intervene because
the private sector, as I indicated even yesterday, also needs to take part
and work with communities and government. So there is no way that you can
say that some people are untouchable. They must create jobs and the
government will then assist with the infrastructure and all it entails.

In addition to what Minister Surty said, I would like to say that the ANC-
led government inherited a fragmented labour market in 1994. Today we talk
about there being very good policies in place, which she should know about
as a member of the Portfolio Committee on Labour. She must not only
criticise. Where things are good she must say so.

I hope the voters are listening because she is actually going back to
exploitation and working conditions - that workers must accept lower
salaries. I hope they are listening. They can see that the DA government is
going to put all those things in place. [Applause.] Together, as the ANC-
led government, we will do more with what we inherited in 1994. Thank you.
[Applause.]

                           THE FIGHT AGAINST CRIME

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chairperson, I think I will respond to the member who spoke about the
initiatives around crime. Obviously, this is a very serious problem in our
country.

I would urge members to look carefully at the budget proposals that the
Minister of Finance has made and see what a huge impact we are trying to
make through spending on crime. One can look in particular at the ad hoc
committee, chaired by the hon Sotyu, which is dealing with the forensic
Bill. I think a few billion rand is being allocated to put the DNA
databases and the DNA structure in place so that we are fully equipped to
deal with DNA, which we aren’t able to deal with today.

Secondly, the fingerprint databases are fragmented and the police do not
have access to any of those databases except our own one. They don’t have
access to the Home Affairs database. They don’t have access to the eNaTIS
database of Transport. Through this legislation we are now linking up all
those fingerprint databases, and we are going to give the police access to
all of them.

So, I would urge people to study this. If they have further proposals on
how to better the fight against crime, I ask that they please bring those
suggestions forward. We will happily interact with them. Thank you.

                            African Youth Charter

            (Consideration of request for approval by Parliament)

Mrs W S NEWHOUDT-DRUCHEN: Chairperson, the Joint Monitoring Committee on
Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled
Persons has discussed the African Youth Charter and now presents it to the
House for ratification.

On 9 December 1994, the first National Youth Summit took place. This was
attended by more than 40 political, religious, cultural, sports and student
formations of the youth. The summit set out policy consensus which would
guide both state and government in the performance of the task of
empowering the youth. The development of the youth policy for South Africa
is therefore a core part of developing policies for the youth across the
region, Africa, as a continent, and finally the rest of the world.

The charter is an important policy document that serves as a guiding
framework to fast-track implementation of a comprehensive youth policy and
strategies that will empower young people to take advantage of increasing
opportunities. We note the involvement of South African youth organisations
such as the National Youth Commission, the ANC Youth League, the NGOs and
the SA Human Sciences Research Council in the process of developing and
drafting to completion the charter as part of regional and African youth
policy.

The African Youth Commission requested the Human Sciences Research Council
to prepare a report on the status of youth in Africa and to draft the
African Youth Charter in 2005. In July 2006, at the African Union Summit in
Banjul, Gambia, the African heads of state adopted this charter. Countries
now have to ratify this charter and put in place its institutional
provisions to ensure that each country’s youth policy is developed and
implemented along with the charter’s objectives.

The African Youth Charter concerns itself with the situation of African
youth. Many of them are marginalised from mainstream society through
inequalities in income, wealth and power; through unemployment and
underemployment; through being infected and affected by HIV/Aids; through
living in situations of poverty and hunger; through illiteracy and poor
quality education systems; through having restricted access to health
services and information; through exposure to violence, including gender
violence; through engagement in armed conflicts; and through experiencing
various forms of discrimination.

The African Youth Charter creates a binding framework for African
governments to create supportive policies and programmes for our youth. It
provides a platform for youth to assert their rights and execute their
responsibilities to contribute to the development of the SADC region and
Africa as a continent that has to develop to ensure a bright future for its
people.

The key policy provision in the African Youth Charter is that the charter
defines youth as individuals between 15 and 35 years of age. It outlines
the rights, freedoms and responsibilities of young people, as well as the
duties to be performed by states to advance their rights. The rights and
duties are clustered into four main themes: namely, youth participation,
education and skills development, sustainable livelihoods, and health and
wellbeing.

The charter also specifies that states which are party to the charter
should guarantee youth participation in parliaments and other decision-
making processes, develop and implement comprehensive and coherent national
youth policies, mainstream youth issues and establish a national youth co-
ordinating mechanism.

As we move to ratify the African charter, we want to highlight these values
as key driving and motivational issues for our youth to strive towards. The
youth shall have a duty to become the custodians of their own development,
and to protect and work for family life and cohesion. They shall have a
duty to have full respect for parents and elders and to assist them at any
time in cases of need in the context of positive African values. The youth
shall have a duty to partake fully in citizenship duties, including voting,
decision-making and governance. The youth should strive towards engaging in
peer-to-peer education to promote youth development in areas such as
literacy, use of information and communication technology, HIV/Aids
prevention, violence prevention and peace building.

The youth shall also have a duty to contribute to the promotion of the
economic development of states, parties and Africa by placing their
physical and intellectual abilities at their service. The youth shall have
a duty to espouse an honest work ethic and reject and expose corruption.
They must also strive towards a society free from substance abuse,
violence, crime, exploitation and intimidation. The youth must strive
towards promoting tolerance, understanding, dialogue, consultation and
respect for others regardless of age, race, colour, gender, ability,
religion, status or political affiliation.

The youth shall have a duty to defend democracy, the rule of law and all
human rights and fundamental freedoms. They must encourage a culture of
human rights protection as well as civil society activities. The youth have
a duty to be patriotic and respect African traditions and cultural heritage
and to pass on this legacy to future generations. They must strive to
become the vanguard of representing cultural heritage in languages and in
forms to which youth are able to relate; and they have a duty to protect
the environment and conserve nature. It is a pleasure for me to recommend
the African Youth Charter for ratification by this Parliament. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

African Youth Charter approved.

 HOW PARLIAMENTS CAN IMPROVE ACCESS TO HIV/AIDS TREATMENT (WITH REFERENCE TO
 THE REGIONAL TRAINING SEMINAR ON HIV/AIDS FOR PARLIAMENTS OF SADC AND EAC)

                                  (Debate)
The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chair, I would like to congratulate the Deputy
Speaker of Parliament on the initiative taken on holding this extremely
important seminar - cum -conference in Parliament this year.

It is very sobering to realise that in this day and age several provinces
are facing stock-outs - shortages of antiretrovirals. The role of
Parliament in such situations needs examination; equally so, the role of
government must also be examined. What is the role of the different spheres
of government? What do they have to do when these matters happen? But, most
importantly, we need to understand what the dynamics are and what it is
that led to this situation and what role Parliament can play in making sure
that this does not happen in the future.

Firstly, we have to look at the cost of drugs, and that isn’t an easy
thing. We do have locally manufactured antiretrovirals. We are told by
certain sources that we are paying too much and that we should be
importing. What does that mean for local manufacturing by our local
pharmaceutical industry? We need to make policy decisions on that, and we
have been in discussion with our partner ministries on that matter.

But this not only has to do with the cost of the antiretrovirals. At the
moment our people are at the first line of antiretrovirals. That is the
first line that was produced to respond to the antiretroviral crisis. But
we are going to have to be moving to the second line, which entails much-
improved drugs with fewer side effects. Those are going to be expensive and
they will also have intellectual property rights attached to them. So, the
battles that we had around the first line are going to be battles that we
are going to have around the second line. What role will Parliament play in
that?

We saw the enormous battles that the developing countries had to engage in
to get the cost of antiretrovirals reduced and bargain on the question of
intellectual property. And we are going to have to go into a second round
of that. It is very interesting to see how we will use the Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights – Trips - to be able
to significantly negotiate our way through these very difficult waters.

Costs are not just related to the individual cost of each tablet of each
package. Costs are also related to the procurement procedures that we
engage in as government. Costs are also related to the way that we manage
our stocks. How long do we wait until we order the new supply? What is the
procurement policy? Is the procurement policy clean? Are we procuring from
the best possible sources?

Without wanting to invade or to undermine the executive authority, I do
think that it is very important for parliaments to acquaint themselves with
the niceties and details of these issues, not just simply because we have
to exercise oversight, but because we have a pandemic in this country, an
illness and a disease that is ravaging our country on a scale that no other
illness has ever ravaged it.

The provision of antiretrovirals has been a beacon of light for so many
people. It has given them their lives back. It has given families their
breadwinners back. These issues are not just budgetary issues: Can we
afford or can we not afford? These are issues that we need to engage in and
not take simplistic views about or just keep on saying government must
deliver. We need to understand not just the constraints and the
difficulties, but also the commitment of government to deliver. We have
delivered and will continue to deliver. So we need to understand the
procurement processes.

We also need to understand the role of donors. It was in the last round of
the Global Fund that we applied for additional funding, and we failed in
that as a country. That was a terrible setback. But out there, there are
large numbers of donors, and let me say that the Americans have been
absolutely superb in our present crisis. The US President's Emergency Plan
for Aids Relief, Pepfar, has come to our assistance in a way that no other
donor was able to. Within a couple of weeks they were able to identify a
source of supply; they were able to get approval; and within a couple of
days we are going to be able to roll out those antiretrovirals to the
supply depot in the Free State.

We must apologise to health workers and to patients who presented
themselves to those facilities and who were turned away because we could
not initiate them onto antiretrovirals. This is a sobering moment in our
history — related to the roll-out of antiretrovirals — when provinces start
to exceed their budgeted targets; when they have more people on
antiretrovirals than they anticipated and then do not have a budget going
forward. What are the policy decisions? How do they manage that process and
how do we go forward? And, I think, this has been a very salient learning
experience for all of us in the health sector.

So there is the aspect of donor co-ordination as well. We are a country
that is proud of having a health infrastructure. We are not the average
developing country that has to depend heavily on donors to provide a lot of
health care services, and we are proud of that. But we must also realise
that we simply do not have the resources to roll out a health care delivery
system on the scale that we would wish, under the weight of the burden of
disease that we are carrying at the moment. So donor co-ordination becomes
a major priority. We need to know those donors, what they need, what lead
times they require, what they can offer us so that we can move swiftly and
efficiently with our partners. In the SA National Aids Council’s resource-
mobilisation committee we are setting up the resources to be able to do
that as best as possible.

Let us not just isolate this issue in terms of HIV and Aids alone. There is
tuberculosis as well. TB is the twin; it walks the same path as HIV and
Aids. And so parliaments really need to be looking at what is happening
with our TB programmes. The debate at hand is: What do parliaments do to
assist with the treatment of HIV and Aids? As a person who has long sat on
these benches, this is something very dear to my heart: The oversight by
Parliament.

I want to say that we cannot see the national Parliament in isolation to
the provincial legislatures. Health is a concurrent function. We do have
the National Council of Provinces that plays an invaluable role in bringing
in the provincial perspectives. But let me just share with you an
experience I have had. When we were in the public accounts committee, way
back in 1994, one of the first initiatives we undertook was to set up an
association of public accounts committees that has met every year since
then for 15 years. This was an association of the national public accounts
committees and the provincial ones. We would have a national get-together
every year to assess where we were; the common issues facing us as
legislatures exercising oversight.

Health service delivery is primarily in the provinces. The national
Department of Health is primarily a department that sets standards and
quality assurance. It is not really at the coalface of health service
delivery. If we are going to have proper oversight, we need to be co-
ordinated. I must say that it would be wonderful if this could be done in
the way that public accounts committees do it: On a nonparty basis, with
our provincial counterparts, to see what effective oversight is.

The national department, the national legislature and the national
parliamentary committee on health can play an invaluable role when we are
looking at the Doha agreements on Trips, and the kinds of international
instruments that can facilitate our access to antiretrovirals, and other
measures to support the fight against HIV and Aids. It is at that local
level – the provincial level - that we really need the oversight, and we
need to be supporting our provincial counterparts. They often come under
incredible pressure and they need support from all of us, working together.


Let me also just say that here in this House every MP has access to a
constituency office. We need to set in place early warning systems around
drug supplies and procurement. One of our best early warning systems would
be for each and every MP to be in contact with what is happening in their
clinics and hospitals. That would be an important port of call for every
parliamentarian and every health care worker or every patient. We would not
need to have the NGOs and health workers calling on us and making us aware
of the problems that they are experiencing in our provinces.

The constituency offices should be an important port of call for every
health worker and every patient in order to be able to say: “Listen, people
are coming here and I don’t have drugs, not only antiretrovirals, but drugs
for diabetes, hypertension ...” – that kind of stock-out. So, we really
want to make the appeal as the Department of Health that individual MPs
take it upon themselves to stay very close to what is happening in our
health care system.

There are many roles and very important roles. There is a suggestion that
there be a specific committee on HIV and Aids and TB. I would endorse that.
There are other ways in which one could do this. We could also have a
subcommittee on health that looks specifically at those issues and
Parliament would have to undertake to play a role.

But a national conversation is going to have to take place around the
challenges that we face: Financial, human resources and whatever. Everybody
has the right to protest, to embark on legal litigation, but we all need to
say that together we need to be facing these problems. We appreciate this
initiative from the national Department of Health and we congratulate
Parliament, and we hope that in the next Parliament we will have very
active and vigilant Members of Parliament when it comes to health issues
and to HIV and Aids in particular. Thank you very much. [Time expired.]

Mr N SINGH: Chair, I wonder if the hon Minister has time to take a
reasonable question.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): Her time has expired, but we will ...

Mr N SINGH: Madam Minister, you spoke about Pepfar funding. Now last year
...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): Let me just first ascertain if the
member wishes to take a question.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: I will.

Mr N SINGH: Thank you. Madam Minister, we rely very heavily on global
funding. I chair a hospice on the south coast of KwaZulu-Natal. Last year,
we understand, R835 million-odd was not made available because the
Department of Health did not endorse an application. Many hospices rely on
global funding and especially to go out and help people infected with HIV
and Aids. Could you give us some indication, Minister, whether a new
application will be supported?

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: We are in the next round of applications now, and
we have the Development Bank of Southern Africa assisting us in getting a
proper secretariat in place. We are working on this and UN Aids has given
us technical support to do that. So we are working very hard to ensure that
that process will go ahead. Thank you. [Applause.]
Mrs S V KALYAN: Chair, given that an estimated 5,7 million South Africans
are infected with HIV, it was highly appropriate that the regional training
seminar on HIV/Aids was held in our Parliament. There was overwhelming
consensus at the seminar that parliamentarians can and must play a critical
role to improve access to HIV treatment, to provide support to infected and
affected persons, and to transform attitudes.

It is heartening to note that since September 2008, the government of South
Africa has buried all the garden remedies in the compost heap and ditched
the nonsense rhetoric about HIV/Aids and that the Minister of Health has
publicly stated that HIV causes Aids and she has committed herself to
tackling the pandemic holistically and scientifically. [Interjections.]
[Applause.]

Bly stil! [Keep quiet!] While the denialist attitudes are gone, the
political leadership of South Africa still needs to be more forceful in our
commitment to deal with this disease. As parliamentarians, we have a duty
to create an enabling environment for infected persons. The tragic case of
the young mother in Lusikisiki who murdered her four children and then
committed suicide because of the stigma around her HIV status should never
have happened. All of us must take collective responsibility for those
deaths.

The Southern African Development Community Parliamentary Forum Model Law on
HIV/Aids has been drafted from a human rights perspective. It is basically
a set of key recommendations for member states to shape their own domestic
legislation with.

Firstly, the Parliament of South Africa needs to have a conversation on
whether we need a specific HIV Act, or whether we should integrate the
model law into existing legislation. Secondly, we need to look at specific
problem areas in the model law, like disclosure of status to third parties,
decriminalising sex work, consensual same-sex relationships and
criminalising societal behaviour, and to analyse these recommendations in
the context of our Constitution with a focus on human rights.

Access to medication is a fundamental component of the right to health. All
parliaments should and must establish enabling legislation necessary for
the production or importation of cheaper drugs. The high cost of
antiretrovirals, especially second-line drugs, is prohibitive.

South Africa’s Aids programme is heading for a funding crisis. Last year we
set aside R4,5 billion for Aids, but by the department’s own admission we
need at least R6,4 billion because more people are seeking treatment than
budgeted for. Therefore we need to rely more on donor funding and we need
to be more relaxed about the strict conditions we impose when accessing
these funds.
Earlier this year R80 million in funding from the Global Fund to Fight
Aids, Tuberculosis and Malaria was put on hold because the government did
not have structures to administer it. I acknowledge that this is the legacy
of the former administration which did not trust donations from the
international community, but I am hopeful because I have just heard you,
Minister, in that we are working, as we speak, to put these systems in
place so that we can use every possible cent in the war against Aids.

There are encouraging signs that our Aids epidemic is stabilising. We hope
that this trend will be shown to continue in the results of the next
antenatal clinic survey which, presumably, will be released within the next
couple of months. But the treatment and prevention programme is still
nowhere close to where it should be.

There are many practical things that we, as parliamentarians, can do to
address the pandemic. Firstly, we need to depoliticise the issue. The DA
fully supports the recommendation that Parliament establish a cross-party
committee on HIV and Aids. We would go a step further and call for this
cross-party committee also to be represented on the SA National Aids
Council. Furthermore, we need to see civil society as an important partner
in the fight against HIV and Aids.

Secondly, we need to be far more aggressive in removing the stigma
associated with HIV and Aids. A campaign encouraging testing for one’s
status, spearheaded by our Parliament, would be an excellent starting
point.

The DA has signed up to the one million tests programme initiated by the
Aids Health Care Foundation, and I urge all political parties in this House
to do the same. We should use our public positions to appropriate funds for
health care and exercise our oversight of executive actions more
vigorously.

Because of the lack of political will for the development of a coherent,
quality medicine regulation system, we have situations such as the one that
the DA was approached with earlier this year. Some Aids researchers have
been waiting for two years for approval from the Medicines Control Council
for a clinical trial on a potential Aids treatment. They faced losing their
funding if the application was not approved by the end of the year. The
trial has still not been approved.

It is time for proper medicine regulations to be restored. Political
appointments in the MCC, which keeps the old order entrenched, must be
swept away and the focus on quality and professionalism must be restored.
The DA supports the call by the Treatment Action Campaign to up the CD4
count from 200 to 350 to qualify for treatment. It just makes good sense.

Minister, you’ve put out a challenge that all Members of Parliament should
go out to their constituencies and monitor the availability of medicines in
the clinics and hospitals. I put a question to you, Minister: Will you then
lift the blanket ban that exists at the moment because of which public
representatives cannot enter hospitals? They have to apply in writing, and
sometimes it takes six to eight weeks before you get a response. I would
like to take up your challenge, but, at the same time, I ask you to advise
or notify clinics and hospitals that public representatives should be able
to walk into the hospitals and that they should be unafraid to answer
questions when it comes to shortages of medicines and the like. [Applause.]

HIV and Aids is a global emergency and a fundamental human rights issue. We
have a duty to promote a nonpartisan approach to the HIV pandemic and the
DA associates itself fully with the resolution of the parliaments. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Chairperson, this debate is centred around a report with a
considerable focus on rights, but asking practical responses from MPs. Two
issues stood out for me in the report. The first was the Model Law on
HIV/Aids and the second issue was on ways of improving access to cheaper
ARVs.

As an IFP member, I am wary lest we fall into the trap of putting blame on
others for our failures as government and MPs to address HIV effectively.

In 2005, the Inter-Parliamentary Union adopted a resolution about the role
of Parliament in advocating and enforcing human rights in strategies for
prevention, management and treatment of HIV and Aids. It was carried into
the Model Law over which we, as MPs, have had very little input.

The rights aspect of managing the HIV and Aids pandemic is important, but
it is also important that we don’t fall into another trap of focusing too
much on human rights aspects and too little on the practical implementation
of an adequate response to the pandemic. Rights misapplied can do more harm
than good. And too often the policy agenda has been set by activists who
had their own agenda. In the early days, it was decided for us that the
right to secrecy for HIV was paramount. That bias came from the West; it
was imported into Africa, fostered by academics and endorsed by our
leaders. It has contributed towards making HIV different.

Let us focus on nondiscrimination more than on secrecy. If we treat HIV
like an ordinary disease, so will the public. If we focus on
nondiscrimination, we will not allow the illness to be treated differently
by insurance companies with regard to death benefits, by medical aids with
regard to chronic medicine benefits, and we will also not allow the chronic
illness grant to be based on the CD4 count but on the ability to work,
linked to a patient’s attempt to try to find word.

At the seminar several speakers argued for greater use of the Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights – TRIPS - in the
World Trade Organisation, allowing patents to be overturned and compelling
companies to give compulsory licences for the production of generics.

In our experience, that has not been necessary. What is necessary is
government will to make treatment available and to engage in good-faith
negotiations with companies to allow appropriate medicines to be
manufactured, often through partnerships with the generic and the parent
companies that still keep their licences.

The price in South Africa is currently R130 per patient for appropriate
medication. That is more than affordable; it is cheap.
As the need for second-generation, combination and newer drugs becomes
necessary, I suggest that we employ the same approach. Let’s keep Trips in
reserve as a stick but engage in good-faith negotiations. And, had the
previous Minister of Health been more accessible to Parliament’s views
previously, we would have not had an expensive court case in terms because
she didn’t want to distribute antiretrovirals and blamed the big-drug
multinationals.

The structure of our health service does not foster access to treatment or
to medication. It is far too centralised. Budgeting and implementation are
confused. Some programmes are duplicated, some are contradicted. Some
budgets are not spent, some are overspent.

Districts should be strengthened and decide priorities close to the point
of delivery, then integrate the services to carry them out. This will
improve transparency, efficiency and accountability.

To make medicines more accessible, we should bring the private sector on
board to manage clinics and hospitals, to run fleets of mobile units, to
manage drug distribution. We should work with the NGO sector in the open
and not as a form of political patronage - one of the reasons why the
Global Fund was obstructed in KwaZulu-Natal in the past. We should open our
arms to international donors and not try to remain self-sufficient, as the
previous Minister claimed she wanted to be. Hopefully, we have a new
approach from our new Minister.

In the early days, as I pointed out, the KwaZulu-Natal ministry, for
political reasons, obstructed the Global Fund, which has happened again
recently. The SA National Aids Council remains relatively ineffectual.
Therefore, hon Minister, let us by all means establish another
interparliamentary committee. But we had one before; it evaporated in the
heat of politics.

Let the new committee, if we do form it, comprise a team of drivers and not
debaters, of actors and not of activists. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs H I BOGOPANE-ZULU: Mr Chair, I think sometimes it really hardens me
when colleagues come to the podium without having done their homework.
[Interjections.] No, I will deliver my own speech, just be patient.

It hurts because sometimes when we want to engage with concepts, especially
around the issues of HIV and Aids, it helps if you do your homework. You
can never equate confidentiality with secrecy, and if you understood the
realities of HIV and Aids, you could never make the comments my colleague
has just made. So that is one of the things that we need to deal with as
Parliament.

Let me first talk about the Inter-Parliamentary Union Advisory Committee on
HIV and Aids, a committee that was established by 12 members from around
the globe and is endorsed by the Inter-Parliamentary Union governing body
and the 152 parliaments who form the membership. That committee was
established because we understood that on the debate of HIV and Aids,
parliaments have been lacking.

The train left the station and, for some reason, parliaments and
parliamentarians were left behind. Now we are sitting in a process that has
moved on without us and we need to invest energy, time and resources to
catch up, because our being left out has caused a lot of challenges in the
fight against HIV and Aids.

One of the most important aspects are the international instruments that
are being ratified - sometimes by our government – and which commit us as
Members of Parliament in our absence. We then find ourselves having to
respond to things that we have not committed ourselves to, but, at the same
time, possibly establishing a lack of coherence and follow-up.

We have the special session on HIV and Aids that takes place every two
years. I think it’s important for this Parliament, in endorsing the
committee to be established in whatever form, to do a wonderful job in
following up and ensuring that Parliament, as an institution, has the
budget to enable South Africans to engage with the report long before it
reaches the United Nations. That will go a long way.

We have the Abuja Declaration, to which we’ve committed ourselves, that has
set certain standards and, for some reason, Parliament has never had an
opportunity to actually engage with the Abuja Declaration. Amongst the
challenges, the Abuja Declaration says that we need to allocate 15% of our
health budgets. How will we do that as overseers of the national budget if
we have not had the opportunity for actually meaningful engagement? So we
need to look, as Parliament, at the strategies of how we engage with these
political commitments government and the executive commit themselves to.

We need to look at issues of legislation. I think that at this time in our
history we do not want to be passing an HIV Act. I can confidently say that
South Africa has the best HIV legislation in the world. We have the right
policies, but we have a challenge in implementing them. [Applause.] We have
them, they are there. Now let’s implement them.

As was said by the previous speakers, we as parliaments need to begin to do
that through our constituencies in partnership with our other partners, and
in that way we will give meaning to the different pieces of legislation and
policies that we already have. This would mean that we have moved four,
five steps ahead of the Model Law for SADC and that we could share with
other SADC countries what we have learnt.

The world is in the process of criminalising HIV. What have we done as
Parliament? We need to look back and ask what is our role and what have we
done to ensure that the criminalisation of HIV does not happen. I know that
when we talk about criminalisation, we talk about difficult issues. The
reality is that we can’t continue to criminalise sex workers and assume
that we don’t contribute to the criminalisation.

We need to deal with difficult issues, because HIV is a virus that has gone
deeper into our cultural values, that has really challenged everybody in
everything that we do. So we need to begin to contribute and make sure that
issues of criminalisation, especially of those vulnerable sectors, are
dealt with as a matter of urgency.

This is one of the priority areas in our national strategic plan. The
section on human rights and access to justice will be made a reality solely
by us in this Chamber and in the legislatures. Come 2011, we need to look
back at what has been outlined in the national strategic plan and what we
as Parliament have contributed towards achieving that.

The member before me talked about secrecy and confidentiality and whatever
her understanding of that was. We have very high levels of stigmatisation,
whether we agree or not. You cannot take a disease that has been associated
from its beginning, from its genesis, with immorality and sexuality and
want to pretend that its confidentiality can be associated with secrecy. To
me, that’s very irresponsible.

We need to deal with issues of notification and disclosure. They are
challenges, but they have nothing to do with secrecy. We need to evaluate
where and how and what value they will add. We need to ask the right
questions, not if we want to talk about the numbers but if we want them for
health system purposes - then, let’s go there. But we should not go there
just because somebody thought that secrecy and confidentiality can never be
confused. [Applause.]

There are issues of travel bans. We are now talking about the UK requiring
visas, but the debate we have missed is that before long people on the
African continent, especially from sub-Saharan Africa, will never be able
to leave their own countries and that includes South Africans. Because we
have a high prevalence of HIV, countries want you to declare your HIV
status as a condition for obtaining a visa, assuming that they are issuing
bans. What have we said as leaders in this House? We need to begin to open
the dialogue on that.

The Minister talked about patent rights, and my colleague before me said
that the former Minister of Health wasted money by having a court case.
What she does not realise is that that court case set and brought the
prices of medicines down. [Applause.]

That court case tested the Trips agreement. That court case set the
precedent in that when negotiations are entered into, we will implement
them. So we will go ahead and as we establish the form of this is and as we
engage on HIV, we will continue to test the flexibilities. We will continue
to work on looking at issues of issuing compulsory or voluntary licences,
but we will do everything we should to bring the price of drugs down,
especially the second-line drugs. That’s what we’ll do. It’s important also
...

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Chairperson, on a point of order ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): Hon member, please take your seat.
There is a point of order.

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Chairperson, is the hon member aware that at the time that
the court case ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): Sorry, are you rising on a point of
order?

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Yes.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): What is the point?

Dr R RABINOWITZ: The point of order is that the member said that I was
wrong ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): No, no, that’s not a point of order.
[Interjections.] Please take your seat.

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Well, may I ask the hon member a question?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): Will you take a question, hon member?

Mrs H I BOGOPANE-ZULU: Time permitting, Chair, I will.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): Okay, time permitting at the end of her
speech.

Mrs H I BOGOPANE-ZULU: Time permitting, I will definitely take the
question. [Interjections.]

With regard to the issuing of permission for people to do research in South
Africa, I think it is very important that we understand that sometimes
people access funding for research without having followed the necessary
procedures. We must never, as South Africans and as this Parliament, allow
researchers to undermine ethics and efficacy in the name of accessing
research. We can’t and we won’t compromise. [Applause.]

We have seen what happened with microbicides and we will continue to
pressurise the ethics committee on its responsibility to work and function
effectively. And, as this Parliament, I think at some stage we need to look
at the guidelines that were set. This is because a lot of researchers come
to South Africa and target rural areas. They bring consent forms written in
English that are not explained half the time and they give people money. So
we need to look at all those realities: That when people want to do
research, which we support, we must engage more on the research.

Monitoring and evaluation remain our biggest challenges. But let me talk
about what our responsibilities are in the few seconds I have left. As
Members of Parliament we need to make sure that as opinion leaders we say
the right things, we use the right language, we stop saying people are
suffering from HIV. They are not suffering; they are infected and affected.

We need to be able, as decision-makers, to make the right decisions
collectively as leaders. We need to be able to oversee and provide the
required leadership. We need to be able to ensure that when we do our
constituency work, when we engage with the budget, when we engage with the
executive, we provide the expected leadership and that we roll out and
become treatment partners to those constituencies that we serve. We are the
ones that will carry their voice so that this Assembly can listen to those
unheard voices. As South Africa, we have a challenge.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): Hon member, your time has expired.
[Interjections.]

Mrs H I BOGOPANE-ZULU: Thank you very much. [Interjections.] No, I could’ve
taken the question if I’d had the time! [Applause.]

Ms T B SUNDUZA: Chairperson, hon members, distinguished guests, it is my
honour to speak for the first time in this House. [Applause.] I thank my
party, the ANC, for the confidence it has in me.
Parliamentarians, as representatives of the people, have a key role to play
in response to HIV and Aids - one of the most serious threats facing the
world. They represent and have the platform to reflect the concerns of all
people, including those living with or affected by HIV. As opinion leaders
and decision-makers, parliamentarians can promote informed debate on issues
related to HIV. As legislators, parliamentarians can lead the drafting,
adoption and oversight of the implementation of the legislation that
protects human rights and that advances effective HIV prevention, care and
treatment. These are some of the interventions in which parliamentarians
can play a role.

It was this immense platform and opportunity to make a difference in the
lives of people afforded to public representatives that gave birth to the
IPU Advisory Group on HIV and Aids. This advisory group’s key mission is to
provide guidance to IPU member states on the implementation of
international commitments on HIV and Aids. It creates the opportunity for
parliamentarians to network and to share their experiences and progress in
order to develop an integrated approach to the fight against Aids.

We must value the opportunity the IPU provides to parliamentarians to share
their knowledge of programmes and strategies. This assists all countries in
benefiting from this knowledge and developing more effective strategies in
their own response to the Aids pandemic. At a policy level, it also
provides the opportunity to develop a common approach, particularly in the
area of ensuring that those who are HIV-positive are protected against
discrimination in any form.
At its 52nd national conference in Polokwane the ANC resolved, among other
things, the following: That education and health be key priorities of the
ANC for the foreseeable future; to further strengthen the public health
care system and ensure adequate funding; that government intervene in the
high cost of health provision; to develop a recruitment and human resource
development strategy; to develop a memorandum of understanding with foreign
countries on the exodus of health professionals; to accelerate the roll-out
of the comprehensive health care programme, such as the provision of ARVs
at all health facilities and the strengthening of capacity to monitor the
side effects of ARVs; to intensify our efforts to create an environment
that promotes positive individual behaviour in our communities, especially
amongst young people; and that more resources are allocated to programmes
on sexual awareness, with ANC branches being actively involved in these
programmes.

Health is, in fact, one of the key priorities of the ANC-led government,
and will remain so when the ANC returns to lead the new government after
the 2009 elections. Critical to our response to the Aids pandemic is to
ensure that all health facilities have the capacity to provide ARV
treatment, notwithstanding the challenges confronting us to achieve this.

As critical is the implementation of the national health insurance, which
guarantees that all South Africans have free access to health care. The new
ANC-led government will ensure the implementation of this over the next
five years. Furthermore, the new ANC-led government will reconsider
establishing a state-owned pharmaceutical company to regulate and provide
cheaper drugs.

What else can members do to get more involved? We can play a key role in
raising awareness of the potential benefits of HIV testing and counselling
and ensure that people’s right to privacy is respected. In this regard, we
should be encouraging as many people as possible to get tested and know
their status. We can assist in the prevention of prejudice, discrimination
and stigma against those who are afflicted and affected.

Many families are devastated by the loss of loved ones and do not deserve
to be treated in an undignified and disrespectable manner. This disease
affects us all. We can promote compassion and understanding within the
broader society and speak out on the tolerance and the rights of women,
children and vulnerable groups.

As legislators, we can ensure that our laws and regulations eliminate all
forms of discrimination against people living with HIV and that we move
away from rhetoric and ensure appropriate action. We must also ensure that
the World Trading Organisation’s Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights is incorporated. We must use this immense
platform we are given as parliamentarians to preach the ABC. We must reject
coercive approaches to HIV prevention such as mandatory HIV testing,
restriction of movement and criminalisation of harm-reduction measures.
Equally, we must reject the gender-based inequalities that fuel the
epidemic and work with members of vulnerable groups such as sex workers,
men who engage in same-sex activity, drug addicts and prisoners.

We are aware that the SA National Aids Council, Sanac, has met regularly in
recent times and that there is unity in purpose among stakeholders as we
combine our efforts to rid our society of the disease that has caused so
much pain in the lives of our people, especially the poor. According to the
national strategic plan, there are plans to duplicate the Sanac structure
and establish it at provincial level, as well as at local level. We must
ensure that this happens and that we are at the forefront of mobilising our
constituencies to become involved in these structures.

Research is a critical part of planning in our response to HIV and in
gauging whether our interventions are having the desired results. From
recent surveys it appears that young adults, who were most vulnerable to
infection, have started to understand the message of prevention, and we
have seen a decline. This is good news, but it does not mean we can now
rest on our laurels. We need to intensify our prevention campaign.

In conclusion, I wish to say that we are well placed in many of the areas I
have mentioned, but we fall short on implementation. I urge all hon members
to commit themselves to taking the necessary action to reverse the impact
that HIV and Aids has on our people. We must unite to defeat this disease
in the same way we came together in unity to defeat apartheid. There is a
role for each and every one of us. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the MF found that the recent seminar held in
Cape Town with SADC and East African Community members on the subject of
HIV and Aids was of great benefit, and that it was educational on the
reality of the pandemic on the continent. It is crucial that HIV and Aids
are tackled on an international basis, as well as on a national basis.

It is pleasing to note that we have one of the largest antiretroviral
programmes. But it is certain that the need does exceed the supply. In this
respect, all our efforts need to be embraced to ensure that the pandemic is
stopped from infecting more South Africans.

Madam Minister, an article by Natasha Joseph in the Cape Times has been
greatly inspiring. She states, and I quote:

  One million male condoms on average are distributed in Khayelitsha every
  month. This initiative of the City of Cape Town and NGOs working in the
  HIV and Aids sector has yielded fantastic results, says the city’s health
  department.
Thanks go to you, Madam Minister.

She continues in writing, and I quote:

    Over a three-year period, the dramatic scaling up of condoms distributed
    in Khayelitsha resulted in a 50% drop in the incidence of sexually
    transmitted infections.

The MF is in full support of all initiatives and embraces their influence,
as parliamentarians, on rescuing communities from this dreadful disease of
HIV and Aids. I thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): Thank you very much. Hon members, the
next speaker will be delivering her maiden speech. I call upon the hon B T
Shongwe. [Applause.]

Ms B T SHONGWE: Chairperson, Madam Deputy Speaker, I am delighted to
participate in this debate on the Inter-Parliamentary Union and HIV and
Aids.

Firstly, I want to commend the Minister and the ANC-led government for,
once again, sending a clear message that says: We care, we are pro-poor,
and that we put our money where it is needed most. I was fortunate enough
to be a participant in the first regional training seminar on HIV and Aids
that was organised by the IPU and hosted by the South African Parliament in
January 2009.
I wish to express my sincere thanks to the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and
the hon Bogopane-Zulu for championing this seminar, which was the first of
its kind held by the Southern African Development Community and the East
African Community.

Holding this seminar on the continent, specifically in South Africa, was
crucial as we acknowledge that Southern Africa is the epicentre of the Aids
pandemic. I say this because of the 14 member states of the Southern
African Development Community, nine have an adult prevalence rate higher
than 10%, six states have a rate higher than 20%, and one state has a rate
higher than 30%.

In 2005, South Africa was home to 14,8 million of the 38,6 million people
living with HIV in the world. These HIV-prevalence estimates conceal the
much more appalling reality of the pandemic’s impact on the human, social,
economic and development structures of most of the Southern African states.

In more than 20 years on the subregion, HIV and Aids has reduced life
expectancy; orphaned millions; affected food security and economic growth;
and compromised hard-gained improvements in social and development
structures. I therefore urge this House to take forward the
recommendations, lessons learned and facts shared by critical formations
such as the civic associations, the IPU and members from various
parliaments.

On 28 November 2008, South Africa joined the Southern African Development
Community in adopting the Model Law on HIV and Aids. The adoption of the
Model Law by an institution as influential as SADC has brought to the
foreground the importance of legislation and the urgency of legal reform as
crucial parts of the response to HIV.

The Model Law enforces a common approach. We hope that this Model Law,
which was developed by the SADC region, will build on existing best
precedents. At the same time, we should be mindful that the ideal should
not be uniformity for uniformity’s sake. Country-specific differences still
need to be accommodated.

The adoption of the model legislation underlines the need for an
appropriate stimulus for debate and advocacy - very much what we are doing
here today. Very importantly, for people living with HIV, human rights
organisations and other civil-society groups, the Model Law is a powerful
tool for advocacy targeted at legal and policy reform.

As an ANC member I join my voice to the many voices that have called for a
cross-party committee on HIV and Aids. We ask that the members of the
Fourth Parliament realise the recommendations of this House. In addressing
the HIV and Aids pandemic, we must give more urgency to the many cross-
cutting factors that have an impact on HIV infection, especially where
women are concerned. Some of the critical areas that require further
redress include the systematic nature of gender-based violence, especially
rape, and the phenomenon of concurrent partners, which are drivers of the
pandemic. Better strategies, more resources and education of boys and men
are crucial in putting to rest outdated cultural practices and bad
behaviour.

Since Polokwane we have seen spaces opening up for us to better interact
with very important stakeholders in all relevant sectors. Strained
relationships between government and civil society have been repaired and
restored. The ANC must be congratulated on continuing its long walk with
civil society. Indeed, civil society was alongside this government when it
fought hard and bruising battles and was bold enough to take on the might
of the multinationals in its quest to make medicine more affordable and
accessible, not only for South Africans but for the rest of the continent
and the world.

We can turn the tide if we take seriously the recommendation to target
districts or areas, where we know the infection rate is high, with specific
programmes, measures and interventions, as opposed to a one-size-fits-all
approach. Addressing systemic weaknesses in the health system, such as
quality of care, and the lack of personnel and remuneration, can go a long
way towards accelerating our ideal of a better life for all.
This government is applauded all over the world for having the most
expansive and largest number of people – over 600 000 - on antiretroviral
treatment. Treating Aids is, however, expensive and requires long-term
commitment. Currently, provinces such as the Free State and KwaZulu-Natal
are under tremendous budgetary strain, but already the Minister has
reflected what the challenges are and how she is going to address them.

We therefore need to use the legislation that this House has passed with so
much courage to ensure that we access drugs at a cheaper rate. But we must
also make use of the flexibilities that the World Trade Organisation
provides for accessing drugs more cheaply.

The ANC Polokwane resolution calling for the establishment of a state-run
pharmaceutical manufacturing plant in South Africa must be taken forward as
a matter of urgency. Not only will this initiative benefit South Africans,
but it will be benefit the rest of the countries on the continent.

It is now urgent that we revisit the first-line treatment regimes that we
offer as first treatment as well as the second-line drugs commonly used to
treat multidrug resistance. As the ANC, we call on opposition parties,
civil society and stakeholders in the country and all over the world to
work with us to ensure that people infected with HIV and who need treatment
will receive the treatment they require. Together we can do more.
This requires bold moves and a conceptual mind-shift. Health is not a
profit commodity, but a matter of pride and not of shame. The ANC lives.
The ANC leads - forward with a better life for all. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

           SADC AND EAC REGIONAL TRAINING SEMINAR ON HIV AND AIDS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, with leave, I
move without notice:

   That the House –


     1) notes that members of the Parliaments of the SADC and EAC countries
        met in Cape Town on 20 and 21 January 2009 for a regional training
        seminar on HIV/Aids;


     2) notes further that the event was organised by the Inter-
        Parliamentary Union (IPU) and hosted by the South African
        Parliament;


     3) appreciates the role played by the IPU Advisory Group on HIV/Aids
        in co-ordinating this event and congratulates the new chairperson
        of the IPU Advisory Committee, Henrietta Bogopane-Zulu, on her
        appointment;

     4) associates itself with the view that, among others, the high cost
        of HIV/Aids drugs for African governments impacts on the
        affordability of anti-retroviral drugs;


     5) encourages our government and Parliament to consider the SADC Model
        Law on HIV/Aids in our endeavours to enhance the fight against the
        epidemic through legislative and other means;


     6) recognises the important role that Parliaments could play in the
        exercise of their oversight in ensuring that health care is
        prioritised in the national agenda and that adequate provision is
        made in the budget for HIV/Aids treatment;


     7) fully supports the recommendation of the seminar that Parliaments
        should establish cross-party committees on HIV/Aids; and


     8) strongly urges the Fourth Parliament to amend the Joint Rules for
        the purpose of establishing a Joint Committee on HIV/Aids.


Agreed to.

                           PARLIAMENTARY LANGUAGE

                              OFFENSIVE REMARK

                                  (Ruling)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! During the speech by the hon P J Groenewald
yesterday, a point of order was taken by the Deputy Chief Whip of the
Majority Party, the hon G B Magwanishe, concerning a reference by the hon
Groenewald to the former head of state as having acted - and I quote from
the Unrevised Hansard - “like the three little monkeys - I hear, I see and
I say nothing" when it came to Selebi.

I undertook to study the Hansard and give a considered ruling on the
remark. In delivering my ruling I should first like to remind the House
that protection in terms of the Rules is only afforded to sitting members,
although it has on occasion been extended to Members of the National
Council of Provinces and premiers.

After studying the Hansard I am satisfied that the hon Groenewald, in
referring to the three monkeys, was making use of a metaphor. The intention
was not literally to imply a resemblance of the former president to an
animal. I am, accordingly, of the view that this remark by the hon member
was not offensive and was not in contravention of the Rules.

I would like to remind members that the hon Groenewald made a later remark
to the effect that if members were to vote in favour of the matter before
the House, they would be “acting like the three monkeys”. I ruled this
remark to be unparliamentary and had to ask the hon member to leave the
Chamber when he refused to withdraw it.

I confirm that this ruling was indeed correct, as the hon member
deliberately used this as a simile with the clear intention to liken
members’ actions to monkeys. I must emphasise that reference to animals,
and specifically, in the context of our history, to monkeys is unbecoming.
I must strongly urge members to refrain from using such terminology.

I also wish to address the House on the matter raised with reference to an
alleged remark that a certain member should go back to Pakistan. Although
no member accepted responsibility for making this comment, such remarks are
deeply offensive, especially given the recent spate of xenophobic violence
and intolerance directed at foreign nationals. I must caution members as
public representatives, entitled to freedom of speech, to exercise
moderation in their conduct and language so as not to undermine the
integrity of this House.

The House adjourned at 11:31.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

    (a)     Notice No 22 published in Government Gazette No 31789 dated 9
        January 2009: National Environmental Management Act, 2008 (Act No
        62 of 2008).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Communications on the
    Broadcasting Amendment Bill [B72B-2008] (National Assembly – sec 75),
    dated 12 February 2009:

    The Portfolio Committee on Communications, having reconsidered clause 3
    of the  Broadcasting Amendment Bill [B72B-2008] (National Assembly –
    sec 75) and the President’s reservations on the constitutionality
    thereof (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 10 February
    2009), recommends that the President’s reservations be accommodated,
    and presents an amended Bill [B72D-2008].


