---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 18 February 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2009-02-18
---

WEDNESDAY, 18 FEBRUARY 2009
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:05.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                                 NEW MEMBER

                               (Announcement)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon members, I would
like to take this opportunity to welcome hon K B Toni, who was sworn in as
a member of the NCOP today. Hon member, you are welcome in the NCOP and I
wish you all the best in your work. He is a new member from the UDM.

               NO NOTICES OF MOTION AND MOTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: (Ms P M Hollander): I have been
informed that the Whippery have agreed that there will be no notices of
motion or motions without notice today, except the motions without notice
from the Chief Whip of the Council.

         PRECEDENCE GIVEN TO ORDERS 1 AND 2 UNDER “FURTHER BUSINESS”

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice:


   That precedence be given to Orders 1 and 2 under “Further  Business”  and
   that the Orders become Orders No 3 and 4, respectively.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                          SUSPENSION OF RULE 239(1)

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice -

   That Rule 239(1), which provides inter alia that the consideration  of  a
   Bill may not commence before at least three  working  days  have  elapsed
   since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended for the purposes of
   consideration of the Reform of Customary Law of Succession and Regulation
   of Related Matters Bill [B 10D – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                   FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT OF PARLIAMENT BILL

              (Consideration of Bill and of Report of thereon)

Mr T S RALANE: Deputy Chairperson and colleagues, the Financial Management
of Parliament Bill is one of those Bills that have taken almost three years
to be brought to this House. The task team that spearheaded the co-
operative work of this Bill engaged in several bilateral and trilateral
engagements, negotiations and renegotiations and many hours of committee
meetings before this Bill could take shape.

Although one item of this Bill that deserves special attention is the
treatment of unspent funds, the Bill permits Parliament to retain unspent
funds. The rationale for this peculiar treatment of unspent funds is that
Parliament is a separate institution; it is distinct from the executive and
judiciary and appropriate checks and balances are in place to ensure
accountability, responsiveness and openness.

The pertinent issue, however, is that this treatment of unspent funds
becomes a disguised attempt to underspend. This House, the NCOP, is
particularly vigilant in respect of municipalities and provinces.
Underspending, the outcome of which is no service delivery, is a practice
that this Parliament has unequivocally condemned. Parliament is excluded
from the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act, PFMA, of 1999.
Although there is an agreement between National Treasury and Parliament on
the retention of unspent funds, these retentions violate the key provisions
of the PFMA.

The PFMA is the hallmark of governance in this country and must always be
upheld by the South African government. In this light, the Select Committee
on Finance appeals to the Fourth Parliament to re-examine the treatment of
unspent funds in this Bill. The Select Committee on Finance appeals to the
members of this House to pass this Bill with its amendments. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Limpopo, Mpumalanga, Northern Cape,
North West, Western Cape.

ABSTAIN: Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal.
Bill accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
  AFFAIRS - DRAFT RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR APPLICATIONS TO COURT IN TERMS OF
                   PROMOTION OF ACCESS TO INFORMATION ACT

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
      AFFAIRS - REVISED DRAFT RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW OF
     ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION IN TERMS OF SECTION 7(3) OF THE PROMOTION OF
              ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE ACT (ACT NO 3 OF 2000)

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Madam Chair, for the information of members, I’ve got
20 minutes and I’ve brought a lot of documentation. I will keep you busy
for my full 20 minutes and I will do my election speech today. [Laughter.]

The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs considered the
Revised Draft Rules of Procedure for Judicial Review of Administrative
Action in terms of section 7(3) of the Promotion of Administration of
Justice Act. [Interjections.] That is actually number three; you will allow
me to start with number three or I can switch around. I can do number two.
Let me rather start and do the other one. There is some confusion here on
Promotion of Access to Information Act of 2000. I would rather do that one
and then get back to the other one.
The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, regarding the
Revised Draft Rules of Procedure for Judicial Review of Administrative
Action in terms of section 7(3) of the Promotion of Administration of
Justice Act of 2000, recommends the Revised Draft Rules to Parliament for
approval. Before we finally recommend this, I want to make some comments:
The finalisation of these rules, again – the Act is from 2000 - is also
long overdue. It is now nine years later and the committee would like to
thank the Minister for Justice as well as the Rules Board for finally
getting these rules in place. It is very important to have these rules in
place.

Another comment is that should the process of the judicial review of
administrative action not be running as expected, particularly for the less
advantaged members of society, or being maybe too burdensome on the state,
the rules would need to be amended. The committee, therefore, requests that
the Minister review the implementation of these rules within 24 months of
approval by Parliament and report back to this House on the implementation
and any amendments that may be necessary.

These rules are, to a certain extent, very complex. The committee also
recommends that the department ensure that the mechanisms are put in place
to assist members of the public in making use of them. These are the rules
and what the department did, which is quite commendable, is that they sent
a couple of forms to be completed by members of the public. It does however
remain a very complex exercise. The forms are complex and I think we can
assist by putting something in place to assist members of the community to
complete these forms.

In conclusion, I want to point out the two differences. The one is the
Promotion of Access to Information Act and the other is the Promotion of
Administration of Justice Act. If anybody would like to have certain
information from the state they can use this particular one, the Promotion
of Access to Information Act, and also, if they require certain information
from individual businesses and so on, there are certain procedures - from
the Promotion of Administration of Justice Act. If a government
institution, for instance, turns down an application for a permit or a
licence, instead of going through the burdensome process of court actions -
lawyers would not mind to do that by the way - they can make use of this
short-cut process. It does not, fortunately, exclude the possibility of
going to court, should there be some hiccups along the line, but the
committee recommends the approval of both sets of the rules. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Reports be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.
Report on Draft Rules of Procedure for Applications to Court in terms of
Promotion of Access to Information Act accordingly adopted in accordance
with section 65 of the Constitution.

Report on Revised Draft Rules of Procedure for Judicial Review of
Administrative Action in terms of section 7(3) of the Promotion of
Administration of Justice Act (Act No 3 of 2000) accordingly adopted in
accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

   REFORM OF CUSTOMARY LAW OF SUCCESSION AND REGULATION OF RELATED MATTERS
                                    BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson and members, the Bill before us is a very
delicate one. There was a judgment in our High Court where it was declared
that never again would, if Sogoni passed on, people, other than his wife
and children, like his brother, uncles, etc inherit from his estate. It has
been changed to state that if he happens to pass on, the estate would go to
the wife and children. They will share equally in terms of the percentage
that is given in terms of the law.

This Bill also deals with men who are irresponsible. When you pass on, all
the children who are born out of wedlock – illegitimate children – are
entitled to inherit from your estate, regardless of whether you were
married to their mother or not. That is the gist of this Bill.

We are now looking to this Bill to say that gone are the days when children
had to suffer, even though the father was well-to-do, a Member of
Parliament, a doctor, or a police officer somewhere. If you pass on now,
all your children will be able to inherit from your estate.

We are bringing about some amendments to the Bill with the following
effect: The definition of descendent in terms of the Bill was so cumbersome
and ambiguous; it stated that if there is a child who is staying with you,
or any person who stays with you, and was depending on you for survival, if
you pass on, automatically this person will also inherit. So, according to
us, that was out of order. Therefore, we made an amendment to say that
person will only inherit if you have accepted and informed everybody that
this person must also inherit in terms of the customary practices, not just
automatically.

Again, there is a provision which says that the Master can only direct the
magistrates to deal with any dispute that affects customary practices when
it deals with inheritance. We are saying that the customary practices and
the custodians thereof are traditional leaders. The amendment we are
bringing is that the master can direct the magistrate or a traditional
leader when need be to deal with the enquiry.

As a committee, we were faced with some serious challenges and we proposed
that some of the things must be referred to the departments, the Minister
and the law commission, such as the following: Let’s take a case where
Sogoni’s brother passes on – with due respect, my brother. In terms of our
culture and practices, Sogoni must go and take over his brother’s family,
and look after them, which is called “ukungena”. According to that culture,
his brother’s children are now his children - I hope you understand what I
mean – and everything, even the family. The question is, in terms of this
legislation, if, unfortunately – sorry to use his example, I know he won’t
be offended by this – he passes on, are his brother’s children and his own
going to inherit equally? That’s the question that cannot be answered by
the committee, the Ministry and the department. Hence, the matter will be
referred back to the law commission and the departments to avoid double-
dipping. The children must all inherit from their biological parents.

Secondly, what happens if there are children who are not known by the
family? If it happens that Sulliman passes on and, after his death,
children come who claim to be his and claim to be entitled to inherit from
his estate, what must happen then? Must his body be exhumed to prove that
these are his children or what should happen? That cannot be answered by
the department, but can be referred back to the law commission and the
department.

Thirdly, here is a traditional leader who happens to be female with no male
figure in the family to take over. In our customary practices, this female
traditional leader will have to marry a candle-wife, who will bear a child
for the family. After the marriage, according to our practice, someone will
be identified within the family to plant a seed in this new “makoti”
[bride]. As you know, it’s practice or norm everywhere that one of the
family members will whisper to the child “By the way, here is your father”.
If that particular father passes on, can the children claim to inherit from
that biological father, or must the child claim from this traditional
leader who happens to be a woman? In terms of our practices, the person who
must look after this child who was born out of that arrangement is this
traditional leader, but the child will know that his father is Bhuda –
ubhuti Tau. What will now happen? [Laughter.]

Again, let’s look at the scenario of two women who had children from their
previous relationships. For some reason, they got bored with their
respective marriages; they changed and got married in terms of same-sex
marriage and are staying together with their children. What is going to
happen when one partner passes on? Are these children entitled to inherit
from the remaining partner, or must they still inherit from their
biological fathers from the previous marriage? That question cannot be
answered by us in this Parliament, but we are referring this to the law
commission again to ask them to look into it.

The other scenario is as follows: Dikeledi and I are married and she is
rich; and she does not have a child of her own. I’m coming to her with my
own baggage of kids, and we are staying together as a married couple. She
passes on. Because we were married, are my children entitled to inherit
from her estate? That question cannot be answered by us, but the matter has
to be referred to the law commission and the department.

These are serious debates that took us some months as a committee. Hence,
we effected some amendments and, at the same time, we are saying that these
are the issues that must be answered by some people somewhere. Hence, we
are recommending that they must consult people who know some of these
practices.

Because of time constraints, because I know that my time is up, I am unable
to give you more examples. We are coming to this august Chamber to request
that you accept this Bill with its amendments. At the same time, if you go
through our report, you will see that we are raising serious issues to say
that some of these questions that we are raising here cannot be answered.
For instance, on the question of “ukungena”, Mrs Nyanda was arguing very
strongly to say that - she likes “ukungena” - as African people there is no
way that we can avoid it, because it’s normal practice in our culture.
Therefore, we are here humbly asking you to accept our Bill with all its
amendments and requests. I submit. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Bill accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 14:43.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent
    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 18 February 2009:


          a) Competition Amendment Bill [B 31D – 2008] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).

          b) National Environment Laws Amendment Bill [B 66D – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).

2.    Membership of Committees

      a) Mr M Johnson and Ms N F Mazibuko have been elected as Co-
         Chairpersons of the Ad Hoc Joint Committee for the Appointment of
         Members to the National Youth Development Agency Board with effect
         from 17 February 2009.

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly and transmitted for
         concurrence on 18 February 2009:


         (a)      Constitution Sixteenth Amendment Bill [B 1 – 2009]
             (National Assembly – sec 74).


            The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Security
             and Constitutional Affairs of the National Council of
             Provinces.
         (b)     Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related
             Matters Amendment Bill [B 3B – 2009] (National Assembly – sec
             75).
            The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Local
             Government and Administration of the National Council of
             Provinces.

2.    Membership of Council

     a) The vacancy which occurred in the National Council of Provinces
        owing to the resignation of Mrs A N D Qikane on 6 January 2009, has
        been filled with effect from 13 February 2009 by the nomination of
        Mr K B Toni.


     b) The vacancy which occurred in the National Council of Provinces
        owing to the resignation of Ms B L Ntembe on 19 January 2009, has
        been filled with effect from 9 February 2009 by the nomination of
        Mr J J Mcgluwa.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Social Development

      a) Regulations made in terms of the Children’s Act, 2005 (Act No 38 of
         2005), submitted in terms of section 3(3) of the Act for approval
         by the National Council of Provinces.

COMMITTEE REPORTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

CREDA INSERT REPORT - T090218e–insert1 – PAGES 431-447

National Council of Provinces

1.    Second Report of the Select Committee on Security  and  Constitutional
      Affairs on the Reform of Customary Law of Succession and Regulation of
      Related Matters Bill [B10B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 76), dated
      17 February 2009:

      The Select Committee on Security and  Constitutional  Affairs,  having
      considered the subject of the Reform of Customary  Law  of  Succession
      and Regulation of Related Matter Bill [B10B -2008] (National  Assembly
      – sec 76) referred to it, and having  amended  the  Bill,  reports  as
      follows:

      1.    The Committee requests the Minister to direct  that  either  the
           Department of Justice  and  Constitutional  Development  or  the
           South African Law Reform Commission  or  both,  conduct  further
           research into the issues mentioned below and to report  back  to
           it within six  months  of  the  adoption  of  this  report  with
           appropriate  legislative  measures  for  consideration  by   the
           Committee, where appropriate. The Department/South  African  Law
           Reform Commission must, when undertaking the envisaged research,
           as far as is practicable, consult with  traditional  communities
           and traditional leaders. The research required  relates  to  the
           following practical examples cited by the Committee. The outcome
           of the research must, where relevant, in each of the examples –

           (a)   indicate the lines of intestate succession in the examples
           cited;

           (b)   whether these examples find application in  customary  law
                 and, if so, confirmation whether the Bill,  as  adopted  by
                 this Committee, adequately makes provision for them and, if
                 not, provide legislative proposals to address them:
                 (i)   The question of “marriages from the grave” which  are
                       known in some traditional communities.
                 (ii)  In the case of two brothers who have children,  where
                       the one brother dies and the surviving brother  takes
                       on  the  responsibility  of  the  deceased  brother’s
                       children, do the deceased brother’s children  qualify
                       to inherit from the estate of the  surviving  brother
                       to the same extent as the children of  the  surviving
                       brother?
                  iii) What is the situation in the case of children who are
                       not fathered by the deceased but who are accepted by
                       him before he dies?  Are they regarded as the
                       deceased’s descendants and can they inherit along
                       with his own descendants?
                 (iv)  What is the situation where a child who  is  not  the
                       biological child of a person but who is  accepted  by
                       the deceased as his or her own child  before  his  or
                       her death and the child  decides  to  revert  to  the
                       surname of his or her biological father or decides to
                       go back to his or her biological father?
                 (v)   How does customary law deal with children who no  one
                       knew about and  who  unexpectedly  turn  up  after  a
                       person’s death, claiming that they are the biological
                       children of the deceased? Who  bears  the  burden  of
                       proving that they are  indeed  the  children  of  the
                       deceased in terms of customary law?
                 (vi)  What is the  situation  of  two  women  who  were  in
                       customary marriages, who have children and who  enter
                       into same sex unions? What is the legal  position  of
                       the children of these relationships?  From  whom  are
                       they entitled to inherit?
                 (vii) What is the position  of  children  from  a  previous
                       relationship who are accepted by the  new  spouse  of
                       their one parent?  Can they, in  terms  of  customary
                       law,  inherit  from  the  deceased  estate  of  their
                       parent’s new spouse (Step parent)?
                 (viii)      What is the position of children who are  borne
                       on behalf of a female traditional leader  by  another
                       woman  who  is  impregnated  by   a   secret   father
                       identified by senior members of the royal  family  in
                       question?  From whom are they entitled to inherit  in
                       terms of customary law?


2.    The Committee further requests the Department  or  South  African  Law
      Reform Commission to investigate the following issues:
      (i)   What the effect of the  amendment  proposed  by  the  Committee,
           which narrows the definition of “descendant” in clause 1 of  the
           Bill, will be on customary law, if any.
      (ii)  The existence of customary practices in terms of  which  married
           daughters  are  precluded  from  inheriting  from  the  fathers’
           deceased  estates  on  the  grounds  that  they   have   already
           benefitted  from  lobola  which  was  paid  for  them  and   the
           constitutionality of such practices.
      (iii) The existence or not of adoption in terms of customary  law  and
           whether the Bill should cater specifically for this  or  whether
           the Bill as amended by the Committee in clause 1 (the  amendment
           to the definition of  “descendant”)  addresses  the  concept  of
           adoption in terms of customary law.
      (iv)  The manner in which extra-marital children generally  are  dealt
           with and regarded in terms of customary law and whether the Bill
           adequately takes care of all such children.

Report to be considered.


