---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 26 May 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2009-05-26
---

TUESDAY, 26 MAY 2009
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:05.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

           ADOPTION OF RULES OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order, hon members! I hope you have had a very
wonderful induction since you started last week until completion. I’m sure
you must have learnt a lot of things. Am I correct? Have you?
[Interjections.] OK, it seems you haven’t learnt much. Perhaps, Chief Whip,
you will have to repeat it!

Now, first and foremost to all the new members, and repeating to all those
who are returning, we would like to be very timeous, because we are very
conscious of time. When the bells ring, you should get into the Chamber and
take your seat, and not stand and talk in the aisles. Once the Chair stands
there it means I’m ready to get into the House, but I still have to wait
for members who are chatting in the aisles. That’s not done. The Rules
don’t allow that. This is just a bit of free information that all of you
should get. In future we shouldn’t be doing that.

Hon members, I would like to announce that this special sitting has been
called for the election, firstly, of the Permanent Deputy Chairperson;
secondly, the election of the Rotating Deputy Chairperson; thirdly, the
election of the Chief Whip; fourthly, the election of the House
Chairperson: Committees; fifthly, the election of the House Chairperson:
Oversight and Institutional Support; and sixthly, the designation of
members to the Judicial Service Commission, the Magistrates’ Commission,
the SADC Parliamentary Forum and the Pan-African Parliament. So, this is a
special session which we have called to come and deal with all those issues
because they are very urgent. These structures are already working and we
have not yet nominated people to them.

Before we can proceed with the election of office bearers, I would like to
inform members that the House will first adopt the Rules. A copy of the
Rules has been distributed to all members with their induction files. You
will remember that that has been done.

As there is no speakers’ list, I shall now put the question. The question
is that the Rules be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in terms of
section 65 of the Constitution I shall first ascertain whether all
delegation heads are present in the House to cast their province’s vote.
Are all delegation heads present? Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province that
wishes to do so? None.

We’ll now proceed to the voting on the question. I will do so in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against, or abstain from voting.

Chief Whip, are all members acquainted with the electronic voting system or
are we going to use the manual voting process?

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Chair, for today, we should use the manual process.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: We will use the manual voting process; in
other words, you talk. [Laughter.] That’s manual.

Question put: That the Rules be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Rules accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

         EXTENSION OF PERIOD FOR DISCLOSURE OF REGISTRABLE INTERESTS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, we now come to the motion on the
Order Paper as printed in the name of the Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces.

Before we proceed, I would like to bring to the attention of hon members
that the words “first sitting of the House” in the third line should be
replaced with the words “members’ appointment”. I now call on the hon
Acting Chief Whip.

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Chair, let me quickly apologise. There was some
misunderstanding and that’s why we started a little late. I apologise - it
will not happen again.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Okay.

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Chair, I move on behalf of the Chairperson of the
National Council of Provinces:

   That the Council, notwithstanding item 6(2) of Part 1 of Schedule A to
   the Joint Rules, which stipulates that members’ first disclosure of
   registrable interests must be within thirty days of the members’
   appointment after an election, resolves, subject to the concurrence of
   the National Assembly, to extend the period to 26 June 2009.

Thank you, Chair. I so move.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I’m sure you were all told about the
disclosure issue. Do you all understand the matter of disclosure?
[Interjections.] Have you disclosed? [Interjections.] You will disclose
very soon after this, nè? [Not so?][Laughter.] Please do so!

Ningenzi iphutha. [Do not make a mistake.]

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

     ELECTION OF PERMANENT DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF
                                  PROVINCES

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! We now come to the following item, that
is, the election of the Permanent Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP. You will
remember the first day when we elected the Chair, the Deputy Chairperson
was not elected, and so today we will elect the Deputy Chairperson.

We will now proceed to the election of the Deputy Chairperson of the
National Council of Provinces. Perhaps I must make this very clear: There
are two Deputy Chairpersons here. The one is permanent, and stays here in
Cape Town, and the other is rotating, like a wheel. We will explain later
on why it is like that.

The Chairperson announced the appointment of Adv M E Phindela as Returning
Officer, and as Assistant Returning Officers Adv B N Nonyane, Adv J
Niekerk, Ms V H Mnana, Ms S Bowers, Mr M Skolo and Mr M Mbebe.

The Chairperson reminded the delegates that nominations had to be submitted
in the prescribed form and duly seconded.

The Chairperson drew the attention of delegates specifically to section 64
of the Constitution, in terms of which no person may be elected as
Permanent Deputy Chairperson of the Council unless he or she is a permanent
delegate of the Council.

The Chairperson informed members that in terms of item 4 of Part A of
Schedule 3 to the Constitution no debate would be allowed.

The Chairperson called for nominations.

Mr J Mthembu, seconded by Ms P Kekana, nominated Ms Thandi Memela for
election as Permanent Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of
Provinces.

The Returning Officer reported to the Chairperson that the nomination paper
had been properly completed.

There being no further nominations, the Chairperson declared Ms Thandi
Memela duly elected as Permanent Deputy Chairperson of the National Council
of Provinces.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: On behalf of all present here, I wish to
congratulate you, Thandi, on your election as the Permanent Deputy
Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces. Perhaps I must say it
now: You are going to work very hard. You are going to deputise for this
person who is sitting here! Perhaps they have already whispered to you that
the work here is a lot. Hands on deck from now, not tomorrow! But I will
give you time to say a few words, your maiden speech. Can you say a few
words? I call upon the Permanent Deputy Chair to say a few words.

  ACCEPTANCE SPEECH BY PERMANENT DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF NATIONAL COUNCIL OF
                                  PROVINCES

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Thank you very much,
Chairperson, MECs, Speakers, and all hon members. Thandi is saying right
now, permanent and special delegates to the National Council of Provinces,
I am proud to stand here this afternoon to accept the responsibility with
which you have entrusted me as the Permanent Deputy Chairperson of the
National Council of Provinces.

I wish to thank you for your belief in me. With your support, I promise to
do my best to serve the people of South Africa in my new capacity.

I am very happy to join the leadership of South Africa’s unique legislative
body. The NCOP is unique in the sense that it is the only institution that
brings together representatives of the three spheres of government under
one roof. It is unique in that it demands of the elected representatives of
the people from the different spheres of government to work together to
deliver services to the people. This constitutional arrangement places the
NCOP in a better position to play a critical role in the promotion of
intergovernmental relations, co-operative government and integrated
planning.

Working together, I am confident that we will be able to deal with the
challenges that are facing our people with increased pace. It is
indisputable that 15 years since we obtained our democracy we still have a
long way to go to bring a better life to all South Africans, as envisaged
by our Constitution. A lot of work has been done since 1994, upon which we
must build a prosperous nation.

I would like to join the call made by the Chairperson of the NCOP, hon M
Mahlangu, at the first sitting of this House for a close working
relationship between the NCOP and local government. As somebody with
experience of working at local government level, I am fully aware of the
importance of this sphere of government in providing quality services to
the people. Local government is central to achieving our vision of a better
life for all.

It is indeed a great honour to accept, with humility, the new
responsibility you have entrusted to me. Thank you. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Ungababi kakhulu, phela Mchunu! [Do not be too
strict, hon Mchunu!] [Laughter.] I shall allow the Deputy Chair to sit
down. I can declare to the House that I now have a Deputy Chair, or rather,
this House has a Deputy Chair. [Applause.] I am sure that you have heard
that she has spoken very well. When it is your first speech in the Chamber,
don’t be too rough, because you know what can happen to you. Speak very
nicely. In a few days’ time it is going to be very hot, but we will all get
used to it.

                   ELECTION OF ROTATING DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! We now proceed to the election of a
Rotating Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces. There
will now be an opportunity for nomination of the Rotating Deputy
Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces.

Let me explain what we mean by that for the sake of the people who are
attending the National Council of Provinces for the first time. The
Rotating Deputy Chair is created by the Rules, and he or she always comes
from among the premiers. You will understand that the premiers are the
leaders of the special delegates to the National Council of Provinces.
Therefore they do a lot of work with the Presiding Officers of the National
Council of Provinces. But after we have elected the Rotating Deputy Chair,
I will say a few things that we need to do so that I also induct the newly
Rotating Deputy Chair who will be elected. I don’t know who that will be at
the present moment. I will hear after he or she has been elected.

The Chairperson called for nominations.

Mr T W Mchunu, seconded by Ms N Moerane-Mamase, nominated Mr David Mabuza
for election as Rotating Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of
Provinces.

The Returning Officer reported to the Chairperson that the nomination paper
had been properly completed.

There being no further nominations, the Chairperson declared Mr David
Mabuza duly elected as Rotating Deputy Chairperson of the National Council
of Provinces.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: On behalf of all present here, I congratulate
you on having been elected Rotating Deputy Chair of the National Council of
Provinces. I now call upon the Rotating Deputy Chair to say a few words.
[Applause.]

 ACCEPTANCE SPEECH BY ROTATING DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF
                                  PROVINCES

The ROTATING DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr D D Mabuza): Chairperson
and hon members, thank you for the opportunity to say one or two words. The
rotation starts in Mpumalanga, so we are rotating.

We are very honoured. We feel very honoured and humbled, and want to assure
the members present here and yourself that we regard this responsibility
bestowed on us seriously, and we are going to do everything in our power to
make the work of this House possible.

We are quite aware, hon Chair, that we have competing interests and
priorities. We are expected to run a province with all the challenges that
come with that responsibility. But we want to assure members here that this
nomination is not just a nomination. It means that there is work I must do
to support this House, and I am going to make it a point that I avail
myself. I have to allow this House to do its work and proceed.

We accept this responsibility, knowing very well the responsibilities that
come with it, availing ourselves from time to time, shuttling between the
province and here. As much as the provincial legislature expects us to do
work there, we will also be expected to support the work here. We are proud
to be the first in the new democratic term to be recognised to fill the
position of Rotating Deputy Chairperson. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, hon Premier. The good thing about
Premier Mabuza is that he doesn’t stay far from me. He has no way to dodge
me! [Laughter.] That’s the good thing about him! If I want to take a car on
a Sunday morning and go to Nelspruit, I will find him. And he can do the
same as well.

You see, the problem we have been having about the Rotating Deputy Chairs
is this one ... It’s actually a challenge; let me not call it a problem. We
acknowledge that you have a lot of work also in the province. You are
tasked with a lot of things you have to do, and it becomes very difficult
at times to honour the work here also in this House.

I have asked a few Rotating Deputy Chairs, the outgoing ones, “please make
yourself available for this House”. We don’t expect you here every day. As
we have already said, if you get time, just make yourself available. We
will appreciate it. We would like one day to see you sitting where I am,
chairing this House. It would be a nice thing. You are holding a very
important position, as a leader of special delegates. That is very
important. It is a constitutional title that is very important. When we
debate policy issues, we would want to see you leading those policy
discussions in the NCOP. There are many, many things that we can do
together to really get this House going. I am sure we will have some time,
you and I, where we will sit down and ponder about a lot of things that we
can do for the National Council of Provinces.

You have already mentioned co-operative government, which is the most
important one. The Speaker will tell you how many times I have repeated in
the past the importance and the relevance of working together, this House
and the provinces. I am referring to Speaker Mthembu. He knows that. He
attended a lot of our workshops in the National Council of Provinces.
Because if we cannot work together as provinces and this House …
Constitutionally, you will remember our mandate is to take the interests of
the provinces to heart and debate them here. This is the House where you
should raise them: Local government issues, national issues and provincial
issues. You should raise them here, not in another House. Some of the
people prefer to run to the other House, where these things are not raised.
This is where you raise them, and this is where we can attend to them
quickly.

Former Speaker Mchunu would know how many letters he wrote to me really
trying to assist this House, to get us into the meeting and all these
things, and calling all Speakers of the provinces to debate all these
issues. What I am trying to say is: Premier, you are going to play a very
important role with regard to intergovernmental relations. Together with
you, we are going to look at the question of the division of revenue, for
example. How are the provinces utilising the division of revenue in the
provinces? It is one money Bill that we have a very great interest in as
the National Council of Provinces.

One day, if you have time, I will invite you to attend our Rules Committee.
That is where we take important decisions. I will meet you from time to
time at the Presidential Co-ordinating Council, where I will also raise
quite a number of things. But I will brief you before, because I have to
lobby you for your help. As you know, we are only 54 in this House. We want
this House to be bigger than what it is. We want to increase the numbers.
We will discuss all these things with you. But thank you, Premier, for
considering taking this position. I was merely mentioning a few issues that
you will be facing, and from time to time we will be discussing them,
either in a meeting or even telephonically, or we will SMS each other. That
is one way of communicating. I wish to thank you very much. [Applause.]

         ELECTION OF CHIEF WHIP OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! We now come to the nomination of the
Chief Whip of the Council.

The Chairperson called for nominations.

Ms J M Mofokeng, seconded by Ms N W Magadla, nominated Ms Nosipho Dorothy
Ntwanambi for election as Chief Whip of the National Council of Provinces.

The Returning Officer reported to the Chairperson that the nomination paper
had been properly completed.

There being no further nominations, the Chairperson declared duly elected
Ms Nosipho Dorothy Ntwanambi as Chief Whip of the National Council of
Provinces.
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: On behalf of all present here, I congratulate
you on having been elected Chief Whip of the National Council of Provinces.
[Applause.] I call upon the newly elected Chief Whip – uit die boks uit
[brand new] – to say a few words to the permanent delegates.

             ACCEPTANCE SPEECH BY THE CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, thank you very much. I would
like to thank the members, and of course the ANC, for once again electing
me as Chief Whip of the NCOP. I would also like to tell the members that I
am a member of the ANC today, tomorrow, forever. [Applause.] But I have a
responsibility, not only to ANC members, but to all members. [Applause.] I
therefore would like to say that I will make sure that I perform my duties
to the best of my ability to ensure that I become a Chief Whip to all,
irrespective of political affiliation.

Lastly, I want to say that for us to succeed, we will make sure that
provincial communication between the office of the Chief Whip of the NCOP
and that of the Chief Whips in the legislatures is better oiled this time
around. That will assist us, particularly with regard to mandates.

To you, hon members, I want to say that the office of the Chief Whip has an
unlocked door. It will always be open to everyone. You have to understand
that I am, first and foremost, an ANC member. There will be times when we
have to take a certain position, and of course we can’t come here as
“freebies”. We come here because we have been nominated by our political
parties – that you must understand in my working with you. As we always say
in the ANC, if we work together, we will do more for our people. Thank you
very much. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, Chief Whip. Now you are a Chief
Whip. As I was sitting here while you were speaking, I could see Mr Watson
was actually agreeing with you. [Interjections.] [Laughter.] When you said
you are the Chief Whip of everybody here, Mr Watson agreed with you. So you
can start whipping right now. You have all the powers to do so.

                  ELECTION OF HOUSE CHAIRPERSON: COMMITTEES

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, we will now proceed to the
election of the House Chairperson: Committees.
The Chairperson called for nominations.

Mr D D Gamede, seconded by Ms A N D Qikani, nominated Ms Nosilivere
Winnifred Magadla for election as House Chairperson: Committees of the
National Council of Provinces.

The Returning Officer reported to the Chairperson that the nomination paper
had been properly completed.
There being no further nominations, the Chairperson declared Ms Nosilivere
Winnifred Magadla duly elected as House Chairperson: Committees of the
National Council of Provinces.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: On behalf of all present here, I congratulate
you on having been elected House Chairperson: Committees of the National
Council of Provinces. I now call upon the House Chairperson: Committees to
say a few words. [Applause.]

           ACCEPTANCE SPEECH BY THE HOUSE CHAIRPERSON: COMMITTEES

USIHLALO WENDLU (Nksz N W Magadla): Mandibulele kuSihlalo weNdlu nakuwo
onke amalungu akhoyo apha eNdlwini ngokuba ndifuman e eli thuba lokuba nam
ndisebenze kule Ndlu, ndisebenzela abantu baseMzantsi Afrika. Ndicinga
ukuba, ukuba nguSihlalo weNdlu: WeeKomiti, kuthetha ukuba masisebenzisane.
Wonke umntu uyazazi ukuba ebeze kwenzani apha.

Abantu baseMzantsi Afrika bajongile ukuba xa silapha kule Ndlu senza ntoni
na. Ngoko, kufuneka sisebenzele abantu baseMzantsi Afrika. Ndiyabulela,
Sihlalo. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[HOUSE CHAIRPERSON(Ms N W Magadla): Let me thank the Chairperson of the
House and all the members present here in this House for the opportunity I
have been granted of serving this House, serving the people of South
Africa. I think that being the House Chairperson: Committees, implies that
we have to work together. Everyone knows why he/she is here.

The people of South Africa are keeping a close eye on what we are doing in
this House. Therefore, we must serve the people of South Africa. Thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]]

     ELECTION OF HOUSE CHAIRPERSON: OVERSIGHT AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: We will now proceed to the election of the
House Chairperson: Oversight and Institutional Support of the National
Council of Provinces.

The Chairperson called for nominations.

Mr F Adams, seconded by Mr S S Mazosiwe, nominated Mr Raseriti
Johannes Tau for election as House Chairperson: Oversight and
Institutional Support.

The Returning Officer reported to the Chairperson that the nomination paper
had been properly completed.

There being no further nominations, the Chairperson declared Mr Raseriti
Johannes Tau duly elected as House Chairperson: Oversight and Institutional
Support of the National Council of Provinces.
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: On behalf of all present here, I congratulate
you on having been elected House Chairperson: Oversight and Institutional
Support. [Applause.] I now call upon the hon House Chairperson to say a few
words.

 ACCEPTANCE SPEECH BY HOUSE CHAIRPERSON: OVERSIGHT AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Chairperson, hon members, Premiers and
MECs present, and, of course, hon special and permanent delegates, I am
quite humbled, I must say, by the expression of confidence that has been
shown in me. I take this to mean that, of course, like my co-chair has
said, as a collective, a lot will be expected from us.

The heartbeat of the NCOP or of Parliament, as we all know, is the question
of effective oversight. It is through effective oversight that we will be
able to ensure that, with the respect we have for the executive, we’ll make
the executive implement legislation in a way that will ensure, at the end
of the day, that the lives of our people are improved.

It is a responsibility that I am, therefore, given and, of course, it is
not in isolation from the broader programmes of the National Council of
Provinces. Together with our provincial legislatures and together with our
local municipalities, it is our responsibility to ensure that oversight is
effective, our machinery oiled, and that we start now. The work must
benefit the poor and especially those in the rural areas. Chairperson,
thank you very much and we hope not to disappoint. [Applause.]

            DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO JUDICIAL SERVICE COMMISSION

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council designates the following members to serve on the
  Judicial Service Commission:


   Mr M J Mahlangu
   Ms B P Mabe
   Mr D A Worth
   Mr M H Mofokeng.

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 178(1)(i) of the
Constitution.
              APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS OF MAGISTRATES’ COMMISSION

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:

  That the Council designates the following members to serve on the
  Magistrates Commission:


   Mr S S Mazosiwe
   Ms R N Rasmeni
   Mr O de Beer.

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion accordingly agreed to in terms of section 3(1)(a)(xi) of the
Magistrates Act, 1993.

             APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS TO SADC PARLIAMENTARY FORUM

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the following members be designated to represent Parliament in the
  Southern African Development Community Parliamentary Forum in terms of
  article 6(3) of the Constitution of the said Forum:


   Ms N D Ntwanambi
   Ms B N Dlulane
   Mr M V Sisulu
   Mr S P Holomisa
   Mr W G James

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

               AELECTION OF MEMBERS TO PAN-AFRICAN PARLIAMENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:
  That the following members be elected as members of the Pan-African
  Parliament:


   Mr M J Mahlangu
   Mr S J Njikelana
   Ms F Hajaig
   Ms S V Kalyan

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 15:17.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
CREDA INSERT - T090522E – INSERT1 – PAGE 10

2.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1. Consumer Protection Bill [B 19D – 2008] – Act No 68 of 2008
         (assented to and signed by President on 24 April 2009).
      2. Child Justice Bill [B 49D – 2002] – Act No 75 of 2008 (assented to
         and signed by President on 7 May 2009).

      3. Financial Management of Parliament Bill [B 74B – 2008] – Act No 10
         of 2009 (assented to and signed by President on 19 April 2009).


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     a) Report of the Independent Commission for the Remuneration of Public
        Office Bearers for 1 January 2008 to 31 December 2008.

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     a) Government Notice No 1397 published in Government Gazette No 31734
        dated 24 December 2008: Standards Matters in terms of the Standards
        Act, 2008 (Act No 8 of 2008).
     (b)    General Notice No 211 published in Government Gazette No 31956
        dated 27 February 2009: Interactive gambling regulations: For
        written comments in terms of the National Gambling Act, 2004 (Act
        No 7 of 2004).

    (c)     Government Notice No R.279 published in Government Gazette No
        32002 dated 13 March 2009: Companies and Intellectual Property
        Registration Office: Amendment of Companies Administrative
        Regulations, 1973, in terms of the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No 61
        of 1973).

    (d)     Government Notice No R.292 published in Government Gazette No
        32002 dated 13 March 2009: Companies and Intellectual Property
        Registration Office: Amendment of Close Corporations Administrative
        Regulations, 1984, in terms of the Close Corporations Act, 1984
        (Act No 69 of 1984).

National Council of Provinces

 1. The Chairperson

    (a)    The President of the Republic  submitted  the  following  letter
        dated 29 April 2009 to the Chairperson of the National  Council  of
        Provinces, informing Members of the Council of  the  employment  of
        the SA National Defence Force for service in co-operation with  the
        South African Police Service in the  prevention  and  combating  of
        crime and maintenance and preservation of law and order within  the
        Republic of South  Africa,  along  the  RSA/Zimbabwe  international
        border, to perform borderline control duties:

        EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE FOR  SERVICE
        IN CO-OPERATION WITH  THE  SOUTH  AFRICAN  POLICE  SERVICE  IN  THE
        PREVENTION AND COMBATING OF CRIME AND MAINTANANCE AND  PRESERVATION
        OF LAW AND ORDER WITHIN THE REPUBLIC OF  SOUTH  AFRICA,  ALONG  THE
        RSA/ZIMBABWE INTERNATIONAL BORDER, TO  PERFORM  BORDERLINE  CONTROL
        DUTIES


        This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I have
        employed the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) personnel
        for service in co-operation with the South African  Police  Service
        in the prevention  and  combating  of  crime  and  maintenance  and
        preservation of law and order within the Republic of South  Africa,
        along  the  RSA  /  Zimbabwe  International  Border,   to   perform
        borderline control duties.


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions  of
        section 201(2)(a) of the Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        A total of 160 members of the  SANDF  will  be  employed  for  this
        service until 31 March 2010.


        I will communicate this report to members of the National  Assembly
        and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence  and
        wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to the attention
        of the National Council of Provinces.


        Regards
        signed
        K MOTLANTHE
        PRESIDENT
    (b)     The President of the Republic submitted  the  following  letter
        dated 5 May 2009 to the Chairperson  of  the  National  Council  of
        Provinces, informing Members of the Council of the extension of the
        employment of the SA  National  Defence  Force  in  Burundi  for  a
        service in fulfillment of  the  International  Obligations  of  the
        Republic of South Africa towards the African Union:
        EXTENSION OF EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN  NATIONAL  DEFENCE  IN
        BURUNDI,  FOR  A  SERVICE  IN  FULFILLMENT  OF  THE   INTERNATIONAL
        OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH  AFRICA  TOWARDS  THE  AFRICAN
        UNION


        This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I have
        extended the employment of the South African National Defence Force
        (SANDF) personnel to Burundi, in fulfilment  of  the  international
        obligations of the Republic of South  Africa  towards  the  African
        Union as part of the African Union Special Task Force  in  Burundi.
        The South African  National  Defence  personnel  are  assisting  in
        providing security to leaders and combatants of the Palipehutu-FNL.


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions  of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        1137 members of the SANDF were employed in Burundi, as part of  the
        African Union Special Task Force, to provide protection to leaders,
        members and combatants of the Palipehutu-FNL. The  African  Union’s
        mission in Burundi is not yet completed.  The  employment  of  1137
        SANDF members is now extended until 30 June 2009.
        I will communicate this report to members of the National  Assembly
        and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence, and
        wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to the attention
        of the National Council of Provinces.


        Yours sincerely,

        signed
        KGALEME MOTLANTHE

