---
title: 'National Assembly - 25 June 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-06-25
---

THURSDAY, 25 JUNE 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 1435.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr J J MCGLUWA: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move:


   That the House debates the following subject for discussion:


      The unwarranted attack on our vuvuzelas by conservative elements and
      the evidence for that.


[Laughter.]

I will submit evidence when this matter is brought to the House for debate.
[Applause.]

Ms J D KILIAN: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall on move behalf of the Congress of the People, Cope:

   That the House-


     1) notes that –


        a) the SABC is an independent public broadcaster and as such
           belongs to all South Africans, irrespective of race, gender and
           political persuasion;


        b) the Corporation is facing the most serious financial and
           management crisis in its history, which has left producers
           unpaid and resulted in the cancellation of popular television
           programmes, and which could put the screening of important
           sporting events at risk; and


        c) most SABC board members resigned after political pressure to do
           so was exerted upon them by the ruling alliance, which now
           leaves a leadership vacuum in the public broadcaster; and

    2) therefore resolves to call on the Portfolio Committee on
       Communications ...

Mr C T FROLICK: Speaker, on a point of order: I wish to point out that the
matter of the SABC Board is currently in front of Parliament, and that
there is an inquiry that is currently taking place. And we believe that the
relevant committee will report to the House on the matter. And as such I
want you to rule on the matter, please.

The SPEAKER: Are you done, hon member? Hon member you are anticipating a
matter coming before the House. You are, therefore, out of order.
[Applause.]

Ms C DUDLEY: On behalf of the ACDP I give notice that I shall move:

   That the House –

     1) notes the current Plan of Study for the Environmental Impact
        Assessment on Nuclear 1, 2 and 3, which ended on 23 June 2009;


     2) acknowledges that amongst other things the plan focuses on the
        proposed nuclear power station at Bantamsklip, east of Pearly Beach
        and Gansbaai;


     3) further notes that this is in the magnificent Whale Coast area at
        the southernmost tip of Africa, where there is a delicate and
        harmonious balance between human settlement, tourism and natural
        environment;


     4) further acknowledges that, if plans proceed as proposed, concerned
        residents and environmentalists believe it would be disastrous for
        the region; and


     5) calls on the Government to seriously consider the concerns of
        people, the impact of the nuclear proposal on tourism in the area
        and the impact on the region in general.

Ms A M DREYER: Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move:

   That the House debates the following subject for discussion:


     The findings and recommendations made by the Auditor-General in his
     report on a performance audit of entities that are connected with
     government employees and doing business with national departments,
     which revealed that more than 2 000 members of the public service were
     involved in tender rigging and corruption worth more than R610 million.

Mr W P DOMAN: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:
   That the House debates the following subject for discussion:


     The national government’s recent acknowledgement that it is possibly
     considering abolishing or reducing the number of provinces and the
     implications this will have on the constitutional imperative of three
     independent spheres of government.


        PARTICIPATION OF THE SA SOCCER TEAM IN THE CONFEDERATIONS CUP


                             (Draft Resolution)


The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House –

  (1) notes that our national soccer team, Bafana Bafana, will play in the
        Confederations Cup semi-final against Brazil today, Thursday, 25
        June 2009;


  (2) further notes that the organisation of the event has been really top
        class and even more pleasing is that players will be returning to
        their home countries with a good opinion of South Africa, the
        people, fans, stadiums, hotels and training facilities;
  (3) believes that the participation of our national soccer team in this
        competition contributes to the efforts of the progressive humanity
        across the globe to deepen the bond of human solidarity across
        national boundaries; and


     4) congratulates the Bafana Bafana team and wishes them the best of
        luck in the competition.


Agreed to.

                  SPRINGBOKS DEFEAT BRITISH AND IRISH LIONS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      notes that the Springboks beat the British and Irish Lions 26-21
        in the first of their three-match test series on Saturday, 20 June
        2009;


   (2)      further notes that South African loosehead prop Tendai “the
        Beast” Mtawarira’s outstanding performance resulted in him being
        Man of the Match;


   (3)      recognises that this win serves as a great boost for the
        Springboks, who last won a series against the British and Irish
        Lions 29 years ago;


   (4)      acknowledges the unwavering and vibrant support shown by
        Springbok fans in Durban and around the country on Saturday who
        heeded to the calls of the team to wear green and who proudly waved
        their South African flags throughout the match; and


   (5)      congratulates the team on their victory and wishes them well for
        the second match of the test series at Loftus Versfeld in Pretoria
        on Saturday, 27 June 2009.


Agreed to.

                                LITERACY WEEK

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker. I move without notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes that Monday, 22 June 2009, marked the beginning of Literacy
        Week in South Africa;
     2) acknowledges that basic literacy is the cornerstone of education,
        is a means for social and human development and provides people
        with the opportunity to empower themselves and to achieve their
        goals;

     3) recognises that there are millions of children and adults in South
        Africa who are illiterate and as a result are at a greater risk of
        falling prey to academic failure, unemployment, poverty, substance
        abuse and resorting to crime in order to be able to feed themselves
        and their families;

     4) acknowledges the selfless role played by stakeholders in civil
        society and in local communities to support and encourage children
        and adults to become literate; and

     5) calls on all South Africans to recognise and promote the importance
        of literacy and to help both children and adults attain this basic
        human right.

Agreed to.

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Hon Speaker, this is not an
objection but just an amendment. The hon Ellis read the date as the 23rd
and I think it was the 22nd. That’s all. It is just an amendment. Thank you


Mr M J ELLIS: Thanks.

Agreed to.

                          HOURS OF SITTING OF HOUSE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker I move without notice:

   That notwithstanding Rule 23(2), which inter alia provides that the hours
   of sitting from Mondays to Thursdays shall be 14:00 to adjournment, the
   hours of sitting of the House on Wednesday, 1 July 2009, shall be 12:00
   to adjournment.

Agreed to.

   APPOINTMENT OF AD HOC COMMITTEE TO NOMINATE A PERSON FOR APPOINTMENT AS
                              PUBLIC PROTECTOR

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I move that the House, in
accordance with section 193(5) of the Constitution, appoints an ad hoc
committee to nominate a person for appointment as Public Protector, the
committee to -


   (1)      consist of 14 members composed as follows: ANC 8; DA 2; Cope 1;
        IFP 1; and other parties 2;


   (2)      exercise those powers in Rule 138 that may assist it in carrying
        out its task; and


     3) report to the House by 28 August 2009.


Agreed to.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                         Vote No 1 - The Presidency:

                           (Resumption of Debate)


The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, Deputy President, Ministers and
Deputy Ministers, hon members, friends, colleagues and comrades, it was on
this day 54 years ago that delegates from all over South Africa gathered in
Kliptown for the first time, on this first day of the Congress of the
People. [Applause.] This event, which produced the Freedom Charter, changed
the course of this country’s history.
In a personal account published in the Sechaba journal in 1980, an unnamed
delegate to the Congress of the People wrote:


   As one approached Kliptown ... one could see the streams of other
   delegates arriving – some in cars, some in buses, others in carts or on
   foot, many carrying banners and wearing colourful national dresses for a
   gala occasion.

Today, 54 years later, we are gathered in the National Assembly as
representatives of the people of South Africa from all over. Like those
delegates that arrived in Kliptown, we have been sent to this Parliament
carrying on our shoulders the wishes, hopes, aspirations and expectations
of the people of South Africa.

This fact became apparent to me as I listened yesterday to the
contributions made in the course of the debate on the Budget Vote: The
Presidency. I wish to thank all the hon members who participated in the
debate. The comments, criticisms and suggestions were appreciated and have
been noted.

In considering the budget, operations and function of the Presidency as the
central executive authority of our democratic government, members returned
again and again to a common vital theme, namely that the people must be at
the centre of everything we do and that we must build an inclusive, caring,
responsive and effective government.
In this hon members echoed the Freedom Charter, which continues to provide
an enduring vision of a new South African society. In its preamble, the
Freedom Charter says:


   We, the People of South Africa, declare for all our country and the
   world to know: That South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black
   and white, and that no government can justly claim authority unless it
   is based on the will of all the people.

It captures the fundamental and enduring principle at the heart of our
democracy that the people shall govern, and underscores the notion of an
inclusive society, a country in which all South Africans have a place in
the sun.

The hon Madikizela-Mandela said we needed to ensure that ours is a
participatory democracy. She called on us to develop a participatory
culture in which our people are not treated as voting fodder, but as agents
of their own liberation. The work of the Presidency is guided by precisely
this sentiment.

Hon members, we appreciate the fact that all the parties supported the
Budget Vote of the Presidency. This indicates to the Presidency the
enormous responsibility we have to ensure that we not only do well in
overseeing the work of government, but that we also strive to be an
institution that represents the aspirations, the identity and the pride of
all South Africans, regardless of race, gender or class.

We were moved by the kind words of Umntwana wakwa-Phindangene, the hon
Prince Buthelezi, in stating that the success of a Presidency of the
Republic is the success of the nation. We will serve taking those words
into account. [Applause.] This indeed indicates a very important point
that, whilst the President of the Republic belongs to a political party,
once he becomes State President, he becomes the President of all the people
of South Africa. [Applause.] We have to be sensitive to this fact.

We are encouraged by the contribution of many hon members on how the
national planning function can be executed to the benefit of all South
Africans. Minister Manuel and other speakers elaborated on processes
relating to national strategic planning. These explanations, hopefully,
reassured all hon members who were in doubt that what we envisage is a
democratic process in which this House and Parliament, as a whole, will
have an important role to play.

It must be a process in which broader society should be involved, giving
practical expression to our efforts to involve the people more integrally
in the process of governance. Let me reiterate that the process of
strategic planning will involve not only national government, but all the
spheres. Working together, we will make it work.
We noted the concern of hon Dandala, that we must ensure that national
planning does not stifle innovation or initiative. National strategic
planning will facilitate and enhance, rather than hinder, delivery. As in
the debate on the state of the nation address, virtually all hon members
who spoke on this matter supported the need for an effective monitoring and
evaluation system.

In a systematic and detailed manner, Minister Chabane explained the process
we will follow to put the monitoring and evaluation systems in place and
how Parliament will be involved. This is informed by the common
understanding that the worth of good ideas and good policies resides in
their implementation and the impact they make on people’s lives. Attached
to this is the need to monitor that implementation, to evaluate impact and
to intervene when weaknesses are identified. This is precisely what we
intend to do.

The hon Gigaba was correct when he said that one of the most important
lessons of the past fifteen years has been that, without a strict
monitoring and evaluation mechanism, you cannot effectively measure
progress achieved, nor timeously put in place interventions to enhance
delivery. He echoed the views of a number of speakers when he said,
“Failure to implement our programmes as the state and” – wisely - “to spend
public funds amounts to total disrespect for the public.”

A number of hon members expressed themselves on the size and cost of the
executive, including the Presidency. Let me reiterate that, in terms of
processes to set up these structures, everything is going well. The task
team set up to deal with these matters is hard at work. It has ensured
that, in all instances, the new members of the executive are able to hit
the ground running. I’m certain that hon members themselves would have
noticed this from the presentations that departments and Ministries, old
and new, made on their strategic plans to the relevant parliamentary
committees.

The hon Trollip is worried about the size of government. He speaks of a
“massive cabinet” and a “bloated bureaucracy”. The issue is not so much
whether the government is too big or too small, but how it should best be
organised to meet the developmental needs of the country and to make
optimal use of the resources available. [Applause.] Let me assure the House
once again that the changes we have made to the configuration of
departments are guided by the need to improve service delivery and to
correct the weaknesses that the people have identified.

We have done so fully aware of the financial implications of our decisions
and mindful of the constraints that the economic downturn has placed on
public finances. While our plans are indeed within our means, we cannot be
complacent. We need to spend wisely. We need to eliminate wasteful
expenditure. We must be able to measure the developmental return on our
investments. All of the programmes we outlined in the state of the nation
address will require funding. The costs of these programmes are negligible
when compared to the cost to society when not implementing them. The cost
of educating our people or ensuring access to health care is nothing
compared to the cost of not doing so. [Applause.]

We have noted the concern of hon members about the use of consultants in
the Public Service. We will watch the trends very closely to ensure that
senior managers do not over-use consultants, especially since they are
employed on the basis of the expertise they profess to have. [Applause.] We
agree that we should reduce people who are employed to do particular jobs,
but then employ other people to do the same jobs.

Hon Godi, we share your unease about the report by the Auditor-General
regarding entities that are connected with government employees doing
business with government departments. We will look carefully into the
compliance with conflict of interest prescripts for public servants. Such
behaviour will not be tolerated.

A number of hon members raised the critical question of the relationship
between the party and the state. Others have spoken about the relationship
between the party and the government, influenced by media reports on this
matter. The hon Madikizela-Mandela answered the question of who governs the
country clearly. [Applause.]
On 22 April 2009, an overwhelming majority of South Africans voted for the
African National Congress and gave it the mandate to govern the country for
another five years. The ANC rules; we see no need to debate that reality.
[Applause.] The resolutions of the ANC conference in Polokwane in 2007,
later defined in our election manifesto, form the basis of the policies and
programmes of this government. There is, therefore, nothing untoward in a
statement that says the ANC makes policy.

Having formed a government to implement its policies and programmes, the
ANC cannot then disappear for five years. [Applause.] It must perform its
own oversight functions to ensure that the government it formed stays true
to its mandate. It owes that to the electorate of this country. In
undertaking this responsibility, the ruling party will engage in internal
processes and consultations it considers necessary, as do all other
political parties. The organisation’s interaction with cadres it has
deployed does not detract from the responsibility of government to serve
all the people of South Africa. I must also add that hon members should not
be afraid of the robust debate within the ranks of the ruling party, or
within the alliance. It does not make sense to call for a robust debate
within this House and in society at large, but then insist that the
President of the ANC should stifle debate within his own party. [Applause.]

On the other hand, there are matters relating to the state. Those
institutions which are meant in their composition and conduct to be
nonpartisan should and will remain so. As we all know, matters relating to
these institutions are regulated by provisions of the Constitution and the
laws of the country. We have frequently stressed that we cannot allow a
situation in which the institutions or resources of the state are used to
advance partisan interests. Where there are violations of these legal
prescripts, we need to ensure that action is taken in line with our laws.

I share the concerns of hon Dandala on this matter and join him in calling
for all organs of state to ensure that they do not promote the interests of
any one party to the exclusion of others. [Applause.] We would also like to
make our national days more meaningful and inclusive to all South Africans.
The Presidency welcomes suggestions on how this can be done.

The hon Meshoe wanted to know when we would implement the decision on the
wearing of name tags by frontline public servants and what we would do if
they refused. The Department of Public Service and Administration,
responsible for government’s Batho Pele customer care programme, will
communicate with all government departments to ensure compliance in this
regard.

Minister Patel reminded us of the enormous opportunities on the continent
and that our vision should be to build a major industrial economy with
strong linkages in the region. He also cautioned that the conduct of South
African business on the continent should reflect our own values and
democratic ethos as a nation. This matter has been raised a few times and
our business communities should treat it with the seriousness it deserves.

Hon members, as the President emphasised ... [Laughter.] ... work on 2010
continues apace, and all challenges are receiving attention. It is very
short ... [Laughter.] Just yesterday, the man was the President.
[Laughter.] Why shouldn’t we be calling him President? [Laughter.] Like
with Speaker, at times, we should say “Madam Speaker, Mr Speaker.” It is
the same thing. At least, if he had never been President, we would be
complaining. He has been the President, so we can’t keep on slipping up.
[Laughter.]

Hon members, Umntwana wakwaPhindangene, the hon Shenge, reminded us of the
critical point that we must look beyond the 2010 Soccer World Cup and
ensure that the marketing of the country intensifies beyond the tournament.
We must ensure that the legacy of infrastructure, stronger national unity,
marketing opportunities for the country and other benefits are sustained
beyond the World Cup.

The international marketing of the country is one issue we should place
firmly on the agenda of our interaction with opposition parties. Together,
we must support programmes that send out a positive message about South
Africa to the world. Sadly, it is often South Africans who communicate
negativity about our beautiful country. We will reflect on our marketing
instruments to assess effectiveness.

Again, we wish Bafana Bafana well, and, logistics allowing, I should be
able to join other fans at the stadium this evening as they play one of the
most important matches in their history. [Applause.] Hon members, as you
might remember, it has been a while since the national team reached the
semi-finals in international or continental games. This is an achievement
that they should share with the whole nation. And, of course, we want them
to go to the finals. [Applause.]

Hon members, as the global recession begins to take its toll on our
country, we take wisdom again from the hon Shenge that unity is a key tool
in our response. He said, “One, naturally, does not expect all political
parties to sing from the same hymn sheet, but we can at least sing certain
bars of our song of survival in unison”. Let me add that it is not enough
that we, as the government, tell the people what we are doing in order to
give them a better life.

Our success, as the government, will also depend on the extent to which
people take advantage of opportunities laid out by government and initiate
their own projects. This partnership between government and the people
should hold true at all times. It should hold even more urgently in times
of big challenges, like in these times of economic recession when
opportunities are fewer and needs are many. It is in such times that we
should remember the words of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party, the hon
Motshekga, who reminds us that a nation should take lessons from its own
traditional spirit of Ubuntu and assist one another, especially families in
distress.

I have observed with fascination the learned discussion between the
Minister responsible for Planning and members of the Official Opposition,
especially hon Ellis, on chickens with teeth and pigs that fly and some
pictures to support this. [Laughter.] They are clearly experts on the
matter. Hon Ellis even produced documentation to prove this point.
[Laughter.] I am sure that only in South Africa chickens could grow teeth
and pigs could fly. [Laughter.] I trust that the Minister and Deputy
Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries took note and will protect
the chickens and the pigs accordingly. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Hon members, thank you for supporting the Budget Vote on the Presidency.
Working together we must do more to fight hunger and poverty and to make
South Africa a winning nation. I thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 14:49.
                                 __________
                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Sport and Recreation for
        2009 – 2013.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     Reply by the Public Service Commission to recommendations in
        the Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
        Administration (Public Service Commission’s Fourth Consolidated
        Monitoring and Evaluation Report of 2007) and the Report of the
        Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration (Public
        Service Commission’s State of the Public Service Report 2008), as
        adopted by the House on 28 January 2009.

        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
        Administration.


     b) Letter from the then Minister for Justice and Constitutional
        Development, dated 24 June 2008, requesting the National Assembly
        to recommend a person for appointment as Public Protector in terms
        of section 193(5) of the Constitution.
        Referred to the Ad Hoc Committee on Appointment of Public Protector
        for consideration and report.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Human Settlements on Budget  Vote
   26 and Strategic Plan 2009 – 2011 of the Department of Human  Settlements
   and its Entities, dated 24 June 2009

1. Department of Human Settlements


   The Portfolio Committee on Human Settlements recognises that  the  budget
   was prepared for the defunct Department of Housing and notes that it  may
   not  cover  the  expanded   mandate   of   the   new   Department.   That
   notwithstanding, the Committee considered Budget  Vote  26  as  well  the
   Strategic Plan of the Department and its housing entities and  wishes  to
   raise the following concerns:

     1. Lack of clarity on the potential impact  of  the  renaming  on  the
        mandate and the restructuring of the Department.
     2. Failure by the Department to provide the Committee with the  policy
        on farm workers accommodation results in the Committee no  able  to
        perform oversight on the implementation thereof.
     3. Lack of integrated  planning  and  coordination  in  the  different
        spheres of government and across departments in housing delivery.
     4. Significant increase in the expenditure  allocated  for  travelling
        and subsistence allowances by the department in programmes 3, 4 and
        5.
     5. Although the Department had prioritised the need to develop skills,
        the budget allocation for bursaries and the provision for  training
        and development has not increased significantly.
     6. Failure to articulate and capture the number of  job  opportunities
        that would be created through the delivery of houses.
     7.  Recurring  incapacity  in  the  housing  inspectorate,   technical
        personnel in provinces and municipalities. This hinders the quality
        and pace of housing delivery.
     8. Lack of data to distinguish between houses built and houses under
        construction.
     9. Lack of social housing particularly in rural towns.
    10. Lack of progress on rectifying and rebuilding of houses affected by
        natural disasters.
    11. Inadequate planning of beneficiary lists results in unoccupied  and
        vandalised houses.
    12.  Poor  implementation  and  coordination  on  community   awareness
        campaigns.
    13. Inability of Community Residential Unit (CRU) to address challenges
        facing hostel dwellers due to the absence of a coherent policy.
    14. No national strategy to deal with backyard dwellers.


   2. Housing entities

   The Committee also  considered  the  strategic  plans  of  the  following
   entities:   Housing  Development  Agency  (HDA)  National  Home  Builders
   Registration  Council  (NHBRC),  National  Housing  Finance   Corporation
   (NHFC), National Urban & Reconstruction Agency (NURCHA)  and  Rural  Home
   Loan Fund (RHLF).  The committee wishes to raise the following concerns:

     1. Housing Development Agency (HDA)
         • Possible challenges faced  by  the  Agency  in  the  funding  of
           projects via the province to the Agency,  may  have  a  negative
           impact on the mandate.

   2.2      National Home Builders Registration Council (NHBRC)

         • The challenges and the negligence by the Department in non-
           enrolment of the projects with NHBRC contribute to the poor
           quality in the construction of houses.


     3.  Rural Home Loan FUND (RHLF)

   The increase in bad debt due to the following:
    • many of RHLF clients are using their  loans  to  sustain  their  basic
      living costs
    • the high interest rate paid on loans by the end-user

   3. Conclusion

   Due to time constraints the Committee could not engage fully with the
   Department and the housing entities. Further deliberations and workshops
   would need to be arranged.
   The Committee acknowledges that even though an induction workshop was
   conducted, crucial issues were not dealt with due to insufficient time.


   Noting the above the Committee recommends that Budget Vote 26 be passed.


   Report to be considered.

2.    Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration Report on
   Budget Vote 9: Department of Public Service and Administration, as
   adopted on 25 June 2009

   The Portfolio Committee received a briefing by the Department  of  Public
   Service and Administration (DPSA) on its Strategic plan and  Budget  vote
   no. 9 on 17 June 2009.


   The DPSA was allocated a total budget of R355 801 000 for  2009/10.  This
   budget is divided as follows amongst its programmes:

      1.    Administration: R108 793 000
      2.    Human Resource Management Development: R68 746 000
      3.    Management of Compensation: R51 230 000
      4.    Information and Technology Management  : R41 531 000
      5.    Service Delivery Improvement: R32 725 000
      6.    Governance: R41 023 000
      7.    Centre for Public Service Innovation: R11 753 000

   This was the newly established Portfolio Committee’s first  meeting  with
   the  Department.  The  discussion  after  the  briefing  was  robust  and
   contributed to Members’ understanding and consideration of budget vote 9.


   The Committee recommends that the National Assembly pass Budget vote 9.


   Report to be considered.

3.    REPORT ON PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION
   BUDGET VOTE 10: THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION, AS ADOPTED ON THE 25 JUNE
   2009.

   The Portfolio Committee received  a  briefing  from  the  Public  Service
   Commission on its Strategic plan and Budget vote no. 10 on 17 June 2009.


   The PSC was allocated a total budget of R121  251  000,  which  is  a  9%
   increase from its budget in 2008/09. The Budget is divided per  programme
   as follows:

      1. Administration: R60 913 000
      2. Leadership and Management Practices: R16 434 000
      3. Monitoring and Evaluation: R19 831 000
      4. Integrity and Anti-Corruption: R24 073 000


   This was the newly established Portfolio Committee’s first  meeting  with
   the Commission. The discussion that followed the briefing contributed  to
   Members’ understanding and consideration of budget vote 10.


   The Committee is satisfied with the allocation and  recommends  that  the
   National Assembly pass Budget vote 10.

   Report to be considered.

4.    Portfolio Committee on Public Service  and  Administration  Report  on
   Budget Vote 8: Public Service Administration  Leadership  and  Management
   Academy for 2009/10, as adopted on the 25 June 2009

   The Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration  received  a
   briefing by the Public Administration Leadership and  Management  Academy
   (PALAMA) on its Strategic plan and Budget vote for  2009/10,  on  the  24
   June 2009.


   This was the newly established Committee’s first meeting with PALAMA. The
   briefing contributed  to  Members’  understanding  and  consideration  of
   PALAMA’s strategic plan and budget vote 8.

   The total Parliamentary Budget  vote  allocation  of  R119  000  000  for
   2009/10 is split as follows:


      1. Compensation of Employees: R23 000 000
      2. Goods and Services: R32 000 000
      3. Capital Assets: R2 000 000
      4. Transfer to Trade Account: R62 000 000


   PALAMA has also budgeted  a  surplus  of  R6  000  000  for  the  2009/10
   financial year.


   The Committee was satisfied with the briefing it received  by  PALAMA  on
   its strategic plan and budget for 2009/10. PALAMA was asked to  submit  a
   written response to questions members raised in the meeting.


   The Committee recommends that the National Assembly pass Budget vote 8.


   Report to be considered.

5.    REPORT OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HEALTH ON BUDGET VOTE 14 AND THE
   STRATEGIC PLAN FOR 2009/10 FINANCIAL YEAR, DATED 25 JUNE 2009

   The Portfolio Committee on Health, having considered the Budget vote 14:
   Health and the Strategic Plan of the Department of Health and its public
   entities for the 2009/10 financial year, on the 17 and 24 June 2009,
   reports as follows:


   1. OVERVIEW OF THE STRATEGIC PLAN

   The Director-General of the Department of health highlighted the national
   health system priorities (The 10 point plan) for 2009-2012 financial
   years as follows:

       1. Provision of Strategic leadership and creation of social compact
          for better health outcomes.
       2. Implementation of the National Health Insurance Plan.
       3. Improving the quality of health services.
       4. Overhauling the health care system and improve its management.
       5. Improved human resource planning, development and management.
       6. Revitalisation of physical infrastructure.
       7. Accelerated implementation of the HIV and AIDS Strategic Plan and
          the increased focus on TB and other communicable diseases.
       8. Mass mobilisation for the better health for the population.
       9. Review of the Drug Policy.
      10. Strengthening research and development.


   The Director-General explained to the Committee that the Medicines
   Control Council does not have a separate budget and strategic plan from
   the Department’s as it is a committee incorporated in the Department and
   not an entity.  He also informed Members of the Committee that they have
   not fully finalised the strategic plan of the Department, due to changes
   in the Department and that the finalised strategic plan will be tabled
   formally early the following week.

   2. BUDGET OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH

   In 2009/10 financial year the budget allocated for the Department of
   Health increased from R15.9 billion to R17.1 billion.  Six programmes
   have been identified for 2009/10 and the largest amount of the budget is
   allocated to Programme 5 which is Health Services.

   The Members of the Committee raised the following concerns:

      • The Budget that is allocated to the Department is not sufficient
        for the Department to be able to deliver fully on its aim of
        promoting health for South Africans and to deliver on what the
        people are expecting.
      • The Committee was concerned about the implementation of the
        Occupation Specific Dispensation (OSD) as this needed urgent
        attention to enable service delivery especially in the public
        sector.
      • The re-opening of the Nursing Colleges also needed urgent attention
        to address the shortage of health professionals in the country.



   3. Public Entities

   The Committee also considered the Strategic Plans of the following public
   entities:

      • National Health Laboratory Services (NHLS)
      • Medical Research Council (MRC)

   3.1      National Health Laboratory Services (NHLS)

      • The Committee was concerned about the presentation of the NHLS as
        they did not mention anything about the budget allocated to them by
        the Department.
      • The Members were also concerned about the large sums of money the
        Provinces owe to the NHLS.
   3.2      Medical Research Council (MRC)

      • The Committee sought clarity about the source of data on causes of
        death in South Africa that the MRC was using to determine the
        health research priorities of the country, particularly the
        accuracy of data received from the Department of Home Affairs.


   4. Conclusion

   Due to time constraints and the fact that the majority of the members are
   new to the Committee, the Committee will arrange follow-up briefings with
   the Department and the entities.


   The Committee having considered Budget Vote 14 and the Strategic Plan of
   the Department and its entities, reports that it has concluded its
   deliberations thereon.


   The Committee recommends that Budget Vote 14 be passed.  The DA members
   of the Committee abstained from voting as they needed to meet with their
   caucus.


   Report to be considered.



