---
title: 'National Assembly - 04 June 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-06-04
---

                            THURSDAY, 4 JUNE 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:10.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 175.

                                 NEW MEMBERS

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I wish to announce that the vacancy which
occurred in the National Assembly owing to Mr J G Zuma being elected
President has been filled by the nomination of Ms T E Lishivha with effect
from 12 May 2009 and the vacancy which occurred due to the passing away of
Ms K N Shoba has been filled by the nomination of Ms T D Chiloane with
effect from 21 May 2009.

The vacancies which occurred owing to the resignations of Ms N C Madlala-
Routledge and Mr T J Mathebula have been filled, with effect from 5 May
2009, by the nominations of Ms P E Adams and Mr E N Ngcobo respectively.

The members have made and subscribed the oath and affirmation in my office
on 27 May 2009.

                   PRESIDENT’S STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS

                                  (Debate)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I have received a copy of the President of the
Republic’s address delivered at the Joint Sitting on Wednesday, 3 June
2009, and the speech has been printed in the Minutes of the Joint Sitting.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, hon President, before
the President’s inauguration on 9 May 2009, it rained to purify our land
and its people. The sun shone immediately to mark the moment of renewal and
to signal the pleasure of God and the gods at the ascension of the
popularly elected President Jacob Zuma to the throne. [Applause.]

The inauguration of the President marked the beginning of the era of
renewal. His opening address to Parliament contained a ten-point national
programme of renewal. The programme is deeply rooted in spiritual and moral
values that the President, like his predecessors, cherishes and believes
are the prerequisites for building cohesive, caring and sustainable
communities.
In the opening paragraph of his speech, the President displayed a deep
commitment to the moral and democratic culture and values born out of the
spirituality and protracted struggles of our people, which gave birth to
freedom and independence from the inhuman apartheid system. He highlighted
the people’s desire for change and their endorsement of the ANC’s call for
unity and co-operation, for continuity and change.

He reaffirmed the vision of an inclusive society, united in its diversity,
and the collective wellbeing embodied in the Freedom Charter, which
profoundly influenced the 1996 Constitution. The President recognised and
acknowledged that the ANC received a decisive electoral mandate to create a
cohesive, caring and sustainable society based on spiritual, moral and
democratic values.

Furthermore, he demonstrated his confidence in the institutions of
democracy, including the judiciary, established on the basis of, and to
give effect to, our revolutionary democratic culture and values. He
recognised and acknowledged the contribution of the founding President of
the Republic, Tata Nelson Mandela, and his successors, Comrades Thabo Mbeki
and Kgalema Motlanthe, and highlighted our culture of continuity and
collective responsibility, and our exceptional ability to manage change.

President Zuma placed the war against poverty at the centre of our efforts
to recover the humanity of black people as the surest means of securing the
humanity of all South Africans, both black and white. He made the war
against poverty the cornerstone of his administration, because he knows
from experience that poverty dehumanises, that is, it robs people of their
humanity.

The President reaffirmed that through social partnerships we can recover
our humanity and its inherent values, and create cohesive, caring and
sustainable communities. He and our revolutionary movement, the ANC, did
not suddenly discover spiritual and moral values because of the 2009
elections. From its inception, the ANC’s moral vision was shaped by
spirituality and revolutionary moral values.

In his 1892 public lecture titled “Upon my Native Land”, the founding
president of the ANC and self-confessed Ethiopian Christian, John
Langalibalele Dube, foresaw the birth of a spiritual, humane, caring and
prosperous Africa. The values were echoed by Dr Pixley ka Isaka Seme, the
convener of the founding conference of the ANC and the architect of the
concept of an African Renaissance.

In his ground-breaking speech, the President echoed Dr Pixley ka Isaka
Seme’s call for unity and co-operation. In his call for social
partnerships, President Zuma followed the path of the founders of the ANC
who included intellectuals, and traditional and religious leaders. The
President’s commitment to working for a better Africa and world stems from
the ANC 1919 constitution, which described it as a Pan-African
organisation.

Soon after its formation, the ANC realised and acknowledged the need to
build cohesive, caring and sustainable communities. For instance, in 1921
Rev Z R Mahabane observed in a public lecture that Africans were degraded
and forcibly robbed of their humanity, denied the vote and made landless,
homeless and hopeless. Thus at the 1923 ANC national conference, Mahabane
argued that the African condition challenged the ANC to strive for the
recovery of African humanity - ubuntu/botho - as a prerequisite for the
recovery of the humanity of all people, both black and white. At this
conference the ANC adopted the first bill of rights on the African
continent.

The opening paragraph of this bill reasserted the African humanity and went
on to demand the participation of African people in the economic life of
the country. In 1943 the ANC adopted the African Claims, the second bill of
rights, which called for the right of African people to self-determination,
and cultural, social and economic rights, five years before the universal
declaration of human rights.

In 1945 the Pan-African Congress held in Manchester in the United Kingdom
established the principle that working together, we can achieve our rights.
The conference called on peasants and workers, intellectuals, students,
women and the youth, traditional and religious leaders to use all the means
at their disposal to liberate their countries.

The 1955 Freedom Charter, adopted under the stewardship of former ANC
president Albert Luthuli, which shaped our vision of postapartheid South
Africa and profoundly influenced our Constitution, was the product of unity
and co-operation of the kind that President Zuma spoke about. The first and
only Congress of the People on South African soil inherited and propagated
revolutionary morality and values of a cohesive and caring society.
[Applause.] Nkosi Luthuli embraced all sectors and people of different
political persuasions. He reconciled his African culture, Christianity,
traditional leadership and political leadership, and saw nothing wrong in
the alliance between the workers’ organisations and the Communist Party of
South Africa, among others.

Like Seme, Nkosi Albert Luthuli called for a unique civilisation for Africa
and Africans. Following in his path, President Zuma told a gathering of
intellectuals at the University of Johannesburg that universities should
not produce graduates who are aliens to themselves. These are the values
that President Zuma called on us to use for building cohesive, caring and
sustainable communities.

Since his election as the ANC president in Polokwane, the President called
on the youth, women, the rural poor, workers, professionals, traditional
healers, organisations, and traditional and religious leaders to work
together for the improvement of the quality of life of all South Africans.
The social partnerships which emerged from this call led to unprecedented
social mobilisation.

For the first time South Africa saw a high level of racial and religious
tolerance that led to interfaith gatherings, including traditional healers
and practitioners of African religion. This racial and religious tolerance
has also seen the birth of a partnership between Afrikaner churches, the
ANC Commission on Religious Affairs and the interfaith National Religious
Leaders’ Forum that is rooted among the people. The forum and its
provincial, regional and local structures have put moral regeneration for
sustainable development at the centre of its desired partnership with
government for the creation of cohesive, caring and sustainable
communities. In its manifesto, the ANC undertook to enter into partnerships
with interfaith forums to advance social education for moral regeneration,
religious tolerance, social cohesion and development.

President Zuma is alive to moral decay in our society. He condemns all
manifestations of moral degeneration. The envisaged partnership between the
President’s administration and interfaith organisations should address,
inter alia, the challenges of moral degeneration through social education.
The President derived his moral vision from his predecessors, especially
our icon, Nelson Mandela, and ANC conference resolutions. For instance, in
his address to the National Interfaith Leaders’ Summit, he observed that
our Constitution embodies the values of the just and caring society that
the ANC seeks to build. More specifically, he observed that the ANC seeks
to build, and I quote:

   A caring society based on ubuntu values and principles. Our value system,
   based on ubuntu, promotes social cohesion and nation-building by
   transcending our cultural, religious, racial, gender and class
   differences.

One of the resolutions of the Polokwane Conference was to integrate
ubuntu/botho values and principles into public policy. The ANC strategy and
tactics document, adopted by the Polokwane Conference, highlights the
universality of the spiritual philosophy of ubuntu. It states, and I quote:


   The dark night of white minority political domination is receding into a
   distant memory, yet we are only at the beginning of a long journey to a
   truly united, democratic and prosperous South Africa in which the value
   of all citizens is measured by their humanity, without regard to gender,
   race and social status.

The Polokwane Conference therefore correctly elevated ubuntu principles to
an overarching value system for all South Africans, both black and white.
In his address to the National Interfaith Leaders’ Summit, held in Kempton
Park on 27 November 2008, the President reaffirmed ubuntu values and
principles, and I quote:


   The challenge is how do we then inculcate these values in our society,
   starting with our children? We want to use education as a tool to
   cultivate moral and social values among the youth and encourage them to
   lead healthy lifestyles.


   We want our children to respect the next person on the basis of their
   humanity and not based on their status in life. To promote these values
   among all people, we need to work together in all provinces in a
   structured way. The provincial interfaith forums should play a leading
   role in promoting moral regeneration and in the promotion of values to
   help us build the caring society we envisage.

The National Interfaith Leaders’ Forum and its provincial structures have
identified social dialogues and education as the surest means of moral
regeneration for sustainable development. The President envisaged the
partnership between interfaith organisations and government in definite and
emphatic terms, and I quote:


   We also see a critical role for religious bodies in providing social
   education and to help us build a caring society. From their inception,
   religious institutions played both a spiritual support and developmental
   role.
A parish should have a house of worship; a library; community hall;
community gardens; workshops for creative industries; health clinics; and a
school.

On partnership between the interfaith organisations and government,
President Zuma had this to say:


   Many church institutions have underutilised facilities which can be used
   for social education in partnership with government and the private
   sector. Social education could address, in particular, moral regeneration
   and social development. Most importantly, we urge the faith communities
   to partner with us to achieve moral regeneration for sustainable
   development. Together with faith-based organisations, we engaged in the
   struggle to eradicate racism, sexism, gender inequalities and class
   oppression. We have also worked together post-1994 on reconstruction and
   development.

In September 2008 the ANC wished all religions well, including African
religion, celebrating their spiritual and cultural festivals as the surest
means of inculcating values and principles. African religion is not only a
fountainhead of spiritual and moral values, but it is also important for
moral regeneration, rural development and agrarian reform. It provides an
indigenous calendar that regulates spiritual, cultural and agricultural
festivals based on a cosmic framework which transcends race, creed and
religion. For instance, the African calendar system places the new year in
September, which is shared by the Muslim, Jewish and many indigenous
African faith communities. The recognition of this calendar would promote
rural development and agriculture based on indigenous knowledge systems
that are rooted in African tangible and intangible heritage. The annual
celebration of these cultural festivals by rural communities would restore
spiritual and moral values, work ethic, love for agriculture and the
culture of self-help and self-reliance.

The role of faith communities in development, as envisaged by the
President, poses challenges to government departments, especially Arts and
Culture, Social Development, Education and Agriculture, to consider
urgently the establishment of the desired partnerships with interfaith
organisations for sustainable development.

In conclusion, on his 91st birthday on 18 July 2009, we shall be
celebrating Mandela Day, which offers us a platform to recall and
internalise the ubuntu values and principles that Mandela espoused and used
in his service of humanity in our troubled land. The annual celebration of
this day will offer us a platform to celebrate and internalise our history,
culture and revolutionary values of human compassion, social and
international solidarity. The day offers all of us, including workers,
families and learners, the opportunity to let their inner light shine upon
others through service to others.

Through the constituency offices throughout the country, the ANC will call
on all communities and sectoral organisations to celebrate Mandela Day on
18 July 2009 by spending at least 67 minutes of their time doing something
useful within their communities, especially among the less fortunate.
[Applause.] This will mark the beginning of a nationwide effort to build a
caring society. On this day the ANC’s idea of an activist Parliament will
be realised. All public representatives will be instructed to lead
community work campaigns on Mandela Day every year.

All of the things I have said above proceed from the understanding that
comprehensive social transformation entails changing the material
conditions of all South Africans for the better. It also ensures that we
forge a nation inspired by values of human solidarity. It is the
combination of these factors that describes the civilisation of national
democracy we seek to build. Thank you. [Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Hon Speaker, hon members and distinguished
guests, President Jacob Gedleyihlekisa Zuma ...

... wena mfokaMsholozi, Nxamalala ... [Ihlombe.] ... kaPhum’ epheth’ inyama
ngapha namasi ngapha, siyakuhalalisela ngokukhethwa kwakho Msholozi.

Mina neqembu engiliholayo i-Democratic Alliance siyalihlonipha ihhovisi
lakho, futhi singathanda kakhulu uma ingxenye yeqembu eliphikisayo kanye
nabalandeli abayizigidi ezinthathu abalikhethile nabo bahlonishwe.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[... wena mfokaMsholozi, Nxamalala ... [Applause.] ... kaPhum’ epheth’
inyama ngapha namasi ngapha, we congratulate you on being elected,
Msholozi!

My party, the Democratic Alliance, and I highly respect your office, and
would appreciate it very much if the side of the opposition party and the
three million supporters who elected it are respected too.]

Mr President, you reminded us at your inauguration that this fourth
democratic term of office is a moment of national renewal. You committed
yourself and this Parliament to the historic undertaking by President
Mandela that never, never and never again would this land experience the
oppression of one by another.

You referred to the spirit of reconciliation that shone so brightly through
the, regrettably, all too brief window of national pride during the late
1990s. The window is still there. All we need to do is draw back the dark
drapings that have shut out the light in the past decade. This is a task
that we are all surely up to.

Yesterday we were treated to the powerful words of two patriotic poets that
provided us with soul food. We, the privileged few of this Parliament, must
take care of our national thread.

You committed yourself to this in Pretoria. You said:


   I commit myself to the service of the nation, with dedication,
   commitment, discipline, integrity, hard work and passion.

I, too, commit myself and my 66 colleagues in the National Assembly and my
10 colleagues in the NCOP to do the same.

Your state of the nation address was indeed positive. We need to be
positive in these difficult times, but we need to be realistic and honest
about the economic realities too. We have no choice in this regard because
the people of this country have become disillusioned by what we do or don’t
do here.

If we do not change the way we do things, we might hear from the people of
this country what the parliament of Oliver Cromwell heard from him when he
put their term of office to end in 1653. Cromwell said that those
representatives had dishonoured the parliament by their contempt of all
virtue and practice of every vice. He said, and I quote:

   You have grown intolerably odious to the whole nation. You were deputed
   here by the people to get grievances redressed, yet yourselves have
   become the greatest grievances and enemies to all good government.

Mr President, your international undertaking to hold ourselves to the
highest standards of service, probity and integrity and to build a society
that prizes excellence, rewards effort and shuns laziness and incompetence,
is the clarion call that our nation so desperately needs and deserves to
hear.

The challenge, however, is not only to speak these fine words, as you did
yesterday, but to ensure that they translate into fine actions. There are
immediate concerns that this noble intent is being undermined right here in
the parliamentary committees by the appointment of people to positions of
public authority who obviously do not espouse these values, people who have
actually defrauded Parliament. The ANC will have to consider whether these
appointments are in accordance with your public blueprint for national
renewal and the call to arms against the cancer of corruption that is
ravaging this country. [Applause.]

The DA commits itself to the proposed partnership for reconstruction,
development and progress that you spoke of, sir, because you said that in
this partnership there is a place for all South Africans, black and white.
I found it significant that you made no differentiation between the
languages they speak or their ethnicity; this is the essence of a true,
successful rainbow nation.

The party that I represent here is a party for all South Africans, and we
have promised our almost 3 million voters that we will contribute to
building one nation with one future. Therefore, if you mean what you say,
we can be partners in building this country into a prosperous nation.

As jy kyk hoe ons, as die DA, hier lyk, sal jy besef dat ons ’n
weerspieëling van ons bevolking is, en, nog meer, dat ons almal Suid-
Afrikaners in murg en been is. Ons verteenwoordig nie kolonialiste of
uitgeweke Suid-Afrikaners nie. U of die ANC kan ons nie wegwens nie, want
ons is kinders van die stof van die vasteland van Afrika. Ons het nie ’n
ander heenkome nie. Suid-Afrika is ons tuisland en ons wil en sal tot haar
vooruitgang bydra deur ons rol as die amptelike Opposisie in die Parlement.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[If one takes a look at our appearance here, as the DA, one must realise
that we are a reflection of our population and, moreover, that we are all
South Africans through and through. We do not represent colonists or
emigrant South Africans. Neither you nor the ANC can wish us away, because
we are children of the soil of the African continent. We have no other
refuge. South Africa is our homeland and we are determined to contribute to
her progress through our role as the official opposition in Parliament.]

Professor George Devenish recently said:


   A responsible opposition is as necessary to the proper functioning of
   parliamentary democracy as is a responsible government. It simply
   requires political maturity to recognise this fact.

Personally, hon President, I am South African to my core. The bookcase in
my office proudly accommodates my grandfather’s Hansard records of his
contribution in this Parliament, and they have found their way back to
Parliament more than half a century later. I come from a family that has
served this country and also paid the ultimate price over generations. My
family and I remain committed to this cycle of service, motivated by proud
patriotism and a deep love for this country. So are my colleagues.
[Applause.]

Mr President, I appreciate the way you welcomed our party’s leader, Premier
Helen Zille, to your Cabinet lekgotla. You have done what you committed
yourself to doing at your inauguration on 9 May, where you said that you
would -


   ... seek a vibrant, dynamic partnership that is enriched by democratic
   debate, that values diverse views and accommodates dissent.


This example will, hopefully, eventually reach the ANC representatives in
the Western Cape legislature and their alliance partners too.

Amalungu e-ANC apha eKapa awonwabanga, ingakumbi la ahleli kweli cala
lasekhohlo. Kambe ke aza kude aliqhele eli cala. [The ANC members here in
Cape Town are not happy, especially the ones who are sitting on the left-
hand side. Be that as it may, they will become accustomed to it.]

The DA is accustomed to sitting on the left-hand side of the House - here
and in most provinces – but all opposition parties aspire to occupy the
benches that you and your party occupy. We have now achieved this in the
Western Cape and plan to do so here too. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

We will not be spectators or passive participants in this House. We will
hold you to account on your electoral and manifesto promises. We will play
an even more vigilant oversight role, but will always offer alternate views
and advice in the best interests of the country, in this regard. The role
of the planning and monitoring commissions, with regard to performance
evaluation of the Cabinet, will be closely watched. I hope this evaluation
will be implemented better than the evaluation under the Public Finance
Management Act and Municipal Finance Management Act that are also
performance-related.

Speaking of that, it is now more important than ever that we recognise the
full extent of the international recession and the fact that we are firmly
gripped therein. We must begin to isolate the opportunities for South
Africa in this global predicament. Many skilled people who left our shores
are returning. We must harvest their skills and place them in the vacant
critical posts of the Public Service in order to improve service delivery.

For far too long now, too many parents in this country have encouraged
their children to attain a worldly education so as to be globally mobile;
the truth is that the pastures are not greener on the other side. We must
encourage our family members and friends to contribute to the development
of South Africa and Africa. This is a place of enormous opportunity, but we
will only succeed if our children and grandchildren become teachers,
doctors, nurses, policemen, detectives, transport specialists, engineers,
scientists and telecommunication experts, with a view to applying these
skills to the advantage of a neglected continent and a developing country.

The 2010 Soccer World Cup, hon President, will be a success. To the
amazement of the entire world, we showed that we could host the Indian
Professional League T20 tournament. The tournament could not be hosted in
India, because of their fractious elections, so we hosted it in South
Africa, with three weeks’ notice, during our peaceful election. [Applause.]
We cannot allow this golden opportunity to showcase our wonderful country
to the world to be jeopardised by self-serving parochial protestations.

When we come out of this cycle of recession, the focus of the developed
world will become fixed on Africa, and South Africa in particular, as we
are the gateway to a continent blessed in abundance with the natural
resources that are in such short supply elsewhere. This will be our
springboard to unprecedented economic growth and prosperity, if we are
appropriately prepared.

Op die oomblik het u, mnr die President, twee dinge in gemeen met die
president van die Verenigde State, president Barack Obama. Julle is albei
onlangs verkies en julle moet albei die gevolge van ’n resessie hanteer en
oorkom. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Currently you, Mr President, have two things in common with the President
of the United States, President Barack Obama. You were both recently
elected and both of you have to deal with and overcome the effects of a
recession.]

This might not be the best time to become a president, but many of the
greatest in history have emerged from similar adversity. I hope, for our
country’s sake, that your name will be added to the illustrious list of
successful post-recessionary presidents. Remember though, at this time,
that it is the poor that need more attention and that depend more on
effective and efficient service delivery. The ANC’s cadre deployment
policies have compromised service delivery standards and need, for the good
of the country, to be reconsidered.

What will also make things more difficult for you than for President Obama,
is the dichotomous composition of your Cabinet and party. This is going to
prove extremely difficult to handle, especially with regard to your
macroeconomic approach in dealing with economic growth and the creation of
decent jobs. A decent job is not one created by an Expanded Public Works
Programme that, incidentally, abuses most labour legislation and takes
people out of penury for a short while, while they dig a trench from point
A to B, only to be plunged back into having to illuminate their homes again
by candlelight or paraffin lamp after they had become accustomed to
flicking a switch on a wall.

Your welcome reference to reducing bureaucratic red tape restrictions in
order to allow for easier licensing and registration of SMMEs is good news,
but you neglected to tell us what you are going to do with the most
inhibiting factor in this regard, which is restrictive labour legislation.

Die SAKP-leier en Minister van Hoër Onderwys, dr Blade Nzimande, het
byvoorbeeld onlangs onomwonde gesê dat wat Suid-Afrika nodig het, is ’n
sosialistiese ekonomiese beleidsraamwerk. Hy het verder gegaan en gesê dat
die ANC nie langer die belange van sy linkse alliansievennote kan ignoreer,
of toegelaat gaan word om dit te doen nie.

Mnr Heinrich Wyngaard van Die Burger het heeltemal korrek opgemerk dat dit
sterk woorde is van die nuut bemagtigde linkervleuel wat kennis gee dat
hulle die dividend vir hul aandeel aan u verkiesing soek. Ons gaan die saak
fyn dophou om te sien hoe hierdie tweeledigheid ontvou. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The SACP leader and Minister of Higher Education, Dr Blade Nzimande, for
instance, recently stated unequivocally that what South Africa needs is a
socialist economic policy framework. He went on to say that the ANC can no
longer ignore the interests of its leftist alliance partners, nor would it
be allowed to do so.

Mr Heinrich Wyngaard of Die Burger has remarked quite correctly that these
are strong words from the newly empowered left wing, who are giving notice
that they want the dividend for their contribution to your election. We
shall be watching carefully to see how this duality unfolds.]

Your duty is to serve the country and not the SA Communist Party nor the
ANC Youth League. [Applause.] What is more, you cannot afford their
socialist agenda. With the constricting economy, tax revenues will decrease
drastically, and your expensive plans of infrastructure spending, Expanded
Public Works Programmes and additional social grants can only come from
greater deficits, which is ultimately irresponsible in this economic
climate.

The economic realities of this country are going to determine much of what
we do over the next five years, and the ANC and its socialist tripartite
alliance members would do well to recognise that our population estimates
are way off the mark. This has a direct impact on the planning and
provision of social services such as hospitals, housing, education and
social security. The situation will have to be dealt with much more
effectively and efficiently by the Department of Home Affairs and the
Department of International Relations and Co-operation - and corruption is
endemic in these departments. However, this fact also directly affects the
Departments of Police, Justice and Constitutional Development, State
Security, Transport, Tourism and Trade and Industry. South Africa is the
destination of choice for African immigrants, and we need to be properly
geared to deal effectively with the consequences of these migration
patterns.
Mr President, much has been said about the olive branch you have extended
to the opposition - and I heard you do so again yesterday.

Kodwa ndifuna ukuthi, eli sebe andikaliboni mna. Ndibone abanye bephiwa
amagqabi kwisebe loMnquma, kodwa ndicinga ukuba xa sibheka phambili siza
kude silibone eli sebe. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[I beg to differ, I have not seen this branch. I have seen some people
being given leaves from the branch of the olive tree, but I think if we
move forward we will eventually see the branch.]

It is a source of great concern to the DA to be called “secessionist”. I
know, hon President, that it is convention not to be too controversial in a
maiden speech. But this is the part I want you to pay special attention to.
It is a source of great concern for the DA to be called “secessionist” by
none other than former Deputy President Baleka Mbete. It is also
unacceptable that the Chief Whip of the ANC in the NCOP can say the
following about the Premier of the Western Cape, and I quote:

   I want to say, Chair, and of course, hon Chief Justice, that I am not a
   racist. If she wants to lead her race, she has the right to do so. She
   has won the race to lead, but not the people of my province. This is my
   home, and she has to be very serious when she leads the people of this
   province.
My question is: Who is “our people”, and who is not serious? This was said
without rebuke from the Chair of the NCOP, the ANC or the media. No one in
the DA here or elsewhere has ever uttered such racist drivel about the ANC
electoral victory or indeed your appointment, sir. Neither have we called
people witches or lesbians with a designed intent to malign and foster
homophobic or genocidal emotions. We have not called any elected
representatives an enemy of the state, nor threatened to make anywhere
ungovernable. This kind of rhetoric has no place in our society, less so in
our Parliament. [Applause.]

I hope, hon President, that this debate will set the tone for this term of
office, so that we can concentrate on the seminal issues that challenge our
nation’s prosperity. Incidentally, for the Chief Whip of the ANC in the
NCOP, the DA will be a government for all the people of the Western Cape.
This Parliament will have to rise to the occasion.

Soos u gister gesê het, mnr die President, ons sal mekaar se hande moet vat
in die gees van ’n Suid-Afrikaanse gemeenskap as dié ’n periode van
hernuwing gaan wees. Baie dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[As you were saying yesterday, Mr President, we’ll have to join hands in
the spirit of a South African society if this is to be a period of renewal.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I am advised that the interpretation system is
down at the moment. It is being attended to, but that should not discourage
people from using the language of their choice.

Rev H M DANDALA: Hon Speaker, Mr President and hon members of this House,
Cope takes this opportunity to thank the President for his address to the
nation yesterday, and welcomes the opportunity to offer reflections on the
speech and the plans that he outlined. Many South Africans welcome and
agree with the President’s analysis of the problems facing our country.
Where we need greater engagement is on how we will respond to these.

Cope commends the President for reminding us that we have a nation to
build, together. We support this call, as it is at the heart of our own
agenda for change and hope, an agenda on whose mandate we stand here to
speak and an agenda that would guide Cope in being a patriotic opposition.

The prudent economic policies that South Africa pursued over the past 15
years are in part responsible for shielding South Africa from the global
economic crisis. Looking at the President’s response to the recession,
however, a few questions yearn for answers.

We would like to hear more about the government’s practical intervention
plans as a response to this recession. The country is left guessing about
suggestions made by some to consider huge bailouts, as well as suggestions
made by others to bankroll companies and/or banks in distress. A clear
statement in this regard needs to be made. The investor community cannot be
left guessing.

Baza kuncedwa njani kwaye bakhuselwe njani abantu ekuweni koqoqosho
lwelizwe lakokwethu? [How are the people going to be assisted so that they
can be protected during the economic meltdown in our country?]

We believe that we need to go beyond the generic mention of the social
partners’ consultation that would stop retrenchments. This is challenging.
What we need is to hear more about the plans and details of the industries
involved in plans that are going to assist us to overcome this problem. How
are the fears of ordinary people going to be addressed? Job losses,
repossessions and retrenchments are already the order of the day.

I missed in the President’s speech a programme that inspires confidence
among ordinary people, and how they should weather the storm in the face of
repossessions by financial institutions. We need to hear more about a plan
to engage these institutions in the face of the high repossession rates. Is
there at least a call to these institutions by government to present a plan
that would shield people from their crumbling financial situations?

All of this happens in the face of debilitating poverty. As the President
correctly pointed out, 13 million people are reliant on social grants. It
cannot be right that a quarter of the population has to be reliant on
grants. We agree with the President that we need to extricate our people
from this dependency.

We need to hear how the government plans to create stable and decent jobs
for our people. We will look closely at the promised half a million jobs in
the next six months, hoping these will not merely be job opportunities
where people who have worked one week here and another day there are
counted as having had one job. [Applause.] We believe that it is crucial to
ensure that the government mobilises all the people to intensify the
efforts of building and supporting small businesses and new enterprises.

In the past, the government of the Republic has had programmes such as the
RDP, Gear, Asgisa and Jipsa. One expected that we would hear the
President’s analysis of the impact and effect of these schemes. We are left
with a feeling that reference was not made to these programmes because they
were not successful. Where is the follow-up on these programmes? Or are we
going to see new plans without a proper evaluation? What is the plan to
tackle poverty on a sustained basis? How are we planning to utilise social
grants and public works as stepping stones to sustainable job creation,
thus dealing with systemic poverty and turning South Africans into
economically self-sustaining citizens?

We welcome the fact that a new department has been established to look at
rural development. Of course, it is disappointing that after 15 years we
still do not have a well-tried and developed strategy to transform our
rural areas into economically active hubs. We will watch the pilot project
in Giyani with bated breath.

There is a need for Parliament to be fully exposed to the plans to tackle
poverty. Here is another issue that is beyond party politics, but must be
the business of all of us in this House.

We welcome the President’s call for nation-building. We also need to
caution that such a call can no longer be made lightly. Members of Cope in
the Public Service are being hounded out of their jobs. [Applause.] We will
encourage them to use the President’s hotline to complain and ask his
office to take up their plight. The harassment of Prof Pityana, Prof Nkuhlu
and many others calls for your intervention. [Interjections.]

Nation-building must become more than just a slogan. We welcome and embrace
Mandela Day, as Madiba truly belongs to all of us South Africans and the
people of the world. [Applause.] His legacy will inspire us to build
tolerance.
Finally, we are pleased that the President has highlighted the culture of
learning. We support the rallying of children to study and the rallying of
teachers to teach. It is the success of education in the long run that will
help our people to extricate themselves from poverty as well as lay a
foundation for the building of a value-centred society.

Because of the importance of education, we need to invest seriously in
infrastructure to make education a success. The phenomenon of schools under
trees, for example, is an embarrassing act and continues to say that we
need to plan well for the education of our children. This is a matter of
national concern which, unfortunately, did not find its way into the
President’s speech.

As we have said many times over, the problem in our country has never been
policy. The state of our nation is that of despair when it comes to service
delivery. That is why we welcome the President’s determination to hold
Ministers accountable. We look forward to a discussion between the
Ministries of Evaluation and Planning about how Parliament will be included
to ensure overall accountability. We also hope that this focus will
permeate all levels of government, particularly the local level.

Mr President, we respect the choice of our people at the polls. And we wish
you, Mr President, and your government well as you implement the promises
that have been made. Where you excel, we will commend you. Where you
falter, we will be there to point it out and work with you to build a
country where all our people can be safe and prosperous. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I’m advised that the interpretation system is now
working.

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Hon Speaker Xhamela, your Excellency the President
Nxamalala, hon Deputy President, hon Ministers and hon members, the people
have spoken through the results of the last elections, last month, although
there has been electoral fraud, especially in KwaZulu-Natal.
[Interjections.] In spite of its extensive nature, one cannot detract from
the fact that the people have spoken and that the President has received a
powerful mandate to govern. I am therefore not rising to oppose the
President or his government, but to offer my counsel and admonition.

I do not do so because I feel I am wiser than anyone else in the House. It
is true that I may be the only one in this House, apart from my brother
Andrew Mlangeni, who has interacted with heads of government of South
Africa from Prime Minister Hendrik Frensch Verwoerd to Prime Minister
Johannes Gerhardus Strijdom, Prime Minister Balthazar Johannes Vorster,
President Pieter Wilhelm Botha, President Frederik Willem de Klerk,
President Mandela, President Mbeki and President Motlanthe, all of whom I
have seen rise to power and relinquish office.
I have known and personally interacted with great leaders in the ANC, also
its founder Dr Pixley ka Isaka Seme, who was my uncle. From my childhood I
knew the first president of the ANC, Rev John Langalibalele Dube. I knew Dr
Alfred Bitini Xuma and I had the privilege of having dinner in his home in
Toby Street in Sophiatown with him and his wife, Madie Hall Xuma. I knew
President James Moroka, and one of my mentors was none other than Inkosi
Albert Mvumbi Luthuli.

I knew and worked with Mr Oliver Tambo until 1979, a fact which was
confirmed at this podium by none other than President Mbeki in your
presence. I have known President Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela over 60 years,
and I had the privilege of being one of his Ministers. I have known
President Thabo Mvuyelwa Mbeki and I was one of his Ministers for five
years. I have known President J G Zuma for quite a few decades, and we
worked together in President Mbeki’s Cabinet.

But, hon Speaker, I do not speak from the strength of this experience.
Today I am speaking with the confidence of a newfound sense of freedom.
Throughout my life, history compelled me to balance conflicting interests
in my contribution to public life. Before liberation, I was at the centre
of political activities which were not banned by the apartheid regime. But
this role limited what I could do. After liberation, I subscribed to our
joint endeavours to consolidate the gains of our struggle. I accepted that
in the initial stages of our post-liberation Republic, not all things would
go well.

I am now free from all constraints and empowered by freedom of thought and
speech I never enjoyed before. I now enjoy the freedom to speak truth to
power. I do not intend to oppose or undermine the popular mandate President
Zuma has received from the electorate, but to provide assistance in the
form of counselling and admonition so that our Republic, through his
leadership, may succeed in fulfilling the aspirations embodied in that
mandate.

I commend the President for his positive overture to the opposition
yesterday to be leading players in shaping the destiny of our nation. As
patriots, we in the opposition must work together with the ruling party for
the sake of our people in the present circumstances of global economic
meltdown. I also commend the President for emphatically stating that our
institutions and Constitution must be respected.

But in speaking truth to power, there are many aspects of the presidential
debate which need to be addressed. Time dictates that I focus on the single
most critical aspect. Nothing is of graver importance than addressing the
economic crisis facing South Africa.

When I spoke in response to his Excellency President Motlanthe’s state of
the nation address this year, at this podium, I warned that South Africa
would not be spared from the global depression and that we were ill-
prepared to deal with it. Despite my warnings, government officials and
politicians boldly declared that South Africa would only be marginally
affected by the global depression. The worst, they said, was already over
and recovery was in sight. I remember even our most popular magazine had a
cover story assuring us of these things. And this was irresponsible
nonsense, of course.

We lost precious time to formulate our response to the crisis. I know,
Xhamela, that my contribution in trying to address this issue may be seen
in the words of an old song, which was popular in my youth, to be rushing
in where angels fear to tread.

Against this backdrop, South Africa is awakened to the harsh reality that
in the first quarter, 22% of its manufacturing capacity has been shut down,
mining has been reduced by 33% and the GDP is down by at least 6,7%. This
is just the beginning. In all likelihood the recession will gather pace in
the next quarter, and the collapse of the real estate market, which has
been held back by the expectation of a quick recovery, now seems
inescapable.

His Excellency the President addressed the problems of the economy in his
state of the nation address and he was, of course, right, because the
economy is our first priority. The recession will undermine government’s
efforts, from the upliftment of the poor to fighting crime - all issues
which were addressed by the President yesterday. Mr President, the
laudatory pledges you announced yesterday would be difficult to fulfil in
times of prosperity, let alone in the times of severe austerity in which we
are living.

The recession cannot be addressed by a bureaucratic administrative or
legislative response. We are not going to fix the economy only by
establishing new departments of state, appointing new Ministers or holding
policy summits. The delay in taking action has restricted what we can do
and what we could have done. We must now liken the global depression to a
world war. We must transform our thinking and build a new financial
architecture. Only the countries that adjust their economies will survive
the global economic depression.

The impact of the global depression is going to be greater than World War
II. We dare not be on the losing side, lest South Africa is reduced, once
again, to a mere global supplier of commodities and raw materials. For
years our country has tried to develop an industrial basis, and we must now
protect it, as our future depends on it.

Already we are experiencing casualties. Hundreds of thousands of people
have lost their jobs, and more will. As winter sets in, we will see
widespread hunger and despair. Under such pressures, our health care system
is likely to disintegrate, alongside our already failing education system.
This, therefore, is not the time, to quote my friend Baroness Margaret
Thatcher, to “go wobbly”. The hour demands courage and determination.

Mr President, if we are serious about protecting jobs in our shrinking
industrial base and attracting foreign direct investment, we must devalue
the rand immediately. We cannot wait for months, weeks or even days. The
United States Federal Reserve gave the example by cutting the prime rate to
zero within hours of the United States markets hitting rock bottom.

Having a strong rand is nothing but ill-conceived national pride. Our
economy is not reliant on imports and we produce enough to ensure that the
devaluation of the rand will not necessarily affect the goods and services
consumed by the low and middle classes. We must devalue the rand and then
stabilise the devalued rand.

No business can cope in an environment of two-digit currency fluctuation.
Government must aggressively use whatever means are available to keep the
devalued rand stable. Undoubtedly, devaluing the rand will increase the
inflation rate over time. But economists and policymakers have informed me
that, for a country such as South Africa, it is better to deal with a
little more inflation than with widespread joblessness and long-lasting
depression.

We should act now. We should save our real estate market before it
collapses and force the SA Reserve Bank to cut its interest rate to single
digits and as close as possible to zero. This by itself will cause the
devaluation of the rand, as the currency would no longer be attractive to
currency investors and speculators.

This compels us to re-evaluate our relationship with the SA Reserve Bank,
which still remains a private entity owned by private shareholders and
controlled primarily by such shareholders which the law requires to be kept
secret. One can only assume that this money trust of bankers acts in the
public interest because they are so tied to our economy that if the economy
suffers, they suffer too.

But we are living in extraordinary times. The American people have begun to
question the old maxim that “what is good for General Motors is good for
America”. It might equally be the case that what is good for the South
African bankers might not be good for the South African people and the
economy. The SA Reserve Bank should become what the Constitution envisages
it to be - an organ of state, part of the government of our country.

This process will take time, even if conducted through nationalisation. I
think “nationalisation” resonates well with my brothers on the right.
[Laughter.] But the urgent need to cut interest rates to a minimum cannot
wait if we want to avoid the compounded domino effect of widespread
repossessions and the domestic devaluation of the South African real estate
asset base.

I know that it is difficult for us as politicians to focus on delicate
economic issues, which are often subcontracted to academics, think-tanks
and bankers. As politicians, we often rely on our gut instinct to know what
is right or wrong and what needs to be done, and we are often right. But
when it comes to economic issues, we have long been trained not to do so. I
plead with His Excellency the President to be responsive to the mandate he
received from the people and to make sure that we maintain employment
levels, jobs and industrial capacity.

I respect the role in which history has cast His Excellency the President.
And I hope that he will respect the role in which history has finally cast
me. I received my mandate from the poorest of the poor, who stand to suffer
the most. Both he and I live amongst the poorest of the poor. The economic
crisis could jeopardise everything we have fought for. I plead with the
President to focus on it, not only with his mind, but with his heart. I
pledge to him my full and truthful support, without abandoning my role as
an opposition party member, whose duty is to hold government to account and
to keep government on its toes.

Finally, let us be honest ... [Interjections.]

NgingumZulu mina, angilona iNgisi! [Uhleko.] [I am Zulu, not an
Englishman.] [Laughter.]

Finally, let us be honest about the widespread electoral irregularities in
the recent elections. We saw acts unbefitting our democracy, such as the
IFP secretary-general, who is our colleague in this House, the hon Rev Musa
Zondi, being searched in broad daylight and being humiliated by the
National Intervention Police Unit in Nongoma. Election irregularities are
not new to us, but they should become unacceptable.

When the former Secretary-General of the OAU, His Excellency Dr Salim Ahmed
Salim, who is now one of the “wise men of Africa”, visited South Africa
ahead of our elections, I met him in Durban. He was to lead the African
Union monitoring team during the election. I gave him a copy of my aide-
memoire, which I provided to the chairperson of the IEC, Dr Brigalia Bam,
and members of the IEC when they met with me and members of the national
council of my party on 31 March 2008. In it I had listed all the
irregularities that had taken place during our elections from 1994 to 2004.
[Interjections.] Dr Bam and the IEC had promised to come back to us. But a
year had already passed and they had not done so.

In our conversation, I asked Dr Salim whether we in Africa were using
different standards in declaring an election “free and fair”. I recalled
that in a previous election in Zimbabwe most political parties in South
Africa sent monitors, including my own. All of them, except the IFP
monitoring team, the chairperson of the IEC Dr Bam and the European
monitoring team, declared the Zimbabwean election “free and fair”. Dr Salim
chuckled and said he preferred the word “credible” rather than “free and
fair”. This reminded me of the wisdom of one of our African sayings ...

Lentswe la Sesotho le re: “Motswalle wa moloi ke moloi, motswalle wa
leshodu ke leshodu.” [There is a Sesotho saying that goes: The friend of a
witch is a witch, and the friend of a thief is a thief.] [Laughter.]

The mandate our President has received places great responsibility on his
shoulders, and we wish you well, Msholozi, Nxamalala. [Applause.]

UNGQONGQOSHE WAMAPHOYISA: Somlomo ohloniphekile, nomhlonishwa uMongameli
wezwe, mhlonishwa Sekela Mongameli wezwe, Sekela Somlomo ohloniphekile,
oNgqongqoshe namaSekela oNgqongqoshe, Malungu esiShayamthetho, maqabani
nabangani. Siyemukela ngezandla ezifudumele inkulumo kaMongameli
nengumkhombandlela esizweni sonke.

Sinethemba futhi lokuthi umphakathi uzobambisana nohulumeni ukuze konke
lokhu esizibophelele kukho kuphumelele. Kuningi okuyinqubekela phambili
esesikuzuzile kwiqoqo lezobulungiswa nokuphepha ukuvimbela ubugebengu.
Nokho, indlela isende, njengoba ubeka Umbutho Wesizwe ukuthi ngokubambisana
singenza lukhulu.Njengoba echazile uMongameli, umthethosiseko nesimo
somthetho wezwe kuqinile futhi kusesimeni esikahle, kuhlumelelisa intando
yeningi.
Iqoqo leMinyango ebhekene nokuphepha lisebenze ngempumelelo lengamela
ukhetho lwesine ngaphansi kwentando yeningi. Nakuba siphumelela kokunye
kodwa zisekhona izinselelo njengoba ucwaningo ngokusebenza kweqoqo
nezinsiza zalo kucacisa.

Kodwa-ke siyoze sikuzuze ukuthula, ukuphepha nokuhlala kahle. [Ihlombe]
Siwethulela isigqoko umphakathi ngokubamba iqhaza ekwakhiweni kwezinhlaka
ezilwisana nobugebengu ubambisene namaphoyisa. Nathi njengoMnyango
wezakaDalawane sizoqhubeka siwugqugquzele umphakathi ngoba impi nobugebengu
idinga kubanjiswane.

Kwezinye zezinto ezishiwo nguMongameli izolo uthe:

   Ngokubambisana masenze lukhulu ukulwa nobugebengu. Inhloso yethu ukwakha
   uhlelo lwezobulungiswa nokulwa nobugebengu oluhambisana noguquko
   oluxhaswe ngezinsiza-kusebenza lwesimanjemanje noluphethwe eqophelweni
   eliphezulu.

Emva kwenkulumo kaMongameli yayizolo kube khona abaholi abathile
emphakathini abathe bafuna imininingwane ngezinhlelo zikahulumeni. Ake
sisike elijikayo kwiqoqo lobulungiswa, ukuvimbela ubugebengu nokuphepha
kanje ... (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF POLICE: Hon Speaker, hon President of the Republic, hon
Deputy President of the Republic, hon Deputy Speaker, Ministers and Deputy
Ministers, hon Members of Parliament, comrades and friends, we warmly
welcome the state of the nation address, which is the programme of the
nation as a whole.

We also hope that the public will co-operate with government in order for
us to fulfil all our obligations. We have made good progress in the Justice
and Security cluster to prevent crime. However, there is still a long way
to go, as the African National Congress says that: “Together, we can do
more”. As the President explained, the Constitution and the criminal
justice system of the country are strong and protected, thus strengthening
democracy.

The Security cluster has worked successfully in providing security for the
fourth general elections under democracy. Even though we have succeeded in
some of the things, there are still challenges, as the research findings
about the functioning of the cluster and its resources indicate.

Certainly, we shall have peace, safety and social stability. [Applause.] We
salute the community for playing a pivotal role in the establishment of
community policing forums to fight crime in partnership with the police.
We, as the Department of Police, will continue to mobilise the community
because the fight against crime needs co-operation.

The President said yesterday, amongst other things, and I quote:
   Together we must do more to fight crime. Our aim is to establish a
   transformed, integrated, modernised, properly resourced and well-managed
   criminal justice system.

After yesterday’s state of the nation address, some leaders in the
community said that they wanted details about government programmes. Let us
copy a model from the Justice cluster, to prevent crime and strive for
safety like this ...]

Hon Deputy Speaker, this is a massive task that involves many aspects of
the criminal justice system. Central in this regard, is the development of
capacity for fighting and reducing crime, and thus the need to review the
functioning of the whole Justice, Crime Prevention and Security value chain
and to ensure integration and co-ordination.

Specific measures include, amongst others: steps to ensure speedy
finalisation of investigations and cases; use of alternative custodial
sanction where appropriate; maintaining and safeguarding the identity of
citizens and foreign nationals; the maximum and efficient utilisation of
facilities and infrastructure within the cluster, including the integration
of IT systems; bringing courts closer to communities; increasing the number
of prosecutors; and the establishment of the awaiting-trial detainees
branch as part of the Department of Correctional Services to reduce
recidivism.

As part of the effort to improve our crimefighting capacity, the President
highlighted, amongst others, the need to enhance our detective and forensic
services. To give a sense of the scale of the programmes being undertaken,
we should mention that with regard to detectives, approximately 12 900
members are already undergoing training in various detective courses, this
financial year. [Applause.] More than 1 120 of this number are sitting for
advanced courses. The programme started at the beginning of April 2009.

Contrary to the negative propaganda suggesting otherwise, our training
programmes are benchmarked with international policing agencies to ensure
the maintenance of the requisite standards.

Part of the criminal justice system modernisation process will involve the
application of technology solutions to manage routine operations, reduce
costs and eliminate waste, and automating paper-intensive systems. The IT
systems of various cluster departments are being integrated to ensure
greater utilisation of technology in the fight against crime.

Our forensic services will be strengthened through the passing of the
Criminal Law (Forensic Procedures) Amendment Bill, a task we must
accomplish within the year.

We have declared war against organised crime and corruption in the public
as well as in the private sector. We shall move with speed to finalise all
matters relating to the establishment of the Directorate of Priority Crime
Investigation, the DPCI. As members know, the head of the DPCI has been
appointed. We are on course to ensure that the DPCI will be fully
functional by 5 July 2009. [Applause.]

We are going to be tough on criminals. We shall adopt the same approach as
we did when we dealt with possible hotspots during the election campaign.
[Applause.] A leaflet by the National Action Council in 1955, in
preparation for the real and true Congress of the People, made a clarion
call to the people of our land. Amongst other things, it said, and I quote:

   Let us speak of the light that comes with learning and the ways we are
   kept in darkness. Let us speak of great services we can render and of
   narrow ways that are open to us. Let us speak of laws, and government,
   and rights ... Let us speak together of freedom. And of the happiness
   that can come to men and women if they live in a land that is free. Let
   us speak together of freedom and of how to get it for ourselves ...

The titanic struggle against the racist policies of white domination taught
us never to surrender, even in the face of mammoth adversity. Through our
own actions we taught ourselves to act in unity to determine our own
destiny. It would be a great sociopolitical tragedy if the majority of the
people of our land who were at the core of the battle against apartheid
colonialism, those who played a central role in the realisation of the
democratic form of government, were to remain marginalised and not take
part in the process of defining and realising the content of our democracy.
Such a situation is not only a threat to future stability, but also a break
to development. The effort to ensure a people-centred and people-driven
process to change must succeed.

Over the centuries, African communities used Letsema/Ilima as a way of
tackling problems collectively. We must continue with the effort aimed at
the retention of this progressive tradition which gives practical
expression to the aspiration of human solidarity. We should work to deepen
our understanding of the practical implications of this tradition, taking
into account our history, the specific socioeconomic conditions, and short
and long-term objectives.

The youth is the energy of society. Unemployment represents wasted creative
potential. Therefore, the youth should occupy our foremost attention as we
work to harness all the people’s creative potential and to deepen the
culture of civic responsibility and human solidarity. [Applause.] Let us
commence so in this, the month of the gallant youth of our land.

It is the foregoing understanding that will inform our endeavours as we
work to mobilise society, and in particular the youth, to take a more
active part in the fight against crime. The young lions have the energy and
capacity to land a telling blow against crime.

The time has come for the subject of crime to be on the agenda of every
home, private or public organisation, not only in the form of passive
debate, but as part of the effort to reclaim peace, security and comfort.

Rightfully so, the people of our land demand effective provision of safety.
Our history has taught us that, in the execution of its duties, a police
service should always be mindful not to infringe upon the people’s human
rights. We need an accountable and service-oriented police organisation.

We have an ongoing responsibility to improve our capacity to prevent crime
before it is committed. However, no police organisation can be everywhere
all the time. Nor is there a police service that can predict every possible
incident of crime.

To ensure accountability, the continued observance of human rights and
improved capacity to prevent crimes before they occur, we require
partnerships between the police and the public.

Accordingly, government continues to strengthen the structural design aimed
at assisting us to better realise our safety objectives and at deepening
and tightening the interface between communities and the police service.
This design includes the establishment of community safety forums, street
or village committees, and the strengthening of the current Community
Policing Forum establishment programme. To this extent, the Ministry of
Police is in the process of establishing a section dealing with strategic
partnership and popular participation.

Community safety forums will help in the monitoring and functional co-
ordination of the criminal justice system at the local and municipality
level. The establishment of street and village committees will take crime
combating and crime prevention to every corner of our country. We commend
those communities already in action on this score and encourage others to
follow suit.

We have noted that there are certain isolated voices who have raised some
objections about the establishment of street committees. We regard such
objections as a typical case of social consciousness having fallen behind
imperatives of social evolution and development. These are the views of
those who are comfortable, wherever they are. The social status and high
security walls have blinded them, making them unable to appreciate the
daily reality faced by millions who, in order to have any sense of safety
and security, must rely on state services and their own sense of civic
duty.

There is nothing genuine about these objections. These views constitute the
natural waste produced by the great river of progress. Let us ignore them
and continue to speak together of freedom and of how to get it for
ourselves.

As part of strengthening the social contract against crime, the Security
cluster will also deepen the interface with labour, churches, business, the
private security industry, traditional leaders and other stakeholders.

Hon Deputy Speaker, the President has indicated that government intends to
improve the legislative framework governing the activities of the private
security industry. In March this year, the Minister of Police appointed a
task team to conduct an in-depth enquiry into the functioning of the
Private Security Regulatory Authority. Consequently, we have come to the
conclusion that the authority has in many ways become dysfunctional.
Remedial measures are being taken to rectify that serious situation.

We are also determined to strengthen partnerships among government
departments, as well as among various spheres of government.

The experience gained during the recent elections has convinced the
Ministry of Police that every department within the security cluster indeed
has a role to play in the fight against crime. We believe that crime and
perceptions about it are such a serious matter in our country that all of
us need to give added attention to the issue.

Law enforcement cannot succeed if social, economic, ideological and
cultural conditions continue to spawn criminality. The living environment
itself must be less conducive to crime.

Commenting on the role that other departments can play, the 1999–2004 White
Paper on Safety and Security states, and I quote:

   Important also, is the need to strengthen partnerships and co-operation
   with the key departments involved in crime prevention and those
   departments which have valuable skills and resources to offer, such as
   the South African National Defence Force.

It is our view that in a country where centuries of institutionalised
racism condemn the black majority to conditions of extreme poverty, lack of
skills and underdeveloped localities, the SANDF, with their skills, indeed
can play an important role in the process of skills transfer and the
transformation of the living environment. We should also contemplate ways
in which the Force could assist in the fight against cash-in-transit heists
- this is in the process of consultation. This murderous kind of crime is
not only a source of fear to those guarding these assets, but also breeds a
culture that cheapens human life.

In many cities and localities, environmental issues that create conducive
conditions to commit crime remain a challenge. Together with local
government, we must change this situation.

We also wish to inform the nation that we shall soon be launching and
escalating throughout the country, Operation Washa Tsotsi. [Applause.]

Before the attainment of democracy, meagre policing resources were spent on
poor communities. We have to monitor progress in this regard and ensure
that this situation changes. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms P DE LILLE: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President,
we appreciate your invitation to civil society, business and nongoverning
political parties to come to the table.

Ek waardeer ook u poging om Afrikaans te praat. Ek kan help met ’n paar
lesse! [Gelag.] [I also appreciate your effort to speak Afrikaans. I can
assist with a few lessons! [Laughter.]]

It is our hope that this is not just a symbolic invitation to us, because
we in the ID are ready to engage with you to find solutions to the
challenges that we face.

The global recession means that we need a plan around which all South
Africans can rally, a plan that can tap into our collective patriotism,
skills and wisdom, and bring us together as a nation.

Mr President, in your state of the nation Address you shared the beginnings
of such a plan. Your list of goals and priorities is laudable, but we’ve
heard some of them before and the key issue, as always, will be
implementation.

The ID has always said that without implementation and monitoring the best
plans will come to nothing, which is why we need to hear the details about
the National Planning Commission, how it will work and its role, so that we
can get the job done.

The ID is pleased to hear that for the first time there is going to be
monitoring and evaluation of the performance of Ministers. We have
repeatedly said that Ministers should be held accountable and responsible
for their actions. We hope that you will make these performance indicators
public every three months, so that we as a nation can be kept abreast of
delivery, achievements and failures.

It is our hope, Mr President, that you will become the first President to
fire a Minister for incompetence and failure to spend their budget.
[Interjections.] This is one time when “Mshini Wam” would be relevant and
we in the ID will be prepared to sing with you. [Laughter.] [Applause.]
Mr President, we think there are several issues that you should address.
You have called upon our nation to cut our cloth according to our means,
but you have made several promises and commitments which pose the question:
Where will we get the resources from?

We are also concerned about the large-scale mismanagement of our state-
owned enterprises at a time when we cannot afford it. The SAA, SABC, Denel
and the pebble bed modular reactor have cost taxpayers billions of rands
which we urgently need for health, education and rural development.

We are also concerned about the effect this recession will have on BEE as a
whole. Often in the past we have relied on economic growth to fund BEE
deals and the current economic outlook means that this funding has fallen
away. The ID would like to see targets and timelines for BEE and
affirmative action. Leaving these processes open and without sufficient
targets has produced a few wealthy individuals while the vast majority of
our people continue to be excluded.

Mr President, our public health system is in a state of disrepair and has
been starved of financial and human resources. While the ID applauds your
goal of delivering ARVs to 80% of Aids patients in need by 2011, this
cannot be achieved unless there are drastic improvements in the sector as a
whole.

The ID supports the idea of a national health insurance scheme and we urge
Cabinet to devise a comprehensive plan for its implementation. We recognise
the complexities involved, but the first step must be an injection of funds
into the health sector and massive improvements in the way it is managed.

We also urge you to intervene in the dispute with the doctors in the public
sector, who, we must all agree, are underpaid and overworked.

We welcome the emphasis on rural development and we support your comments
that teachers must be in the classroom teaching. However, this commitment
will only be realised if you are able to get the support of teachers,
children, parents and the unions.

The economic crisis we are facing will require innovative thinking. It is
our belief that we can turn this crisis into an opportunity, and the ID
Member of Parliament Lance Greyling will present to this House ID solutions
in this regard tomorrow. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Hon Deputy Speaker ... [Interjections.]

Ewe, mfana, ndiza kuthetha kakuhle; andinangxaki ngaloo nto. [Yes, young
man, I will speak well; I do not have a problem with that.]

Hon Deputy Speaker, His Excellency the President of the Republic and his
Deputy, hon Ministers and hon members, the UDM congratulates the newly
appointed Cabinet members. In the same vein, we wish to congratulate the
new parliamentary leader of the DA, the hon Mr Trollip, for the honour
bestowed upon him by his party.

The reality is that President Zuma and his Cabinet, as well as the majority
opposition party, will be carefully watched by the voters who gave them the
mandate to improve the quality of their lives. However, judging by the
recent public spat between the two parties, the advice one can give is that
if you want to focus on the real issues you would need to respect one
another.

It is therefore gratifying to hear the hon Trollip recognising that ...

... ukususela ngomhla we-9 kuMeyi 2009, kuyasholozwa kweli lizwe [... there
is a Msholozi buzz that has crept into the country since 9 May 2009]. The
golden rule is that, irrespective of our mandates in this House, the office
of the President must be respected.

Mr President, South Africans have taken note of your statements of intent.
From today onwards we will try to unpack and understand them. The people in
the rural areas and outlying towns in particular will breathe a sigh of
relief after you committed your government to improving their conditions.
For the first time the people from areas such as Mokgalwana and
Matlametlong of the North West, and towns such as Umtata and Butterworth,
who are struggling for water and electricity, and are experiencing
impassable roads in their areas, will possibly be heard. Indeed, the people
of the OR Tambo region in the Eastern Cape will expect an answer from your
government as to why the building of the stadium promised to them for the
2010 Fifa World Cup has not yet begun.

One other issue which I wish to raise during this debate on the state of
the nation address is how we as a country have conducted the recent
elections. Despite the reported intimidation, the maturity displayed by all
political parties is commendable. However, the IEC, government and
political parties must accelerate the improvement of the infrastructure so
as to eliminate any chances of fraud in future.

The fact that it is becoming so easy for any Jack and Jill to have access
to ballot papers and scanners, as we witnessed in Cape Town, serves as a
reminder that a lot still has to be done. I therefore would like to remind
all political parties present here that the multiparty forum to which we
all belong has been engaging with the IEC on a number of issues. We should
use this legislature to finalise the pending issues, such as the party-
funding legislation; the IEC’s level of independence; the decision-making
level of the political liaison committees; the media, especially public
broadcasting; and creating an enabling environment for participatory
democracy.

The most critical challenge facing our country and this new government
today, I agree with Msholozi, is to continue to fight poverty through job
creation.

We believe that jobs are the ultimate weapons against poverty and that the
country must be managed to ensure the achievement of this goal. Government
has a responsibility to intervene and protect the South African economy and
jobs when necessary. Whilst free-market capitalism is the best economic
system developed by humanity, it is still fraught with weaknesses and
failures that must be actively managed.

We should take a leaf from the book of the outside world, which, when they
were faced with an economic meltdown, did not pussyfoot around, but instead
took decisive steps to remedy their situations.

Iyahlekisa le nto ndiyithethayo, Mphathiswa? [Is what I am saying amusing,
hon Minister?]

South Africans are suspicious and mistrust government because of
perceptions that it is not equitably distributing the resources of the
country. Indeed, since 1994 there has not been consensus on a macroeconomic
policy that can transform the economy in a manner that could create jobs
and spread the wealth wider, and improve the lot of the disadvantaged
majority. There are, in particular, concerns about the inadequacies and
contradictions of the fiscal and industrial policies. Consequently, the
gains of the liberation in 1994 have not translated into real economic
freedom for all, and that’s a reality.

A classic example is the recent call by Cosatu to boycott Vodacom products
and services. However, their call should be viewed in the context of a
directive issued by the former secretary-general of Cosatu in his capacity
as the then Minister of Communications, Mr Jay Naidoo, which culminated in
the selling of 15,2% of Telkom shares to the Thintana group of the USA.
Those shares, as we all know, made their way back to a South African
consortium, which includes an entity that carries a beneficial interest of
some individuals and institutions aligned to the ruling party.

Before any intended boycott therefore takes place, I would like to call
upon you, Mr President, to investigate the structure and beneficiaries of
an entity known as Clident 1 and Clident 445 Pty Ltd, which also has an
interest in the sale of Vodacom shares by Telkom.

We contend that this economic policy uncertainty is unhealthy for the long-
term growth of the country. Just as Codesa served as a forum where the
nation could gather to find broad consensus on the political dispensation,
so an economic indaba is required to find broad consensus on the economic
dispensation.

For our part, the UDM will enter such an economic indaba with one goal,
namely to argue that the basis of economic policy must be the expansion of
the economic cake so that we can give a bigger slice to everybody. Right
now the economic cake remains overwhelmingly in the hands of the minority,
and that of a small black elite, whilst the majority do not have a seat at
the table and must survive on the crumbs that happen to fall on the floor.

Our only option, if we are serious about uplifting the masses and
sustaining the democratic project, is to adopt economic policies that are
geared towards opening the doors to the fortress of the formal economy for
the millions who are locked out of it.

The very few blacks who are recipients of the BEE crumbs have instead
accumulated more liabilities than assets through overpriced shares of the
white-owned companies. Yes, we need to deracialise our economy. Since 1994
black South Africans have made no real progress in ownership and control of
the economy.

In conclusion, both Minister Manuel and hon Minister Patel ...
[Interjections.] No, you are not honourable.

Awukho “honourable” wena tu, mfana. [Young man, you are not honourable at
all.] [Laughter.]]

... need to keep contact with the public. They should give serious
attention to the UDM policy proposal to establish a presidential council on
sustainable development where all stakeholders in society would actively
interact and participate in developing their communities instead of being
excluded and waiting for handouts.

Such an approach would quickly determine why people have been living in the
dark without electricity since 1994, or why many have been living in shacks
since the eighties in places such as Cape Town, leading people to ask where
this so-called freedom of 1994 is.

We must begin to give the people of the country an input.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr B H HOLOMISA: They can’t simply be used as voting cattle every few years
...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member ...

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Uxolo, mhlekazi; ungu ”hon Manuel”. [I am sorry, sir, you
are hon Manuel.]

The MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION: Hon Deputy
Speaker, hon President and Deputy President, hon members, our hon President
laid out a comprehensive work programme for government. He identified both
the tremendous possibilities that lie before us and the challenges we face
today. He also emphasised the role that our country needs to play in the
international world and in rejuvenating our economies, not only of South
Africa, but of the continent as well. It must be the spirit of collectivism
that guides us as South Africans and as Africans, otherwise ...

... ka Sepedi ba re: Tau tša hloka seboka di šitwa ke nare e hlotša.Se se
bolela gore ge re sa šomišane mmogo le dinagamabapi, re tla ikhwetša re le
mathateng ao a fetago a re lebanego le wona. (Translation of Sepedi
paragraph follows.)

[... in Sepedi they say: United we stand, divided we fall. This means that
if we don't work together with other countries, we will find ourselves in
more trouble than we already are.]

We are therefore called upon to play our role in the design of the
international order that will better deliver for the peoples of the world,
many of whom still live in conditions of abject poverty and squalor. The
message of our movement, “Working together, we can do more”, is relevant
and apt to our international relations work. It will guide us as we build
partnerships with other nations of the world to address the many challenges
that face the international community.

Our people declared through the Freedom Charter that there shall be peace
and friendship. Based on this vision of the Freedom Charter, the democratic
South African government is at peace and enjoys friendly relations with the
nations around the globe. Thus, as we start our new term of government, we
can do no less than preserve this proud heritage. We are expected to
marshal these peaceful and friendly relations for further advancement of
our country and our people.

Mohlomphegi Modulasetulo, ge e le bothata bja ekonomi ya lefase, gora gore
kgomo e tswaletše mphorogohlong wa dithaba, e gana ge bašemane ba tšea
mohlana wa yona ka gobane e hlaba. [Hon Chairperson, there is a huge
problem which is difficult to resolve with regard to the economy of the
world.]

If anyone had any doubt, the financial crisis has proved that today we live
in a global village. A crisis that originated in one part has quickly
spread to all the corners of the globe. In its wake it has left no country
untouched, increasing unemployment in some countries and causing a
recession in others. In general it is setting us back many years against
the gains that we made in pushing back the frontiers of poverty in the
developing world.

We know that the crisis was caused by, amongst other things, a lack of
effective regulation of global finance. Significantly, the crisis has also
exposed the democratic deficit in global governance. The existing global
institutions do not reflect the world of today. They were not created to
deal with the challenges that the world is facing currently. We should see
in this crisis an opportunity to hasten the reform of global governance. We
should not let this opportunity pass. We urge those who occupy positions of
privilege in the current global architecture to realise that it is also in
their interest that these institutions are reformed.

It is these perspectives that will inform us in our participation in both
the UN conference on the global financial crisis in June and the next group
summit of the Group of 20 and the G8 plus 5, as well as in all the WTO
processes. Our view is that the strategy for South Africa out of this
crisis would include, amongst other things, strengthening South-South
relations, as those countries offer new market opportunities for South
Africa’s exports as well as opportunities for investment. We need to
develop strong links with countries in Asia, Latin America and the Middle
East, and further enhance our partnerships with IBSA and China and other
like-minded countries.

It is our considered view that the United Nations as an institution that is
at the centre of multilateral systems is also in need of urgent reform,
both politically and structurally, in particular with regard to its key
organs such as the Security Council. You may wonder why we are talking so
emphatically about the reform of global governance. We talk about reform
because of our strong belief in the importance of multilateralism. We
therefore talk about reform, because we wish these institutions of global
governance to be more effective in discharging their mandates.

I also wish to submit to this esteemed House that we will struggle to
achieve the objectives that we have set for ourselves as a country without
a conducive international environment. The current global environment also
convinces us of the correctness of our quest for stronger and more
effective integration of our continent. We have always been convinced that
it is when Africa is united that our voice will be stronger in the world.
As we conclude our term as the chair of the SADC, we are happy with the
strides that our region has made. In addition to the launch of the SADC
free trade area, work is advancing towards the implementation of other
protocols that will further enhance the integration of our region. We have
to continue pursuing this important objective.

What we seek is a regional integration process that is underpinned by our
developmental perspective.

The President called upon the international community to support Zimbabwe’s
inclusive government to achieve their economic recovery. We can only add to
that call by stressing that this is an important window of opportunity for
all of us to help the people of Zimbabwe to help themselves. We believe
that this support should not be delayed any longer, since it is critical
for the consolidation of the political process in that country.

Bjale ka ge Mopresidente a boletše gore mo nakong ye re lego mo go yona e
boima, e nyaka kopano magareng ga baagišane. [The President has alluded to
the fact that we are in a difficult era, and the situation requires unity
among neighbouring states.]

We will also continue to work with other SADC countries for the restoration
of the democratic government in Madagascar.

We have always looked at the African regional economic communities, such as
SADC, as building blocks to stronger continental integration. Indeed, this
was the wisdom that informed the Abuja Treaty of 1991. Since then, we have
also seen the entry into force of the African Union in 2002. The birth of
the African Union marked a new dawn in the history of the integration of
our continent.

What we have witnessed on the continent in the recent past could not have
been foreseen a few decades ago. Then some saw our continent as a place
without hope. In the eyes of some, Africa was defined only as a place of
conflict and misery. But today we can boldly say that that these sceptics
of yesteryear are also witnesses of the important progress that our
continent is making. The spread of democracy and the increasing recognition
of the need to respect human rights, the emergence of institutions such as
the African Court for Human and People’s Rights and the Pan-African
Parliament all give us hope and give hope to the people of the entire
continent. They also serve to redefine the image of our continent in the
eyes of the world.

We also have to contend with the fact that challenges remain on our
continent. Indeed, some of the progress that we speak of can still be
reversed if we do not apply the necessary vigilance, and if we decide to
rest on our laurels. What this calls for are strategies that include
effective post-conflict peace-building and the provision of support to
those who wish to build democratic institutions on our continent. It also
means that we have to promote these and other values within the SADC and
the African Union.

South Africa’s role in post-conflict peace-building initiatives in the
Democratic Republic of Congo, Burundi and Sudan is contributing to the
consolidation of the peace processes in those countries. We have to
continue on this path. As the President has said, and I quote:

   We will continue to encourage a peaceful and sustainable settlement to
   the Israeli-Palestinian conflict based on the two-state solution. We will
   support the peace efforts of the African Union and the United Nations on
   the African continent, including in the Saharawi Arab Democratic Republic
   and Darfur in Sudan.

We also welcome the rapprochement between the United States and Cuba, and
look forward to the normalisation of relations between these two countries.

At the ANC’s 52nd national conference, we said that South Africa should be
proactive in the debate and processes that lead to the creation of the
African Union government, including the mobilisation of progressive forces
and governments towards a common understanding of the strategic plan. This
Union government must be built through regional structures as building
blocks, with strong economic integration at all levels.

To achieve these objectives, we will partner with countries on the
continent and others outside of the continent. It also means working for
the implementation of Nepad and the strengthening of the African Peer
Review Mechanism. It is also in this context that our government has taken
the important decision to change the name of our department to the
Department of International Relations and Co-operation. The President also
reminded us that we will establish, as agreed at the 52nd national
conference of the ANC, the South African Development Partnership Agency,
which will enhance our capacity to contribute to the development
partnerships that Africa needs.

Our work in international relations will continue to be informed by the
domestic priorities of our government. The international relations work
that the President highlighted in his address to this Chamber and the
decisions of the ruling party’s conference are based on the Freedom Charter
and South Africa’s own national interests.

The first President of democratic South Africa, Isithwalandwe, Tata Nelson
Mandela, correctly and wisely reminded us that South Africa could never be
an island of prosperity in a sea of poverty. We must use Mandela Day to
propagate to the world the spirit of ubuntu.

A re kopantsheng lefase ka letšatši le, re le dire letšatši la
boditšhabatšhaba, le dinageng mabapi le mose wa mawatle. Serokolwana se
senyane se ikoketša ka monkgo. [Let us unite the world today, including our
neighbouring states, countries abroad and make it an international day.
Unity is power.]

We also join the President in popularising Mandela Day.

I have talked mainly about our work in advancing the consolidation of our
African agenda. South Africa is privileged to enjoy peaceful relations with
countries all over the world, both in the North and in the South. As the
President indicated, we will continue to enhance these relationships. Our
success as a country is predicated on peace in the world as well as on
strengthening our cordial relations with countries both in the North and
the South.

To achieve all these goals we also have to recognise the important role
that nonstate actors play in international relations. Therefore, among the
partnerships we will seek to build are partnerships with South Africa’s own
business community and civil society, including academics and the media. We
have to enhance the potential and the capacity of all these partners to
represent brand South Africa abroad.

In conclusion, the President also reminded us that we should continue to
extend our solidarity with the suffering people of Palestine and Western
Sahara. To all of us, and to the rest of the international community, it
should not be acceptable that the sister peoples of Palestine and Western
Sahara should continue to live in the conditions that they are in today.

Ours is to export ubuntu and partnership amongst the people of the
continent and the world. Let their problems be our problems because “I
ndlopfu ya hina leyi” [This is our responsibility.] We are, because they
are. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms D SMUTS: Madam Deputy Speaker, we were greatly encouraged by our hon
President’s remarks yesterday on the enhancement of judicial independence,
even if that independence was rhetorically presented as part of
transformation. The reference to independence was welcome, because it is so
necessary.

I would like to say to the hon the President that I can think of no single
act of statesmanship that would more resoundingly restore confidence in
this government’s commitment to our constitutional order than the
appointment, in a few months’ time, of a good choice for a Chief Justice of
South Africa, and it would help with economic confidence too.

That appointment will perhaps be the single most important function which
our hon President will fulfil during his tenure as head of the executive.
He may also appoint a new Deputy Chief Justice - that would happen, should
he decide to elevate the sitting deputy to the position of Chief Justice
when our esteemed Chief Justice, Judge Pius Langa, retires.

The difference between those positions - the Chief Justice of South Africa
and the Deputy Chief Justice - and the appointment of the other
Constitutional Court judges is that our hon President can appoint a person,
or in the second scenario two persons, of his choice. He does not have to
draw on a list emanating from the Judicial Service Commission. He will
choose, not in consultation with, but only after consulting the JSC and the
leaders of parties represented in Parliament.

I remember that Mr George Bizos has said that his predecessor, President
Mbeki, never departed from the JSC’s recommendations and we hope that the
President, too, will take wise counsel, because our constitutional order
has been shaken to its foundation over the last year by unwise comment and
sometimes by wild comment about the judiciary, such as the charges of
counterrevolution made against our judges, which we all remember.

There was an aftershock recently, at the last weekend, when our new Justice
chairperson, the hon Ramathlodi, said to the Mail & Guardian that the
judges should know their place. Now, I hasten to add that the hon
Ramathlodi offered us an explanation, unasked, on the occasion of his
election this week and we readily acknowledge his assurance that he
believes that our independent institutions need to be restored and to be
given their rightful space.

It is just that we have so often felt, sir, during this last year that we
were losing South Africa. Because it is no exaggeration to say that if the
courts crumble, the whole of the constitutional construct comes crashing
down, pillar and pediment. The courts are part and parcel of the
constitutional architecture, but let us never forget that they are separate
and subject only to the Constitution and the law, and that they are the
authoritative interpreters of the supreme law.

Dit is ons werk, as die wetgewende gesag van Suid-Afrika, om uitdrukking te
gee aan die Grondwet en aan die fundamentele regte wanneer ons wette skryf
of herskryf. Ons interpreteer ook. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[As South Africa’s legislative authority, it is our duty to give expression
to the Constitution and to the fundamental rights when we write or rewrite
laws. We interpret as well.]

But it is the courts that can strike down our work and government’s conduct
for unconstitutionality. As a parliamentarian, I believe we, as one arm of
the state, have a particular duty to the people to protect that other
separate arm, and to protect in particular the status and the stature of
the judges, the very people who can throw out our work, suspend it and send
it back after months and years of work, because if we do not so respect and
protect them, if there are no such courts, there is no supreme
Constitution. Then Parliament is sovereign again, as it was until we
created this constitutional democracy, and then our hon President becomes
just like Mr P W Botha, who set up next door in Tuynhuys as an executive
president. We don’t want that, sir, and he will not want that.

I hope, therefore, that the President will send a clear signal of
statesmanship and constitutionalism when he appoints the Chief Justice of
South Africa a little later this year - I think in August, I am not sure.

A last thought: No doubt there is more than one good choice available on
the highest Bench, but it is interesting to remember that when natural
successors are passed over, confidence can be affected. Judge Michael
Corbett, recently departed - much loved and rightly honoured - was the
natural successor in 1986 to the Chief Justiceship, as it then was, when
Judge Rabie was due to retire. The hon President will remember only too
well that these were the emergency years. Judge Rabie, himself reappointed,
was instrumental in getting the right man - Judge Mick Corbett - appointed
after his own extended service.

The late Kobie Coetzee, whom many of us remember for his many contributions
to the founding of our new state, was then Justice Minister and he was said
to have been toying with another choice altogether at the time, but the
right man was appointed. I leave only the thought, hon President, that it
can make a very big difference to have the right person in the right post
at the right time, and when the right people, moreover, make the right
appointments in turn, well, you make new countries or you recapture them.
We wish you very well, hon President. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Mr Chairman,
President, yesterday I listened to the second state of the nation address
this year and to my 17th since 1994.

My overarching impression of President Zuma’s address was “back to
business”. Government in the past often got stuck in complicated
ideological debates, debates where the existence of serious problems such
as crime, Zimbabwe and HIV/Aids had been denied. This was not the case in
yesterday’s address. President Zuma had identified most of the core
problems of South Africa and made proposals as to how these could be
addressed. This includes the present recession and issues such as our high
crime rate, corruption, poor health services, discipline in education,
poverty, etc.

The FF Plus, however, foresees one big problem. Among these proposals of
the government on the one hand and the populace on the other, one finds the
Public Service. They have to implement these plans at ground level to the
advantage of South Africa.

I know many wonderful public servants, who work very hard and go out of
their way to deliver good services to the people, but I have encountered so
many incompetent officials, officials who are political or cadre
appointments, officials who are arrogant and do not go to any trouble to
render a service to the public.

South Africa needs a professional, nonpolitical public service where
competence and nothing else determines one’s position and promotion. Such a
public service is loyal to the government of the day, regardless of which
political party is in charge. The President yesterday repeated that South
Africa belongs to all who live in it. The Public Service also in the same
way belongs to all South Africans. Therefore, if there is no renewal in the
Public Service, many of these proposals will only create expectations, but
will not be implemented in practice.

The President concluded his speech yesterday by saying:
   To be a citizen is not only about rights, it is also about
   responsibility, making a contribution to make ours a better country.

The FF Plus agrees with this. It is not only the government’s job to make a
contribution to a better South Africa. Every citizen, every nongovernmental
organisation and every political party has a duty and a responsibility.

Then where does an opposition political party such as the FF Plus fit in?

In a mature democracy there should also be room for opposition politics. I
stand here with a mandate from the FF Plus voters. That mandate differs
from the mandate of the ANC or of the DA. It is a mandate to manage the
interests of the FF Plus voters as best I can in this Assembly. It deals
with self-determination, the protection of minorities, about the pressure
which Afrikaners and Afrikaans are experiencing and with constructive
opposition - that is the mandate.

Why does the FF Plus believe that good opposition is necessary and that it
is our contribution “to make ours a better country”, as the President said
yesterday? Because the true test of democracy does not lie in the existence
of different democratic institutions alone, but in the functioning of these
institutions. The most important institutions would be the media,
Parliament, opposition parties and the state watchdogs such as the Auditor-
General and public accounts committees.

In countries where there has been a move from a democratic to an autocratic
state, the move took place gradually. Government slowly scales down the
role of the media and other democratic institutions. The result is that it
becomes more difficult for the opposition and the media to gain access to
the information it needs to fulfil its roles. The next step of an
autocratic government is to employ people who are sympathetic to the ruling
party in all the troublesome positions, positions such as the Auditor-
General, the chairs of public accounts committees and judges. The annual
reports of governmental departments become increasingly vague. Questions in
Parliament are not answered. Through these steps, information regarding
government’s activities becomes less and less available. Without this
information, the opposition cannot function effectively.

The last step in losing democracy would be elimination of the opposition as
the unpatriotic enemy. In South Africa we are far removed from this, but
this does not mean that we can take democracy and freedom of speech as a
given. As an opposition party the FF Plus will help guard over this. It is
important to remember that the longer any government rules, the less it
tolerates being controlled.

Daarom het die VF Plus as opposisieparty nie gehuiwer om die ANC-regering
Grondwethof toe te vat oor stemreg vir Suid-Afrikaners in die buiteland
nie. Daarom het die VF Plus die Openbare Beskermer gevra om die vermorsing
van geld te ondersoek nadat die aanklagte teen mnr Zuma laat vaar is.
Indien nodig, sal ons weer sulke stappe doen. Ek het hierdie standpunt in
my gesprek met die President oor die aanvaarding van ’n Adjunkministerspos
aan hom oorgedra.

Sedert die stigting van die VF Plus met genl Viljoen as leier was die party
se uitgangspunt dat verantwoordelike opposisie nodig is, maar dat dit nie
net afbrekend is nie.

Suid-Afrika beleef tans ’n resessie wat almal raak. As die Suid-Afrikaanse
skip ekonomies sou sink, dan sink die DA- en VF Plus- ondersteuners saam.
Daarom is die VF Plus ook bereid om ’n konstruktiewe rol te speel in die
belang van almal in Suid-Afrika.
Artikel 83 van die Grondwet lui as volg:

   Die President –


   (c)      bevorder die eenheid van die nasie ...

Hoe doen ’n President dit in ’n land met 11 amptelike tale, agt hoofgelowe
en 31 kultuurgroepe? As President Zuma dan in sy inhuldigingstoespraak by
die Uniegebou sê, en ek haal hom aan:

   We must forge a partnership for reconstruction, development and progress.
   In this partnership there is a place for all South Africans, black and
   white. It’s a partnership founded on principles of mutual respect and the
   unfettered expression of different views. We do not seek conformity. We
   seek a vibrant, dynamic partnership that is enriched by democratic debate
   that values diverse views and accommodates dissent.

Dan sê die VF Plus ons is bereid om die risiko te loop en as opposisieparty
op hierdie basis ’n bydrae in die belang van Suid-Afrika te maak. Op
hierdie basis steun die VF Plus se federale raad, as hoogste beleidmakende
liggaam van die party, die VF Plus se aanvaarding van ’n
Adjunkministerspos.

Die praktyk sal aantoon in watter mate sukses op hierdie basis moontlik is
of nie. Kom ek gee vir u ’n voorbeeld: In sy toespraak verwys die President
na ’n gemeenskaplike en inklusiewe benadering ten opsigte van
naamsverandering. As dit in die praktyk op die grondvlak gaan lei tot ’n
nuwe, lang en uitgerekte stryd van dorp tot dorp waar een groep se helde en
name verwyder word en deur ’n ander groep s’n vervang word, dan is hierdie
leë beloftes. Dan sal dit net lei tot groter polarisasie en vervreemding
tussen groepe in Suid-Afrika.

As die President se verwysing na ’n gemeenskaplike benadering van
naamsverandering egter beteken dat daar so gou as moontlik duidelike
riglyne kom oor hoe dit gedoen moet word, met erkenning aan alle groepe,
dan verwelkom die VF Plus dit. Sulke riglyne sal aandui hoe daar ruimte
gelaat moet word om erkenning aan almal se helde en verlede te gee, met ’n
afsnypunt wanneer hierdie saak afgehandel behoort te word.

Suid-Afrika is ’n pragtige land met pragtige mense wat ’n model vir die res
van die wêreld kan word oor hoe verskillende tale en groepe in harmonie ’n
toekoms uitwerk met ’n plek in die son vir elkeen, maar juis hierdie
verskillende tale, groepe en verskille maak Suid-Afrika ’n baie
ingewikkelde land wat met ’n verkeerde besluit of onverantwoordelikheid in
geweld kan ontplof. Dis ons taak as leiers wat hier sit, almal, ook dié wat
hier mor, om die Suid-Afrikaanse skip veilig deur die waters te stuur.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Die VF Plus beplan om as ’n konstruktiewe opposisieparty
op die wyse wat ek hierbo uitgespel het die volgende vyf jaar sy rol in
hierdie Parlement te speel. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[For that reason the FF Plus, as an opposition party, did not hesitate to
take the ANC government to the Constitutional Court with regard to the
right of South Africans, who live abroad, to vote. The FF Plus also asked
the Public Protector to investigate the waste of money after the charge
against Mr Zuma had been withdrawn. If necessary, we will take such steps
again. I conveyed this point of view to the President during our
conversation about my acceptance of the position of Deputy Minister.

Since the founding of the FF Plus with Gen Viljoen as leader, the point of
reference of the party has always been that responsible opposition is
necessary, but that it should not only criticise everything.

South Africa is currently experiencing a recession that affects everyone.
If the South African ship were to sink economically, then the supporters of
the DA and FF Plus would sink together with it. For that reason the FF Plus
is also prepared to play a constructive role in the interests of everyone
in South Africa.

Section 83 of the Constitution states the following:

   The President –
   (c)      promotes the unity of the nation ...

How does a President accomplish this in a country with 11 official
languages, eight main religions and 31 cultural groups? As President Zuma
said in his inauguration speech at the Union Buildings, and I quote:

   We must forge a partnership for reconstruction, development and progress.
   In this partnership there is a place for all South Africans, black and
   white. It’s a partnership founded on principles of mutual respect and the
   unfettered expression of different views. We do not seek conformity. We
   seek a vibrant, dynamic partnership that is enriched by democratic debate
   that values diverse views and accommodates dissent.

The FF Plus then says that we are prepared to take that risk and, as an
opposition party, make a contribution along these lines in the interests of
everyone in South Africa. On this basis the federal council of the FF Plus,
the highest policy-making body of the party, supports the acceptance of the
position of Deputy Minister by the FF Plus.

Time will tell to which degree success will be possible along these lines
or not. Let me give you an example: In his speech the President refers to a
joint and inclusive approach with regard to name changes. If this were to
lead in practice to a new, long, drawn-out battle from town to town at
grassroots level, where the heroes and names of one group are removed and
replaced with those of another group, then we are left with empty promises.
That will only lead to greater polarisation and alienation between groups
in South Africa.

However, if the President’s referral to a joint approach to name changes
means that clear directives are to be issued as soon as possible on how
this should be done, with recognition of all groups, then the FF Plus will
welcome the approach. Such directives will indicate how much room should be
left to give acknowledgement to everyone’s heroes and past, with a cut-off
date for the completion of this process.

South Africa is a beautiful country with beautiful people and can become a
model for the rest of the world as to how different languages and groups
can, in harmony, work towards a future with room for everyone. But, because
of these different languages, groups and differences, South Africa is a
very complicated country, where a wrong decision or irresponsible behaviour
can explode in violence. We leaders who are seated here, even those of us
who are muttering, have the duty to steer the South African ship safely
through the waters. [Interjections.] The FF Plus envisages that the party
will, as a constructive opposition party, play a role in this Parliament
over the next five years in the manner in which I have explained. I thank
you.]

Business suspended at 16:17 and resumed at 16:32.

UMPHATHISWA WESEBE LOPHUHLISO LWAMAPHANDLE NOHLENGAHLENGISO LOMHLABA:
Sihlalo ohloniphekileyo, Mongameli ohlonipheke kakhulu, Sekela Mongameli
nabahlonipheki bonke, asikuko nokuba liwonga elikhulu ukuba ndithathe
inxaxheba kule ngxoxo yentetho kaMongameli ngobume besizwe, kambe
nokukhonza abantu besizwe sethu kukwanjalo. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraph follows.)
[The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon chairperson, His
Excellency the President, the Deputy President and all the distinguished
guests, it is not just a great honour for me to participate in this debate
on the President’s state of the nation address, but also to serve the
people of our country.]

Mr President, we have heeded your call to duty and shall endeavour to serve
the people of this country as dedicated cadres in the war against poverty.
In that regard, our mission is to build as well as facilitate vibrant and
sustainable rural communities through the effective implementation of the
Comprehensive Rural Development Programme, as envisaged by the 52nd
national conference of the ANC.

Ngonyaka ka-2004 i-ANC yenza isibhambathiso nabantu boMzantsi Afrika sokuba
iya kudala amathuba omsebenzi, ilwe intlupheko. Konke oku yayikwenzela
ukuba kwakheke intlalo okanye ubomi obungcono babo bonke abantu baseMzantsi
Afrika.

Ngo-2009, ngaphezu kwezigidi ezilishumi elinethoba zabemi boMzantsi Afrika
baya kuvota, ngomhla wama-22 ku-preli, bengqinisisa ukuba basazimisele
ukuba yinxalenye yeso sibhambathiso. Ngobuninzi babo, bavota bevotela
izinto ezisibhozo, zinto ezo ezisuka kwisigqibo senkomfa ye-ANC ePolokwane
ngo-2007. Ezi zinto zisibhozo ndithetha ngazo ziziintsika zomqulu wonyulo
we-ANC: Imisebenzi efanelekileyo; intlalo entofontofo; uphuculo lwemfundo;
uphuculo lwezempilo; uphuhliso lwamaphandle; inguqu kwintlalo noqoqosho
kumaphandle; uhlengahlengiso lwemihlaba; nokulwa ubundlobongela
nobuqhophololo. (Translation of isXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The ANC made a binding agreement in 2004 with the South African people
that it would create jobs and fight poverty. It did all this in order to
build a better life for all the people of South Africa.

In 2009, more than 19 million South Africans cast their votes on 22 April,
confirming that they are devoted to being part of that agreement. They
voted in their large numbers for the eight things that were agreed on in
the 2007 ANC conference in Polokwane. The eight things I am talking about
are the pillars of the ANC’s election manifesto: better jobs, comfortable
life, improvement of education, improvement of health, rural development,
transformation of the rural life and economy, land reform and the fight
against crime and corruption.]

Just as you said yesterday, Mr President ...

   Laat ons mekaar se hande vat, en saam oplossings vind in die gees van ’n
   Suid-Afrikaanse gemeenskap. Die tyd het gekom om harder te werk. Ons
   regering gaan vorentoe kyk, nie agtertoe nie.

So het die President gister gesê. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)
   [Let us takeone another’s hands and together find solutions in the spirit
   of a South African community. The time has come to work harder. Our
   government is going to look forward, not backward.

That is what the President said yesterday. [Applause.]]

Siza kujonga phambili, siqinise imiqolo, sifinye ngemikhono yeehempe
sizalisekisa esi sibhambathiso sisenze nabantu baseMzantsi Afrika. Kwezi
veki zimbalwa zidlulileyo, uMongameli wesizwe uye wathetha ngembali
yokwakhiwa kwamaphandle neefama zaseMzantsi Afrika ngoorhulumente
bangaphambili. Ngenxa yaloo nto, ndiye ndakhumbula ukuba ndikhe ndahlangana
nayo le nto, ndiyibona kwezinye iincwadi ezibhaliweyo. Ikhona indoda ebhale
ngembali yabasebenzi basemigodini eMzantsi Afrika, kwaye umqulu wokuqala
wale ncwadi iwubhale ngo-1992.

Le ncwadi, Mongameli, ingqinelana nale nto uyithethayo, ndiyacaphula:

   After the Anglo-Boer War, the government pursued a policy which favoured
   the white farmers. The switch to the white farmers was intensified by the
   ability of white commercial farmers to secure favourable legislation,
   from colonial, republican and later Union governments. The
   commercialisation of white agriculture was aided by a massive programme
   of subsidies, grants and other aid. Assistance to farmers came forth in
   the shape of fencing, dams, houses, veterinary and horticultural advice;
   farmers were cushioned by generous rail rates, by special credit
   facilities and by bountiful tax relief. As early as 1908, with the
   floodgates of interest politics not yet fully raised, it was remarked
   that “it is probable that during the last twenty years more money per
   head of the rural population has been devoted to the relief of farmers in
   South Africa than in any other country in the world”. Then, to cap it
   all, as the railways passed through farming country the demand for farms
   and land rose and so did their value.

Loo nto ibonakalisa kakuhle ukuba le nto ibithethwa nguMongameli wesizwe,
eneneni kufanele ukuba siyithathe njengomzekelo omhle wokwenziwa
zizirhulumente zangaphambili ukuncedisana nophuhliso lwamaphandle, ukuze
namhlanje sithethe singamafama oshishino ngakumbi, sikwazi ukuthetha ngolu
hlobo sikholelwa ekubeni ... (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[We will look forward, work hard, through thick and thin in fulfilling the
agreement we entered into with the people of South Africa. In the past few
weeks, the President of the country spoke about the history of the
establishment of rural settlements and South African farms by the previous
governments. Because of that, I remembered that I did come across that in
the history books; there is a man who wrote about the history of the South
African mineworkers and the first volume was written in 1992.

Mr President, this book confirms what you are saying, and I quote:


   After the Anglo-Boer War, the government pursued a policy which favoured
   the white farmers. The switch to the white farmers was intensified by the
   ability of white commercial farmers to secure favourable legislation from
   colonial, republican and later Union governments. The commercialisation
   of white agriculture was aided by a massive programme of subsidies,
   grants and other aid. Assistance to farmers came forth in the shape of
   fencing, dams, houses, veterinary and horticultural advice; farmers were
   cushioned by generous rail rates, by special credit facilities and by
   bountiful tax relief. As early as 1908, with the floodgates of interest
   politics not yet fully raised, it was remarked that “it is probable that
   during the last twenty years more money per head of the rural population
   has been devoted to the relief of farmers in South Africa than in any
   other country in the world”. Then, to cap it all, as the railways passed
   through farming country the demand for farms and land rose and so did
   their value.

That clearly shows what the President of the country said, and that is that
we should really consider it a good example set by the previous governments
in assisting with rural development, so that today mostly as commercial
farmers, we are able to speak like this believing that ...]

... we were aided by the government of the day, so should it be ...
... kumafama akhoyo [... for the current farmers.]

And that is what the President was saying. We will follow that, Comrade
President. We intend to accelerate transformation - agrarian transformation
in general and land reform in particular.

Lunayo ingxakangxaka olu daba lomhlaba, ngoba olu daba lunento yokuba
lufikelele kule nto yemali. Loo nto ke ithi isenze sicinge ngakumbi ukuba
siza kujikela njani kulo mcimbi wemali, ngoba kunyanzelekile ukuba ...
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[The issue of land has that complication because it has financial
implications. That makes us think mostly about how we are going to go
around the issue of finances because ... ]

... we must ensure that there is increased food production, sustainable
land use and that previously disadvantaged people in this country
participate in the mainstream of our rural economies. We will, as a short-
term measure, expedite the processing of settled land claims, as well as
settling outstanding land claims, by addressing internal and institutional
factors. In the medium to long term, we will deal with external
sociopolitical factors affecting finalisation of restitution as well as
postsettlement programmes. We further commit to ensuring that effective and
regular communication takes place with claimants on the status of
outstanding claims.
Abantu bayabuza: “Ndandifake ibango lam ngo-1997, ngo-1998. Kumanxa
lindawoni ngoku?” [People are asking: “I submitted my claim in 1997, in
1998. How far is it now?”]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Minister, just a minute. Our
apologies for the translation services. We said to them 10 minutes, but
they are not yet back from their 10-minute break. Somebody is attending to
it. We really want to apologise, but continue, Minister, in whatever
languages that you speak.

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Thank you, hon Chair.

In terms of land redistribution, we will, as a medium-term intervention,
take a closer look at the relevant legislation currently before this House,
including the Land Use Management Bill, as directed by the President
yesterday. Furthermore, we will finalise the review ... Perhaps “review” is
too strong a word, but we will certainly take a closer look at the willing-
buyer, willing-seller model of land redistribution, as well as
investigating other less costly alternative models of land redistribution.
It is clearly not possible over the next five years, particularly under the
current economic recession, to raise R71 billion to fulfil this
requirement. This is an imperative intervention in ensuring that we find
mechanisms to speed up land reform processes.

It is our considered view that we need to get into close interaction with
those South Africans who are privileged enough today to control land
resources in our country to ensure that we debate this issue and
collectively find solutions that will be favourable to all South Africans.

With regard to tenure reform, we will review policy and legislation
relating to tenure security and in particular patterns of land ownership.
This relates to the point I have made above. We will enhance the capacity
of the state to effectively respond to challenges of land administration,
to create certainty and unlock development potential in these areas. Our
view is that some of the blockages are more internal institutional problems
that need to be resolved.

It was imperative for us to take bold steps to deal effectively with hunger
and poverty. No South African should go to bed hungry when we have the
possibility of optimal use of and benefit from our relatively vast natural
resources. We shall, therefore, through the rural development programme,
improve social and economic infrastructure, public amenities and
facilities.

I have said what the President thinks, but I heard the secretary-general of
the ANC say: “We want you to build dams. Construct dams, provide fences,
mechanisation, shearing shears, and all these kinds of practical issues.” I
have also heard the Deputy President say: “Why don’t you look at all the
boarding schools that are closing down?” Some of the buildings are still
there, but they’re dilapidated. “Why don’t you go and look at them,
renovate them and turn them into centres of excellence in education? Get
the best coaches to train children in sports. Get the parents to plough the
land and grow vegetables to cook for their children.” These are elements of
a model of rural development, one from the President, another from the
secretary-general and yet another from the Deputy President of the country.
Their wish is our command.

We are talking about rural development as a cross-cutting function. We are
looking at working together with other departments, municipalities and
South Africans in the private sector, NGOs, to look at issues such as clean
water, sanitation and even ICT hubs. It is not fair that children from
rural areas must go to cities to go to the cinema or the theatre. We are
looking at livestock and crop farming, electricity, communal and household
gardening, on- and off-farm roads, small-scale irrigation schemes,
recreational facilities for young people, revival of land that is lying
fallow, and conservation for local economic development, as well as human
development. This is what we want to do as part of our mandate - social
cohesion and development.

When we are talking about development, we really refer to shared
prosperity: equity, full employment and cultural progress in the long term.
This will be the bedrock and the measure against which the success of this
programme should be measured. We have to reverse the creeping fragmentation
of rural communities and restore the spirit of ubuntu. Umntu ngumntu
ngabantu. [I am because of you.]

In fast-tracking the implementation of all our land reform programmes,
working together with the Department of Water and Environmental Affairs, we
will ensure that the Water for Growth and Development Strategy is
implemented and that water allocation reform is an integral part of the
Comprehensive Rural Development Programme to ensure equitable distribution
of this scarce natural resource. For every community plan and every land
reform project, we will ensure that sufficient water is secured for that
purpose and that there is optimal use and management of this natural
resource.

It is of critical importance that during this difficult period of economic
recession we strive to put in place measures to harness and streamline
available rural development financing to make sure that it is accessible,
affordable and effective. We are currently developing a national template
which will serve as a framework to guide all spheres of government in the
implementation of the Comprehensive Rural Development Programme. We have
identified the greater Giyani Local Municipality, especially the villages
of Muyexe, Dingamanzi and Gon’on’o, as pilot sites. As we speak, all three
spheres of government are working together with the people of Giyani,
concretising their Comprehensive Rural Development Programme priorities and
costing them.
In addition to Giyani, we will, in the next three months, roll out the
programme to other provinces: KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga, the Free State,
the Eastern Cape and the North West. Next week we are going to Riemvasmaak
in the Northern Cape to interact with that community to better understand
their developmental needs and thus work together with them and other
departments and other stakeholders to bring about change in their lives.
The Riemvasmaak community, which in the past received more that 75 000
hectares of land, shall be receiving a further 46 000 hectares through the
restitution programme during this Land Month of June. As we interact with
them next week, we want to understand the best interventions and
initiatives to effectively deal with the prevailing poverty in that area.

The Comprehensive Rural Development Programme is not another social
security programme. Its key objective is social cohesion and development.
It is therefore important that communities organise themselves, and that we
assist them to organise themselves as well in the spirit of “Vukuzenzele!
Hi ti hluvukisa!” [Get up and do it for yourself! We develop ourselves!]

I have committed myself as part of development, because I need to develop
in this regard. I have committed myself, with the traditional leaders of
Giyani, that every time we visit there over the next two years, we will be
involved with them, that we will have 30 minutes and that I will learn the
language.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order! Hon Minister, unfortunately
your time has expired.

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Thank you, hon
Chairperson. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Before I call the next speaker, I
just got information that the interpreting services have been there the
whole time. However, they are experiencing technical problems. Please do
not crucify them for my earlier remarks. They are experiencing technical
challenges.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairperson, hon President, Deputy President and
colleagues, the ACDP welcomes President Zuma’s state of the nation address,
which we believe was positive and daring, and instilled hope in many of our
people. We further welcome his acknowledgment that our country has entered
a recession and his intention to have government act speedily to minimise
the impact of this economic downturn on those most vulnerable –
particularly by protecting jobs.

When highlighting some of the steps that will be taken by government in
response to the economic crisis, the President left us with questions that
need answers and statements that should be clarified.

As an example, the President said, and I quote:


   Workers who would ordinarily be facing retrenchment due to economic
   difficulty would be kept in employment for a period of time and be
   reskilled.


While acknowledging that the President did say that discussion on the
practical detail is continuing, the ACDP wants to know whether all workers
in all sectors, including mining, will benefit from such an arrangement and
whether the reskilling the President spoke about will also benefit those
doing low-paying jobs, such as cleaners and domestic workers.

We also want to know whether there are sufficient funds to help all
companies that are in distress. What will the criteria be for funding a
company in distress, and will small businesses also benefit from such a
programme?

The ACDP also welcomes plans to reduce the regulatory burden on small
businesses, which will reduce the cost of doing business in South Africa.
This, we believe, will help to attract new investment opportunities that
are urgently needed during the recession.

The President also said, and I quote again:

   We are mindful of the need to link social grants to jobs or economic
   activity in order to encourage self-reliance among the able-bodied.
The ACDP believes this link is important as it will prevent our country
from turning into a welfare state that robs people of initiative, dignity
and independence. What we want to know is when this need to link social
grants to jobs or economic activity will become government policy; by when
will it be implemented and will government have the capacity to make it a
success?

We commend the President for admitting that the quality of health care is
deteriorating very fast. We were unfortunately not told what this
administration is going to do about that. We trust that government will
move from the position of just being concerned, to actively reversing the
deterioration. Our people who have been promised a better life deserve
quality and professional health care and they deserve to be treated with
compassion and respect.

Mr President, the treatment given to some patients, particularly the
elderly, is appalling and is nothing but abuse. This practice has to stop
and the elderly must be given back their dignity and the respect they
deserve. There was a shocking story on the front page of the Pretoria News
which told of a helpless patient who described the ordeal he allegedly
suffered at the hands of Steve Biko Academic Hospital nursing staff as
“hell on earth”. How can nursing staff be allowed to get away with letting
a patient lie in his own faeces for almost three days? If the President has
not heard about this shocking abuse, he must please get a copy of the
relevant article and read first-hand about the dire extent of the
deterioration of service in some public hospitals. The ACDP believes that
the culture of proper caring, compassion, respect for the rights of
patients and love for those who are suffering must be restored in all our
hospitals.

While we understand that our health workers are underpaid, overworked and
under a lot of pressure, we find it totally unacceptable that a patient who
is crying in pain and in need of help and painkillers should be told by
health workers that they are on their tea break or having lunch. Where is
ubuntu in all this? Urgent attention must be given to the bad attitude and
work ethic of some of our health workers.

Having said the above, the ACDP believes doctors and nurses should be paid
well, to minimise the poaching that is taking place and to ensure that we
do not lose any more doctors. We believe the salary demands made by doctors
are not unreasonable and that the occupation-specific dispensation should
be finalised as soon as possible.

Mr President, we believe doctors must be paid well because we need them and
we do not want to lose them to the private sector or to countries that will
show them more appreciation.

As far as crime is concerned, the ACDP believes that police powers must be
revisited and more teeth must be given to law enforcement officers. We have
been assured many times before that particular attention will be given to
combating the theft of police case dockets, but this is still happening. Is
there anything new that this administration intends to do to ensure that
the theft of case dockets comes to an end?

Mr President, the Forensic Procedures Amendment Bill was not finalised by
the Third Parliament, notwithstanding it being referred to an ad hoc
parliamentary committee for urgent attention earlier this year. It is
disgraceful, we believe, that the SA Police do not have access to the
fingerprints contained in the databases of the Department of Home Affairs,
which contains about 31 million prints, and that of the Department of
Transport, which has a further six million prints. It is no wonder that so
many offenders are not apprehended.

The Bill also sought to enhance DNA profiling. It is irrefutable that the
effective use of fingerprints and DNA evidence helps to track down
criminals and, once apprehended, ensures that the prosecution’s case
succeeds in court. We heard the hon Minister of Police saying that this
Bill would be finalised within a year. We trust that it will be done as a
matter of urgency, sooner rather than later.

It is not enough, Speaker, to merely say that the most serious attention
will be given to combating organised crime as well as crimes against women
and children. Has this not been said before? Reported stories about sexual
abuse of boys are worrying. According to reports, children’s clinics around
the country are struggling to cope with the huge increase in the sexual
abuse of boys, some as young as three years old.

Mr President, government is failing our children. Not a single day passes
without one hearing about a child who has been raped, and many of these
incidents are not reported to the police.

The ACDP has been saying for years now that pornography is harmful and
should be removed from street corners and shops. Those who defend
pornography still claim that there is no scientific proof linking
pornography to rape. I am sure, Mr President, you will agree with me when I
say that pornography is the theory and rape is the act. What other
conclusion could there be to explain why a baby of a few months old is
raped by an adult, or why a 65-year-old grandmother was raped by a 16-year-
old boy, as happened in Mthata this past weekend? I urge the President to
bite the bullet and declare that pornography is dangerous, harmful and
addictive, and that its easy availability has contributed immensely to the
unacceptably high incidence of rape in this country.

Could you please tell us how this government is going to protect our
children and babies from the scourge of rape? Let us not only talk about
loving our children, but let us go, if necessary, even to what some might
call extreme measures in order to protect our children. [Time expired.]

Mrs M N MATLADI: Madam Chairperson, hon President, my colleagues: Thank you
very much, Mr President, for the speech you delivered at the opening of the
fourth democratic Parliament. It was a speech that was easy to comprehend
and that had targets. This speech is going to make it easy for us to assess
the performance and achievements of your government. It will be easier, as
well, to remind you that these targets were not met or were met, and what
could have been the obstacles or the problems in meeting them. We will know
who is performing and who is not, and corrective measures will be put in
place timeously.

The President has hinted to the people of South Africa that South Africa
cannot escape the consequences of the present economic meltdown and he has
admitted that the country is facing a recession, and that the government is
joining hands with its social partners to come up with plans to minimise
the impact of this recession. This is a step in the right direction.
However, we wish the hon President could have revealed what plans are in
place so that we could engage in robust debate on the successes and the
limitations of these plans.

In numerous speeches, the President has indicated that he is willing to
work closely with opposition parties, and we would like to be engaged in
the formulation of plans so that we own them, and not later blame the
ruling party for having failed South Africa.

An amount of R787 billion is a good amount of money that could be used to
improve on the dilapidated infrastructure throughout the country and move
on with the building of new structures. But the question is: How will the
rural areas benefit from the R787 billion in infrastructure development? If
we do not cater for the rural areas, we will be perpetuating the economic
imbalance as it exists in South Africa now. We hope and trust that the
National Planning Commission in the President’s Office will address the
issue.

We congratulate the President for coming up with intervention strategies to
address health problems, including the introduction of the national health
insurance scheme, and paying attention to the issue of the remuneration of
health professionals.

On the second issue of the remuneration of health professionals, the
government must take a holistic approach rather than a piecemeal approach
solution. Is it not time that the whole salary structure of the public
sector be reviewed, so as to avert strikes and picketing by unions that
affect service delivery and the economy of the country?

The President has indicated that he will be meeting with school principals
because of the lack of discipline, the lack of work ethics, ill-mannered
learners, the low morale of teachers and teachers who sexually abuse
learners. In doing this, if I am not wrong, he will be the first head of
state to meet with the teaching fraternity, and this is another step in the
right direction. [Applause.] If he can solve the problems facing the
education system in South Africa, it will be a giant step forward. More
often than not, research reveals that our learners are rated the lowest in
reading and writing skills. It is high time educators were reminded of
their responsibilities, and it is in meeting with these professionals that
their responsibilities would be spelt out.

The President, in meeting with these teachers or educators, must remind
them that reading makes a man, and reading and writing at the same time
make a full man. Therefore, no time wasting, like the President said: If
you don’t deliver, give way.

There are two Ministries of Education now, and we hope that these
Ministries will not perpetuate the fragmentation that exists in the
education department, the system of unco-ordinated directorates.

We humbly submit that the curriculum be looked into. It should not change
from one Minister to the other. Since 1996, we have had Curriculum 2005, or
OBE, which changed to the Revised National Curriculum Statement, or RNCS,
which also changed to the New Curriculum Statement, or NCS. These changes
confuse educators, who are not properly trained to deal with them, thus
resulting in the low morale of educators and the poor products of our
education system, that are less competitive in the international
educational arena.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, your time has expired.

Ms M N MATLADI: When the Americans landed on the lunar surface for the
first time, there was a saying: One giant step forward! And the Rural
Development Ministry is such a giant step forward. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Madam Speaker, hon
President, hon Deputy President, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers,
Members of Parliament, dumelang bomme le borre! [Good afternoon ladies and
gentlemen.] [Interjections.]

Yesterday, the hon President warned us that the global economic downturn
should not cause us to change our plans to improve the lives of the poorest
of the poor. Instead, it should urge us to implement our plans with speed
and determination.

It is in this spirit of the address of the hon President that we will speed
up economic growth and transform the economy to create decent work and
sustainable livelihoods in the agriculture, forestry and fishing
industries.

Here we will encourage small business development, the development of co-
operatives, the creation of “green” jobs, investment in appropriate public
infrastructure, as well as agricultural broad-based black economic
empowerment and the national youth service for agriculture.

In the same breath, we will work together with our people in the rural
areas to ensure a comprehensive rural development strategy that is linked
to land and agrarian reform and food security, as already outlined by the
Minister.

This is also reiterated in the manifesto and the Polokwane resolutions,
which appeal for food security to ensure that not a single person goes
hungry. We will also reduce our dependence on food imports, and develop
access to food at affordable prices, especially as it relates to the poor.
We further need to expand access to food production schemes in rural and
periurban areas and advance land and food production in schools.

Our co-operation with the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform
will begin to address a massive programme to build economic and social
infrastructure, to ensure the realisation of the Comprehensive Rural
Development Programme. To this end, we will unfold and massify a programme
of fencing in rural and farming areas which will create a sizeable number
of jobs through the Expanded Public Works Programme. We will also, in light
of co-operatives, hand out the massification of the Nguni cattle project,
which to the surprise of many members will give co-operatives ten pregnant
heifers and one bull, to assist the bull and to give the bull a head start
in the production of Nguni cattle. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The vision of the Comprehensive Rural Development Programme is about
enabling rural people to take control of their destiny, thereby dealing
effectively with rural poverty through the optimal use and management of
natural resources, thereby creating and maintaining an intricate balance
between human civilisations and Mother Nature.

Madam Chairperson, more than two thirds of Sub-Saharan Africa’s population
are employed in agriculture, yet the sector contributes only about a third
of the region’s gross domestic product.

However, China’s overall political and macroeconomic packages enabled their
agricultural policy package to realise its objectives in the economy. In
this regard, amongst others, the Chinese developed a unique rural pathway,
namely “village industrialisation”, which is the setting up of township
enterprises to provide jobs for the rural population. This is exactly what
we seek to do in Riemvasmaak through our Comprehensive Rural Development
Programme.

On 19 June we will be commemorating the Native Land Act of 1913. This year,
on the very 19 June, we will be descending on Riemvasmaak to launch the
Riemvasmaak Comprehensive Rural Development Programme. We will be taking
the hon Derek Hanekom down memory lane.

Efforts to bring the people of Riemvasmaak back to their land got momentum
in 1993. The decision to give 74 000 hectares back to the people was taken
in February 1994, and this became the first land restitution project in the
new South Africa, under the able leadership of President Nelson Mandela.
Most of the original residents were back on the land at the end of 1995. In
2002 the people of Riemvasmaak received title deeds to the plots they live
on, a milestone for those who were landless for so long. However, economic
development has evaded this poorest of the poor community for more than 15
years.

Through our project, the Development Bank of Southern Africa and the IDC
will partner with Citrogold on 80 hectares, on behalf of the community, and
R200 million of investment will be utilised for this purpose. Citrogold’s
once-off investment of R200 million will immediately include the creation
of 280 permanent jobs. [Applause.] Mr President, you can subtract that from
the number of jobs you wish to create. The figure is further expected to
double during the peak season.

On that same day, the Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform will
hand over about 46 000 hectares as the last phase of the settlement of the
claim. Together, we can do more! [Applause.] We will use agriculture,
forestry and fisheries as a catalyst to chip away at the vestiges of rural
poverty. Step by step we will create jobs in rural areas through
agricultural intervention.

Madam Chairperson, energy has always been perceived as widely abundant and
forever available for use. Human societies over the years have failed to
pay attention to the sustainability and importance thereof. It is evident
that an ignorant approach to energy sources will not just stall human
development, but indeed can cost us dearly as nations of the world.

Significant improvement in research and development of technologies over
the years has enabled us to access energy from different sources to power
human civilisations. We need to creatively exploit energy sources that are
mutually beneficial to the environment and human life.

The recent economic concerns raised by our President, such as the depletion
of resources, have called for the development of urgent plans to develop
our own renewable energy needs. In our case, we will follow through the
proposed industrial strategy for biofuel production, which was approved by
Cabinet in 2007. Through bio-fuel and our other strategies for renewable
energy, we envisage creating more than 500 jobs in the forthcoming
financial year. This would be 500 sustainable, permanent jobs in the
industry.

South Africa cannot ignore the global drive towards green fuels. Our
approach will have to take into consideration the effects of climate change
and also look into creating green jobs and the application of scientific
technology in the production processes.

In doing so, the options proposed should create a balance between economic
development and national food security.

Deur saam te werk met ander departemente soos Mynwese asook Wetenskap en
Tegnologie, sal ons in staat wees om die gebruik van hernubare hulpbronne
van energie maksimaal te kan benut. Ons moet konstant aandag gee aan en
bewus wees van energiebesparing en die gebruik van alternatiewe vorme van
energie as dit kom by landbouproduksie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[By working together with other departments like Mining and Science and
Technology, we will be in a position to utilise renewable energy resources
maximally. We must constantly pay attention to and be aware of saving
energy and utilising alternative forms of energy when it comes to
agricultural production.]

Through the forestry sector, the effects of desertification will be
receiving our attention; amongst other things, we will continue to
intensify the drive to plant more trees to protect the environment. In
addition to the implementation of the National Industrial Policy Framework,
particularly in the forestry, pulp, paper and furniture sectors, we will
establish ways of increasing our forestry resources for trade purposes.

Pressure on our marine environment is mounting. Careful planning and good
policy decisions necessitate our taking a fresh look at fishing quotas as
they have been handed out on the West Coast, particularly as these pertain
to poor rural communities. [Applause.] Our approach will be to continue
supporting food security, with a specific bias to giving fishing quotas and
reassessing fishing quotas to the rural poor. [Applause.]

The developmental state must have the technical capacity to translate broad
goals and objectives into practical programmes and projects and ensure
their implementation, which requires effective training, appropriate
orientation and leadership skills. Our structures and systems will
effectively facilitate the implementation of programmes that have been
decided upon. I think the President’s speech called on us to have this kind
of practical implementation of our programmes that he has spelt out.

An alliance between the state, civil society and business will be a
fundamental necessity, where the state takes the role of leader in
effecting a developmental agenda. Our strong government, through your
leadership, hon President, is a prerequisite for the developmental state we
are building, with the capacity to be responsive to changing conditions and
the ability to lead and manage our economic relations.

South Africans have it in their power, as a people, to continually change
the environment in which we operate in the interests of a better future.
However, we will have to display remarkable ingenuity if we wish to succeed
as a nation. But, as demonstrated by the vision in your speech, we have
broken the back of poverty.

Die rottang is alreeds geknak. [The cane has already been broken.]

Silufezile ugqatso! [We have succeeded!] [Applause.]

Dr W G JAMES: Chairperson, we could say that freedom is the autonomous and
self-generating ability to do what needs to be done. President Zuma spoke
yesterday about what needs to be done. He is to be congratulated for firmly
placing service delivery, and especially so for poor people, in our line of
vision and sight.

Government can count on our wholehearted support for the service delivery
project. We cannot prosper, we all realise, unless we make poverty history.
And the question, of course, is how. There is no straightforward answer to
this, especially at a time when the growth that confirmed the macroeconomic
dogma has come to a recessionist halt. Still, we do know that education
matters and it matters enormously. It matters to our changing position in
the global economic order as we seek to move from a resource-based export
economy to a knowledge-based one.

Education matters to our efforts to modernise our communications, our
energy and our science-based health sectors. It matters immensely to the
quality of our democracy, for a dynamic one cannot function effectively
without having educated citizens who are accustomed to thinking for
themselves. Most of all, it matters to our young people, for education
remains the most powerful route to moving from the tyranny of survival to
the freedom of self-actualisation.

We therefore applaud President Zuma and his government’s embrace of
education as a priority. But we need to go much further than simply
emphasising teacher discipline, important as that may be. At the heart of
what needs doing in our country is the professionalisation of the vocation
of teaching. We often say that teachers are the most important people
because we entrust our children’s education to them, and then we proceed
very easily to treating them very badly indeed. We should stand firmly
behind the good teachers, of whom there are many in this country.

The hon Minister of Higher Education and Training must ensure that teacher
training becomes excellent, because it is not. Set aside attractive
bursaries; make teaching a worthwhile career; provide incentives for
improving their academic education; strengthen the professional
associations; shield the teachers from the distraction of self-serving,
instrumentalist and reckless trade unions. Please do not put teachers
through another round of curriculum reform. Refine, focus and support
teaching, and ensure that the basics – reading, writing and arithmetic –
are there.

Young people from poor areas struggle to get access to higher education.
The educational quality of entry undergraduates is not very good at all.
The dropout rate is much too high. There are not enough science,
engineering and medical graduates. We are not graduating enough doctorates,
in some critical fields, to replace the ageing professorial populations.

Let the institutions of higher learning play to their strengths. Let the
community colleges graduate adults with Grade 12 and some employment-
related diplomas. Let the undergraduate universities offer a well-rounded
four-year bachelors degree. Create professional colleges for teacher,
nursing and agricultural science training. Let the postgraduate divisions
of the major research universities expand and pull these universities
closer to the Department of Science and Technology with their elaborate and
sometimes aloof science councils. And, yes, do this in a financially
sustainable way. The hon Minister of Higher Education and Training should
therefore talk to the hon Minister of Finance before he declares his unwise
favour of free undergraduate university education.

President Zuma was silent on science and technology applications when it
comes to poverty and development. There are new technologies for waste
removal, for sanitation, for water supply and irrigation. There are low-
cost energy panels for people living in informal settlements under
development. Many of these innovations take into account some critical
global warming and climate-change issues.

There is a world of biology that yields new diagnostic and predictive
biomedical technologies. There are new ways of using genome-based science
to make vaccines for animals and human infectious diseases. Remember that
as a country we are not very good at discovery science, but we are very
good at adapting discoveries made elsewhere for local use.

Most of all, I would like this government to stop the ambivalence it has
when it comes to science and technology, and to start owning what is the
largest science and technology infrastructure on the African continent.

I end by introducing you to Ruqshana Parker. She is from Mitchells Plain
and she is a student at the University of Cape Town working towards a BA in
English. I asked her to come to Parliament today. I want to say that there
are thousands of Ruqshanas in Mitchells Plain, Khayelitsha, Langa,
Kraaifontein, Soweto, Eldorado Park, Chatsworth, Uitenhage and the many
places we, hon members, represent, waiting to have their talent discovered
and nurtured. We owe it to them and to our children to use taxpayers’ money
to give them the best education, using the best science and technology that
there is, leading into the future. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Ms M S MANGENA: Hon Chairperson, Mr President, hon members, in Azapo we
listened with appreciation, Mr President, to your timely call to join
hands, not only to survive the present crushing economic squeeze, but to
progress, to develop our country, to create jobs, to defeat poverty and to
create a more caring society. It is particularly at difficult times such as
these that the whole country looks up to you for leadership.

The story is told of a prisoner in Pretoria Central Prison in the sixties
who called himself Long John Silver. He was the boss in his cell and,
naturally, had the best blankets and could get the prisoners to amuse him
in whatever way he desired.

They would run in a circle, singing his favourite song:

“Mmutla ka bohlale o tlogetse bana ba hae, o tlogetse bana ba hae.” [The
hare, because it is clever, left its children, left its children.]

Sitting in his corner Long John Silver would be going: “Krr ... Qah! Krr
... Qah!” At some point he would stand up and ask: “Ngubani lo?” [Who is
this?] And they would say: “ULong John Silver.” [It is Long John Silver.]
“Ngubani lo?” [Who is this?] “ULong John Silver.” [It is Long John Silver.]

Udlani na? Udla imealie rice, isinkwa no shukela, USilver wabantwana.
[Uhleko.] [What is he eating? He is eating mealie rice, bread and sugar,
Silver for the children. [Laughter.]]

The point is that he was locked up in this cell like the rest of them and
he didn’t have the key to get out.

The vast majority of us in this House, together with our compatriots in the
townships and villages, are in a giant cell, without a key. Some of us
might have better blankets or afford “imealie rice, isonka ne shukela”
[mealie rice, bread and sugar] ... but, fundamentally, we are all in a
cell.

That might explain why we would smash up a university if we were angry with
the vice chancellor; why we would trash the city and vandalise as many
things as we could find if we were in disagreement with the council or the
mayor; why we would burn the train if it arrived late at the station. There
is no sense of ownership of the city, Metrorail and its trains, and, of
course, the university.

The terribly skewed ownership of the economy, the huge inequalities and the
crushing levels of poverty all combine to deny us the strong clue required
to unite the country - that is the workers, peasants, business and
government – to work together to save our country from the ravages of the
global economic meltdown that you referred to.

We agree with you, Mr President, that we must cultivate and nurture
patriotism amongst all our people, but the content of that patriotism must
be a more equitable ownership of the economy of the country. That’s the
missing key, and we must find it. Otherwise, how do we continue to ask
people to save an economy from which they feel alienated?

We are pleased that education and skills have been prioritised. Without a
functioning, effective and efficient education system, we will not get
anything right – not the economy, not social infrastructure, not crime. As
long as we fail as a society to give our youngsters skills and good
character through education, the criminal justice system will continue to
battle difficult odds.

We also hope, Mr President, that we will take advantage of these economic
difficulties to develop, fund and commercialise new South African
technological innovations, so that when the upturn arrives, we are ready to
trade with the world in goods and services containing our own intellectual
property. The talent and know-how are there, needing only support,
recognition and encouragement. Increasingly, let our “Krr ... Qah!” take
place outside the cell. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Hon Speaker, hon President Jacob Zuma,
Deputy President Kgalema Motlanthe, hon members, the ANC remains guided by
the Freedom Charter that states:

   The Doors of Learning and Culture Shall be Opened!
   The government shall discover, develop and encourage national talent for
   the enhancement of our cultural life. All the cultural treasures of
   mankind shall be open to all, by free exchange of books, ideas and
   contact with other lands.

In the words of this extract, we will ensure that, indeed, we open our arts
and culture doors to all.

It is this knowledge and understanding that only freedom of expression and
freedom of creativity can serve to deepen democracy, and that only free and
fruitful exchange can build a more unified and dynamic society that
underpins the ANC’s policy on culture. Yesterday President Zuma gave us a
call to build a more cohesive society.

The President reminded us that our vision remains that “of an inclusive
society, a South Africa that belongs to all, a nation united in its
diversity, a people working together for the greater good of all”.

Let us embrace this rallying cry by promoting unity in diversity and
developing a shared value system, based on the spirit of community
solidarity and a caring society. In the spirit of ubuntu we shall work in
this regard with the moral regeneration movement to reach all our
communities, including the religious and faith-based communities.

Our task must be to strengthen the gains of our national democratic
revolution and to continue to work towards a truly nonracial, nonsexist and
united South Africa.

In this regard, arts, culture and heritage will play a significant role in
social regeneration, unity and reconciliation. As we transform our country,
we need to ensure that we build cohesive, sustainable and caring
communities. The Department of Arts and Culture is tasked to lead and co-
ordinate efforts to promote national identity and social cohesion.

We pledge our full support to the campaign to celebrate and commemorate
Mandela Day on the 18th July every year. We call upon all South Africans to
spend 67 minutes of their time on this day doing good deeds in the spirit
of ubuntu, serving their communities and assisting others in order to
strengthen our values and our resolve to work together for a better life
for all our people.

In the next quarter, Mr President, we shall consolidate our work in
building a more cohesive society and in nurturing our people’s culture. We
shall pool our efforts by encouraging national dialogue and community
mobilisation towards a more caring society.

In the second half of this year we shall hold the first national conference
on social cohesion that will be hosted in KwaZulu-Natal. The theme of the
conference is “Building a Caring Society”.

Ziza kujula ke iingxoxo apho. Sizakube sixoxa khona ngokwakha isizwe. Le
nkomfa iza kudibanisa iinkokeli zethu zemveli, iinkokheli zethu zakwalizwi,
iinkokheli zethu zoluntu, ulutsha, amakhosikazi nabantu abakhubazekileyo.
Sisonke sizakube sixoxa sinenjongo enye yokuba siwakha njani na uMzantsi
Afrika, sisakha njani na isizwe sethu saseMzantsi Afrika. (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Debates will be intense. We shall be debating about building the nation.
This conference will bring together our traditional leaders, our religious
leaders, our community leaders, the youth, women and the disabled people.
We shall all be debating with one aim, which is how do we build South
Africa and how do we build our South African nation.]

We shall continue to strive to make the arts accessible to all. We shall
focus our attention on what needs to be done, including amending
legislation as well as modifying our policies in order to create a more
enabling environment for the flourishing of the arts.

We shall look at ways of strengthening the work of our councils and
institutions so that they can better serve the needs of our people.

Through our national legacy projects, the department is broadening access
to heritage resources in the country. The Sarah Baartman project, in
particular, seeks also to provide opportunities for South African
architects to design a memorial and interpretation centre in the Eastern
Cape. [Applause.]

We shall also promote the people’s arts within our communities and
especially our rural areas, including community arts centres, local theatre
groups – a favourite of Minister Nkwinti - music groups, local cultural
forms of expression and creative work in all our national languages,
including traditional dance and music, our poetry and literature.

We shall improve arts, culture and heritage education and training
programmes by placing 400 artists in schools and community arts centres. We
shall also assist with programmes at community arts centres.

We shall increase access to arts, culture and heritage by providing at
least one programme for women, children and people with disabilities in all
27 arts, culture and heritage institutions in the country.

Through investing in the culture programme we will ensure that our
investment results in thriving communities which ultimately can stand on
their own and grow.

Culture must be rooted in the realities of our people, in their daily
lives, struggles and victories. Creative industries are critical for our
country and for nation-building. They create critical opportunities to
uplift and empower our people, especially the youth and rural women.

We shall work together with cultural workers and our communities to ensure
that we use the opportunities to do more and to create a better life for
our people, including the youth, women and people with disabilities.

We shall focus on creating sustainable jobs through supporting initiatives
in training and skills development, and by expanding opportunities for
cultural workers. We are also eager to expand our contribution to economic
growth.

The arts, culture and heritage sector prides itself on its potential to
create sustainable jobs and entrepreneurial opportunities, even in areas
where people have minimum or no formal education at all.
We shall work towards the nurturing of sustainable jobs in the sector and
be part of the national effort to fight poverty and unemployment.

During the Expanded Public Works Programme, Phase 1, the Department of Arts
and Culture, through its Investing in Culture programme, created 7 374 job
opportunities. Of these 51% were for women, 44% for the youth and 5% for
people with disabilities.

In the next five years, we shall redouble our efforts to match the
expansion requirements for the Expanded Public Works Programme, Phase 2, in
promoting sustainable job opportunities and ensuring skills transfer for
unemployed arts, culture and heritage practitioners.

We shall place particular emphasis on encouraging women in rural
communities to produce high-quality products for both domestic and export
markets. This year, the department established the annual national craft
awards, where no fewer than 60 crafters across the nine provinces received
awards and recognition for their contribution to craft development.

Through the national craft awards the Department of Arts and Culture hopes
that South African crafters will become global players and will develop
high-quality products for the export market.

Our private sector partners have also been instrumental in providing
infrastructure and other resources to assist this sector. We shall continue
to strengthen our relationship and build stronger public-private
partnerships in the future.

In our efforts to bring arts and literature to our people in all our
communities, the department is engaged in the recapitalisation of community
libraries. This focuses on extending library services to previously
disadvantaged areas, including our rural areas.

The department is also encouraging the development of reading material in
all our official languages. The national library is republishing classics
in African literature. Thus far, 24 classics have been republished,
including the work of AC Jordaan, and the national library is also
embarking on the second phase of this project. This will include, among
others, the Sesotho classic, Chaka by Thomas Mofolo, and Insila ka Tshaka
by John Langalibalele Dube.

We are also awarding language bursaries, especially in African languages,
to help build capacity in the language sector.

We shall finalise the name changes. We shall continue to work together on
the matter of name changes of our towns and cities. It is indeed our
collective responsibility and interest to ensure that we do not only
liberate ourselves but that we also liberate our cities and towns and other
geographical areas.
Angeke sithi siwuqedile umsebenzi wethu wenkululeko kusekhona izindawo
ezibizwa abo Kafferfontein. [We cannot say we have finished our work of
fighting for freedom if there are still places called Kaffirfontein.]

We continue to encourage the development of local content. We call on the
SABC to do more to support local content and local artists. Investing in
culture is also investing in artists and creating an enabling environment
for our artists to lead a healthy, long, productive and prosperous life.

The other challenge that faces us in this sector is the fact that the
entertainment industry is dominated by only a few multinationals, who
dominate the profit, yet cultural workers who are the real creators of
music, films, drama and poetry in our country are exploited throughout
their lives, and they end up being given a pauper’s funeral.

We shall work with the unions and artists towards ensuring that social
security becomes a reality for the arts and culture community. We must work
together to fight for transformation and equity in the creative and
entertainment industry. We must work together towards transforming the
entire industry, where black artists also must have ownership rights
throughout the value chain of this important industry, and where black
artists, not multinationals and business managers, decide what to produce
and decide what they want to create.

It is important, therefore, that our interventions assist in broad-based
black economic empowerment in the arts and heritage sector. We can also do
this by developing co-operative production facilities which can provide
employment opportunities for more of our artists.

We must also guard against the fake tapes, CDs and DVDs that we buy on the
street. If we do that, we are actually stealing from the livelihood and the
bread of our artists and cultural workers.

In line with our vision of developing sustainable cultural industries, the
department bought the Downtown Music Hub in November 2008 from Gallo/Avusa.
We believe that the Downtown Music Hub will become a unique and innovative
music production entity that will empower our stakeholders in the music
industry, especially previously disadvantaged artists. The Hub will be in
partnership and involves corporate and community-based entities. We believe
that, working together with our artists and the private sector, we can do
more in creating a better life for the arts.

The department is also working together with the Department of Sport and
Recreation on the 2010 World Cup. As South Africa prepares to welcome
guests for the Confederations Cup and the 2010 Fifa World Cup, let us
recognise that the cultural component is also very important in sharing our
arts and culture with our visitors, the fans and the players that will be
coming to our country and also ensuring that we leave a legacy for the
future.

The department has initiated a project that will seek to document the
history and culture of host cities in South Africa and in the SADC region
as a whole.

Internationally, we shall continue to play an important role in ensuring
that we strengthen South-South co-operation. We shall continue to be part
of projects that foster relations between Africa and its Diaspora. We have
seen the great success of the first Nepad cultural projects in January this
year, with the launching of the new library building for the Ahmed Baba
Institute in Timbuktu in Mali. The South Africa-Mali project should also
pave the way for further Nepad cultural projects that seek to preserve
ancient heritage for the purpose of new and future generations. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Ms A M DREYER: Chairperson, to achieve our goals we must hold ourselves to
the highest standards of service, probity and integrity. Together we must
build a society that prizes excellence and rewards effort.

This is what President Jacob Zuma said in his inauguration speech at the
Union Buildings. The DA wholeheartedly agrees with these principles of
achieving high standards and rewarding excellence.

However, Minister Richard Baloyi, Minister for the Public Service and
Administration, recently acknowledged that there are difficulties in
reaching these ideals when he said, “The quality of service the public
receives needs much improvement in many areas.” The DA also agrees with the
Minister on this score.

Sadly, the Public Service Commission revealed that between 2006 and 2007
there was a 46% increase in cases of corruption reported to the national
anticorruption hotline. Therefore, we were glad that President Zuma
highlighted his commitment to fighting corruption in the Public Service.

Further, year after year, the Auditor-General highlights financial
mismanagement by various departments, seemingly without consequence. These
problems are linked to not signing performance contracts with senior
management staff. A Public Service that cannot measure the performance of
its officials cannot hold them accountable for failures. It also cannot
acknowledge the hard work done by the many dedicated officials. A
responsive government will ensure that senior managers enter into
performance contracts and are held accountable for service delivery.

In sy staatsrede het president Zuma gehaltedienslewering juis verbind met
Batho Pele – mense eerste. Wat ’n treffende beginsel! Hoe kan ons dit ten
beste uitleef? Deur by elke gemeenskap se unieke behoeftes aan te pas. As
owerhede eiesoortige stelsels in die verskillende provinsies toepas, sal ’n
mens sien watter metodes werk die beste. Stelsels wat werk vir die Noord-
Kaap is nie noodwendig die antwoord vir Gauteng nie. Die diversiteit van
gemeenskappe moet lei tot die diversiteit van stelsels.

Die gedagte van een gesentraliseerde staatsdiens vir al drie sfere van
regering waarin minister Collins Chabane – ek sien hy’s nie nou hier nie –
die mag gaan hê om prestasie in 9 provinsies, 56 distriksmunisipaliteite, 6
metro’s en 283 munisipaliteite landwyd te moniteer, is egter gevaarlik.
[Tussenwerpsels.] As Ministers dienste in hul eie departemente nie kan
verseker nie, hoe gaan een sentraal beheerde staatsdiens vir nege
provinsies dit regkry? [Tussenwerpsels.]

Hiermee haal die regering homself ’n las op sy hals wat selfs die
kommunistiese Sowjet-Unie met miljoene amptenare nie kon baasraak nie.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Kort voor lank stort alle dienste in duie.
[Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[In his state of the nation address, President Zuma specifically linked
quality service delivery to Batho Pele – people first. What a striking
principle! How can we best realise this? By adapting to the unique needs of
every community. Should the authorities apply distinct systems in the
various provinces, one would be able to ascertain which methods would be
the best. Systems applied successfully in the Northern Cape are not
necessarily the answer for Gauteng. The diversity of the communities should
bring about diverse systems.

The idea of having a single centralised public service for all three
spheres of government where Minister Collins Chabane – I notice that he is
not present at the moment –  would have the authority to monitor
performance in 9 provinces, 56 district municipalities, 6 metros and 283
municipalities throughout the country, however, is
dangerous.[Interjections.] If Ministers are, however, unable to guarantee
service delivery within their own departments, how could this be
accomplished with a single centralised public service that caters for nine
provinces? [Interjections.]

The government will hereby saddle itself with a burden that not even the
communist Soviet Union with its millions of officials could cope with.
[Interjections.] Before long, all services would collapse.
[Interjections.]]

The biggest problem with service delivery is at local government level.
Minister Baloyi once again acknowledged this when he said, “It is clear
that local government faces a challenge that is sometimes met by filling
posts with people who do not have the suitable skills.” Once again the DA
agrees with the Minister. Service delivery depends on having the right
people in the right positions. We must fill the many vacancies with
suitably skilled people.

In provincial government, at senior management level there was a 16%
vacancy rate in the North West, 19% in the Free State and 31% in the
Northern Cape. In local government in January this year there were 32
vacant municipal manager posts. Often these positions are not filled
because there are no suitably qualified candidates in the required racial
category. Surely, it is better to fill the position with a suitably
qualified person of any colour in the interests of service delivery.
[Applause.]

In conclusion, the DA follows the three principles I have emphasised here,
namely accountable performance, diversity and merits. In fact, President
Zuma pleaded for this once again when he said:


   We do not seek conformity. We set ourselves a task of ensuring that we
   create a state that is responsive to the needs of all the people of the
   country, a state that will ensure that basic services were available to
   all regardless of race, colour, gender or creed.

President Zuma also gave sound advice when he spelt out his vision. He
said:
   We must build a society that draws on the capabilities, energy and
   promise of all its people.

Mr President, if you ensure that proper services are provided by all the
people, regardless of race, colour, gender or creed, to all the people,
regardless of race, colour, gender or creed, the DA will support you.
Siyabonga. [Thank you.] [Applause.]

Ms H N NDUDE: Mr Chairperson, hon President, hon Deputy President, members
of the executive and hon members, the arrival of Cope on the political
scene has forever altered the political landscape of South Africa.
[Applause.]

Its emergence is an affirmation of our democracy. The hon President has
asserted in his speech that we have a strong and fully functional
constitutional democracy system, and that what we witnessed yesterday in
this House was a celebration of what makes this democracy work.

These are fine words, but it is with a heavy heart that I must refer to the
personal persecution that members of Cope have suffered in recent months
... [Interjections.] ... persecuted for doing nothing more than expressing
their democratic choice, and in a supposedly free and democratic country.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, can you just take your
seat for a moment? Hon members, can we allow the hon member to make her
speech without being disturbed, please. [Applause.]

Mrs H N NDUDE: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. If I may proceed, on 15 December
2008 the National Post and The Star reported the following statement that
was made by the president of the ANC:

   It is better when you have an enemy that you do not know than the one
   that you know.

The one that you know is more difficult. In Zulu we refer to a form of
witchcraft called “ukuphehla amanzi”, where your enemy would mix dirt from
your body in a calabash and stick a spear into the mixture to cause you
sharp body pains. [Applause.] When the witch is a family member, we know
that it is more dangerous than an enemy from outside. [Applause.]

In November of last year, in an interview with Al Jazeera, Themba Ndaba,
the chairperson of the Sedibeng ANC Youth League, was reported to have
said, and I quote:


   People like Terror Lekota and all those people who want to destroy the
   history of our organisation behave like cockroaches and they must be
   destroyed.
[Interjections.]

Mr Chairperson, we cannot choose to have our cake and eat it. If we are
proud of our democracy, then we must uphold that democracy with the
responsibility and integrity that it deserves. And this must not happen
some of the time, but all of the time.

In a democracy, those who choose to be in opposition cannot be termed
witches, traitors, dogs, snakes or baboons. [Applause.] When the rhetoric
of politics descends to this level, it becomes a blight on our democracy
and diminishes the soul of our great nation. Madiba would never have
countenanced this. [Applause.]

Polokwane is behind us now. [Interjections.] The common road that many of
us walked ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order! Hon member, there is a point
of order!

Mr C T FROLICK: Chairperson, on a point of order: We understand that this
is the maiden speech of the hon member. However, there are certain
conventions in the House when a maiden speech is being delivered, and that
is that we will respect the input of the member, unless it is provocative.
And it is provocative at this stage. And we ask you to rule on that matter,
please. [Interjections.] [Applause.]
Mrs H N NDUDE: Mr Chairperson, I have said that the common road that many
of us have walked together ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order! Order, hon members! I am
going to appeal once more to hon members. The hon President will be
responding next week, and I am quite sure that the President wants to hear
what each and every member has to say. [Interjections.] So, can we simply
tone down our expressions and utterances?

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, may I just say that the DA doesn’t find this
provocative at all. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Can you continue, hon member?

Mrs H N NDUDE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The common road that many
of us have walked together in the search for freedom diverged at Polokwane.
[Interjections.] For many of us, the treatment that was meted out to former
President Mbeki was regrettable. We are deeply hurt at the handling and the
timing of his recall. The removal of a President must never, ever happen
like that again. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

This Parliament must ensure that the power to remove a President must
reside here and nowhere else. [Interjections.] [Applause.] The Constitution
of South Africa should never, ever be trumped by the constitution and
processes of any political party. [Interjections.] Our nation’s
Constitution must reign supreme. Therefore, Parliament should ensure that
its authority ... [Interjections.]

Mr O E MONARENG: Chair, on a point of order: I think hon member Frolick did
ask for your indulgence in terms of ... [Interjections.] Chief, keep quiet,
please. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order! Order, please!

Mr O E MONARENG: The hon Frolick has asked for your indulgence in terms of
the relevance of what the member is saying. She is giving us information.
Can she now inform us if hon former President Thabo Mbeki is Cope’s member?
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): No, that is not a point of order.
[Applause.] Can you continue, hon member? [Interjections.] Order!

Mrs H N NDUDE: Mr Chairman, our national Constitution must reign supreme.
Therefore, Parliament should ensure that its authority is not denuded in
this way again.

Cope wishes to bend its back to alter the bleak and tormented lives of
millions of our people. We wish to co-operate with the ANC on a
professional and dignified basis. [Interjections.]

We wish to do so because our forebears have left us the legacy of ubuntu,
and it is incumbent upon us to work in the spirit of ubuntu.
[Interjections.]

We want to hold the President responsible for ensuring that our
Constitution is upheld at all times and that everyone acts accordingly. Hon
President, we cannot compromise on this. This is what South Africans expect
of you and this House demands of you. [Interjections.]

It is very unfortunate that we have been so reckless in damaging and
degrading the environment as though there is no tomorrow. The hon President
has correctly pointed out that South Africa, being a dry country, requires
urgent action to mitigate adverse environmental changes and to ensure the
provision of water to citizens.

But, hon President, that is only part of the problem. The big issue is that
of our climate change, which is already here. Within a decade or two, the
western half of South Africa will begin to dry up even further and the
ocean could rise to submerge parts of Cape Town. [Time expired.]
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Ms M T KUBAYI: Hon Chairperson, His Excellency the President of the
Republic of South Africa, Deputy President of the Republic of South Africa,
members of the National Assembly, ladies and gentlemen ... ndi masiari [...
good afternoon].

I think my colleague, hon member Ndude, is going to learn with the process
that we should focus on the ball and not on the people. [Laughter.]
[Applause.]

Mongameli wezwe, intsha yoMzansi Afrika iphumile ngobuningi ngomhlaka 22
Apreli iyovota, ivotela uKhongolose wabantu futhi yethemba ukuthi ikusasa
layo lizoqhakaza ngoba ... (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[President of the country, the youth of South Africa went out in their
numbers to vote for the African National Congress on 22 April, hoping that
their future will be bright because ...]

They believed that “ANC rocks for sure!” and that “ANC is cool!”
[Applause.] This was to defend the gains of our democracy and our
revolution.

In 11 days’ time, we will be commemorating 33 years of the June 16
Uprising. The launch of this agency on June 16 gives hope to young people
in South Africa in terms of what has been raised as concerns around the
issue of inefficiency and ineffectiveness of the National Youth Commission
and the Umsobomvu Youth Fund. It is a signal that the ANC-led government is
able to listen to young people.

This launch signals new hope for all young people of South Africa, black
and white. [Applause.] It gives the young people of South Africa an
opportunity to grow, develop and learn. The mandate of the institution
itself will be to initiate, design, co-ordinate, evaluate and monitor all
programmes aimed at integrating youth into the economy and into the society
at large. The agency will play an instrumental role in ensuring that young
people are self-reliant and do not rely on government alone to be able to
have a better life.

It will ensure that departments develop policies that are friendly towards
procurement from young people, and also that, as government, we take young
SMMEs seriously, so that we continue to create jobs for young people. The
success of the agency will be measured by the extent to which young people
contribute positively to the developmental state, and hence it will be
critical to ensure support for young entrepreneurs.

I would also like to appeal to provincial governments to fast-track the
repeal of the National Youth Commission legislation, so that they make way
for the implementation of the National Youth Development Agency Act, 2008.
We cannot delay the development of young people any longer. [Applause.]

We have seen the success of the first phase of the Expanded Public Works
Programme and the National Youth Service Programme, as a tool to absorb
young people into the economic system. More than 20 000 young people have
received offers locally, and 700 have been placed internationally in the
work placement programme. We are looking forward to the success of the
second phase of the EPWP, which will create 500 000 jobs by December this
year, and 4 million jobs by 2014. We believe that the ANC-led government is
going to deliver on this. [Applause.]

Hon members, rural development will not be sustainable if young people do
not become a key element of it. We need to ensure that we cut the cycle of
poverty in rural areas and that young people do not inherit poverty, but
are able to be absorbed within the economic system in their own areas.
Young people in rural areas are often forced to leave their areas in search
of better opportunities in urban areas such as Johannesburg. They end up
being exploited and abused. This needs to stop, as we are encouraging them
to be part of the rural development in their areas. We appeal to young
people that, as these rural development projects come to their areas, they
should take the opportunity to develop their own areas.

In 1953, when Hendrik Verwoerd was addressing the Senate, he said, and I
quote:

   The native will be taught from childhood to realise that equality with
   Europeans is not for him. There is no place for the Bantu child above the
   level of certain forms of labour. Until now, he has been subjected to a
   school system which drew him away from his own community and misled him
   by showing him the green pastures of European society in which he was not
   allowed to graze.

We need to deal with the legacy of apartheid in our education system, in
basic and tertiary education. The Freedom Charter promises that the “Doors
of Learning and Culture Shall be Opened to all”. [Applause.] Working
together, we can do more in our societies in terms of education. We need to
work together, parents fulfilling their responsibilities, taking the
initiative and being part of the school governing bodies; teachers being in
classes, being responsible and doing what they are expected to do; and
learners themselves being responsible and committing themselves to their
education. This can be achieved if we work together as a society.

Bontši bja baswa ba Afrika-Borwa ba phela ka tlase ga kgatelelo le
tshokolo. Bontš i bja bao ba lego dinagengmagae ba fetša mphato wa
marematlou gomme ba palelwa ke go tšwetša dithuto pele ka lebaka la gore ba
sa kgone go fihlelela thuto ya ka godimo. (Translation of Sepedi paragraph
follows.)

[Most South African youth are subjected to oppression and poverty. Most of
those who live in rural areas are unable to further their studies after
completing matric because they cannot afford higher education.]

Mr President, tertiary education cannot continue being a luxury in our
country. There is a need to have serious engagement with institutions to
ensure that students do not drop out of institutions because of lack of
financial support. [Applause.] The National Student Financial Aid Scheme
also needs to exhaust its entire budget allocation each and every year.

In the previous financial year, the National Student Financial Aid Scheme
was not able to exhaust its funds, despite the fact that a lot of young
people continue to drop out of tertiary institutions because of financial
exclusions. This is cause for concern. We need to look into this
institution to ensure its effectiveness and review it so that it is able to
support young people.

Resourcing of training institutions and refocusing them is a critical tool
that we should use for young people who are dropping out of high school and
are not able to be absorbed back into the education or schooling system.
This category of young people is also an important group in society,
because this group mainly falls between the ages of 20 and 29. They are out
of the schooling system, they are not absorbed by the tertiary education
system, and they are unskilled. If we don’t focus on them, we will face a
bleak future because these are young people who need to contribute to the
economy of South Africa. So we need to look at this.

Mr President, I am happy that you spoke about resourcing and revitalising
the training institutions as well. Despite many efforts to ensure youth
development and empowerment, many young people are still facing challenges,
one of which is experimentation with alcohol and drugs. Often, this leads
them to being involved in crime. The implementation of the Child Justice
Bill is critical, as it will assist with the issue of children in conflict
with the law. We need to ensure that these children are rehabilitated and
that they don’t eventually become hardcore criminals. It is their
constitutional right that children should not be detained, except as a
measure of last resort. I know, Mr President, that this Bill was passed
last year, and therefore it is critical that, as Parliament, we ensure that
its implementation becomes a success.

The President, yesterday, committed to improve implementation of the
comprehensive plan for treatment management and care for HIV and Aids, and
further to reduce new infections by 50% by 2011. Young people can play
their part by being responsible and ensuring that we strive to achieve an
HIV-free generation. We need to work together with the ANC-led government
in ensuring that this target becomes a reality. [Applause.]

Maitshwaro a rona jwaloka batjha ke ona a tla etsa hore re kgone ho
fihlella mona. [As the youth, it is our behaviour that will enable us to
reach this point.]

As part of social cohesion and promoting a healthy lifestyle, there is a
need to ensure that all sporting codes exist, even in previously
disadvantaged communities. We need to ensure that young people, even in
black communities, are exposed to sporting codes such as tennis and
cricket. These should not continue to exist elsewhere and not in these
communities. We cannot continue perpetuating the legacy of apartheid, where
black South African children were only exposed to sporting codes such as
soccer and netball.

The hon President highlighted yesterday that sport should become part of
the curriculum. I hope that indigenous sporting codes will also become part
of the curriculum, as part of restoring and promoting our heritage and
culture as South Africans.

South Africans will be hosting the 2009 Confederations Cup in less than 10
days. We need to come out in numbers with our energy and vibrancy as young
people to support this tournament and make it a most memorable one for our
guests and Fifa. We are a truly unique country, rich in diversity and
heritage. This is the South Africa that the world should experience when
they come here.

Sepedi se re moeng tla ka gešo re je ka wena. [There is a saying in Sepedi
that it is always a pleasure when visitors are around.]

Young people need to make use of the opportunities that will exist during
this tournament and grab them. We need to come out in numbers to support
our South African team, Bafana Bafana. We wish them well in the tournament.
We trust that they will do us proud during this tournament.

In conclusion, as we move forward, it is important that we understand that
a true national, democratic society can only be achieved when the youth
have been fully emancipated from the fetters of the past which continue to
truncate their development. There should be a clear intention which
manifests itself in progressive programmes to empower the youth. The youth
of our country have always been loyal to the objective of the revolution.
They need to be harnessed, mobilised and engaged in the journey to a truly
united, democratic, nonracial and nonsexist South Africa. It is the duty of
the ANC to reverse the damage done to the youth by the apartheid system.
Ndza khensa. [I thank you.] [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Hon Chairperson, on a point of order: I wish to refer
to the speech by the hon member from Cope before the last speaker, when she
was very loudly booed. I submit to you, with respect, that booing is
unparliamentary. I request you to consult, if necessary, with the Speaker
and to make a ruling by the Presiding Officers on whether booing is
parliamentary or not. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): We will look into that, hon member.

Mr M M SWATHE: Hon Chairperson, the DA supports sustainable and equitable
land reform and rural development. We view this as both a moral necessity
to correct the imbalances of the past and as a fundamental condition to
growing our economy to benefit all South Africans.

We would also like to congratulate the President for recognising the need
to address problems in the rural areas by appointing a Minister and setting
up a new department to deal specifically with both rural development and
land reform. The appointment of Minister Nkwinti shows how crucial this
portfolio is. We extend a hand of co-operation to his department, while
also assuring him of our critical engagement when things go wrong. We will
not be doing this for cheap political point-scoring but in order to ensure
that all South Africans enjoy and share the wealth of this country.

The Department of Rural Development and Land Reform faces numerous
challenges. It inherits one of the poorly functioning departments under the
previous Department of Agriculture and Land Affairs.

The reality is that many landless people feel neglected in the democratic
dispensation. Our collective task will be to address, as a matter of
urgency, the target of reaching 30% of land redistribution by 2014, which
seems unachievable. The previous administration sought to introduce
manifestly unconstitutional laws, such as the Expropriation Bill, to
accelerate land redistribution, but this was not going to work and would
scare off investors.

We need to develop legally justifiable laws that will speed up land reform
processes to ensure that new landowners are provided with adequate post-
settlement financial and material support. It is indeed an indictment that
over 50% of land reform projects are failing because the state does not
provide adequate support to the land reform beneficiaries. South Africa
cannot afford this when millions of our people face the danger of food
shortages and go to bed without food.

We need to accelerate the settlement processes of over 4 000 land
restitution claims which still remain unsettled; we need to remove
bureaucratic bottlenecks which hinder the settlement process; and we need
to upgrade land titles to freehold titles to as many South Africans as is
legally and economically feasible. Indeed, it is an anomaly that there are
still South Africans who hold their land under the apartheid-type title
deeds while we are 15 years into democracy.

The hon Minister must take swift steps to ensure that vacant posts in his
department are filled by efficient and properly qualified people. We cannot
afford the policy of cadre deployment when our people go hungry and remain
landless.

Morena Modulasetulo, setšhaba sa gešo sa dinagamagae se dutše godimo ga
kgatelelo e kgolo ya go hloka thušo go dinaga tšeo ba di filwego. Ditšhaba
tše di nyaka thušo ya mašeleng le thlahlo gore ba kgone go tšwetša temo
pele. Nakong ya pušo ya pele, balemi ba makgowa bao ba filwego dinaga ba be
ba thušwa ka mašeleng le thekgo ya mahlale a temo. Re le ba DA re ka
thabela go bona Tona ya tša Tlhabologo ya Dinagamagae le Mobu a šomiša
tsebo yeo ya boradipolase bao ba tlogelago dipolase tša bona. Re rata go
bona tlhabologo ya motheo naga ka bophara.

Re le ba DA, re dumela gore naga ke ya batho bohle, gomme ditšhaba tšohle
di swanetše go hlabollwa ka go lekana. Re re dikgoba tša thlabologo a di
fiwe batho kamoka ba Afrika Borwa.

Ditšhaba tša dinaga magae di lla ka kabo ya ditirelo tša motheo. Ditšhaba
tše di nyaka meetse a go hlweka, ditsela tše kaone, mohlagase le mešomo.
Ditšhaba tše tša dinagamagae di rata go bona thlabologo dinageng tša bona.
Ke ka fao ba ilego ba tšea karolo ka bontšhi dikgethong tša naga. Ga go
Mopresidente yo a ka thopago dikgetho ntle le thekgo e kgolo ya badudi ba
dinagamagae.

Re le ba DA, re hlompha le go amogela di poelo tša dikgetho gomme re
holofetša setšhaba gore re tla se šomela ka potego le boikgafo. Re tla dira
bonnete bja gore ditshepišo di phethagale ka go hlokomela gore mmušo o aba
ditirelo go batho bohle ba Afrika Borwa. (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr Chairperson, our people in the rural areas are under severe pressure as
they do not benefit from the land that was given back to them. These people
need financial assistance and training so that they can continue with
farming. During the previous regime, white farmers who were given land were
supported with training in farming and were assisted financially. As the
DA, we will be glad to see the Minister of Rural Development and Land
Reform using the knowledge and experience of farmers who leave their farms.
We would like to see basic development in general.

As the DA, we believe this country is for all people, and therefore all
people must be developed equally. We are saying, let all the people of
South Africa get opportunities for development.

People in the rural areas are complaining about basic services. These
people need clean water, better roads, electricity and job opportunities.
They would also like to see development in their villages. That is the
reason people took part in large numbers during the general elections.
There is no President who can win an election without the tremendous
support from the people in the rural areas.

As the DA, we respect and accept the election results and therefore we
promise the nation that we will work for them with honesty and
determination. We will make it a point that the promises are fulfilled by
making sure the government delivers services to all people.]

We will need to develop economies that are integral to development in the
rural areas.

Once more, Mr Chairperson, the DA will support the new administration and
we will gladly make available all our policy inputs on land reform. We hope
that this will be reciprocated with the co-operation it deserves. Our role
as the official opposition party will continue, but the interests of South
Africa’s land reform will inform all our critical engagement with the
administration. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS:
Chairperson, His Excellency the President of the Republic, the Deputy
President of the Republic, Cabinet Ministers present, hon members of the
House, guests in the gallery: Firstly, I want to address myself to the
Leader of the Opposition, Mr Trollip, on the issue of appointing people who
were involved in the travel issue as chairpersons. The issue here is that
the DA as an organisation is always talking about the rule of law and
respect for the rule of law. Not only that, they talk about respect for the
Constitution. In this matter, when we were dealing with the Scorpions, the
parliamentary legal services pronounced on the issue, but not only that. Mr
Hugh Glenister took the matter to court, even to the highest court of the
land. They failed. The members who were involved in the travel issue are
members of the House and they can participate in all parliamentary
processes. [Applause.]

Now they are talking about respect for the rule of law while they are
undermining the Constitution and the Constitutional Court, which says these
members have the right to participate here. They talk about morals and
respect for the law and the Constitution when it suits them. What I was
saying is that, even thereafter, the Electoral Court handled the matter and
pronounced on it. You can’t awake ghosts on matters that were finalised by
the courts if you respect the rule of law. We must speak the same language.
[Applause.]

What we probably should do is to have some sort of induction for new
Members of Parliament on decisions that were taken by the previous
Parliament, so that they do not repeat the same ground in that respect.
[Interjections.]

The second issue that was raised by the Leader of the Opposition was that
of the ANC in the Western Cape. He said that the ANC in the Western Cape
was adverse to being in opposition; they are uncomfortable. That’s what he
said. Since 1994, the ANC has been in opposition. We know about this. When
the then National Party and the then Democratic Party formed a coalition of
convenience, in that situation the ANC was an opposition and we never had
any problem with that. Even today we will continue to be an opposition
representing almost 700 000 people in the Western Cape. What we are saying
is that, as an opposition, we will be effective and robust.

What is more important, is that Mr Trollip said that the leadership of the
DA here represents all the people of the Western Cape. We want to challenge
you, Mr Trollip, that the leadership here doesn’t represent all the people.
If you did, why do you have an all-male cabinet? Where are the women of the
Western Cape if you are taking that position? [Interjections.] Do you mean
that you are representing them? [Laughter.] Therefore, you can’t speak in
the way that you are speaking.

He continued to say that there was corruption in the Department of
International Relations and Co-operation. No corruption whatsoever has ever
been recorded in this department. If you have evidence, present it; we
would like to attend to the matter. [Applause.]

The hon Rev H M Dandala raised an issue. He said that the Ministers in The
Presidency must come here and educate parliamentarians on the issues of
oversight and monitoring. Hon reverend, in terms of parliamentary processes
and the institutions in South Africa, there is a separation of powers. The
executive accounts to Parliament. You can’t have a situation where the
executive teaches parliamentarians on how to monitor and do oversight.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

The other issue that he raised was that the President was supposed to have
given details in his speech. Of course, hon Dandala, I think you would know
that there are time limits on what you can do. Not only that, but there is
a space and a time when Ministers are able to speak on their policy
debates. You will get the details at that time. You can wait patiently. You
will be able to get the information on what is going to happen. [Applause.]

Another issue was raised by the hon Rev Dandala. He talks about members of
Cope who are hounded out of jobs and out of positions. People can talk
about the issue of the vice chancellor of Unisa: If you’ll recall, long
ago, there was a disagreement, even then, between the then Minister of
Education and the vice chancellor on issues. This government has not
pronounced whatsoever on the issue of the vice chancellor.

Regarding the issue that Rev Dandala raised about Mr Nkhuhlu in the Eastern
Cape, that issue relates to a difference between the MEC and Mr Nkuhlu.
When Mr Nkuhlu was requested to come and account to the MEC as an executive
authority, he could not do so. If he then defies an elected leader and does
not want to account, what must one do? [Interjections.] Therefore, I think
we must put things in context when we talk about this.

I would be happy if you presented empirical evidence to the Minister for
the Public Service and Administration and myself. As we are responsible for
governance and the administration cluster in government, we will be able to
handle and process these issues. There is nobody, to our knowledge, who has
been hounded because of their political affiliation. If there is evidence
to that effect, please present it and we will take it up.

The other issue that was raised by hon Inkosi ... uMntwana wakwaPhindangene
ukhuluma ngodaba lokuthi kube nobugebengu nenkohlakalo endabeni yokhetho.
Manje-ke into esiyi shoyo uthi yena lokho kwabonakala ngokuthi ubaba
unobhala-jikelele um hlonishwa, uMfundisi uZondi waye waseshwa.

Sithi–ke thina ngokomthetho wezwe lakithi, ukuthi abantu bayalingana
ngaphambi komthetho. Okusho ukuthi amaphoyisa anelungelo lokusesha noma
ubani uma kunento angayiboni kahle. Akukhethwa ukuthi uyisikhulu seqembu
elithize manje ungayekwa ngalokho. Ngaleyo ndlela leyo sithi-ke thina,
amaphoyisa enze ngendlela efanele - ngendlela ekufuneka kwenziwe ngayo
ngoba siyalingana emthethweni welizwe lakithi ngendlela esibona ngayo.
Kodwa ukhuluma ngendaba yenkohlakalo, umbuzo wukuthi: ubani oye waboshwa
eboshelwa ukuthi kuye kwatholakala izinto zeKhomishane Ezimele Yokhetho
futhi uphuma kuliphi iqembu ngizoshiya lowo mbuzo Shenge. [Uhleko.]

Mnu M G BUTHELEZI: Ukhukhalima impambuko: Mhlonishwa ngithanda ukumtshela
ukuthi ngingamfundela.

UNGQONGQOSHE KAHULUMENI WOKUBAMBISANA KANYE NEZINDABA ZEZENDABUKO:
Ngiyabonga Sihlalo, engikushilo mina angikhulumanga ngagama lamuntu,
ngibuze umbuzo nje kuphela angizange ngiqhubeke nenkulumo. Okunye okukhona
engifuna ukukuphawula wukuthi ubaba uMntwana wakwaPhindangene ngendlela
ebekhuluma ngayo kwezomnotho ubungasho impela ukuthi cha le nkulumo
ibibhalwe yikomanisi elikhulu ubaba uBlade Nzimande uma ekhuluma ngokubekwa
phansi kwesizwe. Kangazi noma bayawahlanganyela amanothi kulodaba lolu
ngendlela ebekhuluma ngalo.

Enye into ayikhulumile umama uDe Lille uyewakhuluma ngodaba lokuthi ...
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The Prince of Phindangene spoke about the issue of crime and corruption
during the election. And now, what we are saying is that his claims are
based on the fact that the secretary-general, the hon Rev Zondi, was
searched by the police. We are saying that, according to the Constitution
of our country everyone is equal before the law. This means that police
have a right to search anyone who is suspected of wrongdoing. It does not
mean that if you are an official of a particular party you are supposed to
be exempted. We are therefore saying that the police have acted
appropriately – they have done what they were supposed to do because in
this country we are all equal before the law.

You come here and speak about corruption, but the question is: Who is the
person who was arrested for being in possession of the Independent
Electoral Commission stuff and which party does he belong to? I will only
leave you with that question, Shenge. [Laughter.]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: On a point of order! Hon Chairperson, I want to tell
him that I can read it for him.

The MINISTER OF CO–OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Thank you,
Chairperson, what I know is that I did not mention any names - I just asked
a question; that is all. And the other thing I want to point out is that
the way the hon Prince of Phindangene spoke about the economy you would
swear that his speech was written by the great communist, hon Blade
Nzimande, when he spoke about putting the nation first. I am not sure if
they shared their notes on this issue given the manner in which he spoke.
And the other thing hon De Lille spoke about is the issue of ...]

... the National Planning Commission and that the Minister must elaborate
on the matter. The Minister in The Presidency will talk about it tomorrow
as he deals with the commission. This issue will be elaborated on further
during the policy debate.

I want to move to the issue Mr Holomisa spoke about, regarding the Umtata
Stadium in 2010. We went to the area two weeks ago and we found that the
council was sitting with an amount of about R280 million for the stadium.
We are assisting them in processing the issue around the construction of
the stadium.

I want to conclude with the issue alluded to by hon Ms Ndude. We believe
that Rev Dandala spoke in a very dignified way, which actually respected
the decorum of the House. However, I must say that hon Ndude was a bit
provocative in raising issues not pertaining to the President’s speech.
This possibly reflects two things: Firstly, maybe there is no coherence in
the party’s strategy in terms of what must be articulated.

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it the right thing to do
for the Minister to talk about one member not responding to the President’s
speech, when in actual fact he’s done anything but that himself?
[Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: I am
saying then, to me, it might be an issue of saying that the member is
undermining the leader, by ensuring that things are articulated that are
not consonant with what is expressed by the leader of the party in that
respect. These issues that were raised were done within the law and within
the Constitution of the Republic. There was no subversion of the law or the
Constitution in this respect.

Mr President, yesterday a five-year programme was tabled in terms of the
priorities of this democratic government. When the President concluded, he
posed the following open question and invitation:

   Indeed, as citizens we should at the same time ask ourselves what it is
   that we can do on our own to help promote this national programme.

Today and tomorrow all of us must be able to answer that question,
decisively and boldly. We need to answer this question as elected public
office bearers; as public servants in the national, provincial and local
government; as businesspeople; as workers; as leaders of civil society
formations, as well as religious people; as traditional leaders; as
academics; as students and the youth; as men and women and patriotic
citizens. My submission to this esteemed House is that the Department of Co-
operative Governance and Traditional Affairs that the President announced
on 10 May 2009, will play its role diligently and relentlessly as a choir
conductor of the system of co-operative governance.

This single, sovereign government is constituted under the Constitution as
one government with three spheres, which are distinct, interrelated and
interdependent. The same can be said about the choir that the Department of
Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs will be leading and
orchestrating until the end of this term. In our system of government we
have a choir where some will be singing baritone, others will be singing
alto and others will be singing soprano. [Laughter.] This department will
protect, guide and direct our unique voices and roles over the next five
years. As we project a single national harmonious melody, we must have
rhythm, vibrancy and meaning. This must be so good that it must inspire
people to get up from their chairs and join this choir. This is simply our
understanding of the issue of co-operative governance and our role as the
conductor of the choir for the next five years.

Mr President, you have given the musical score and the songsheet to
government and the nation. It is clear, inspiring, unambiguous and focused.
We understand that we’ll need to build on the gains that we have made in
the past 15 years, and simultaneously attend vigorously to our weaknesses
and deficiencies. Fighting poverty, creating decent work and improving the
lives of our people will be at the centre of our collective actions. We
will need to address the misaligned government processes and systems
between the three spheres of government. We must make sure that the essence
of the choir is felt by the conductor.

The integrated development plans and local economic development strategies
of municipalities must reflect the priorities of the entire public sector,
including those in the public entities, as well as those in business. We
are aware that this misalignment is a fundamental challenge. In the OR
Thambo District Municipality in the Eastern Cape, for example, two weeks
ago the district went to the same local municipality to conduct outreach
around the IDPs. The municipality was in the same area, in a different
village, conducting the same processes. We believe that we must ensure that
we co-ordinate our efforts so that we can maximise the impact on the
limited resources we have. We believe that we must be able to ensure that
we work very closely with the National Planning Commission, because we must
ensure that the views of the people on the ground, the IDPs that are
expressed there, must be linked with the provincial growth and development
strategies.

The implementation of government programmes in many areas continues to
experience some fragmentation, disjointedness and lack of co-ordination. In
September last year, Parliament went to Bushbuckridge on a parliamentary
programme. In November we were given the responsibility to make follow-ups
on the issues that were raised at that level. Within a period of three
months, we managed to ensure that government works together and a lot was
achieved in that area through this co-ordination. It shows that the issue
of co-ordination is something that must be taken up and driven.

We believe that traditional leaders and traditional communities must be at
the centre of rural governance. They must make sure that they participate
in these issues and that these issues are dealt with. In addition, we must
ensure that the issue of disputes around the recognition of traditional
leadership is also dealt with and resolved in the next five years.

Mr President, we believe that, as we move forward, we must be able to
ensure that the state functions in a coherent and seamless way in
delivering services. We believe that in doing so we will be able to ensure
that we take our country to another level.

Our understanding is that the role of the Ministry is to ensure that we are
the envoys and emissaries who go to the Premiers and provinces. In that
respect, I have had a discussion with the Premier of the Western Cape, Ms
Zille. She said she was going to work with us, as long as we work with her,
within the Constitution and the laws of the country, and I believe we are
going to do exactly that. She has invited us to meet with her within the
next few weeks to come and present the report on the state of the Western
Cape as a province, as well as address the structures of local government
in this province. We are going to ensure that we work with her. We believe
that she is part of South Africa – she can’t be an island here in the
Western Cape, as she believes.

As the appointed choir conductor of our system of co-operative governance
in this country, we will ensure the maxim that says: Many voices, one
message - melody and song. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Before we adjourn, I would just
like to respond to the hon Ellis’ earlier question about relevance. I think
it is also a concern of some other members regarding the relevance of some
of the speeches. If you look at the nature of the President’s address, it
touches a wide range of political issues, and therefore members are going
to respond likewise. They would talk about various political issues in
response to the President’s address. I am sure even tomorrow this is still
going to happen, members will do that. I think it stems from the nature and
focus of the President’s address.

Debate interrupted.

The House adjourned at 18:46.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           WEDNESDAY, 27 MAY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker
1.    Membership of Committees
The following members have been appointed to the Committees below:

Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries

ANC

Phaliso, Mr N M
Gelderblom, Mr J P
Moss, Ms L N
Johnson, Mr M
Abram, Mr S
Sulliman, Mr E M
Pilusa-Mosoane, Ms M E
Mabuza, Ms M C

DA

Bosman, Mr L L
Coetzee, Mr T W

COPE

Carter, Ms D
IFP

Cebekhulu, Mr  R N
Msimang, Mr C T (Alt)

Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture

ANC

Farisani, Mr T S
Maluleka, Mr H P
Lekgetho, Mr G
Tshivhase, Mr J T
Nyalungu, Ms E R
Dunjwa, Ms M L
Bikani, Ms F C
Malale, Mr I M

DA
Lotriet, Ms A
Van Der Walt, Ms D

COPE

Ntshiqela, Mr P

IFP

Msweli, Ms H S
Van der Merwe, Mr J H (Alt)

Portfolio Committee on Basic Education

ANC

Chohan, Ms F I
Gina, Ms N
Mkhulisi, Ms N P
Mashishi, Ms A C
Manamela, Mr B K
Madlala, Ms N M
Madikizela-Mandela, Ms W N
Mataboge, Mr K D

DA

Kloppers-Lourens, Ms J C
Smiles, Mr D C

COPE

Kganare, Mr D A

IFP

Mpontshane, Mr A M
Msweli, Ms H S (Alt)

Portfolio Committee on Communications

ANC
Vadi, Mr I
Mkhize, Mr L N
Morutoa, Ms R M
Magazi, Ms M N
Kholwane, Mr S E
Bonhomme, Mr T J
De Lange, Mr J H
Dlulane, Ms B N
DA

Van Der Berg, Mr N J
Mazibuko, Ms L D
COPE

Kilian, Ms J D

IFP

Zondi, Mr K M
Makhuba, Ms H N (Alt)

Joint Committee on Constitutional Review

ANC

Holomisa, Mr P S
Nqakula, Mr C
Masango, Mr F T
Mathebula, Mr J
Ainslie, Mr R A
Matlanyane, Ms H F
Hajaig, Ms F
Snell, Mr G T
Portfolio Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs

ANC
Tsenoli, Mr L S
Boshigo, Ms F D
Williams, Mr A J
Matshoba, Mr J M
Dunjwa, Ms M L
Nonkonyana, Mr M
Tsebe, Ms S R
Mavunda, Mr D W

DA
Doman, Mr W P
Wenger, Ms M

COPE

Botha, Mr T

IFP

Smith, Mr P F
Cebekhulu, Mr R N (Alt)
Msimang, Mr C T (Alt)
Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services

ANC

Smith, Mr V G
Ngwenya, Ms W
Fihla, Mr N B
Mdaka, Ms M N
Mdakane, Mr R M
Sithole, Ms S C N
Sulliman, Mr E M
Gcwabaza, Mr N E
DA

Selfe, Mr J
Fritz, Mr A T

COPE

Blaai, Ms B C

IFP

Van der Merwe, Mr J H
Ndlovu, Mr V B (Alt)
Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans
ANC

Booi, Mr M S
Monareng, Mr O E
Gololo, Mr C L
Dlodlo, Ms A
Mgabadeli, Ms H C
Mlangeni, Mr A
Mohale, Ms M C
Mabedla, Ms N R

DA

Maynier, Mr D J
Lorimer, Mr J R B

COPE

Tolo, Mr L J

IFP

Mncwango, Mr M A
Ndlovu, Mr V B (Alt)
Portfolio Committee on Economic Development

ANC

Coleman, Ms E M
Huang, Mr S B
Tlake, Ms F
Tsotetsi, Ms D R
Manamela, Mr K B
Masilo, Ms J M
Mathebula, Mr J
Matlanyane, Ms H F

DA

Coetzee, Mr R
Rabie, Mr P J

COPE

Ngonyama, Mr S

IFP

Singh, Mr N
Oriani-Abrosini, Mr M G (Alt)
Skosana, Mr B M (Alt)
Portfolio Committee on Energy

ANC

Thabethe, Ms E
Tinto, Ms B
Njikelana, Mr S J
Mlambo, Mr M E
Selau, Mr J G
Nchabeleng, Mr E M
Mkhize, Mr L N
Morutoa, Ms R M

DA

Motau, Mr S C
Schmidt, Mr J

COPE

Dexter, Mr P D

IFP
Lucas, Mr E J
Zondi, Mr K M (Alt)

Standing Committee on Finance

ANC

Mufamadi, Mr T A
Sibhidla, Ms N N
Mthethwa, Mr E M
Dlamini-Dubazana, Ms Z S
Zulu, Ms L D
Rasool, Mr E
Radebe, Mr S G
Mbili, Mr M E

DA

George, Mr D T
Swart, Mr M

COPE

Koornhof, Mr N C J

IFP
Singh, Mr N
Oriani-Ambrosini, Mr M G (Alt)

Portfolio Committee on Health

ANC

Goqwana, Mr B M
Pillay, Mr S M
Kenye, Ms T E
Segale-Diswai, Mr M J
Mafolo, Ms M V
Dube, Ms M C
Luthuli, Ms A N

DA

Waters, Mr M
More, Ms E

COPE
Balindlela, Ms Z B

IFP

Msweli, Ms H S
Makhuba, Ms H N (Alt)

Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Traning
ANC

Marais, Mr F L
Mushwana, Ms F F
Makhubele, Ms S Z
Magazi, Ms N M
Mtshali, Mr E
Lekgetho, Mr G
Molebatsi, Ms A M
Nelson, Ms W J

DA

James, Mr W G
Boinamo, Mr G G

COPE
Vukuza, Ms N Y

IFP
Mpontshane, Mr A M
Zikalala, Ms C N (Alt)

Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs

ANC

Martins, Mr B A D
Maunye, Ms M M
De Lange, Mr J H
Magau, Ms R K
Balfour, Mr B M
Mathebe, Ms D H
Koornhof, Mr G W

DA

Terblanche, Mr J F
Mnqasela, Mr M

COPE
Mda, Ms A

IFP

Makhuba, Ms H N
Dhlamini, Mr B W (Alt)
Portfolio Committee on Human Settlements

ANC

Dambuza, Ms B N
Borman, Ms M G
Mdakane, Mr M R
Mtshali, Mr E
Gasebonwe, Ms T M A
Motimele, Mr M S
Mashishi, Ms A C
Jacobus, Ms L

DA

Steyn, Mr A C
Figlan, Mr A M

COPE
Botha, Mr T

IFP

Dhlamini, Mr B W
Mncwango, Mr M A (Alt)

Portfolio Committee on International Relations and Co-operation

ANC

Nxesi, Mr T W
Magau, Ms R K
Balfour, Mr B M
Mathebe, Ms D H
Koornhof, Mr G W
Gxowa, Ms B N
Pilusa-Mosoane, Ms M E
Magama, Ms T H

DA

Mubu, Mr K S
Mokgalapa, Mr S

COPE

Ngonyama, Mr S

IFP
Skosana, Mr B M
Van der Merwe, Mr J H (Alt)

Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development

ANC

Ramatlodi, Mr N A
Sithole, Ms S C N
Jeffery, Mr J H
Manana, Mr M C
Jordan, Mr P Z
Kekana, Mr D C
Kholwane, Mr E S
Landers, Mr L T

DA
Smuts, Ms M
Michael, Ms N W A
COPE

Adams, Ms L H

IFP
Van der Merwe, Mr J H
Oriani-Ambrosini, Mr M G (Alt)

Portfolio Committee on Labour

ANC

Yengeni, Ms L E
Rantsolase, Ms A M
Khumalo, Ms F E
Tsotetsi, Ms R D
Newhoudt-Druchen, Ms W S
Manyene-Sibiya, Ms N A
Mnisi, Ms N A
Duma, Ms N M

DA

Louw, Mr A
Ollis, Mr I M

COPE

Madisha, Mr W M

IFP

Ndlovu, Mr V B
Mpontshane, Mr A M (Alt)

Portfolio Committee on Mining

ANC

Gona, Mr F M
Mathibela, Ms N F
Ndabandaba, Mr L B G
Phaliso, Mr M N
Gelderblom, Mr P J
Huang, Mr S B
Ngele, Ms J N
Diale, Mr N L

DA
Schmidt, Mr H C
Marais, Mr E J

COPE

Dexter, Mr P
IFP

Lucas, Mr E J
Zondi, Mr K M (Alt)

Portfolio Committee on Police

ANC

Chikunga, Ms L S
Nhlengethwa, Ms D G
Mabaso, Mr X
Schneemann, Mr G D
Mocumi, Ms P A
Chauke, Mr H P
Magagula, Mr V V
Makhubele-Mashele, Ms L S

DA

Kohler-Barnard, Ms D
Schafer, Ms D A

COPE

George, Mr M

IFP

Ndlovu, Mr V B
Mncwango, Mr M A (Alt)

Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises

ANC

Mentor, Ms M P
Masilo, Ms J M
Zulu, Mr Z B
Twala, Ms N M
Bam-Mugwanya, Ms V
Maake, Ms J J
Mlangeni, Mr A
Tshwete, Ms P

DA
Van Dyk, Mr S M
Van Dalen, Mr P

COPE
Nhanha, Mr M A

IFP

Oriani-Ambrosini, Mr M G
Dhlamini, Mr B W (Alt)

Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration

ANC

Moloi-Moropa, Ms J C
Maluleke, Ms J M
Mohale, Ms M C
Boshigo, Ms D F
Williams, Mr A J
Tshwete, Ms P
Rasool, Mr E
Bikani, Ms F C

DA

Dreyer, Ms A M
Van Schalkwyk, Ms H C

COPE

Odendaal, Ms L

IFP

Msimang, Mr C T
Msweli, Mr H S (Alt)

Portfolio Committee on Public Works

ANC

Hendricks, Ms L B
Moss, Ms L N
Mandela, Mr Z M D
Gxowa, Ms B N
Manana, Mr M C
Magama, Mr T H
Turok, Mr B
Dlulane, Ms N B

DA

Masango, Mr S J
Rabotapi, Mr M W

COPE

Mguni, Mr P B

IFP

Dhlamini, Mr B W
Singh, Mr N (Alt)

Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform

ANC

Sizani, Mr S P
Nchabeleng, Mr E M
Bam-Mugwanya, Ms V
Mnisi, Ms N A
Nyalungu, Ms E R
Mandela, Mr Z M D
Mmusi, Mr S G
Radebe, Mr B A

DA
Swathe, Mr M M
Steyn , Ms A

COPE

Dandala, Mr M H

IFP

Msimang, Mr C T
Cebekhulu, Mr R H (Alt)
Skosana, Mr B M (Alt)


Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology

ANC

Ngcobo, Mr N
Ngcobo, Ms B T
Ntuli, Mr Z C
Nxumalo, Ms M D
Nyama, Ms M M A
Nyanda, Ms M F
Nyekembe, Mr E
DA

Kalyan, Ms S V
Shinn, Ms M R

COPE

Molau, Ms S P

IFP

Smith, Mr P F
Lucas, Mr E J (Alt)

Portfolio Committee on Social Development

ANC
Botha, Mr Y R
Xaba, Ms P P
Manganye, Ms J
Nelson, Ms J W
Magagula, Mr V V
Makasi, Ms X C
November, Ms N T
Saal, Ms G
DA

Kopane, Ms S P
Lamoela, Ms H

COPE

Gcume, Ms N P

IFP

Makhuba, Ms H N
Zikalala, Ms C N (Alt)

Portfolio Committee on Sports and Recreation

ANC

Komphela, Mr B M
Luyenge, Mr Z
Suka, Mr L
Dikgacwi, Mr M M
Ndabeni, Ms S T
Mjobo, Ms L N
Tinto, Ms B
Mmusi, Mr S G
DA

Lee, Mr T D
Van Der Linde, Mr J J

COPE

MacKenzie, Mr G D

IFP

Dhlamini, Mr B W
Lucas, Mr E J (Alt)

Portfolio Committee on Tourism

ANC

Gumede, Mr D M
Khorai, Mr L P
Hajaig, Ms F
Snell, Mr G T
Tshabalala-Msimang, Dr M E
Turok, Mr B
Zulu, Mr B Z
Twala, Ms N M

DA

Krumbock, Mr G R
Shinn, Ms M R

COPE

Njobe, Ms M A

IFP
Zikalala, Ms C N
Smith, Mr P F (Alt)

Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry

ANC

Fubbs, Ms J L
Ramodibe, Ms D M
Duma, Mr M
Gcwabaza, Mr E N
Line, Ms H
Njikelana, Mr S J
Mabedla, Ms N R
Masango, Mr F T

DA

Marais, Mr S J F
Van Der Westhuizen, Mr A P

COPE

Kotsi, Ms C M P
IFP

Lebenya, Ms P S
Oriani-Ambrosini, Mr M G (Alt)


Portfolio Committee on Transport

ANC

Bhengu, Ms N R
Khunou, Ms N P
Mpahlwa, Mr M B M
Mlambo, Mr E M
Newhoudt-Druchen, Ms W S
Ngele, Ms N J
Ngwenya- Mabila, Ms P C
Nqakula, Mr C

DA

Farrow, Mr S B
De Freitas, Mr M S F

COPE
Poho, Mr P D

IFP

Lucas, Mr E J
Dhlamini, Mr B W (Alt)


Portfolio Committee on Water and Environmental Affairs

ANC

Sotyu, Ms M M
Bhengu, Ms P
Diale, Mr L N
Selau, Mr G J
Mayende-Sibiya, Ms N A
Skosana, Mr J J
Sosibo, Ms J E
Tlake, Ms M F

DA

Morgan, Mr G R
Lovemore, Ms A T
COPE

Ndude, Ms H D

IFP

Zikalala, Ms C N
Makhuba, Ms H N (Alt)

Portfolio Committee on Women, Youth, Children and People with Disability

ANC

Thompson, Ms B
Motimele, Mr M S
Petersen-Maduna, Ms P
Tseke, Ms G K
Malgas, Ms H H
Kekana, Mr D C
Tshabalala-Msimang, Dr E M
Mabaso, Mr X

DA

Robinson, Ms D
Duncan, Ms P C

COPE

Rwexana, Ms S P

IFP

Lebenya, Ms P S
Makhuba, Ms H N (Alt)

Committee on Private Member’s Legislative proposals and special petitions

ANC

Thobejane, Mr S G
Jeffery, Mr J H
Chauke, Mr H P
Molebatsi, Ms A M
Mocumi,  Ms P A
Mdaka, Ms M N
Fihla, Mr N B

DA

Dreyer, Ms A M

COPE

Kilian, Ms J D

IFP

Oriani-Abrosini, Mr M G
Smith, Mr P F (Alt)

Committee on Public Accounts

ANC

Mathambi, Ms F A
Mangena, Ms M S
Ainslie, Mr R A
Koornhof, Mr G W
Pillay, Mr S M
Nyanda, Ms M F
Rantsolase, Ms A M

DA

Steele, Mr M H
Du Toit, Mr N D

COPE

Mashiane, Ms L M

APC

Godi, Mr T N

IFP

Singh, Mr N
Lebenya, Mr P S (Alt)


Standing Committee on Appropriations

ANC

Sogoni, Mr E M
Mokgoto, Mr K
Mashigo, Ms R J
Kubayi, Ms M T
Abram, Mr S
Mabuza, Ms C M
Bonhomme, Mr T J
Ramodibe, Ms M D
Mphahlwa, Mr M B M

DA

Swart, Mr M
Rabie, Mr J

COPE

Koornhof, Mr N C J

IFP

Skosana, Mr B M
Singh, Mr N (Alt)

Joint Standing Committee on Defence

ANC
Mgabadeli, Ms H C
Monareng, Mr O E
Gololo, Mr C L
Dlodlo, Ms A
Maunye, Ms M M
Jordan, Mr P Z
Chikunga, Ms S L
Booi, Mr M S

Committee on Auditor-General

ANC

Masutha, Adv M T
Matshoba, Mr J M
Nonkonyana, Mr M
Tsebe, Ms S R
Mavunda, Mr D W
Tlake, Ms F M
Ndabandaba, Mr L B G
Nxumalo, Ms D M

COPE

Mashiane, Ms L M

IFP

Singh, Mr N
Lebenya, Mr P S (Alt)

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    a) Submission of the Financial and Fiscal Commission on the Division of
       Revenue Bill for 2010-2011, tabled on 26 May 2009 in terms of
       section 9(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997
       (Act No 97 of 1997) [RP 92-2009].
                            THURSDAY, 28 MAY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1. National Railway Safety Regulator Amendment Bill [B 32B – 2008] –
         Act No 69 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 20 May
         2009).

      2. Civil Aviation Bill [B 73B – 2008] – Act No 13 of 2009 (assented to
         and signed by President on 25 May 2009).

      3. National Environment Laws Amendment Bill [B 66D – 2008] – Act No 14
         of 2009 (assented to and signed by President on 25 May 2009).

National Assembly

The Speaker

 1. Membership of Committees


The following members have been elected as Chairpersons of the Committees
below with effect from 28 May 2009.


Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries

Phaliso, Mr N M

Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture
Farisani, Mr T S

Portfolio Committee on Basic Education

Chohan, Ms F I

Portfolio Committee on Communications

Vadi, Mr I

Portfolio Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs

Tsenoli, Mr L S
Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services

Smith, Mr V G

Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans

Booi, Mr M S

Portfolio Committee on Economic Development

Coleman, Ms E M
Portfolio Committee on Energy

Thabethe, Ms E

Portfolio Committee on Health

Goqwana, Mr B M

Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training

Fransman, Mr M L

Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs

Martins, Mr B A D

Portfolio Committee on Human Settlements

Dambuza, Ms B N

Portfolio Committee on International Relations and Co-operation

Nxesi, Mr T W

Portfolio Committee on Mining
Gona, Mr F M

Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises

Mentor, Ms M P

Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration

Moloi-Moropa, Ms J C

Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform

Sizani, Mr S P

Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology

Ngcobo, Mr N

Portfolio Committee on Social Development

Botha, Mr Y R

Portfolio Committee on Sports and Recreation

Komphela, Mr B M
Portfolio Committee on Tourism

Gumede, Mr D M

Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry

Fubbs, Ms J L

Portfolio Committee on Transport

Bhengu, Ms N R

Portfolio Committee on Water and Environmental Affairs

Sotyu, Ms M M

Portfolio Committee on Women, Youth, Children and People with Disability

Thompson, Ms B

Committee on Private Member’s Legislative proposals and special petitions

Thobejane, Mr S G

Committee on Public Accounts
Godi, Mr T N

Standing Committee on Appropriations

Sogoni, Mr E M

Committee on Auditor-General

Masutha, Adv M T

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform

    a) Report and Financial Statements of the Commission on Restitution of
       Land Rights for 2008-2009 [RP 39-2009].
                             MONDAY, 1 JUNE 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

   1. Membership of Committees


    Note: The following item replaces the item published on page 51 of the
    Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 28 January 2009:


    (1)     In the ATC of 28 May 2009, it was incorrectly indicated that Mr
        N M Phaliso was elected as Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee
        on Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries.


        In fact, Mr M Johnson was elected Chairperson of this Committee
        with effect from 28 May 2009.

                            TUESDAY, 2 JUNE 2009
ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker
1.    Membership of Committees

   The following members have been elected as Chairpersons of the Committees
   below with effect from 02 June 2009.
   Standing Committee on Finance


   Mufamadi, Mr TA


   Portfolio Committee on Labour


   Yengeni, Ms LE


   Portfolio Committee on Police


   Chikunga, Ms LS


   Portfolio Committee on Public Works


   Hendricks, Ms LB

TABLINGS

National Assembly

 1. The Speaker
     a) The Acting President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 31 March 2009 to the Speaker of the National Assembly,
        informing members of the Assembly of the extension of the
        employment of the SA National Defence Force for service in
        fulfilment of the international obligations of the Republic of
        South Africa to the Democratic Republic of Congo to assist with
        capacity building of the DRC Defence Force:

        EXTENSION OF THE EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE
        FORCE FOR A SERVICE IN FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS
        OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF
        CONGO


        This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have extended
        the employment of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF)
        personnel to the Democratic Republic of Congo, for a service in
        fulfilment of the international obligations of the Republic of
        South Africa towards the DRC to assist with capacity building of
        the DRC Defence Force.


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).
        Members of the SANDF were employed to assist the DRC Defence Force
        with capacity building. The employment of these members will expire
        on 31 March 2009. The SANDF’s mission in the DRC is not yet
        completed. The employment of 11 SANDF members is now extended until
        31 March 2010.


        I will communicate this report to members of the National Council
        of Provinces and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on
        Defence, and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to
        the notice of the National Assembly.
        Regards


        signed
        B MBETE
        ACTING PRESIDENT

     b) The Acting President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 31 March 2009 to the Speaker of the National Assembly,
        informing members of the Assembly of the extension of the
        employment of the SA National Defence Force for service in
        fulfilment of the international obligations of the Republic of
        South Africa to the Democratic Republic of Congo to assist with
        integration and training of the armed forces of the DRC:

        EXTENSION OF THE EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE
        FORCE FOR A SERVICE IN FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS
        OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF
        CONGO


        This serves to inform the National assembly that I have extended
        the employment of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF)
        personnel to the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), for a service
        in fulfilment of the international obligations of the Republic of
        South Africa towards the DRC, to assist with integration and
        training of the armed forces of the DRC.


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        Members of the SANDF were employed to assist the DRC with
        integration and training of armed forces. The employment of these
        members will expire on 31 March 2009. The SANDF’s mission in the
        DRC is not yet completed. The employment of 28 SANDF members is now
        extended until 31 March 2010.


        I will communicate this report to members of the National Council
        of Provinces and the Joint Standing Committee on Defence, and wish
        to request that you bring the contents hereof to the attention of
        the National Assembly.


        Regards


        signed
        B MBETE
        ACTING PRESIDENT
     c) The Acting President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 31 March 2009 to the Speaker of the National Assembly,
        informing members of the Assembly of the extension of the
        employment of the SA National Defence Force for service in
        fulfilment of the international obligations of the Republic of
        South Africa towards the African Union as part of the African Union
        Observer Mission in Northern Uganda:
        EXTENSION OF THE EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE
        FORCE FOR A SERVICE IN FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS
        OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE AFRICAN UNION AS PART
        OF THE AFRICAN UNION OBSERVER MISSION IN NORTHERN UGANDA


        This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have extended
        the employment of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF)
        personnel to Northern Uganda, for a service in fulfilment of the
        international obligations of the Republic of South Africa towards
        the African Union, as part of the African Union Observer Mission in
        Northern Uganda.


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        Members of the SANDF were employed to participate in the African
        Union Observer Mission in Northern Uganda. The employment of these
        members will expire on 31 March 2009. The SANDF’s mission in
        Northern Uganda is not yet completed. The employment of 5 SANDF
        members is now extended until 31 March 2010.
        I will communicate this report to members of the National Council
        of Provinces and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on
        Defence, and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to
        the notice of the National Assembly.
        Regards


        signed
        B MBETE
        ACTING PRESIDENT


     d) The Acting President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 31 March 2009 to the Speaker of the National Assembly,
        informing members of the Assembly of the extension of the
        employment of the SA National Defence Force for service in
        fulfilment of the international obligations of the Republic of
        South Africa towards the United Nations and African Union as part
        of the UN/AU hybrid operation in Darfur:

        EXTENSION OF THE EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE
        FORCE FOR A SERVICE IN FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS
        OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE UNITED NATIONS AND THE
        AFRICAN UNION AS PART OF THE UN/AU HYBRID OPERATION IN DARFUR


        This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have extended
        the employment of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF)
        personnel to the Darfur, for a service in fulfilment of the
        international obligations of the Republic of South Africa towards
        the United Nations and the African Union as part of the UN/AU
        Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in accordance with the United
        Nations Security Council Resolution 1769, dated 31 July 2007.
        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        Members of the SANDF were employed to be part of the UN/AU Hybrid
        Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The employment of these members will
        expire on 31 March 2009. The SANDF’s mission in the DRC is not yet
        completed. The employment of 850 SANDF members is now extended
        until 31 March 2010.


        I will communicate this report to members of the National Council
        of Provinces and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on
        Defence, and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to
        the attention of the National Assembly.


        Regards


        signed
        B MBETE
        ACTING PRESIDENT

     e) The Acting President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 31 March 2009 to the Speaker of the National Assembly,
        informing members of the Assembly of the extension of the
        employment of the SA National Defence Force for service in
        fulfilment of the international obligations of the Republic of
        South Africa towards the United Nations as part of the United
        Nations political mission in Nepal:
        EXTENSION OF THE EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE
        FORCE FOR A SERVICE IN FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS
        OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE UNITED NATIONS AS PART
        OF THE UNITED NATIONS POLITICAL MISSION IN NEPAL


        This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have extended
        the employment of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF)
        personnel to Nepal, for a service in fulfilment of the
        international obligations of the Republic of South Africa towards
        the United Nations, as part of the United Nations Political Mission
        in Nepal.


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        Members of the SANDF were employed to be part of the United Nations
        Political Mission in Nepal. The employment of these members will
        expire on 31 March 2009. The SANDF’s mission in Nepal is not yet
        completed. The employment of one SANDF member is now extended until
        31 March 2010.


        I will communicate this report to members of the National Council
        of Provinces and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on
        Defence, and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to
        the attention of the National Assembly.


        Regards


        signed
        B MBETE
        ACTING PRESIDENT

     f) The Acting President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 31 March 2009 to the Speaker of the National Assembly,
        informing members of the Assembly of the extension of the
        employment of the SA National Defence Force for service in
        fulfilment of the international obligations of the Republic of
        South Africa towards the Democratic Republic of Congo:

        EXTENSION OF THE EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE
        FORCE FOR A SERVICE IN FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS
        OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF
        CONGO


        This serves to inform the National assembly that I have extended
        the employment of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF)
        personnel to the Democratic Republic of Congo, for a service in
        fulfilment of the international obligations of the Republic of
        South Africa towards the United Nations for participation in the
        peace mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo.


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        Members of the SANDF were employed to participate in the peace
        mission in the DRC. The employment of these members will expire on
        31 March 2009. The SANDF’s mission in the DRC is not yet completed.
        The employment of 1248 SANDF members is now extended until 31 March
        2010.


        I will communicate this report to members of the National Council
        of Provinces and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on
        Defence, and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to
        the attention of the National Assembly.


        Regards


        signed
        B MBETE
        ACTING PRESIDENT

     g) The President of the Republic submitted the following letter dated
        5 May 2009 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, informing
        members of the Assembly of the extension of the employment of the
        SA National Defence Force in Burundi for service in fulfilment of
        the international obligations of the Republic of South Africa
        towards the African Union:


        EXTENSION OF EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE
        IN BURUNDI, FOR SERVICE IN FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL
        OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE AFRICAN
        UNION


        This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have extended
        the employment of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF)
        personnel to Burundi, in fulfilment of the international
        obligations of the Republic of South Africa towards the African
        Union as part of the African Union Special Task Force in Burundi.
        The South African National Defence personnel are assisting in
        providing security to leaders and combatants of the Palipehutu-FNL.


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        Members of the SANDF were employed in Burundi, as part of the
        African Union Special Task Force, to provide protection to leaders,
        members and combatants of the Palipehutu-FNL. The African Union’s
        mission in Burundi is not yet completed. The employment of 1137
        SANDF members is now extended until 30 June 2009.
        I will communicate this report to members of the National Council
        of Provinces and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on
        Defence, and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to
        the attention of the National Assembly.


        Yours Sincerely,


        signed
        KGALEMA MOTLANTHE
        PRESIDENT

                           WEDNESDAY, 3 JUNE 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees

    (1)     The following members were appointed to the Rules Committee in
        accordance with Rule 159(d):


        African National Congress (21)
        Booi, M S
        Chohan, F I
        De Lange, J H
        Frolick, C T
        Fubbs, J L
        Hendricks, L B
        Jeffery, J H
        Landers, L T
        Magwanishe, G B
        Martins, B A D
        Masutha, T M
        Mentor, M P
        Moloi-Moropa, J C
        Motshekga, M S
        Njikelana, S J
        Rantsolase, M A
        Sotyu, M M
        Tsenoli, S L
        Thabete, E
        Thomson, B
        Tshwete, P
        Kholwane, S E (alternate)
        Khunou, N P (alternate)
        Sogoni, E M (alternate)


        Democratic Alliance (5)
        Davidson, I O
        Doman, W P
        Ellis, M J
        Kalyan, S V
        Pretorius, P J C


        Congress of the People (3)
        Botha, T
        Koornhof, N J J van R
        Mashiane, L M


        Inkatha Freedom Party (2)
        Oriani-Ambrosini, M G R
        Van der Merwe, J H


        Independent Democrats (1)
        De Lille, P


        United Democratic Front (1)
        Ntapane, S Z


        Freedom Front Plus (1)
        Mulder, C P


        African Christian Democratic Party (1)
        Dudley, C


        United Christian Democratic Party (1)
        Matladi, M N


        Pan-Africanist Congress of Azania (1)
        Mphahlele, L M


        Minority Front (1)
        Bhoola, R B


        Azanian People’s Organisation (1)
        Mangena, M A


        African People’s Convention (1)
        Godi, N T

    (2)     The following member has been elected as Chairperson of the
        Committee below with effect from 2 June 2009:


        Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development


        Ramathlodi, Mr N

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Tourism and the Minister of Water and Environmental
    Affairs

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Environmental Affairs and
        Tourism for 2009/1- to 2013/14.

2.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

    (a)     Business Plan of South African National Parks for 2009/10.

3.    The Minister of Tourism


    (a)     Strategic Plan of South African Tourism for 2009/10 to 2013/14.

                            THURSDAY, 4 JUNE 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees

    Rules Committee


    Appointed:   Johnson, M (ANC); Terblanche, J F (DA)
    Discharged:  Booi, M S (ANC); Kalyan, S V (DA)

