---
title: 'National Assembly - 28 October 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-10-28
---

                         WEDNESDAY, 28 OCTOBER 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

                                 GOVERNANCE
                                  Cluster 3

MINISTERS:

     Reconciling of statement on budgeting with purchase of official car

 223. Mr I O Davidson (DA) asked the Minister in the Presidency -
         National Planning Commission:
         (1)           How does he  reconcile  his  statement  on  budgeting
               (details furnished) with the purchasing of a motor vehicle of
               R1,2 million (details furnished);


         (2)      whether he intends to have one official vehicle;  if  not,
               what vehicle does he intend purchasing for use in Gauteng; if
               so, what transport does he intend using outside  the  Western
               Cape?                          NO2379E

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Speaker, let
me just correct the hon Davidson The Presidency purchased the vehicle. It’s
not my personal vehicle. It’s a vehicle I use for official purposes. I made
the selection of colour from a range of options, and that is the vehicle
that we are talking about; that is the vehicle that I responded to on a
question a fortnight ago.

That the vehicle is expensive in the context of what I said earlier, I can
see that it is an error of judgment. Now, let me look at this issue
further. I have evaluated – but let me also remind this House of what the
hon Deputy President said last week. He said, in response to a question by
the hon Leader of the Opposition:

   These purchases were, in fact, planned and budgeted for. The purchases
   were not unethical in that they were not illegal or underhand. For these
   reasons, we do not intend to request the return of the vehicles. In any
   event, as the hon Leader of the Opposition is aware, a used car has far
   less resale value than a new car.


I have run the numbers, and the vehicle is now five months old. It has
6 700 kilometres on the clock. Vehicles depreciate very, very, very quickly
and, in the current circumstance, probably would not find a buyer and so
would be written down a lot more quickly. I have run the numbers and
perhaps the hon George can assist – he’s an actuary, I’m told – and you
will see that continuing to argue that these vehicles should be returned
does not actually make economic sense. Here is a decision. It was taken
within the rules. I am saying that in my case it wasn’t entirely well-
advised, but the decision was taken, and it is one of those decisions that
you live with.

The hon Buthelezi last week was exceedingly helpful to all of us in this
House, when he said the point had been made, and he appealled to other
opposition parties not to continue milking a cow that will not yield a drop
more. The udder is empty. [Applause.] So, I think it is fundamentally
important in the instance of this institution that we deal with the matter
like that.

Finally, I’d like to say to the hon Davidson that if he and his party work
exceedingly hard, they will move from that side of the House to this side
of the House, and he might actually become the inheritor of this car. Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you very much to the hon Minister
for his very candid response. I can assure you that we do appreciate it.
Let me say that, in respect of the hon Minister, Prince Buthelezi, I know
that we have milked this cow, and we milk this cow specifically to make the
point that government has got to walk the talk.

We have, on a number of occasions, be it the President or be it the hon
Minister of Finance yesterday, stressed how we have to look after every
single rand and every single cent because one has to make it stretch. Quite
frankly, when we have a scenario where R43 million is spent just on cars,
we are not walking the talk.

Now, I understand exactly the position that the Minister was put in, but
you know, sir, the Premier of the Western Cape was put in a similar
position. She could have gone out, and her Ministers could have gone out,
according to the rules that pertain to this, and bought luxury vehicles,
but she stated right at the outset exactly what had to be done, and they
are all using pool cars, old cars, with high mileage. That is the example
that we expect every single Minister in this House to follow.
[Interjections.] [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Speaker,
again I’d like to draw the attention of the hon Davidson to the point that
was raised a fortnight ago in response to the hon Krumbock’s question, and
that is that I walked into a place where there wasn’t an establishment.

You needed to buy a vehicle; within the rules, the vehicle was purchased,
and I think that you will find that across the board the same trend
obtained, save and except where there were individuals whose vehicles were
way beyond the mileage set out in the rule book. At that stage, if the kind
of motor plan is gone, costs rise very, very quickly. Somebody has to look
at the economics of this as well.

So, we’d all like to be more Catholic than the Pope, and we commend the hon
Zille on having attained that status, but let’s be real about this issue as
well. Thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Hon Minister, thank you for your frankness. Arising from your
response, the new Minister of Finance stated that the Ministerial Handbook
is to be reviewed as part of government’s attempts to effect savings and,
according to the preliminary report on this task team, the handbook was
devised several years ago and certain aspects of it may no longer be
suitable or relevant.

Are you, hon Minister, aware whether the review will be considering the
issue of the cost of Ministers’ motor vehicles, and would you support a
review of that aspect; and, lastly, shouldn’t Parliament be involved in the
whole review process? Thank you very much, Minister.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: In respect
of the last point raised by the hon Swart, when I looked at the report of
the Moseneke Commission last year, the question of tools of trade of
Members of Parliament was raised, and he said the tools of trade are best
dealt with at the institution. I think that when we deal with the issues in
the handbook we should understand that in the main they are tools of trade.

If you revise the handbook, what you may well have is a situation that
there are more people outside of the new rules that are set. I am saying
forgive me father for I have sinned, whoever you may be, father. For now, I
have sinned. I’ve made an error of judgment. Let’s live with it.

You see, there are a number of issues in the background to this thing. When
I first became a Minister, every time I needed to go somewhere, my
protectors had to spend two days at the government garage, pleading for a
car. We would get what the drivers didn’t want.

We improved on the system, and then there was the 70% rule that seemed to
provide for a BMW 5 Series that was adjusted when all of our salaries were
adjusted last year by the Moseneke Commission, and this is an unintended
consequence. It’s important to understand that these issues have a
background and a history, and I want to plead, as the hon Buthelezi did
last week. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr S G THOBEJANE: Speaker, I wanted to check with the Minister, as you are
addressing the issue of economic challenges, are you also taking into
consideration the protection and the safety of our Ministers? Thank you.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: The handbook
makes provision for all of these things. There are some issues about which
I think we can actually really, really plumb the depths, and one of those
is the kind of accommodation that we have, the kind where we sit on the bus
when we travel between Johannesburg and Cape Town or Cape Town and Durban,
and the hotels we stay in. We can plumb the depths of this thing. What we
need, as parliamentarians, as colleagues, fundamentally is a rational
approach. That’s all I plead for, within the rules. Thank you.

Mr P D DEXTER: Speaker, I think that we should really say it. It is
refreshing to have a Minister respond with such candour and to just be
frank, and I commend the Minister for that.

It is unfortunate that he has been singled out, because we know that this
is a sin that is committed by many, rather than by an individual. I think
what his candour demonstrates first of all, and I hope he would agree, is
that it is time to relook at the handbook and all the perks in government
generally. It is not about his car; it’s about a general issue, about an
ethos and the symbolic nature of these kinds of things, because they do
send particular messages to our constituencies.

Secondly, in times like these that we face, with a general state of
economic recession, that symbolism has an added significance. Thirdly, I
would like to ask on a lighter note, and perhaps the Minister could advise
me, is it true that because of this situation, the theme song of the ANC
has been changed from Umshini Wami to Oh Lord, won’t you buy me a Mercedes
Benz? [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Am I allowed
to sing the song, Speaker? You know, this is, of course, a matter that is
considered all over the place. I see certain retired Archbishops who praise
heads of state in one place, who travel with four large aeroplanes all over
the world, for being disciplined and so on, and then smack everybody else
in South Africa.

So, we have double standards as far as this is concerned. I think what is
important is that, at all times, we try and live within the rules. It
obviously is better if somebody else tries to define the rules for us. We
try and live within those rules, and we exercise judgment. That is
ultimately what this is about. Executive responsibility is about the
exercise of judgment, and that is what we need to be evaluated against.
Thank you. [Applause.]

                      WELCOMING OF NIGERIAN DELEGATION

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I would like to acknowledge the presence in the
gallery of a delegation from Nigeria. These are members of the South Africa-
Nigeria Bi-National Commission’s joint parliamentary activities. They will
be here for two days, meeting with members of the South African Parliament.
Hon members, I welcome you to our Parliament. [Applause.]

     Steps taken to address water crisis in light of climate change and
                                urbanisation

206.  Mr S L Tsenoli (ANC) asked the Minister  for  Co-operative  Governance
      and Traditional Affairs:

     What steps has he taken in local government  to  address  the  looming
     water  crisis  in  light   of   climate   change   and   urbanisation?
                                  NO2361E

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Mr
Speaker, on the issues of climate change and the looming water crisis that
has been anticipated, the department is more supportive of the Department
of Water and Environmental Affairs on this aspect.
Our task is to ensure that we support the department and it’s the one that
is leading on these issues and, therefore, we are accepting that whatever
they come up with through co-operative discussions will be taken up by
ourselves. What we have done though, is to conduct a study around the water
and sanitation backlogs in South Africa. We have the report in that respect
that outlines what has to be done for us to be able to ensure that
universal access is reached in South Africa.

The last point is on the issue of urbanisation. We have developed an Urban
Development Framework, a framework that is aimed at looking at the
migration of people. We found out that a lot of people are staying in
squalid conditions in informal settlements because they are running away
from the grinding poverty in rural areas. Others are being evicted from the
farms, therefore they go to these urban areas and stay in these conditions.

Now we have a situation in South Africa where areas that are wealthy are
living side by side with squalid conditions and poor areas. Thank you very
much.

Mr S L TSENOLI: Speaker, Minister thank you for your response. There is no
doubt that this is one area that requires collaboration and co-operation
across the three spheres including the communities on the ground.

South Africa is a water-scarce country and the fact that we might be facing
a water crisis suggests that as individuals, families, organisations and
especially government, we need to take proactive steps to increase the
intensity of this collaboration. However, its results also ought to be
evident in the manner in which municipalities themselves, especially
because they are on the frontline, provide guidance and assistance in water
harvesting. This also applies to the kind of maintenance that is required
for infrastructure that we provide, to make this service absolutely
available now and in the future.

Concerning drought and similar disasters that affect our area of
responsibility this collaboration needs to be intensified for purposes of
sustainability which we are committed to. Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Mr
Speaker ...

Baba Somlomo, esifuna ukukusho nje nathi esivumelana naye uSihlalo, ubaba
uTsenoli ukuthi udaba lokusebenzisana nokuthi sibenesixaxambiji uma senza
umsebenzi kuyinto esemqoka kithi, esiyithandayo nesiyenzayo. UMnyango
wakhelwe lokho ukusebenzisana kwalezi zigaba zikahulumeni. Ngaleyondlela
leyo ... (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Mr Speaker, we would like to say that we also agree with the Chairperson,
Mr Tsenoli, with regard to the issue of collaboration. We should co-operate
if we are working together; it is important to us, because it is something
we love and practise. The department is also meant for the collaboration of
these governmental spheres. In that way ...]

... morena, re a thaba ge re ekwa taba ye. Re re re tla e lokiša. Re tla
kgona go šomišana gore re kgone go tšwela pele ka go lokiša ditaba tše tša
meetse ka ge re dumela gore meetse a bohlokwa setšhabeng sa Afrika-Borwa.
Ke a leboga. [Magoswi.] (Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[... sir, we are glad to hear that; we will address that. We believe that
water is an important resource to the nation of South Africa. We will
therefore work together to address the issues around it. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

Mr W P DOMAN: Speaker, hon Minister it’s a known fact that 98% of the
surface water in South Africa has already been allocated and climate change
will mean that we would have less surface water in the future. So this is a
very important aspect, given the fact that a lot of municipalities are very
badly run, and you know that the majority are run by ANC.

I would just like to ask the Minister whether he would agree that there is
an urgent need to consider that the Municipal Infrastructure Grant, MIG, be
directed towards fixing the ailing water infrastructure, and also whether
he would he would strongly condemn curb water theft in this country.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Mr
Speaker, I am requesting the hon members, on this side of the House, to
rise above petty party politics.

Issues of governance do not require the approach that hon Doman takes. He
is a very sensible man. Today I am shocked to the marrow that he speaks
like this. Maybe, he has been briefed by somebody to speak like this
because he’s always been rational in the way he approaches matters.

When you talk about the issues of municipalities that are badly run,
municipalities are not different from the ones in the Western Cape. The
ones in the Western Cape are the worst because people go to bed with
different partners at different times, because of the coalition system that
is prevailing in this area.

You find that leadership is being changed from time to time when people
come in. Now I am saying let us not throw stones when we live in glass
houses. I am requesting that we should focus on the issues at hand and
engage with them. [Interjections.] I like it when the temperatures rise
under these conditions. I enjoy it, in fact.

The issue that is important hon Doman is the Municipal Infrastructure
Grant. We do agree. We must be able to find creative measures and ways of
ensuring service delivery. Thank you very much. [Time expired.]

Mr P F SMITH: Minister, we know that government has committed a huge
amount, in the order of R50 or R60 billion, to resources for solving this
problem and also that, for the first time, there has been a lot of
concentration and emphasis on preventive maintenance.

However, the situation is that there are tight, time constraints to deal
with this matter, because there are very long lead times to resolve the
water crisis in the longer term.

Secondly, there has been nearly enough reduction and consumption, and
that’s pretty huge pressure on some of the systems like the Vaal system in
particular. Thirdly, we have enormous capacity constraints with the local
level to deal with the problem. Now the Minister made the comment that yes,
we have a report, let’s identify the backlogs.

The question I would like to ask the Minister is not about whether he has a
report but about whether he has a plan or whether the government has a plan
with timelines and specific targets to address the crisis because it is in
fact a crisis. Fourthly, does the government have a plan to deal with
emergency interventions in respect of those places in the country where the
poor water quality is a threat to the environment and to life? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Speaker,
on the issues that have been raised around the backlogs, it’s more of what
has been raised by hon Smith, on waste-water-treatment plants, where we are
saying that the cost requires an amount of about R56 billion. When he talks
about what is a plan, do we have a plan? I must tell you that this
information was assembled and presented last week on 21 and 22 October in
relation to the extent of the backlogs.

We are involved in the process of developing a turnaround strategy. If you
ask me the same question in December, I will be able to give you a reply
because we are developing a strategy that will be ready at that time.

On the issue of consumption being reduced, the people who are mostly
consuming the water are the farmers and the people at the mines and that is
where the consumption of water is most prevalent. We are engaged on issues
of ensuring that savings happen on those areas and also interventions on
areas where there is an emergency. That matter is taken up, hon Smith.
Thank you very much.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Speaker, there are many concerned citizens who say that
the challenges in our water sector are beginning to bear a resemblance to
those that sounded the initial alarm bells of the current energy crisis.

Water availability and quality have been compromised. Water pollution and
the poor management of water resource infrastructure have culminated in
severe water shortages in some places with measurable health impacts and
environmental damages. What we want to know, hon Minister, is what specific
actions are local governments in Gauteng province in particular taking, to
ensure that they do not experience water shortages in the year 2013, as has
been predicted by many. Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Mr
Speaker, on the issues of challenges there is no doubt that South Africa is
a semiarid country. Water is not available in abundance and this is
compounded by the fact that we are losing almost 40% of the water
underground that is not reaching the people and the municipalities because
of leakages. Those are the issues that are applicable across the country in
different municipalities.

Therefore, we are involved in measures to ensure that: one, we save on the
leaks so that the leakage is able to be stopped; and two, we are involved
in campaigns to ensure that we save water because if we do not do so, as we
get water from Lesotho, the agreements are going to kick in earlier than
the year 2017 if we don’t act on this.

Therefore, as government we are involved in measures to ensure that water
is treated as a scarce resource and that it is managed as such. But we are
requesting Members of Parliament to work with us in this campaign of
conserving water. Thank you very much.

  Submission of Cedaw reports to UN and progress made in implementing Cedaw
                                 provisions

202.  Mrs D M Ramodibe (ANC) asked the Minister of  Women,  Youth,  Children
      and People with Disabilities:

      (1)   Why (a)  did  South  Africa  not  submit  the  required  country
           progress  reports  to  the  United  Nations  in  terms  of   the
           Convention on the Elimination of  All  Forms  of  Discrimination
           Against Women, Cedaw, in (i) 2001 and (ii)  2005  and  (b)  were
           country reports submitted late;


      (2)   who is responsible for verifying the accuracy and  relevance  of
           information reflected in the country report;


      (3)   what measures are in place to ensure that (a) future reports are
           submitted timeously and (b) they meet all  requirements  as  set
           out by the Cedaw Committee;
      (4)   what has been the progress in  implementing  the  provisions  of
           Cedaw?                                                   NO2357E

The SPEAKER: Question 202 has been posed by the hon D M Ramodibe to the
Minister of Women, Children and People with Disabilities. Unfortunately,
the Minister is not available. The question will stand over to the next
question opportunity.

    Measures in place to provide for amendment or rejection of long-term
                          strategic plan by Cabinet

222.   The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (DA)  asked  the  Minister  in  the
      Presidency - National Planning Commission:


     Whether, with reference to  the  Green  Paper  on  National  Strategic
     Planning (details furnished), any measures are in place to provide for
     the eventuality where Cabinet amends or  rejects  the  long-term  plan
     devised and proposed by the National Planning Commission; if not,  why
     not; if so, what measures  will  be  put  in  place  to  resolve  this
     dissension?                        NO2378E

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Hon Speaker,
I am not quite sure how to deal with the question because Rule 68(2) is the
anticipation rule. The hon Leader of the Opposition is the member of the ad
hoc committee dealing with the Green Paper. I would like to believe that
the process being undertaken by that ad hoc committee has full veracity.

I don’t think it is correct for a member of that committee to ask me to
anticipate its outcome. The committee now has full power. The Green Paper
is a consultative document. The committee should feel free to get evidence
from anybody. I have indicated to the committee on more than one occasion
that I am available to do that. That may be a more appropriate forum. I am
not trying to duck the question, but I am trying to find a way that
recognises the process underway. I think that Rule 68(2) does provide us
with a way of trying to deal with this matter. I thank you.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon Minister I accept
that it might be pre-emptive to have asked the question I have asked, but I
could pose the following question to you. Since the national vision is a
long-term strategic plan, covering at least 15 years, at least two
congresses of a governing party could take place within that time. If,
after such a congress, a governing party that is leading the government at
the time were to change their strategic direction, how would that affect a
long-term vision determined by the National Planning Commission?

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: I think
between such congresses there are also national elections. I think that we
have always set store by the fact that our elections must be free and fair,
allowing the electorate to articulate their view about the trend and
direction of government. That serves as a check and balance in the system
of democracy.

The approach that we eventually take to the Planning Commission is that we
are mindful of all of these. What we don’t want is a commission that finds
itself impaled on a fundamental difference between itself and the executive
because the Constitution vests executive authority with the President and
the Cabinet. You cannot deal with the contradiction or have a lapdog
commission. You can’t have a commission that sets itself up as a place
where bargaining takes place.

I am hoping that, in exploring these kinds of issues and making
recommendations, as I have already indicated to the ad hoc committee, we
would be persuaded by the issues that they raise in their report. We are
undertaking to go back to them to indicate the issues that we will be
taking forward, arising from the detailed work that they are doing.

We must find the kind of balance that would give the commission the
necessary authority over and power to implement the issues that they raise.
It is a difficult path. It may have been easier in 1994 to establish a
National Planning Commission like this, but I think we have taken the
decision that we want to have greater clarity and participation about the
future. The perspective that we take should extend beyond the life period
of an elected government. I think we must take account of these issues as
we proceed. I thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: My apologies. My input pertains to the question that is
standing over. I thank you.

Mr D A KGANARE: Speaker, Minister, I think the challenge with regard to
national planning is the manner in which the plan is adopted. You have to
ensure that it becomes a country plan rather than a party-political plan.
The problem with this particular plan and the discussion in general, is
that an attempt is being made to project it as being only Cosatu and SACP
plans. For it to be a 15-year programme, we have to ensure that we canvass
the views of the people in general and that the plan is embraced by the
majority of South Africans so that it does not become a party-political
plan. Do you agree with me on that? [Interjections.]

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Speaker, I
do agree with hon Kganare. It is not a party or a government plan, but it
is a national plan. It involves all South Africans, regardless of political
persuasion. It is about mediating between the future and now. It is about
reconstructing what we do. Therefore, the ideas must be widely canvassed.
That is quite fundamental.

I want to use this opportunity to indicate that I don’t frequently notice
the party that the hon Kganare represents here in Parliament at that
committee. I don’t think that they go there at all, but I speak under
correction. It would be good if that party didn’t complain about issues,
but excluded themselves, because I actually know the members who ought to
be participants and alternates in that committee and they don’t attend. I
thank you. [Applause.] [Laughter.]

Mr N SINGH: Speaker, I accept what the Minister has said, vis-à-vis the
rule of anticipation. However, the ad hoc committee has been engaged in the
process of public hearings. What is refreshing is the kind of consensus
that is emerging within the committee. [Interjections.]

Mr M GUNGUBELE: Hon Speaker, can I raise a point of order?

The SPEAKER: What is the point of order, hon member? Hon Singh, can you
please take your seat?

Mr M GUNGUBELE: Speaker, correct me if I am wrong, but I find it irregular
or you will correct me, that the ad hoc committee is sitting and addressing
this issue; and that this issue is now being sneaked into this Parliament
and being discussed at this stage, whilst the ad hoc committee is dealing
with it. Can the hon Speaker give direction with regard to this?
The SPEAKER: Hon member, that is not a point of order. Continue, hon Singh.
[Interjections.]

Mr N SINGH: Hon Speaker, I was going to say that the ad hoc committee has
been seized with a number of issues which I think will be identified in the
report. The report was supposed to have been finalised today, but
unfortunately, it didn’t happen. I think in due course the report will be
finalised and will deal with the details of what the Planning Commission
should entail, the institutional arrangements, and so forth. That is
exactly what I wanted to say.

Hon Chairperson, I don’t think I have gone into any details of what the ad
hoc committee has said, but I just wanted to respond to the Minister that,
yes, the rule of anticipation should apply in this regard. I thank you.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: The rule of
anticipation, Rule 68(2), is the one being drawn attention to. The hon
Singh is perfectly correct about that. I do think that we should go back to
the ad hoc committee and try and resolve these issues. If there are
contradictions, we can try and intermediate with regard to those issues
before we try and bring them back to the floor of the House for discussion
and debate. I thank you.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I would like to recognise in the gallery, the
former deputy chairperson of the NCOP, Mrs Peggy Hollander, who is sitting
in the Speaker’s bay. We are extending a warm welcome to you. [Applause.]

Mr M E MBILI: Thank you, hon Speaker. Minister, for the purposes of those
of us who were not part of the process, the simple question would be, when
do you foresee its conclusion, since we are hearing the scepticism out
there? If the process is not finalised promptly, it does send mixed
messages, more especially when it comes to the investor community out
there. We would appreciate it if you could just give the House a timeline
as to when this process will be coming to fruition. I thank you.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Chairperson,
let me just start by saying that the way in which we undertake the issues
around the Planning Commission should make a lot more sense to all of us as
South Africans, ordinary people who feel differently about their future.
That should be the benchmark and investors would be persuaded by what we
do.

I want to have a rather different benchmark in dealing with this matter,
going forward. In respect of completion, on the one hand, the matter is now
in the hands of the ad hoc committee, which is chaired by the hon Mufamadi,
who is doing this amongst a series of other tasks. One would hope that,
before we rise in a few weeks, Parliament would have spoken about the
issues. As the executive we can then take this matter and consider it.
I have said in public that I would like to see the establishment of the
institution, sooner rather than latter. The sooner we can have it, the
better because part of what we in the executive have to learn, is a
different way of approaching these matters. The sooner the institutions are
there, the better it would be for all of us. I don’t want to pre-empt a
process that I think is inclusive and very detailed. That is the process
led by the ad hoc committee. I thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, Minister. Regarding the
rule of anticipation, I think it is in order for members to discuss the
process around the ad hoc committee, as long as they do not get into the
substance of the matters being discussed there. That will be covered when
the committee reports to the House. In future members should stick to that.


   Achievement of targets for employment of persons with disabilities, and
                              impeding progress

208.  Mrs J M Maluleke (ANC) asked the Minister for the Public  Service  and
      Administration:

     Whether targets for the employment of persons with  disabilities  will
     be achieved by 31 March 2010 as espoused in the Job  Access  Strategy;
     if not, what factors are hindering the progress; if  so,  what  actual
     percentage of people with disabilities is currently  employed  by  his
     department?                  NO2363E

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, if
government departments continue at the current pace, it is unlikely that we
will reach the 2% employment equity target for people with disabilities in
the public service as set out to be achieved by 31 March 2010. At the
moment, and as of June, the actual average performance stands at 0,22%.

Regarding the part that refers to the performance by the Department of the
Public Service and Administration, at the moment the performance is at
1,47%, which indicates that the department falls short by 0,53% to reach
the set target of 2%. As I have indicated, if this continues as an average
performance, we are unlikely to reach our target. Thank you very much.

Ms J M MALULEKE: Chairperson, thank you.

Ndza khensa Holobye eka vutihlamuleri bya n’wina. [Thank you, Minister, for
your accountability.]

Recently, the Portfolio Committee on Tourism went to the Ficksburg border
post on an oversight visit. The new building under construction at this
border post looks like it will not be able accessible to people with
disabilities.
What strategies are in place to ensure that when new buildings are
constructed, they will be able to cater for access by recruits with
disabilities, as well as people with disabilities seeking services in these
buildings?

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, it is
government’s position, as well as a policy position, that when new
buildings are constructed, departments should make sure that these
buildings will be accessible to people with disabilities.

This also applies to old buildings. It is necessary to modernise our
buildings to meet the required standards, so that a building, as a
structure, should not in itself become a deterrent to people with
disabilities.

I think the Ficksburg border post will have to respond accordingly to this
issue. Thank you.

Dr H C VAN SCHALKWYK: Chairperson, hon Minister, government acted very
strongly on affirmative action, especially as far as race is concerned,
and, to a lesser extent, as far as gender is concerned. It seems, however,
that government is only paying lip service to disabled people, or they do
not have the political will to reach the target of 2% in the Public
Service. It is important that government must talk to disabled people and
not only about them.

My question is the following: Does the Department of the Public Service and
Administration communicate with organisations representing disabled people
as part of a recruiting process? Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson,
government moved with speed in implementing policies across the board,
whether it’s a policy on affirmative action or on disability. What the
department does – and we remind all departments, every year, through our
engagement on improving conditions for policy implementation - is to make
sure that when it comes to dealing with issues related to people with
disabilities, we take the stakeholders that are dealing with that on board.

The association Disabled People of South Africa, DPSA, has made itself
available to say, “nothing about us without us”. That is what we encourage
departments to do. It may not be correct to say that the slow pace is
actually because we are paying lip service to the issue. It is an issue
wherein we acknowledge that there is room for improvement.

The Public Service Commission, PSC, recently studied what is causing these
kinds of delays. Nothing close to lack of commitment was found, but there
certainly are issues that we will improve on. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson, thank you. Hon Minister, what is it the
department sees as obstacles to achieving the required targets, and what
measures are being implemented this time to overcome them? Are these
measures producing some results? Please give us some of those relevant
details. Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, what
we can say, like I referred to the study that the PSC has conducted, is
that one of the reasons the PSC reported was that departments indicated
that they are not getting sufficient applications. That is one of the
reasons stated.

All we are saying - like when we engage with stakeholders every year we
have a conference mainstreaming the issue of dealing with cases of people
with disabilities - is that we may also have to make a call to the public
representatives present here to encourage and support departments because
departments themselves are saying that they are not getting sufficient
applications to work with towards achieving the goal. Thank you very much.

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: Chairperson, arising from the Minister’s response and a
concern that, at the pace at which they are travelling, they may not reach
the target, I wanted to find out from the Minister if there is a
departmental target that has been set for each department to meet in
employment, because I believe it is not only the responsibility of one
department, but a shared responsibility.
It sounds to me almost like a lack of will issue. It sounds strange that we
would say that there are not enough applications. Is there no way that you
could target or headhunt as part of the strategy to deal with that
particular question? I wish the Minister could explain what other
strategies are there to meet the target, other than to say the pace we are
travelling at is very slow. Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, the 2%
target, which is a national target, is a target for each department. It is
very clear. That is why I said that when it comes to the Department of the
Public Service and Administration, we are working towards this 2% target,
and we are now at 1,47%.

We are not saying that we are limited to what is being said. That is why I
indicated that the PSC had to investigate because it is an issue of
concern. As a nation, we wanted to know what was going on. You get
different reasons. What we are saying is true. It is true that it is a
shared responsibility.

What the Department of Public Service and Administration is doing is to
make sure that, this being policy, we encourage and insist that there has
to be compliance. That is why we are making a call to all government
departments and stakeholders that have an interest in dealing with issues
of people with disabilities to assist departments in making sure that we
get responsive applications to enable us to reach the target. Thank you
very much.
          Initiatives launched by NYDA to advance youth development

228.  Ms S P Lebenya-Ntanzi (IFP) asked the Minister  in  the  Presidency  -
      Performance Monitoring and Evaluation as well as Administration:

     What initiatives have been launched by the National Youth  Development
     Agency, NYDA, since June 2009 to (a) advance youth development and (b)
     promote    the    economic    development     of     young     people?
                            NO2384E

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION (on behalf of
the Minister in the presidency - Performance Monitoring and Evaluation AS
well as Administration): Chairperson, the National Youth Development
Agency, NYDA, was formed in June 2009. Four months is not a long time to
establish the programmes, especially since the characters of the two
organisations that have been brought together to form the NYDA, namely the
Umsobomvu Youth Fund and the National Youth Commission, were vastly
different. Their mandates were different. The Umsobomvu Youth Fund was
funded from the demutualisation levy and the National Youth Commission was
essentially a representative body without much programme support.

So, the initiation of the new programmes has been under some pressure.
There is a career guidance programme called Start Here and there is an in-
school entrepreneurship education programme and a graduate placement
programme.

In respect of economic development, the NYDA has now taken over the
Umsobomvu Youth Fund’s responsibilities. It provides micro and small
business loans of up to R300 000. In addition, it has the Business
Development Support Programme, using vouchers to facilitate non-financial
advisory support to entrepreneurs. The NYDA also has a programme to support
young entrepreneurs to obtain procurement opportunities from large
enterprises.

There are, of course, budget constraints, as we heard yesterday. It is a
difficult time to establish new institutions and many new programmes.
However, there is a fair amount that is ongoing. The hon member should
check the website www.nyda.gov.za. All of the issues are dealt with at some
length there. Thank you.

Ms S P LEBENYA-NTANZI: Hon Chair, the Minister must be aware that the now
defunct National Youth Commission and the Umsobomvu Youth Fund failed
dismally in their goals of creating jobs for young people and developing
skills among young South Africans, because the two organisations lacked the
capacity to deliver on their mandates. Another problem that led to their
demise was the fact that they were not accessible to young South Africans,
especially young people in rural areas.

My question is: What is the Minister doing to ensure that the new National
Youth Development Agency will deliver on its mandate and that the NYDA is
accessible to all young people? Also, can the Minister give an undertaking
that young people from nonpolitical organisations and those not aligned to
the ruling party will also be able to benefit from the National Youth
Development Agency?

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Chair, the
first issue is a very serious judgment call, to suggest that they failed
miserably. Of course, the National Youth Commission would have failed
miserably at job creation because they had no programme money; it wasn’t
part of their remit.

In respect of the Umsobomvu Youth Fund, the record speaks for itself, but
whatever resources we have in the state can never get out there to meet the
demand. In fact, every bit of analysis on youth unemployment reflects that
one of the major problems is that young people don’t even know where to
find the information to get assistance.

The information asymmetry is a first hurdle, and the second one is to get
from where they are to where the help is. It arises in respect of
information and in respect of employment, entrepreneurial support, etc,
which is why a very high percentage of young African men and women have
never had employment in their lives.

It is a fundamental problem, and I think that institutionally, if you ask
bodies such as the National Youth Development Agency to have offices in
every nook and cranny in the country, you are setting them up for failure.
This is because the overhead costs then supersede what they can spend on
programmes.

Rather, we have to work together to ensure that, through the Thusong
centres, information and assistance are available so that there can be
online advice from a Thusong centre to a centralised point, and we can try
and deal with an issue in that way.

I think that, as Members of Parliament, we should understand what the
limitations and constraints of these institutions are and set out to help
them rather than throw stones at them. Youth unemployment is the biggest
challenge; it’s the longest shadow that history casts over democracy in
this country. We must set our minds to this issue and try and do it
together. Thank you very much.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairperson, notwithstanding what the Minister has just
said, both the National Youth Commission and the Umsobomvu Youth Fund were
heavily criticised for underperforming, nondelivery and failing to live up
to expectations, hence the formation of the National Youth Development
Agency, NYDA.

While the ACDP accepts the fact that initiatives launched by the National
Youth Development Agency may be minimal because it is in its infancy, we
are nevertheless concerned that it may repeat the blunders of its
predecessors if it is not monitored with diligence and there are no clearly
defined expectations and outcomes.

As our young people have severely limited access to formal sector
employment, too often compounded by a lack of skills, how will the NYDA
address the lack of skills among the youth? How will the Presidency ensure
that this new formation does not have a top-heavy bureaucracy, where most
of its funding is used, and that the decisions they make are not just
boardroom decisions, but decisions that are representative of the wishes
and aspirations of the young people, who shall have been consulted? Thank
you. [Time expired.]

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Chair, I
don’t know whether it’s absolutely correct for the hon Rev Meshoe to say
“notwithstanding the facts”. Perhaps the best means of accountability is
for youth oversight.

Last Monday, the National Youth Development Agency, NYDA, held a
stakeholder forum that was very well attended. The party that the hon
Lebenya-Ntanzi represents actually didn’t attend it. One of the things
decided at that forum was that information centres should become the most
important issue.

If one looks at the statistics of young people in South Africa, one of the
biggest problems is that, as we sit here now, there are 600 000 young
people out there writing their matric and only a very small percentage of
them will find employment next year. Accept that as a fact, and don’t blame
the National Youth Development Agency for it. Try and go back into the
education system; look at all manner of issues that ought to prepare young
people for absorption into life after school; ask why those things are not
there and try and deal with that.

Understand that as an objective constraint in society. Understand that as
the biggest challenge that we must all rise to, and don’t throw stones at
the NYDA. Help them through this because it is an unbelievably difficult
and thankless task. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M JOHNSON: Chairperson, I thank the hon Minister for the profound
answers to simple questions that have their own answers. One of the
priorities that the ANC has had and continues to have is to develop rural
areas.

The fundamental question for me is related to the fact that part of the
road shows that have been held during the formation of the NYDA touched on
this very issue of access, especially in the rural areas. Could the
Minister outline to this august House what government has in mind in terms
of ensuring access to services by the youth in rural areas, as well as its
strategies in this regard? Thank you.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Chairperson,
I was half hoping that the hon Johnson would extend his explanation and
basically say: Hon Minister, do you confirm what I’m saying? I would have
said “yes”, because he has been working in this area. In fact, he led the
parliamentary process that gave rise to the NYDA.

The key issue is young people in rural areas and information. The second
issue is young people in rural areas who need access to rural development
issues so that we don’t keep denuding rural areas of talent and of people
who would rather come to starve in the cities. It is about getting those
balances right and I think that that requires a series of non-governmental
forces at play to ensure that we strike the appropriate balances as we deal
with these issues. This is fundamentally important.

I think that as a nation we actually pay too little attention to just how
hard things are for young people who don’t have connections and find
themselves at their wit’s end and at a loose end. Thank you very much.

Ms A MDA: Chairperson, it’s a well-known fact that one of the reasons the
Umsobomvu Youth Fund and the National Youth Commission were ineffective in
their efforts to plough back into the programmes for young people and to
make sure that they developed young people, was the fact that their budgets
were mostly used on indabas, workshops, izimbizo and many summits. However,
they were ultimately unable to deliver.

What is it that the NYDA will do differently to make sure that deliverables
are indeed attained by young people, more especially by the rural young
people who have largely been unable to benefit from the National Youth
Commission and the Umsobomvu Youth Fund. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Chairperson,
I almost said that the hon Mda did not benefit from those programmes.

You see, by law, the National Youth Commission was required to hold those
indabas, do the listening and provide a listening post for young people.
That is what it set out to do and that is the remit it had. If you thought
that would create employment, you were creating expectations that could
never be fulfilled.

I happened to be there at the establishment of the Umsobomvu Youth Fund. We
secured money from the demutualisation levy and used that to finance it.
Over the 10 years of its existence, it used that money very wisely, because
it always had to exercise a balance between the available resources and the
demand for resources.

I really believe that the annual reports of the Umsobomvu Youth Fund and
the commission should be examined and we should look at these issues. You
will find that the overheads of the Umsobomvu Youth Fund were actually
substantially smaller than its programme spending. It didn’t spend on the
highfalutin stuff that the hon Mda says it did.
I think it’s very important that we set the record straight on these
matters.

The reasons for merging the Umsobomvu Youth Fund and the National Youth
Commission are now well established. We have a new agency. The only appeal
I make is: Let’s support it. Let’s make it work. Let’s take democracy into
the lives of those young people who need it so that they can understand
change in their own lives. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Questions 227 and 204 will stand
over because the Minister of Women, Children and People with Disabilities
is not here.

   Evaluation of municipalities’ performance, especially those affected by
                          service delivery protests

226.  Rev K R J Meshoe  (ACDP)  asked  the  Minister  in  the  Presidency  -
      Performance Monitoring and Evaluation as well as Administration in the
      Presidency:


     Whether the Government has started with the process of evaluating  the
     performance of municipalities, especially those that have had  service
     delivery protests; if not, why not; if so, (a) what are  the  outcomes
     of the evaluation and (b) how will such results prevent the recurrence
     of violence?           NO2382E

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION (On behalf of
the Minister the Presidency - Performance Monitoring and Evaluation as well
as Administration): Chairperson, the discussions of the norms for
monitoring and evaluation are indeed underway. As it happens, we were
discussing these matters today in another room not far from here, but that
is about national government. There is a different process in respect of
municipalities. The first baseline of information is done in a process led
by hon Minister Shiceka and the Department of Co-operative Governance and
Traditional Affairs.

We will wait for that report and some of these issues were discussed last
week Tuesday, when the President met all the mayors and all the municipal
managers. Minister Shiceka and his department convened an indaba on local
government last week. There are a series of issues that are being worked
through. Perhaps, the question on municipal government would be better
answered by hon Minister Shiceka.

It is a large and complex issue. We need to get through a number of levels
and understand all manner of issues about the competencies of
municipalities, the issues that he was responding to earlier on -
availability of clean water, competent sewerage treatment works in all
municipalities, understanding why there are service delivery protests,
getting through all of those things and also looking at the competencies of
managers.

As these matters stand, we are actually also involved in the process of
evaluating all of the management structures in all municipalities. I think
that as the processes unfold we will keep Parliament informed, but it is
too early in this entire and unbelievably complex process. Thank you.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairperson, I wish to understand whether the Minister is
suggesting that the question should stand over or whether we should carry
on with it.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Chairperson,
I have answered the question to the best of my ability. Anything else will
be fiction. I am saying that this is a work in progress and if the question
is asked three months, six months, nine months hence and all of us in
government, my colleagues, the Minister responsible for Performance
Monitoring and Evaluation as well as the Minister of Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs are held to account in this House ...
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Minister, I think you have
clarified your point.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Well, obviously, because of the violent protests that are
taking place in the country, we are all concerned about that. We have to
ensure that the causes of these violent protests are being addressed
satisfactorily, because what the international community sees does not give
a clear or a good picture of what is happening in this country. Hence, we
want to know what is being done to ensure that these violent protests come
to an end.

There are also some statements that are being made by some protesters that
I would like the Minister to respond to. Some of these frustrated people,
for example, there was a person in Mashishini Township, who said that they
believe that the only language that government understands is the language
of toyi-toying. Because, if they don’t protest violently then they will not
get the attention they need. This might be an incorrect perception, but it
has to be addressed.

That is why we cannot just wait for this report to come. In the meantime,
when people are thinking like this, what is government going to do to
change the thinking of such people? What is happening in our streets is
unacceptable. [Time expired.]

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Chairperson,
this is a work in progress, I mean there are very few townships that have
had service delivery protests that have not had visits by some government
representatives.

Give Minister Shiceka two minutes and he will run through them very
quickly, township by township. He will give you the names and the protest
issues. It is not as though this is an alien thing. But there are all
manner of reasons. Sometimes there are very strong and genuine reasons and
sometimes the reasons are not so strong.

We have to be able to work through this and ensure that the service
delivery protests or whatever the natures of the protests are, don’t happen
in the future. Notwithstanding the disagreement between the hon Meshoe and
myself, Chair, I will not protest violently against his questions.
[Laughter.]

Mr W P DOMAN: Chairperson, to deliver services we really need good
officials, Minister. It is my view that appointments must be made, because
too many positions are kept open in local government. And those
appointments must be made more on merit so that we can get to what I want
to ask the Minister, and my question is: In this evaluation in which we
should also measure productivity, will that be included in the measurement
of local government?

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Chairperson,
the evaluation is a very broad range. Amongst the issues that are being
looked at is that we are not just trying to understand whether there are
vacancies or not. Because, I could take my cousin or sister and make her a
municipal manager. There is no vacancy, because there is somebody whose
warm body is in that box in the organogram, but she may be totally
incompetent to do the job.

And so, you need a very thoroughgoing area of work and it is just one of
those things, Chair, that you must allow this work to happen. I think,
periodically Parliament needs to be told that the work is underway but you
are not going to ripen this apple by squeezing it.

The work must continue and I think Parliament needs to know that the work
is underway. Perhaps, Minister Shiceka would be able to come at a different
time and talk about what the parameters of the evaluations are, because it
is being done. But getting through this entire process is fundamentally
important. Of course, there is a timeline and these things must be done
well in time for the 2011 elections.

So, the clock is ticking against this process and I want to assure members
that it pleases government no more than it pleases the opposition benches
that these things are happening and that the first level services provided
by local government are as infrequent and are of as poor a quality as too
many people are experiencing in South Africa.

Mrs D F BOSHIGO: Chairperson, I thank the Minister for his response. How
will the performance evaluation of the Minister be linked to the national
local government turnaround strategy framework adopted at the national
indaba last week? Would the Minister also agree that, although
municipalities are mainly responsible for their failures, the national and
the provincial departments also do not give the expected support to the
local government?

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Chairperson,
in respect of the first question, assimilating all of the recommendations
of the indaba last week, it is clearly too early to be able to answer that
with any candour.

However, the issues on the operations of local government, the kind of
support system, the responsibilities and powers that they have, the split
between categories A, B, and C, understanding all of these trends, are
covered by the evaluation. And I am sure that within the next six to eight
months, Minister Shiceka would be able to put a set of recommendations
about this before Parliament for its consideration.

    Number of state departments employing outside consultants, and costs
                            associated with this
229.  Mr J H van der Merwe (IFP) asked the Minister for the  Public  Service
      and Administration:

     (a) How many state departments employ outside  consultants  to  assist
     them in executing their duties and (b) how much  does  the  government
     spend    per    annum    on     employing     outside     consultants?
                                                   NO2385E

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC  SERVICE  AND  ADMINISTRATION:  Chairperson,  we
have recently introduced a management system that will assist us  to  record
and capture information related to the  use  of  consultants  in  our  state
departments. At the moment there  is  no  instrument  that  we  can  use  to
capture that information. We have identified a need to do so.

This arrangement will assist us to know which departments  are  doing  their
business through the use of consultants and in which areas. This will  avoid
situations where departments use consultants for  the  work  that  they  are
able to achieve through the use of their own public servants.  This  is  why
we are doing that.

In some areas the use of consultants is unavoidable because  of  a  lack  of
skills that you may not command. In other areas you  may  do  without  them.
This system is built into our integrity management system to make sure  that
we have that information to be able to act when the need arises. Thank you.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, I am shocked by the  answer  of  the  hon
Minister, because, for a period of about 15  years,  government  departments
have been using consultants  costing  millions  of  rands.  I’ve  asked  the
Minister how many departments are using consultants and how  much  is  being
spent on it, and he said, “I don’t know.  There  is  no  system  in  place.”
Minister,  I  suggest  that  you  get  consultants  to  do  that  for   you.
[Laughter.]

I think that millions of rands are being wasted because  Ministers  who  are
appointed are supposed to have the skills and the capacity to do  that  work
themselves. The moment they are appointed to higher positions with big  cars
and big salaries, the first thing they do is get people to do the  work  for
them and pay them millions. [Interjections.]

Chairperson, I look forward  to  the  day  that  hon  Minister  can  ask  an
intelligent question. I want to summarise by saying ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Chauke is not the Minister.
[Laughter.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE:  Yes,  and  I  don’t  think  he  will  ever  become  a
Minister, because he doesn’t have the capacity. [Laughter.]

We need that information. The Minister must get  it,  because  millions  are
being wasted. Yesterday, the Minister of Finance told us that we must  start
to curb spending. This is the place to start. Ministers  have  to  do  their
work themselves and they shouldn’t pay  millions  for  other  people  to  do
their thinking and doing.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson,  it  is
unfair for hon Van  der  Merwe  deliberately  to  ignore  that  it  is  this
government that has taken  a  step  to  manage  this  area  of  the  use  of
consultants.  The  very  handbook  that  the  Minister  of  Finance   tabled
yesterday, as he was tabling the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement,  is  a
demonstration that we, as government, are determined to work  on  addressing
these things.

I’ve indicated that we’ve built and  introduced  the  system  to  deal  with
these issues so that we can capture information. It will be wrong to have  a
one-size-fits-all statement that says in all  cases  where  consultants  are
used, it is not for genuine reasons. We have to indicate that we  are  doing
all these things so that centrally we may be in a position to address  that.
It is fair for hon members to give credit where it is due.

We are dealing with these things. We are not saying that we  will  not  give
you the information that you need, but what we are saying  is  that  at  the
time of raising a  question  like  this,  where  we  don’t  have  a  central
management system, it may be very difficult to do that. When this system  is
introduced, at the press of a button, we will be able not  only  to  provide
answers, but also to manage and make sure that where a consultant is  to  be
used, it would be for scarce skills that we  don’t  command  in  our  Public
Service.

Dr H C VAN SCHALKWYK: Chairperson, hon Minister, I usually  address  you  in
English, but I want to ask you this question in Afrikaans.

Agb Minister, die DA voel baie sterk daaroor dat die situasie wat die
regering geskep het, as gevolg van kaderontplooiing, die ekonomie lank
reeds baie benadeel. Hoogs gekwalifiseerde mense is vervang met mense wat
nie oor die nodige vaardighede beskik nie. Die gevolg is dat konsultante
van buite hulle werk moet doen en natuurlik skep dit ’n dubbele staatsdiens
met dubbele salarisse. Twee mense moet nou vergoed word vir een pos. My
vraag aan u is die volgende: Sou u saamstem dat spesifieke
opleidingsprogramme nou die hoogste prioriteit moet geniet ten einde
hierdie situasie te red? Baie dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[The DA feels very strongly that the situation created by the government as
a result of cadre deployment has been harming the economy for a long time
already. Highly qualified people have been replaced by people who do not
possess the required skills. The result is that consultants from outside
must come and do their work, which of course creates a double public
service with double salaries. Two people now have to be remunerated for one
post. My question to you is the following: Would you agree that specific
training programmes should now be receiving the highest priority in order
to save this situation? Thank you.]

SWA VUKORHOKERI BYA  VAAKI  NA  MAFAMBISELO:  Mutshamaxitulu,  hi  kombisile
kwala ndlwini leyi leswaku ku tirhiwa mitirho hi vanhu  lavo  huma  ehandle,
ku ta endliwa ntsena eka tindzhawu leti hi nga hava vatirhi lava  kotaka  ku
tirha ntirho wa lowo. A hi nga ta swi tirhisa ntsena ntsena.  Eka  vuleteri,
hi letela loko hi tiva leswaku  hi  lava  mhaka  yo  karhi.  Vanhu  vo  huma
ehandle va tirhiseriwa xintirhwana xa nkarhinyana. U  nge  swi  koti  ku  ya
teka vuleteri hikwalaho ka xintirhwana xa nkarhinyana. Loko hi  vulavula  hi
vutivi hi fanele hi tiva leswaku vutivi a hi  vuli  malembe  yo  tala  u  ri
endzeni ka ntirho, kambe hi vula vuswikoti byo kota ku antswisa ku tirha  ka
mfumo. Inkomo. (Translation of Xitsonga paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE  AND  ADMINISTRATION:  Chairperson,  we
have indicated in this House that  consultants  will  only  be  utilised  in
those areas where we do not have skilled personnel to perform  such  duties.
We will not use they for the sake of using them. With  regard  to  training,
we do  the  training  when  we  want  to  achieve  a  particular  objective.
Consultants are utilised for certain short-term jobs. You may  not  have  to
undergo training because of a short-term job. When we talk about  knowledge,
we have to take note of the fact that we do not mean the number of years  of
experience a person has in the  job  at  hand,  but  rather  the  skills  to
improve the functioning of government. Thank you.]

Ms F C BIKANI: Chairperson, my question to the Minister is based on  wanting
to know if  there  is  a  model  or  a  strategy  to  capacitate  government
departments to reduce the state’s  dependency  on  outside  consultants  and
also in order to help rebuild our developmental state. Thank you

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Yes,  it  is  there.
Through  the  Public  Administration  Leadership  and  Management   Academy,
Palama,  we  capacitate  public  servants  and  departments  and  we   train
departments to be able to rise to the  level  of  the  challenges  that  are
there  in  as  far  as  the  skills  we  need  to  be  able  to  pursue  our
developmental agenda. Yes, we do that.

Ms A MDA: Minister, it has been reported  that  most  senior  managers  have
neglected their duties and wrongfully appointed consultants. What  steps  is
the department going to take to make sure  that  we  don’t  continue  having
those public servants milking the national fiscus wrongly  and  making  sure
that if it is as a result of a shortage  of  skills,  then  we  appoint  the
relevant people who will be able to deliver accordingly? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson,  it  is
a sign of professionalism that  when  you  have  to  intervene  and  address
issues in a particular situation, you don’t  generalise  and  base  that  on
rumours. If the hon member could provide us with  information  in  terms  of
the allegations she is raising, we would be  in  a  position  to  deal  with
that. The system we are building will be  able  to  assist  us  on  our  own
initiatives to follow up on the use of consultants so that  there  is  value
for money.

       Strategies for co-ordinating and aligning needs of communities

210.  Mrs D F Boshigo (ANC) asked the Minister for the  Public  Service  and
      Administration:

     What strategies are in  place  to  co-ordinate  and  align  the  needs
     relayed by communities to the community development workers with local
     governments and relevant departments?              NO2365E

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson,
individual community development workers, CDWs, write reports on the work
they do in communities for submission to their supervisors who, in
conjunction with community development worker peer managers, consolidate
all received reports into an integrated report. The consolidated report is
shared and circulated to stakeholders including local government and other
departments for the purpose of sharing information and to follow up on
matters emerging from communities that require attention.

At provincial level, various forums such as the intergovernmental
relations, IGR, stakeholder forums have been established and are utilised
as a platform to share views on the needs relayed by communities to CDWs.
These stakeholder forums include provincial government departments. Thank
you very much.

Mrs D F BOSHIGO: Chairperson, my question has been answered. Thank you.

Dr H C VAN SCHALKWYK: Minister, I am back to speaking English to you.
[Laughter.]

Despite the fact that training is provided and CDWs undergo an induction
process, it became crystal clear during a recent oversight visit to some
centres that CDWs are confused and frustrated. They do not know where they
fit into the service delivery chain. They do not know to whom they are
accountable and lack necessary resources like computer equipment. They also
experience that other departments do not recognise them as colleagues. My
question, hon Minister, is: What is being done to educate communities and
departments around the benefits or the necessity of CDWs so that they are
not seen mainly as party-political agents?

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, we and
the Department of the Public Service and Administration and the Department
of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs run road shows, make
departments conscious, address ward councillors and ward committees and
talk to departments to encourage them to work with CDWs. In fact, the issue
we might have to indicate is that CDWs are not confused or anything like
that. The issue that is there is for them to ask how they can deal with the
question of co-ordinated services and how they can deal with a situation
where they, as foot soldiers of services delivery, have to make an impact
in areas they go to. There are some challenges which we are actually
managing. But these are not challenges that can make one say that CDWs have
problems, are confused and so on. Thank you very much.

Mr P F SMITH: Chair, I think the Minister is in fact wrong. CDWs are
confused. They do not know who they report to. The issue that is being
raised is a valid one. In fact, I think it’s time that government applied
its mind to the value of CDWs and to whom they should report.

The first recommendation that was raised at the indaba last week and that
received loud applause from the floor - from local government practitioners
and not from members here - is that they should be abolished. The second
recommendation, as an alternative, was that they should report to ward
committees and not to provinces. Does the Minister have a view on that?

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, CDWs
are not politicians but are what we refer to as special cadres of public
servants. They are there and know that they report to structures in the
local government. There is no doubt about that. You might have listened to
one input, but we have been to all provinces in the programme of
strengthening the role of CDWs.

We need to understand that in an environment where there are CDWs working
in an area where there are also ward committees, they complement one
another, clearly and perfectly so. We need to understand that in some
instances it might well be that in your area, hon member, you might have a
councillor who feels threatened or a CDW who does not feel welcome. But the
general picture about the work of our CDWs is to provide mobile services to
the people - door to door - which of course we are improving in terms of
providing them with the necessary resources. That is what they are meant to
do.

There may be minor challenges. But, like I have indicated, those are issues
that we are addressing. In any situation where there is change, you are
bound to go down and explain. That is exactly what we are doing to
strengthen the programme of CDWs. Thank you very much.

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: Minister, the question arising from your response is that
it seems to me that what CDWs are saying on the ground and the information
you are getting are two entirely different things. In a recent oversight
visit, every CDW we spoke to, including their co-ordinators, indicated the
fact that they were not really recognised. One of them said that when they
were employed they received one pencil and one writing pad and that was it.


I think there must be more co-ordination and more interaction between the
department and local government in order to make sure that the reports they
bring receive attention. They said that they were being discredited on the
ground on the basis that they were not getting any feedback on what they
have been taking to the Ministers or people up there.

People said to us that there was no basis for us to be asking them
questions because they have been telling us things and there has been no
response. Is there a commitment, Minister, that there is going to be an
institutional arrangement to be put in place in order to ensure that these
matters that are being raised by CDWs receive the necessary attention at
the level that government requires? What action will be taken?

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, there
is always room for improvement on things that one does, even in areas where
one is doing very well.

Let me put on record that CDWs will be able to assist residents. CDWs can
intervene and take a person who applied for a child support grant and has
not been getting any joy in terms of receiving the service on time to the
service provider to solve the problem. We have many reports of success
stories. I have been in the Western Cape and the Eastern Cape personally. I
am not sure which provinces we are talking about here. Maybe there are
specific instances you are referring to.

We are going to have a national indaba on this issue of CDWs together with
the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs. We would
like to invite hon members who believe that CDWs are not recognised to come
forward and raise these issues. Thank you very much.

Mr W P DOMAN: Chairperson, on a point of order: The hon member Boshigo did
not ask a follow-up question. Isn’t there an opportunity for a fourth
question? You have only allowed three follow-up questions.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order! I know. She did stand up to
say that she was answered sufficiently. So this was counted.

Mr W P DOMAN: Was that counted?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Yes.

   Plans by department to assist municipalities in recovering debt owed to
                                    them
219.  Mr W P Doman (DA) asked the Minister for Co-operative  Governance  and
      Traditional Affairs:

     Whether his department has any plans in place to assist municipalities
     in reducing the debt owed to them; if not, why not; if  so,  what  are
     the relevant details?              NO2375E

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: House
Chairperson, we have established a team composed of the National Treasury,
the Departments of Local Government in the Provinces, our department which
is lead by ourselves, wherein we are looking at the whole question of debt
that is owed to municipalities. We have employed a person who’s dealing
with that at the highest level in the department. The person responsible
for this is developing a strategy that is looking at debt management and
revenue enhancement.

We hope that by December the strategy will be in place and everything will
be there. There are a lot of views that are there to say maybe we should be
looking at a situation whereby the debt is sold to the private sector. Our
view is that the debt must be taken by the national government so that we
are able to ensure that we assist municipalities in dealing with it.

We will be profiling the debt to know who owes municipalities in terms of
government, in terms of the private sector and also households. And once
that has been done and looked at by Cabinet, we will be able to take that
to you to ensure that we move forward.

I want to conclude by saying that we want to look at the issues of debt in
two forms: firstly, to curb the growth of debts; and secondly, to ensure
that we are able to reduce it. In conclusion, we want to have a situation
whereby we say the systems must be the same, they must talk to each other.
We are saying one country, one President, and one system. Thank you.

Mr W P DOMAN: Chairperson, I really have appreciation for what the hon
Minister and his department are doing in this regard. Under his leadership,
I am sure that there won’t only be talk and that there will be a difference
in the future so that we can collect this R53 billion debt. But, in section
96 of the Local Government Municipal Systems Act, it says that
municipalities must collect all money that is due. And the next one,
section 97, says that such a policy to collect the debt must provide or can
provide for the termination of services or the restriction of the provision
of services when payments are in arrears.

On this point, hon Minister, I feel that you, yourself must set an example
in this regard and come out on the side of municipalities that are
seriously collecting arrears. I think that we need discipline. I know you
stand for discipline and feel that you should come out and say that your
are on the side of those municipalities that are applying the law, that are
doing their duty. This is also in the performance contracts of the
municipal managers and other people, and they collect the debt that you are
on their side and not on the side of those people who are not paying. [Time
expired.]

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS:
Chairperson, hon Doman, I’m on their side. However, this is a curveball;
they must act within the law and within the Constitution, so that the rule
of law is promoted. We are looking at this matter of incentivising good
practice at municipal level, not only at the level of collection, but also
at the level of payments in wards. This is because we believe that
government and governance must happen at ward level, as it is the lowest
level at which the system of governance is.

Now in that respect, we are looking at the possibility of having a
situation where, if wards are paying well, we are able to ensure that they
are incentivised and they get the money back, so that they are able to be
involved in development projects. That’s how we are looking at managing
these things. Let’s manage them in 3 985 wards in South Africa where work
has to happen, rather than doing things in the way we have been this far.
We want to do things differently as regards the way we conduct ourselves
and we believe that, with your support, hon members, we will be able to
reach agreement and achieve what has to be achieved. Thank you.

Ms T B SUNDUZA: Chairperson, on a point of order: According to the Rules,
cameras and cellphones are not allowed in Parliament. The members of the DA
on the other side, hon Mazibuko and the gentleman in the yellow tie are
taking photos with their cellphones. Thank you.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, the point of order is in order. Please don’t take
photos or use cellphones in the Chamber. Thank you.

Mr P F SMITH: Chairperson, this issue of municipal debt has been a crisis
for donkey’s years. We are up to R50 billion now, of which government owes
R7 billion. So, I would suggest that we could start in government assisting
municipalities by paying our own bills.

I want to remind the Minister, I’m sure he knows, that last month there was
a court case in Gauteng and the High Court ruled against the Gauteng MEC,
who had to pay R107 million in outstanding rates to the metro. The court
heard that the province had failed to pay even though it had engaged in
discussions with the debt credit section of the municipality. The judge
said he would have no difficulty at all in having the MEC locked up for
contempt of court if he didn’t pay promptly.

Now, this is exactly the kind of problem we have. We have a debt collection
crisis. Government doesn’t pay its bills and MECs don’t give a damn. We
have to go to court to get the money out of government. What do you expect
the ordinary citizen to do in this country? Why should people, ordinary
people, pay their bills if government doesn’t? So, the question I will put
to the Minister is: When is government going to take a hard line on its own
accounting officers, who are legally bound to pay the bills for which the
departments owe money?

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS:
Chairperson, well it is quite interesting that you find that the ANC and
the other side of the House are really ensuring that we narrow the gap in
terms of seeing things. We are seeing things in a similar way, which I
highly appreciate. It means people are actually beginning to learn the
lesson of rising above petty party politics and are focusing on important
issues. [Laughter.]

In that respect, we agree with hon Smith in saying that there is no need
for people to spend money to pay lawyers for them to be able to recoup what
belongs to them, which is owed by the departments. Now, we are looking at
the debt, we will know by December this year, who owes whom, in relation to
government and municipalities.

On the basis of that, it is clear that when government owes, they must pay,
there’s no compromise on that, it has to be done, because if we have to
support municipalities, the first thing that you do is you support them
financially, particularly on what belongs to them. Therefore, in that
regard, hon Smith, once information is available and processed by Cabinet,
you will be informed. We will also forward it to Parliament. Thank you.

Ms M J SEGALE-DISWAI: Chairperson, I would like to know whether the
Minister has already started talking to his colleagues in Public Works, to
pay what is owed by government departments to municipalities, and to pay
that on time and regularly, as the President mentioned recently. Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS:
Chairperson, well, on the issues of the Department of Public Works playing
its rightful role in ensuring that responsibilities are being executed in
the payment, we can’t say with confidence and conviction that we’ll be able
to ask the department to do so, because we ourselves don’t even understand
the extent of the departmental debt owed to municipalities.

Once that has been done, we will be able to interact with all government
departments affected not only at national level, but also in provinces to
ensure that, as part of section 154 of the Constitution that talks about
supporting municipalities, what has been done in practice, has been done in
word.

Therefore, in that respect, hon member, we will be able to take up the
issues. We will be able to ensure that all those responsible play their
part, because we believe that the support to municipalities is something
that has to be done and has to be taken very seriously by all. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr D A KGANARE: Chairperson, at this level of the highest level Minister
... [Laughter.] ... the issue of debt collection, it is all right to talk
about debt collection, but if we have municipalities who are underspending
all the time if they have to collect more, are we not going to just
increase the level of underspending because they are unable to spend the
money they have, even if they are not able to collect? I think the problem
is not only the collection of debts; it’s the inability to manage funds by
municipalities. Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS:
Chairperson, hon Kganare, there are multifaceted reasons at times for
municipalities not being able to spend, amongst them the availability of
skills. People must be able to do the job and do it properly and be able to
plan and ensure that they execute what they have to execute.

Therefore, what we want to do, of course, in collaboration with National
Treasury, is to say that if municipalities don’t spend, national government
must go and assist; provinces must be able to go and assist in ensuring
that the money is spent; and service delivery happens, because you find
that more often than not these people who can’t spent are in poor areas.

In municipalities that don’t have the capacity to do the work, you can’t
punish the citizen, because of the fact that there is no capacity in
municipalities. We must be able to assist in that respect. We are looking
at different models of ensuring that the capacity in those smaller
municipalities is there and is able to be taken up going forward.

On the issue of collection of debts, what belongs to municipalities must be
able to be paid to them. The ability to spend is not an issue, irrespective
of the side. The issue is that what belongs to municipalities must be able
to be paid and that is what we are going to be doing, and that’s what we
are going to be following without fear, without favour and without
prejudice. Thank you. [Applause.]

     Visits to areas in which service-delivery protests have taken place


218.  Mrs M Wenger (DA) asked the Minister for Co-operative  Governance  and
      Traditional Affairs:

      (1)    Whether  he  has  visited  the  areas   across   the   country,
           particularly in Mpumalanga, where protests  related  to  service
           delivery have taken place; if not, what is the position in  this
           regard; if so, what are the relevant details;
      (2)   whether he has consulted the residents about  their  issues;  if
           not, why not; if so, (a)  what  are  the  exact  issues  of  the
           residents  and  (b)  how  will  these   issues   be   addressed?
                                                   NO2374E

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: House
Chairperson, first and foremost I must say that in South Africa we have 283
municipalities. Protests have happened in about 31 of them. Therefore, if
you look at the scale of the issue, it is not as big as it has at times
been made out to be, and the impression that sometimes is being given.

Having said that, since January we have managed to consolidate the
information, to check what the causal factors for these protests are. We
have managed, under the leadership of MECs, to visit each municipality in
South Africa. Not only that, we have managed to gather information which we
can say with confidence is the best information obtained in South Africa to
date. That information is the one thing that has enabled us to say that
this is the state of local government in South Africa.

Having done this, we then managed to ensure that we looked at the causal
factors, as I have said. One of those is the issue of social distance
between government at the local level and the people. On the other hand
these are the issues that are the responsibility of national government in
respect of housing, which comes out strongly in the demands of the people
on the ground and other issues that are not the responsibility of
municipalities.

Also, they raised issues of service delivery. The issue of corruption has
been raised very strongly, of nepotism, as well as mismanagement of
finances. Having looked at all those, we had a national local government
indaba that took place last week on Wednesday and Thursday. Following that,
we are now in the process of developing a turnaround strategy that will be
ready by the end of the year.

I must say to the other side of the House that they have actually
dismissed, almost removed, one of the finest administrators, Shanaaz
Majiet. We have taken her into the department now. She is going to be
playing a critical role in ensuring that South Africa is turned around in
relation to what is happening. [Interjections.] What you have removed, we
have taken. We are saying one man’s poison is another man’s meat. That is
what we have done as government. Thank you very much.

Mrs M WENGER: Minister, it is 31 municipalities too many. We are delighted
that finally the Minister has got around to visiting all the hot spots in
our country. However, the issues need to be addressed. Will the Minister
please inform this House, how and where the skills and the resources are
going to come from to address the crisis in these municipalities?
Furthermore, I would like to request the Minister that he actually
familiarises himself with the issue of Majiet. Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Thank you
very much, to the shadow Deputy Minister for Co-operative Governance and
Traditional Affairs, Madam Wenger. The issue of skills is something that we
are attending to. As we speak, we are conducting an audit so as to check
every individual employed in the municipality so that we are able to know
which people have the skills, which people must be retrained, and those
that cannot be retrained must give way to people who are able to do the
job.

Within that context, we have a framework for deploying people in areas
where there is a scarcity of skills so that we are able to move forward. We
will be ensuring that we do that, and you must know that the Department of
Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs is part of government.
Government is going to take responsibility in ensuring that the scarce
skills are being funded by government and people are there do the job. That
is what we are doing. We will be presenting the report, once it is ready,
to Cabinet for it to take a decision.

In conclusion, Chairperson, on the issue of Shanaaz Majiet, she is a lady
who is disabled, who has been removed, not because of incompetence, but
because she was not appointed by the DA. They have deployed a cadre in her
place. [Interjections.] What is worse is that they have employed a man over
a woman. They have removed Africans and blacks and put in whites.
[Interjections.]

We have now gone back to the old in terms of the system, whereby white
males are in positions of authority in this province. From our point of
view, we know what history is talking about and, therefore, nobody must
question our integrity and knowledge. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Ms D G NHLENGETHWA: Minister, we understand that during this interactive
process, the national and provincial departments managed to visit the 31
troubled municipalities across the country. In the spirit of ubuntu,
letsema and rebuilding the nation, will it not be a good idea if the
Minister and the department, through continuous interaction with the
residents, discuss the issue of how they can contribute in some way to the
rebuilding of the damaged structures that were burnt down? An example would
be the library that was burnt down in Sakhile Township in Mpumalanga. I
thank you.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS:
Chairperson, we must thank the hon member for raising issues that had been
raised. Of course, what we are looking at is that the process of turning
around local government cannot be a matter of an individual; it cannot be a
matter of government alone. It is a societal matter.

Our slogan says “local government is everybody’s business” and that is how
we must live up to that. There is no magic wand that you offer to the
collective. Our responsibility is to co-ordinate ideas. Our responsibility
is to ensure that ideas are implemented and we are able to move forward. In
that context, the issue of whether or not people who destroyed the
infrastructure of local government, who burnt properties in municipalities,
are going to be involved, is a matter that must be decided by the
collective in terms of what has to be done.

From our side, we want to see good citizens, based on what we are
developing, the governance values that we think we must be able to rally
around as a country and all of us be able to use. In that respect, we hope
that the matter will be taken up there and be discussed. We can’t be, as we
are here, saying that this is a route that must be taken but we want
everyone to contribute in building these municipalities because they are
very important in terms of service delivery. They are at the coalface of
our people; they are the shock absorbers of our system of governance. Thank
you very much, Chair.

Mr D A KGANARE: Mr Minister, the issue of these violent protests is well
documented. In this House, you said that the people responsible are the
third force and now the third force has been exposed to be the SACP.
[Laughter.] So, it is well documented, if you read newspapers, but since
the African National Congress is full of people who do not read, it becomes
a problem.

What I want to know, Minister, is whether you have engaged the third force,
which is the SACP, so that they should stop these violent protests because
they said they are the ones responsible? Secondly, to us the burning of
government property or any property is a criminal action. Have you engaged
your colleague, the Minister of Police, to ensure that the people who, in
the City Press, have admitted to have led these protests are prosecuted?
[Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Well, I
can see that hon Kganare has overthrown uBaba uBotha lapha [Mr Botha here]
as the spokesperson on local government. [Laughter.] As regards the issue
of the third force, hon Kganare, I can see that you read a lot of
newspapers.

I have never ever said that protests are caused by the third force. I have
been very clear that the issues are genuine. The journalist tried to ram
that issue down my throat, and I refused to do that and to allow that
system to be forced on me. I want to clarify this again; we believe that
the issues of service delivery are genuine. Of course, there are
individuals who are exploiting genuine issues of the people to take them
up, which is part of the organising of individuals.

As to whether the SACP, ANC, DA or Cope is involved, I don’t have
information in that regard. I would ask anybody who has information to come
forward and present that to me so that we are able to take it up. I have
not then, hon Kganare, spoken to the SACP on the matter.

I can tell you that the Deputy Minister in the department is a member of
the politburo of the SACP. He is a senior member of the SACP. Therefore, I
don’t think he would sabotage his own department. It is not possible. That
is why I say come and present evidence, if you have, hon Kganare. We will
take it and look at it on merit. Thank you very much.

Mr W P DOMAN: Chairperson, I want to use Ms Majiet’s case as an example to
ask about service delivery. In the Western Cape, with about 15 000 to
20 000 officials, the DA asked only three to leave. Ms Majiet was mentioned
in the Erasmus Commission on 40 accounts.

There was a disciplinary hearing coming. She was doing the dirty work of
Premier Rasool and, therefore, I am very glad that the ANC is taking
responsibility for this official, because she was misused and she decided
to terminate her contract, which was in any case going to end at the end of
November. [Interjections.] Now, my question about service delivery ...

Adv T M MASUTHA: Chairperson, on a point of order ...
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, let’s hear the point of
order. You will complete your question after this.

Adv T M MASUTHA: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it parliamentary for
the hon Doman to accuse the relevant person of doing dirty work for Mr
Rasool? [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): We will come to that point before
you end. Hon Doman, you may continue.

Mr W P DOMAN: Chairperson, I withdraw that. She did the political dirty
work of the hon Premier. [Applause.] Minister, my question is: Isn’t it
part of the service delivery problems ...

Adv T M MASUTHA: Chairperson, he hasn’t really withdrawn the comment. He
has just repeated himself.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): As I have said, we will come back
to it. Continue, hon Doman.

Mr W P DOMAN: Minister, isn’t it is part of the problem of these service
delivery issues and the protests that the position between the officials
and politicians has become blurred and a lot of them are being misused by
politicians and, therefore, we have this unrest because the people see that
and they don’t get services? [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: On the
issue of Madam Majiet, I will be happy if hon Doman can present a report.
The roles are reversed. The executive now requests a report from the
legislatures and this led to the conditions that necessitated the DA acting
in the manner it has acted. Up until we engage on those questions, this
matter will remain on the table for a long time to come.

I think it is better that we engage on it, and I think we have a very good
relationship. We can find each other. We will report to Parliament once we
have done that, particularly the National Assembly. [Interjections.]

Having said that, as regards the issues that you are raising of the blurred
roles and responsibilities, you find that the intra and interparty
conflicts that, at times, tend to undermine the integrity and the standing
of the institution of local government we a challenge. We are going to be
engaging, once we finalise the turnaround strategy. We want to engage with
parties to talk about the governance values, what are the dos and the
don’ts in the way we run municipalities so that the wrong tendencies and
ways of doing things can be rejected in our system, not only by political
parties but by South Africans as a whole. That is what we want to do. In
that respect, we think that we are on the same page. We are singing from
the same hymn book, in relation to these issues.

That is why I was saying earlier on that it is amazing that the gap between
that other side of the House and this side has narrowed. We are speaking
almost the same language, and I think we must continue. It means that you
are good learners ... [Laughter.] [Interjections.] ... you learn about the
issues of rising above petty politics. Thank you very much, Chair.
[Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order please, hon members. Let me
just come to the point of order which was raised by hon Masutha in
reference to the words ”dirty work” used. To accuse a member of this House
of being engaged in dirty work is unparliamentary. Therefore, hon Doman
should withdraw the reference to hon Rasool’s dirty work.

Mr W P DOMAN: Chairperson, I withdraw. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Thank you very much, hon member.
The time allocated for questions has expired; outstanding replies received
will be printed in Hansard.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Ms B C BLAAI: Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move:
   That this House –


     1) notes that the ongoing service delivery crisis in the country
        continues to deepen unrelenting factionalism and division in the
        ruling party; and


     2) notes that the recalling of the mayors and councillors on account of
        disgruntled residents, vandalising property ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member, that is no longer a
motion, you are now engaging on the issues. I thought you were just
indicating a topic.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


   That the House, noting that the teaching of history has been a weighty
   subject of public debate since 1994, debates the teaching of our
   country’s history and the selection of history materials in our schools.

Ms A MDA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

  That the House debates the collapsing state of our abandoned schools;
  where teachers continue to drain government of salaries while no
  production is attained at the end of the day, with specific reference to
  Mpheko Senior Secondary School, in Mthatha in the Eastern Cape, where
  this was revealed, through the SABC current affairs programme The Cutting
  Edge.

Mrs H LAMOELA: Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House –


     1) debates the negative effect that the low salaries and level of
        benefits for social workers working for NGOs have on effective
        social development in South Africa; and


     2) comes up with possible solutions to increase their benefits to a
        level that will allow them to continue to deliver this very
        important service to our society.


Thank you.

Mr S B FARROW: Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

  That the House debates the future role of the taxi industry as an
  integral part of the Bus Rapid Transport system currently being
  introduced in many of the large cities in South Africa.
Thank you.

    CELEBRATION OF FORMER ANC PRESIDENT OLIVER REGINALD TAMBO’S BIRTHDAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson I move without
notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes that Tuesday, 27 October, marked the day on which former ANC
        President Oliver Reginald Tambo was born 92 years ago;


     2) further notes that O R, as he was affectionately known, was among
        the founding members of the ANC Youth League (ANCYL) in 1944 and
        became its first National Secretary;


     3) recalls that in the ANCYL, Tambo teamed up with Walter Sisulu,
        Nelson Mandela, Ashby Mda, Anton Lembede, Dr William Nkomo, Dr C M
        Majombozi and others to bring a bold new spirit of militancy into
        the ANC, which transformed it from an organisation that held public
        meetings and occasionally petitioned the government, to a
        campaigning movement that would draw large numbers of people
        through mass actions involving civil disobedience, strikes,
        boycotts and other forms of non-violent resistance;


     4) recognises that –


           a) among Black South African leaders, Oliver Tambo was probably
              the most highly respected on the African continent, in
              Europe, Asia and the Americas;


           b) during his stewardship of the ANC he raised the ANC’s
              international prestige and status to that of an alternative
              to the Pretoria government; and

           c) he was received with the protocol reserved for Heads of State
              in many parts of the world; and

     5) acknowledges the important contribution Oliver Tambo has made to
        the growth and development of the ANC and its policies, and that
        these policies today form the foundation upon which the democratic
        Constitution, government and legislature rest.


Agreed to.

                       2009 CARBON DISCLOSURE PROJECT

                             (Draft Resolution)
Mr F B FARROW: Chairperson on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Opposition, I
move without notice:

   That the House –


     1) notes that the report of the 2009 Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP)
        was released last week;


     2) further notes that South Africa notched up the fifth best response
        rate this year, performing better than China, India and Australia,
        and that 87 % of respondents now measure their carbon emissions,
        compared to 77 % last year;


     3) congratulates Nedbank on coming out tops in the SA 2009 Carbon
        Disclosure Leadership Index;


     4) acknowledges new entrants Sappi, Old Mutual, Sanlam, Santam, Anglo
        Platinum and Netcare; and


     5) calls on all departments and companies to make climate change a
        priority as a matter of urgency by giving preference to policies
        and programmes that encourage sustainable living, climate change
        action and corporate responsibility.

      Agreed to.

                       STORM DISASTER IN WESTERN CAPE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms H N MAKHUBA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


   That the House –

     1) expresses regret and heartfelt condolences to the families and
        loved ones of those who perished in the dreadful storm that hit
        Cape Town in the early hours of Monday, 26 October 2009;


     2) applauds the emergency services and charitable organisations who
        responded swiftly, fearlessly and with professionalism; and

     3) calls on the City of Cape Town to take any measures necessary to
        help prevent such a tragedy from occurring again.


   Agreed to.


                      WORLD DEVELOPMENT INFORMATION DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson I move without
notice:

   That the House –

      1) notes that 24 October is observed worldwide as World Development
         Information Day;


      2) further notes that World Development Information Day was first held
         on 24 October 1973 and that this day is dedicated to world public
         opinion on development problems and the necessity to strengthen
         international co-operation to solve them;

      3) recalls that on 17 May 1972 the United Nations Conference on Trade
         and Development proposed measures for the information dissemination
         and the mobilisation of public opinion relative to trade and
         development problems and that this became known as Resolution 2038
         (XXVII) and was passed by the UN General Assembly on 19 December
         1972;


      4) further recalls that Resolution 2038 (XXVII) called for the
         introduction of World Development Information Day to help draw the
         attention of people worldwide to development problems;

      5) believes that an informed society is a vital condition for the
         effective functioning of government and modern political and
         economic systems; and


      6) supports World Development Information Day and commits itself to
         disseminate information to the citizenry so that the citizenry can
         play a meaningful role in governance and development.

Agreed to.

     EXTENSION OF DEADLINE FOR CONSIDERATION OF REPORT ON GREEN PAPER ON
                         NATIONAL STRATEGIC PLANNING

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, on behalf of the
Chief Whip of the Majority Party, I move the motion as it appears in his
name on the Order Paper as follows:

   That the House, notwithstanding the resolution it adopted on 20 October
   2009, resolves to extend the deadline by which the ad hoc committee to
   consider and report on the Green Paper on National Strategic Planning –
   September 2009 has to report, to 10 November 2009.

Agreed to.

The House adjourned at 17:14.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Transport

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of  the Department of Transport
        Vote 33 for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 33 for
        2008-09 [RP 227-2009].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South  African  Maritime
        Safety Authority (SAMSA) (including the Maritime Fund) for 2007-08,
        including the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the  Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 231-2008].


    (c)     Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Cross-Border  Road
        Transport Agency (C-BRTA) for 2007-08, including the Report of  the
        Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements   and   Performance
        Information for 2007-08 [RP 131-2008].


    (d)     Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Cross-Border  Road
        Transport Agency (C-BRTA) for 2008-09, including the Report of  the
        Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements   and   Performance
        Information for 2008-09 [RP 235-2009].


    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of  the  Driving  License  Card
        Account  for 1999-00, 2000-01, 2001-02, 2002-03, 2003-04,  2004-05,
        2005-06, 2006-07, 2007-08 and 2008-09, including the Report of  the
        Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements   and   Performance
        Information for 1999-00, 2000-01, 2001-02, 2002-03, 2003-04,  2004-
        05, 2005-06, 2006-07, 2007-08 and 2008-09 [RP 131-2008].


2.    The Minister of Finance


    (a)     Report and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Reconstruction  and
        Development Programme Fund for 2008-09, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements   and   Performance
        Information for 2008-09 [RP 244-2009].


    (b)     National Treasury – Consolidated Financial Information for  the
        year ended 31 March 2009 [RP 245-2009].


3.    The Minister of International Relations and Cooperation

    (a)     Accession to the revised Cotonou Partnership Agreement:
        Agreement Amending the Partnership Agreement between the Members of
        the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States, of the one
        part, and the European Community and its Member States, of the
        other part, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
        1996.
    (b)     Explanatory memorandum to the Accession to the revised  Cotonou
        Partnership Agreement: Agreement Amending the Partnership Agreement
        between the Members of the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group  of
        States, of the one part, and the European Community and its  Member
        States, of the other part.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

       a) Letter from the Minister of Communications dated 26 August 2009,
          to the Speaker of the National Assembly explaining the delay in
          the submission of the Annual Report of the South African
          Broadcasting Corporation (SABC) for 2008-09.


          TABLING OF THE SABC ANNUAL REPORT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 31
          MARCH 2009


          This serves to inform Parliament that the SABC will not be able to
          meet   the deadline of 30 September 2009 for tabling its Annual
          Report for the financial year ended 31 March 2009 in Parliament.


          This is because the SABC Interim Board has requested an extension
          to submit the Annual Report and financial statements of the SABC,
          as required by section 51 (2) of the Public Finance Management
          Act, on 31 October 2009 instead of 31 August 2009. The reasons put
          forward by the Interim Board are that it has just been established
          in July and is in the process of expediting the finalization of
          the report and the accompanying statements. Furthermore, the
          Interim Board is currently establishing the Audit Committee as
          required by legislation, and facilitating the finalization by the
          external auditors of the audit.


          The request for an extension will delay the tabling of the Annual
          Report by 30 September 2009.


          Yours sincerely


          signed
          GEN (RET) SIPHIWE NYANDA
          MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS


    COMMITTEE REPORTS


    National Assembly


    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology on the
    consideration of a shortlist of candidates for appointment to the Board
    of the South African National Space Agency Board, dated 28 October
    2009:

    The Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology, having considered
    the shortlist of candidates for appointment to the South African
    National Space Agency Board, in terms of section 7 (1)( c ) of the SA
    National Space Agency Act (Act No 36 of 2008), which was referred to
    the Committee on 7 October 2009, reports as follows:


    The Committee held meetings on 21 and 28 October 2009 on the above
    subject. The Department received 94 applications and shortlisted 25 of
    the candidates.


    During the Committee’s deliberations on 21 October 2009, Members raised
    their concerns about the lack of shortlisted candidates, who fall
    within the ‘vulnerable groups’ with special needs, such as persons with
    disabilities. The Committee subsequently requested that the Department
    in future consult organisations working with persons with special
    needs, to identify potential candidates, for inclusion in the
    shortlist.


    The Committee recommends that the House approves the following
    shortlist:


    1. Mr Anderson Francois
    2. Mr Annamalai Leeandran
    3. Mr Buthelezi Themba
    4. Prof De Wet Gideon
    5. Mr Fihlani Zola
    6. Dr Gavin (Adam) Elizabeth
    7. Ms Lawrence Joy-Marie
    8. Ms Limpitlaw Justine
    9. Mr Louw Rudolph
   10. Mr Magugumela Maurice T
   11. Mr Maine Potlaki
   12. Ms Majaja Nomfuneko
   13. Dr Malan J
   14. Captain Mamashela Mpho
   15. Dr Mc Kinnell Lee-Anne
   16. Ms Mogudi Louisa
   17. Mr Nepfumbada
   18. Mr Ratsheko Tsheko
   19. Dr Scholes Robert
   20. Ms Sekese Rosey
   21. Ms Sekgobela Simangele
   22. Ms Sharpe Carla
   23. Dr Siziba Kwanele Benett
   24. Ms Titi Vangile Brenda
   25. Mr Zondi MC

Subsequent to the meeting of 21 October 2009, the following ensued:

   1. Ms Limpitlaw Justine withdrew her application, due to personal
      circumstances.
   2. The Department approached the organisation, Disabled People South
      Africa who recommended the following candidate for inclusion on the
      shortlist:  Mr Vincent Gore.

Report to be considered.


